BACKGROUND
height growth in humans is distinctly different from growth in other mammals and is characterised in infancy by rapid but decelerating growth, a prolonged childhood phase of slow growth and a pubertal growth “spurt” before final height is reached – termed the infancy/childhood/puberty  growth model  <cit> . growth in rodents along with most other animals follows a very different path with maximum growth rate occurring in the early postnatal period, rapid growth to sexual maturity and much slower growth thereafter  <cit> .

variation in the timing or rate of developmental events is recognised as a mechanism for evolutionary change. this phenomenon can be observed in the origin of the elongated childhood  growth phase in humans, which can also be seen in social mammals and is associated with the learning of complex behaviours required for survival  <cit> . in puberty primates show some associated body-weight gains but no evidence of a return to the long-bone elongation seen in humans, suggesting that the growth spurt associated with human puberty is specific to homo sapiens as supported by both comparative auxological studies  <cit>  and the fact that human height growth can only be defined by complex mathematical modelling in comparison to simpler models for other primates  <cit> .

as yet no study has examined the changes in gene expression that accompany development in children and correlated them with biological pathways at different ages and stages of development. some insight into the genetic program that accompanies growth in mammals has been gained from the study of rodent models where tissue-independent gene expression has been shown in a range of cell types  <cit> . this work provided mechanistic insight into the existence of a multi-organ genetic program to suppress growth  <cit>  which was associated with human imprinted genes some of which are involved with the etiology of rhabdomyosarcoma  <cit> . it is likely that a genetic program could exist to underpin human height growth, but it would need to relate not only to growth deceleration, but also acceleration as seen in puberty.

the use of lymphoid tissue as a tool to study human growth response has been established  <cit> . gene expression profiles between multiple types of human tissue is marked by their similarity  with only a limited fraction of gene expression being truly tissue specific   <cit> . it is recognised that the control of gene expression between tissues is highly independent in relation to specific functions  <cit>  but redundancy does exist in relation to “maintenance”  functions, including growth related genes  <cit> .

in this analysis, we have used transcriptomic data from cells of lymphoid origin to describe gene expression clusters that correlate with the phase of childhood growth. we have then used network analysis to examine gene expression clusters in relation to a map of all known human protein and genetic interactions . to understand the biological pathways associated with human development/height growth and age, we have used derived sets of the most highly communicating proteins, i.e. those with high “connectivity”  <cit>  and therefore the greatest functional relevance  <cit> . finally, we have compared development-related gene expression in a number of different human tissues to highlight candidate pathways associated with a multi-organ genetic program of growth.

RESULTS
development-related gene expression correlates with the phases of human growth
we conducted a gene expression analysis on a library of datasets from normal children with age annotation, collated from the ncbi gene expression omnibus  and ebi arrayexpress . these four data sets were then combined to form a study group of  <dig> individuals ranging from  <dig>  to  <dig>  years of age   . there were  <dig> gene expression probes significantly associated with age representing  <dig> distinct genes , 477/ <dig> of these age-related genes were associated with growth ontology . the  <dig> age-related genes found formed three distinct clusters of higher gene expression: 1) ≤6 yrs  ; 2) > <dig> to ≤17 yrs   and 3) >17 yrs   . these gene clusters demonstrated age-related differences in associated gene ontology and canonical pathways  and for predicted transcription factor  recruitment to promoter elements in these genes . transcription factors included early b cell factor  <dig>  and pax <dig>  that have been associated with both the proliferation of b cells and also the regulation of bone development  <cit> .

of the genes associated with age,  <dig> had been previously identified in human genome wide association studies  on a variety of different conditions  <cit> ; including  <dig> genes associated with human height , one of which was the top age-associated gene in our study igf2bp <dig>  . these genes are therefore both associated with the phases of human growth as well as final adult height. in addition a further  <dig> genes were associated with diabetes , including bach <dig> , the second most significantly age-associated gene in this study.

recently age-dependent changes have been observed in the methylation of human genes in peripheral blood mononuclear cells   <cit> . of the genes in our study identified as having age-dependent alterations in gene expression, 12%  also have age-associated methylation changes   <cit> . the age-related genes were also mapped onto mouse genes identified as having stat <dig> bound upon activation by growth hormone  to examine putative gh regulation  <cit> ; 18%  were associated with stat <dig> in this model . it was also noted that of the five genes chosen as representative of multi-tissue age-regulated down-regulation and used to define the rodent common program of growth deceleration  <cit> , igf2bp <dig>  sox <dig> and mest were present in the  <dig> age-related genes  and peg <dig> and igf <dig> were not tested for in this study.

connectivity of genes corresponds with growth-phase related expression
the development-associated clusters of genes defined by expression analysis were used to generate interactome models based on all known protein:protein and protein:genetic interactions   <cit> . examination of the development-associated clusters of genes within the human interactome demonstrated a significant increase in their ‘connectivity’  compared to controls . interactome connectivity is a marker of biological function and associated with “essential” biological mechanisms  <cit> . the highest levels of protein connectivity were shown to occur during infancy and to reduce as final height is reached .

minimal essential networks derived from growth phase-related gene expression are associated with evolutionarily conserved growth pathways
minimal essential networks  consist of the top 10% of interactome proteins scored for connectivity and bottleneck network properties, and represent the most functionally related regions of interactome models  <cit>  . men were derived from the interactome models generated from the different gene expression clusters correlating with stage of child development . we used men gene expression changes to detect growth related evolutionarily conserved biological pathways  including notch, vegf, tgfb and wnt pathways in both the infancy/early childhood and late childhood/puberty clusters of gene expression. the infancy phase of human growth is characterised by a rapid deceleration and the gene expression identified in the infancy/early childhood associated cluster  demonstrated a similar deceleration of expression, for example dtx <dig> in the notch signalling pathway, camk2d and lef <dig> in the wnt signalling pathway and id <dig> and e2f <dig> in the tgfb signalling pathway . the puberty phase of human growth is characterised by a return to growth and there were also distinct gene expression profiles in the late childhood/puberty associated cluster of gene expression  that showed a corresponding rate of change including vegfa and chp in the vegf signalling pathway , skp <dig> in the wnt signalling pathway  and tnf , dcn and tfdp <dig>  in the tgfb signalling pathway. in the adult cluster of gene expression  the genes showed unchanged gene expression throughout childhood with a final rapid increase in gene expression including ltbp <dig> in the tgfb pathway and kat2b in the notch pathway .

gene expression of glucocorticoid receptor interacting proteins correlate with the phases of human growth
analysis of human interactome associated canonical pathways demonstrated the key involvement of glucocorticoid receptor  mediated transcription in all age groups. glucocorticoid regulation has been shown to modulate function in notch, vegf, tgfb and wnt signalling  <cit> . the gr has well established interactions with the gh pathway, mainly mediated by regulation of igf-i but also by cross-talk with stat <dig> and stat <dig>  <cit> . also glucocorticoid excess in childhood, either as endogenous hypersecretion in cushing’s syndrome or as exogenous therapy, has a marked growth inhibitory effect. to further investigate whether gr modulation was associated with age, we generated a list of current known direct interacting proteins of the gr  and examined how the expression of these genes changed with age . three distinct clusters of increased expression of gr interacting genes were observed correlating with the infancy, early childhood group , the late childhood, puberty group  and the adult group  .

a minimal essential network derived from tissue-independent development-related gene expression is associated with evolutionarily conserved growth pathways
the presence of a set of evolutionarily conserved growth pathways associated with the phases of human growth and development in lymphoid tissue was validated by replication in an independent set of pbmc gene expression data from age-grouped normal children . in this data set  no adult controls were available but infancy and late childhood/puberty clusters of development-related gene expression were defined including  <dig> genes . derived interactome models were associated with the same biological pathways identified using the main data set ; 16/ <dig> identical biological pathways in infancy & 9/ <dig> identical biological pathways in late childhood/puberty  .

examination of other human tissue for development-related changes in gene expression was performed over childhood  in a variety of available tissue data sets ; bone marrow  <cit> , skeletal muscle   <cit> , pbmcs  <cit> , conjunctival endothelium   <cit>  and temporal lobe brain tissue   <cit> . infancy and late childhood/puberty clusters of altered gene expression were observed in all tissue comparisons and overlap of gene expression  was used to generate an interactome model of  <dig> protein nodes and  <dig> connecting interactions . a tissue-independent development-related minimal essential network derived from this interactome model  was associated with the same evolutionarily conserved growth pathways identified in the main data set . the observations of interactome network connectivity changing with age made in the main lymphoid data set were also seen in brain tissue where adult samples were also available .

discussion
this is the first study to examine the changes in gene expression that accompany aging and development in children. we have shown in normal children using cells of lymphoid origin that the expression of  <dig> genes is associated with age and subsets of these genes form clusters that correlate with phases of growth – infancy/early childhood, childhood/puberty and final height . these clusters of gene expression were examined in relation to an interactome model and shown to include evolutionarily conserved growth pathways   with high levels of ‘connectivity’ implying essential biological functions  <cit> . we were able to analyse network connectivity across all age groups in both the main lymphoid data set and in temporal lobe brain tissue; this was highest in infancy and reduced to final height in both data sets . it is also of note that a proportion of genes with increased expression in adults also have a similar pattern of expression in infancy ; these genes conversely have decreased gene expression over puberty and are enriched for cell cycle related genes .

this study had some limitations, primarily related to age matching. it was established that each study used to generate the main data set was evenly distributed over childhood for age and gender; however, it was only possible to integrate adults via the lymphoid cells from bone marrow  although the rest of this data set was homogenous with the other sets used. using temporal lobe brain tissue as an independent data set, it was also shown that the adult development-related gene expression cluster had similar interactome connectivity in comparison to the adult cluster in the main data set, as well as a similar relation to the infancy and late childhood/puberty clusters. another potential issue is that there is variation in the timing of entry to puberty  <cit>  which is not possible to assess in this study, although we used gender as a co-variate.

there are obvious difficulties in obtaining different tissue samples from healthy children. this issue was reflected in the difficulties encountered in matching the age categories for comparison of development-related gene expression in the five different types of tissue available with appropriate annotation . the tissue-independent development-related gene expression observed in the mouse  <cit>  would imply that we would expect to see more overlap in children than we were able to define; this is likely to be due to imperfect age matching between samples. however, the use of network analysis gives confidence to the observations made using interactome models. this is due to several features of this type of analysis; first biological networks exhibit what are termed “small world” properties  <cit>  implying that fluctuations of connectivity within the network form secondary structure  associated with function  <cit> ; second, as a consequence of the small world feature, biological networks tend to exhibit a “scale free” nature so comparison of networks derived from different sized sets of gene expression data is possible  <cit> ; third biological networks are highly robust and resistant to random error  <cit>  therefore tolerating the uncertainty inherent in the comparison of data sets from studies designed for different purposes. all these features of the network analysis of biological systems gives confidence to the observation that an interactome model generated from the  <dig> genes we identified as “tissue-independent” was associated with the same evolutionarily conserved growth pathways as identified using the main data set despite the small size of the overlap.

we have shown that the expression of clusters of genes varies in a development-dependent manner in multiple human tissues. whilst the similarity in a development-related gene expression between different tissues was limited  interactome analysis demonstrated that these changes were integrated into similar evolutionarily conserved growth pathways . these observations suggest that a “re-wiring” of highly connected interactome modules is a primary difference between tissues, as has been previously suggested by bossi & lehner  <cit>  and that growth occurs via similar mechanisms.

several of the pathways identified vary between infancy and puberty in all tissues examined  . however both the gr and wnt signalling pathways were clearly associated with all three growth phase-related clusters; this may reflect the known association of these pathways with aspects of the human aging process  <cit> . also wnt signalling was identified as part of the genetic program for growth observed in the mouse with a temporal change in the three tissues studied   <cit> .

the association of glucocorticoid receptor signalling with development-related gene expression was undertaken separately  by using known gr interactions as markers of activity. the gr pathway is modulated by the hypothalamic–pituitary–adrenal axis and has organism wide effects on different tissue. the primary mechanism of glucocorticoid signalling is genomic  and not mediated by cell surface receptors; tissue specificity is modulated by enzymatic conversion of the ligand to an inactive form , tissue-specific expression of co-regulators and/or epigenetic effects  <cit> . the pleiotropic and organism-wide effects of gr signalling indicate a specific niche in the integration of organismal responses. the observation of glucocorticoid regulation strongly associated with development-related pathways is in alignment with this model of gr signalling, and how multiple tissue and time-dependent events can be regulated by gr  <cit> .

we examined whether the development-related genes identified in our study were also present in other investigations into mammalian height growth. genome-wide association studies by the genetic investigation of anthropometric traits  consortium have defined a set of genes associated with adult height and mapped these genetic differences to growth-related biological pathways including the notch & tgfb signalling pathways, also identified by network analysis in our work  <cit> . development-dependent changes have been observed in the methylation of human genes using pbmcs although this work was not correlated with phases of human growth  <cit> ; 12% of the genes with development-related gene expression also have age-associated methylation changes indicating that epigenetic mechanisms are important in the transition of human growth phases. in mouse embryonic fibroblasts the whole genome response to growth hormone has been investigated using stat <dig> as a marker  <cit> . of the development-related genes defined in our study we identified 18% by orthology that also had been shown to bind stat <dig> in the mouse and therefore are potentially growth hormone responsive.

the evolutionary origin of the growth pathways associated with the clusters of development-related gene expression defined in this study dates back to insects in the case of the glucocorticoid receptor pathway  <cit>  and in most cases extends back to the origins of multi-cellularity e.g. wnt, tgfb, vegf and notch pathways  <cit>  . these data suggest that a similar pathway signature should be present in multiple types of human tissue and that a genetic program exists to regulate the development of the phases of child growth. the further definition of development-related gene expression in longitudinal studies will allow more detailed investigation of this event and provide insight into the return to long bone growth in puberty as a specifically human event  <cit> ; also it provides a framework on which a “human growth program” could exist analogous to that defined in rodents  <cit> .

it is likely that development-related gene expression within some biological pathways has implications for the treatment and pathogenesis of disease. the possible association of age and growth-related gene expression changes with childhood cancers has been highlighted for rhabdomyosarcoma: imprinted growth genes , whose decreased expression is associated with growth deceleration in rodents  <cit> , show increased expression in human rhabdomyosarcoma cell lines  <cit> . however it is likely that many other genes are involved in human growth which is characterised not only by periods of deceleration  but also acceleration . the key evolutionarily conserved growth pathways associated with a development-related gene expression in this study are involved in the aetiology and pathogenesis of childhood cancers e.g. tgfβ signalling in wilms tumour  <cit>  and rhabdomyosarcoma  <cit> . biomarkers in use from these pathways include foxo <dig> within the vegf pathway, as a prognostic marker in rhabdomyosarcoma  and also shown to be highly expressed in the infancy cluster of increased gene expression .

the mathematical properties of biological networks  have been associated with biological function using protein connectivity as a primary measure  <cit> . proteins from genes with a development-related gene expression changes have been shown to have significant differences in “connectivity” within the interactome, with greatest “connectivity” shown in infancy and decreasing to final height in adults . using analysis of the interactome we have defined a “map” of normal growth. comparison of gene expression in childhood diseases/conditions with this map in normal children will allow the characterisation of potential abnormalities in the timing and/or levels of expression in gene networks therefore establishing whether there is a maturational aspect to the disease/condition and hence contribute to understanding mechanism or the identification of targets for diagnosis or prognosis.

CONCLUSIONS
these results imply the existence of a tissue-independent genetic program that correlates with age and phase of human growth. furthermore our work demonstrates the first observations of gene expression changes within evolutionarily ancient pathways associated with a distinctly human growth event, the pubertal growth spurt, a recent and human-specific addition to mammalian growth. these observations have direct medical relevance as an abnormality in switching the program from one phase to the next, e.g. failure to “turn off” infancy genes, may lead to pathological changes that induce disease. taking into account development-dependent gene expression profiles for normal children will be the key to the appropriate selection of genes and pathways as potential biomarkers of disease or as drug targets.

