BACKGROUND
fresh citrus fruits, from harvest to human consumption, require a lengthy period for shipping, storing and marketing. during that time, the main damage to fruit comes from biological diseases and physical damage. storage pre-treatments, such as biotic or abiotic typological treatments, can be used to inhibit disease and extend the shelf-life. among the various types of treatment available, heat treatment has previously been reported to induce disease resistance in apples, citrus, grapes, peaches, pears and mangos against a multitude of pathogens  <cit> .

in the fruit industry, hot water treatment is an alternative physical treatment, which has been used in citrus fruit storage since  <dig>  <cit> . more recently, hot air and hot water systems have been widely adopted in several countries to inhibit postharvest decay of fruits and to alleviate chilling injuries during storage. heat treatment  has the advantage of minimizing surface infection in pericarp without leaving any chemical residues  <cit> . ht can prevent the development of plant pathogens and disease by heat-killing disease organisms or by inhibiting pathogen mycelial growth, by removing surface insects and by structurally altering epicuticular wax  <cit> . ht can also enhance fruit resistance to chilling injury in cold-sensitive cultivars, and help the fruit retain quality during cold storage and help maintain shelf life  <cit> . aside from controlling pathogenic organisms, ht may also reduce disease by changing the physical characteristics of the interior pericarp. for example, ht not only delayed fruit ripening and coloration, inhibited fruit softening, and slowed ethylene production  <cit> , it also increased fruit hardness, as well as increasing the content of polyphenolics, flavonoids and dopamine  <cit> . however, less is understood about the regulatory genes which are active in the response to microbial attack, and there is no exhaustive metabolomics profile detailing the changes in heat treated pericarp.

in the past few decades, researchers have given increasing attention to the study of gene expression in heat treated fruits. sapinitskaya et al. <cit>  reported ht activates stress genes and lipid modification genes in response to chilling stress in grapefruit, such as glutathione-dependent formaldehyde dehydrogenase, dehydrin, heat shock protein , ascorbate peroxidase, superoxide dismutase, fatty acid desaturase and lipid transfer protein. some scientists discovered ht induces phenylalanine ammonia lyase and accumulates phenylpropanoid compounds, which play a vital role in heat-induced fruit resistibility  <cit> . dixon et al. <cit>  studied the functions of phenylpropanoid compounds in plants involved in local and systemic signalling for defence-gene induction. however, little information is available related to which particular class of phenylpropanoid compounds plays a core role in defensive functions, and even less is known about the regulatory genes which orchestrate the rapid induction of phenylpropanoid defences in response to ht. proteome analysis reveals the induction of hsps, allergen proteins, dehydrin, and other proteins involved in the stress response. repression of polyphenol oxidase caused by ht may constitute the molecular basis for the protection against chilling stress in peach fruit  <cit> . however, few proteins involved in ht were reported to have induced fruit resistance to deterioration, especially in citrus fruit.

also, proteomics analysis and metabolic profiling approaches make possible comparative parallel analyses of global changes at the proteome and metabolome levels, facilitating an understanding of the relationships between changes in specific proteins and subsequent alterations in metabolites in response to ht. in the present study, fruits of ‘kamei’ satsuma mandarin  received ht. the comparative proteomics analysis and metabolic profiling  analysis were performed based on two-dimensional electrophoresis , gas chromatography and mass spectrometry  and high-performance liquid chromatography/electrospray ionization-time of flight-mass spectrometry . comprehensive physiological and biochemical analysis were completed. results will provide additional theoretical evidence to improvement of disease resistance in heat treated pericarp.

RESULTS
satsuma mandarin is one of the main citrus crops in east asia, including china, south korea and japan. however, this cultivar has poor storability mainly because it is susceptible to biotic stress and physical damage. ht improved fruit resistance to stress and damage effectively and inhibited postharvest decay of fruits. in present study, ht fruits were dipped in a 52°c warm water bath for 2 min, and control fruits were dipped in a 25°c water bath for 2 min. after treatments, fruits were stored in a ventilated warehouse . samples were collected at 2 h, and  <dig>   <dig>   <dig>   <dig>   <dig>   <dig>   <dig>   <dig>   <dig>   <dig>   <dig>   <dig>   <dig>   <dig>   <dig> and 60 days after treatments  for further analysis.

ht increased fruit weight loss slightly, but did not affect fruit quality
fruit quality directly determines its commercial value. parameters related to fruit quality, including weight loss, respiration rate, and soluble solids content, were evaluated to investigate the influence of ht on fruit quality. weight loss increased significantly in heat treated pericarp compared to control pericarp during the storage period . however, no obvious changes were observed in the respiration rate and soluble solids content between ht and control fruits during the entire storage period . since soluble solids content is a well-known standard in measuring fruit internal quality and respiration acts as an important standard for fruit storability, the minor changes in soluble solids content and respiration indicated that heat treatment did not affect fruit flesh quality.

ht suppression of penicillium germination on pericarp
artificial inoculation tests were conducted with the blue mould penicillium italicum to assess the effects of ht on the fruit’s response to biotic stresses. few spores had germinated on the peel of ht fruits  <dig> d after inoculation, but about 90% of the control fruits showed typical symptoms of blue mould development at the inoculation sites . as for the rate of disease incidence, the incidence of disease on control fruit was significantly higher than on ht fruit from 4– <dig> d after inoculation ; lesion diameters were significantly higher in control fruit than ht fruit from 4– <dig> d after inoculation . based on the above experiments, ht effectively inhibited the germination of penicillium on pericarp.

differentially accumulated proteins in ht citrus pericarp
to explore the differential expression of proteins between ht and control at the same period, the pericarp of ‘kamei’ satsuma mandarin fruit were analysed with samples collected at  <dig>   <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> dat. after 2-de analysing, more than  <dig> protein spots were reproducibly detected . the protein relative abundance was obtained with the pdquest 2-d software version  <dig> . protein spots were scored only when they were reproducibly observed in four independent replicates. data were normalized as a percentage of the total density of all spots on the corresponding gel. comparative analysis was carried out using  <dig> -fold comparative analysis and one-way analysis of variance . result showed there were only  <dig> differentially displayed protein spots whose abundance was altered at least  <dig> -fold when comparing the ht and control during the same period of storage. of these,  <dig> were identified using applied biosystems  <dig> matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization-time-of-flight tandem mass spectrometry  based on tryptic peptide sequences . based on previously reported functions of these proteins, they were classified into five categories : glycolysis and tca cycle , redox regulation , stress response , other metabolism , and protein folding .

samples at  <dig>   <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> dat were used for differential analysis of proteins accumulation. after 2-de, protein spot intensities were quantified using pdquest 2-d software version  <dig> . comparative and statistical analysis shows there were only  <dig> differentially displayed protein spots whose abundance was altered at least  <dig> -fold between the ht and control during the same time period. of these,  <dig> proteins were successfully identified using applied biosystems  <dig> matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization-time-of-flight tandem mass spectrometry  analysis. protein relative accumulation is represented by the column configuration, and accumulation at  <dig>   <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> dat is shown from left to right. protein name and gi no. are from the national center for biotechnology information  database . experimental molecular mass and pi  were calculated using pdquest software , and mass is shown in kda. pc: peptide count. ms: mascot score.

differentially accumulated metabolites in ht citrus pericarp
differentially accumulated metabolites were studied to investigate the changes in metabolic composition between ht and control pericarp. the biochemical changes were determined by gc-ms and hplc-qtof-ms. a parallel analysis of non-polar and polar extracts using methanol extraction enabled the detection of a large number of compounds of different classes.

a total of  <dig> identified metabolites were monitored in the same sample sets using gc-ms, including mainly alcohols, amino acids, sugars, organic acids, and fatty acids. after conducting an analysis of significance with anova ,  <dig> detected metabolites, mostly organic acids, sugars and amino acids, were found to be significantly up/down-regulated in heat treated pericarp when compared to control pericarp with the same storage period .

samples at 2 h after treatment and  <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> d after harvest were used for the differential primary metabolic profiling analysis. a 300 mg sample was extracted in  <dig>  μl of methanol. extracts were determined with gc-ms used ribitol as internal standard. a total of  <dig> metabolites were differentially accumulated in heat treated pericarp. this table shows the ratio . *: significant difference . up: metabolite was detected in the heat treated pericarp but not in the control pericarp.

gc-ms metabolite profiling  was complemented using hplc-qtof-ms analysis of mostly secondary metabolites. statistical filtering was applied to the mass signals data to estimate the number of up/down-regulated metabolites in heat treated pericarp. after ms/ms analysis, a total of  <dig> metabolites were found to be significantly regulated  in heat treated pericarp when compared to control pericarp during the same period of storage, and  <dig> of these metabolites were identified . the metabolites detected by the hplc-qtof-ms technology contained mainly polyphenols and flavonoids .

samples at 2 h and  <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> dat were used for the differential secondary metabolic profiling analysis using the hplc-qtof-ms instrument. four replicates were compared and statistically analysed per sample using student’s t-test; p <  <dig> . after ms/ms analysis, a total of  <dig> metabolites were found to be significantly regulated  in heat treated pericarp when compared to control pericarp , and  <dig> of these metabolites were identified. this table shows the ratio . n.s.: not significant.

ht up-regulated stress response proteins in citrus pericarp
in disease response, ht induced beta- <dig>  3-glucanase  and class iii chitinase  accumulated in pericarp , where these proteins are involved in reducing stress resistance in plants. in the stress response, ht up-regulated  <dig>  kda heat shock protein  and low molecular weight heat-shock protein  accumulated in pericarp, especially at early storage stage . also, other proteins accumulated in heat treated pericarp in higher amounts when compared to control pericarp during the same period of storage, which might be indirectly involved in the fruit’s response to stress, including the pyruvate dehydrogenase e <dig> beta subunit isoform  <dig> , chloroplast stromal ascorbate peroxidase , putative atp synthase beta subunit , putative inorganic pyrophosphatase, isoflavone reductase related protein , and cytoplasmic malate dehydrogenase .

ht down-regulated reactive oxygen species metabolism-related proteins in citrus pericarp
ht down-regulated reactive oxygen species metabolism-related proteins, especially during later periods of storage , including oxidoreductase, zinc-binding dehydrogenase family protein , putative nadh oxidoreductase, isoflavone reductase , aldo/keto reductase family protein , copper/zinc superoxide dismutase , and putative nadh oxidoreductase, isoflavone reductase . also, other proteins were down-regulated in heat treated pericarp , such as triosephosphate isomerase, cytosolic , abscisic stress ripening-like protein , and thiazole biosynthetic enzyme, chloroplast precursor . in addition, some proteins were up-regulated in heat treated pericarp  only in the middle of the experiment, including, phosphoglycerate kinase, putative , pyruvate dehydrogenase e <dig> beta subunit isoform  <dig> , aldo/keto reductase family protein , mitochondrial processing peptidase , putative inorganic pyrophosphatase . putative atp synthase beta subunit  was up-regulated at the end but down-regulated at the beginning in heat treated pericarps .

ht increased contents of sugars and flavonoids in citrus pericarp
primary metabolite profiling of the ht and control pericarp revealed prominent changes in a group of metabolites during the entire storage phases , mainly including sugars and fatty acids. interestingly, the contents of many kinds of sugars were increased in heat treated pericarp  at 2 h after ht, but decreased to the same level with control at later storage phases, such as galactose, fructose, glucose, sucrose and 4-keto-glucose. some primary metabolites contents were increased in heat treated pericarp  during whole storage, including oleic acid, tetradecanoic acid and ornithine .

secondary metabolite profiling of the ht and control pericarp revealed that a group of metabolites were increased in heat treated pericarp  during some periods of storage, including quercetin-dihexose-deoxyhexose, hesperetin, hydroxybenzoic acid-hexose, naringenin, naringenin chalcone-hexose, vanillic acid, diosmin, rutin and isosakuranetin, which all might play a vital role in the response to stress.

ht decreased contents of organic acids, amino acids and phenylpropanoids
primary metabolic profiling revealed organic acids, fatty acids and amino acids were down-regulated in heat treated pericarp when compared to control pericarp, especially at 2 h after heat treatment. levels of five types of organic acids  had decreased in heat treated pericarp compared to the control at 2 h after ht , but levels of ten types of organic acid increased in heat treated pericarp  at  <dig> dat . the content of ten types of amino acids were lower in heat treated pericarp than in the control at 2 h after ht, while only five of them were lower in heat treated pericarp than in the control at  <dig> dat, although two of them were higher in heat treated pericarp than in the control at  <dig> dat . in a similar way, compared to organic acids, levels of four types of fatty acids decreased in heat treated pericarp compared to the control at 2 h after heat treatment; levels of three of them increased in heat treated pericarp compared to the control at  <dig> dat . there is common occurrence here; levels of many types of organic acids, amino acids and fatty acids decreased in heat treated pericarp compared to the control at 2 h after ht, but levels of many of them increased in heat treated pericarp compared to the control at  <dig> dat. compared to increased sugar concentrations, it appears there is a sudden transformation of organic, amino and fatty acids into sugars which is driven by ht; also, levels of many types of organic, amino and fatty acids increased in heat treated pericarp compared to the control during the later stages of storage.

further metabolic characterization of chemicals which induced resistance in heat treated pericarp was performed using an hplc-qtof-ms. contents of ferulic acid, sinapic acid, cinnamic acid and caffeic acid, the precursors of lignin synthesis, decreased in heat treated pericarp when compared to the control pericarp, especially at 2 h and  <dig> dat. moreover, the contents of other secondary metabolites decreased in heat treated pericarp, especially at 2 h or  <dig> dat, such as hydroxylated naringenin-hexose, sinensetin, p-coumaroyl quinic acid, feruloylquinic acid, pantothenic acid-hexose, quercetin-o-dihexoside, eriodictyol-o-dihexoside, and jasmonic acid.

ht decreased h2o <dig> content in citrus pericarp
the content of h2o <dig> decreased in heat treated pericarp during the storage phase while the content of h2o <dig> increased in the control pericarp . this suggests ht decreased the content of h2o <dig> in pericarp, and the content of h2o <dig> was held at a lower level in heat treated pericarp when compared to control pericarp during storage.

superoxide dismutase  and peroxidase  play important roles in deoxidization of h2o <dig>  in this study, the activity of pod showed no significant change between ht and the control . the activity of sod was higher in heat treated pericarp relative to the control at  <dig> dat, but was lower in heat treated pericarp relative to the control at  <dig> and  <dig> dat . so, the activity of sod fluctuated during the entire storage period in heat treated pericarp compared to the control .

concerning redox regulation, most of the proteins were down-regulated in heat treated pericarp when compared to control pericarp, especially in the later stages of storage . this suggests the redox reaction was weaker in heat treated pericarp during storage.

ht increased fruit firmness and the content of lignin in citrus pericarp
fruit hardness gradually decreased during storage ; however, ht increased fruit hardness, especially at  <dig> dat , which led to the heat treated fruit remaining firmer than the control fruits during the entire storage period. lignin is an important component responsible for fruit hardness. so, samples from 2 h after treatment and  <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> dat were used to detect lignin content changes over time. results show ht significantly induced lignin accumulation in pericarp . also, the activity of phenylalanine ammonia-lyase , a critical enzyme in lignin synthesis, initially increased in heat treated pericarp at  <dig> dat but subsequently fell into the same level as in the control . furthermore, levels of ferulic acid, sinapic acid, cinnamic acid and caffeic acid, the precursors of lignin synthesis, declined in heat treated pericarp when compared to control pericarp . this suggests a rapid transformation occurred from ferulic acid, sinapic acid, cinnamic acid and caffeic acid to lignin in heat treated pericarp after ht.

discussion
ht improved fruit pathogen resistance without negatively impacting fruit quality
physical treatments are used frequently to keep fruit fresh, including microporous membranes, pre-storage treatment , ultraviolet illumination, radiofrequency treatment, heat treatments , and other storage techniques. postharvest heat treatments such as hot water treatment and hot air treatment provide a type of quarantine, inhibit the development of pathogens, enhance fruit resistance to chilling injury in cold-sensitive cultivars, and help preserve fruit quality during storage and extend its shelf life  <cit> . in the present study, ht effectively inhibited the development of pathogens. also, ht  caused a statistically significant reduction the incidence of chilling injury  <cit> .also, postharvest ht had no obvious negative effects on fruit flesh quality during subsequent storage. this suggests ht increased the ability of fruit to tolerate storage stress without affecting their commercial qualities, and shows strong potential application in the citrus industry.

ht induced stress response proteins
ht can effectively inhibit fruit chilling injury during cold storage  <cit> . after ht, some proteins were up-regulated, while others were down-regulated. the up-regulated proteins might be responsible for heat induced fruit resistance. interesting, some proteins were up-regulated at  <dig> d after ht, and decreased to the previous level of control during the storage period. those kinds of proteins might be just involved in response to ht, but not play a vital role in fruit disease resistance. the proteins, which are up-regulated during whole storage period might be directly involved in fruit disease resistance.

in the present study, heat shock protein   <dig> , putative hsp  <dig> and low molecular weight hsp were up-regulated in heat treated pericarp compared to the control during entire storage period . hsps are encoded by a multigene family and are located in different subcellular compartments  <cit> . these molecular chaperones play a crucial role in protecting plants against stress by re-establishing normal protein configuration and thus helping to maintain cellular homeostasis  <cit> . abiotic stresses usually causes protein dysfunction; so maintaining proteins in their functional configurations and preventing the aggregation of non-native proteins is particularly important for cell survival under stress  <cit> . hsps are responsible for protein folding, assembly, translocation and degradation during cellular processes. hsps also stabilize proteins and membranes, and can assist in protein refolding under stressful conditions  <cit> . our results suggest hsps play a crucial role in reducing the susceptibility of ht fruit to biotic and abiotic stress.

ht significantly inhibited pathogen development and fruit decay during storage  <cit> . chitinase and β- <dig>  3-glucanase were up-regulated in heat treated fruit in this study; these enzymes have long been thought to be active in fruit antifungal defences. pathogenesis-related  proteins have been classified into five groups and two of these groups contain proteins with β- <dig>  3-glucanase and chitinase  <cit> . chitinase catalyses the hydrolysis of chitin, a β- <dig>  4-linked polymer of n-acetyl d-glucosamine and is a major component of cell walls of most phytopathogenic fungi  <cit> . crude protein extracts of chitinase and β- <dig>  3-glucanase were observed to effectively inhibit fungal activity  <cit> . also, β- <dig>  3-glucanase and chitinase are thought to contribute to the level of resistance provided and are known to inhibit mycelial growth of a wide range of fungal pathogens  <cit> . this suggests β- <dig>  3-glucanase and chitinase were directly involved in ht induced pathogen resistance in fruits.

ht increased the content of stress response metabolites
primary metabolites are directly involved in normal growth, development, and reproduction. in the present study, the content of ornithine, oleic acid and tetradecanoic acid increased in heat treated pericarp compared to the control during storage, and levels of seven types of sugars increased in heat treated pericarp compared to the control at 2 h after ht . in plants, ornithine is required for the synthesis of polyamines and alkaloids, which contribute to oxidative stress tolerance in plants subjected to severe water stress  <cit> .

flavonoids are important defensive compounds which protect fruit against the development of pathogens, acting either as phytoanticipins or phytoalexins  <cit> . flavonoids were observed to be up-regulated in heat treated pericarp , including quercetin-dihexose-deoxyhexose, hesperetin, naringenin, naringenin chalcone-hexose, hydroxybenzoic acid-hexose, isosakuranetin, diosmin, and rutin, which may play a vital role in response to stress  <cit> . rutin is a bioflavonoid with strong antioxidant activity, which had an antimicrobial effect on pathogens, as evidenced by reduced conidial germination and appressorium formation of the pathogen  <cit> . quercetin protected cells from oxidative stress-induced cell death by blocking both the cyclooxygenase and lipooxygenase pathways  <cit> . quercetin has a protective function against oxidative stress by reducing oxidative injury to the cells during h2o <dig> treatment  <cit> . also, plant extracts rich in quercetin have been applied as an interesting resource for functional food products and other foods used to reduce the risks of age-related macular degeneration  <cit> . hesperidin acts as an antioxidant, based on in vitro studies, and hesperidin also provides strong cellular antioxidant protection against the damaging effects induced by stress  <cit> . diosmin, hesperidin and naringin are flavonoid glycosides that occur naturally in citrus fruits; they exert a variety of properties such as antioxidant and free radical scavenging  <cit> . interestingly, naringenin and rutin are not only involved in response to stress, but also were assumed to be signalling molecules  <cit> .

ht induced fruit pathogen resistance and increased lignin content
the functions of phenylpropanoid compounds in plant defence range from preformed or inducible physical and chemical barriers against infection  <cit> . defensive functions are not restricted to a particular class of phenylpropanoid compounds, but are found in the lignification of monolignols to lignin  <cit> . in the present study, ht decreased the level of precursors needed in lignin synthesis , but increased lignin content . lignin is one of the major components of secondary cell walls, providing cells with mechanical support and isolation from the environment. in plants, cells can sense cell wall polymer structure and this activates trans-plasma membrane sensor proteins which might trigger a cascade of signal transduction events interwoven with other pathways that might modulate cellular functions by the activation or inhibition of specific transcription factors as well as by affecting posttranslational control of gene expression and protein function  <cit> . if a cell wall is damaged, cells activate a series of responses to the invading disease organisms, which might negatively impact fruit quality. the accumulation of lignin induced by ht creates a thickening of cell walls which forms an effective physical barrier to pathogens, delaying the invasion of disease organisms. also, ht increased fruit firmness; this might be a result of ht induced lignin thickened fruit cell walls.

ht reduced the content of h2o2
ht is an effective method for improving citrus storability. in storage, fruits suffer a variety of biotic and abiotic environmental stresses. all these stresses could lead to the generation of reactive oxygen species . to avoid the accumulation of ros, which may lead to cell death, plants have up-regulated enzymatic and non-enzymatic antioxidants to scavenge ros and alleviate their negative effects  <cit> . in this study, ht down-regulated h2o <dig> content in pericarp, which was consistent with the effect of ht on yeast cells. ht yeast cells accumulated less ros than untreated cells in response to stresses  <cit> .

also, isoflavone reductase  might have an important role as an antioxidant  <cit> . ifr is an enzyme involved in the production of isoflavone phytoalexins and it accumulates in response to pathogenic attack, fungal elicitor and biotic stress  <cit> . isoflavonoids are important secondary metabolites for essential physiological processes. kim et al. <cit>  reported the isoflavone reductase-like gene may act as a down-regulator by producing antioxidant chemicals to prevent the elevation of ros. in this study, isoflavone reductase, a related protein , was up-regulated in heat treated pericarp when compared to control pericarp , which might be another factor leading to lower h2o <dig> levels and stronger resistance to pathogens in heat treated pericarp when compared to control pericarp.

ascorbate peroxidase scavenges h2o <dig> in specific organelles of the cell  <cit> . also, cu/zn-sod is the main cellular isoform of sods which play a key role in the antioxidant defence system through the disproportionation of h2o <dig> <cit> . both of these can prevent ros caused damages to the cellular membrane and act as a primary defence mechanism when organisms were exposed to oxidative stress. these proteins are considered the main enzymatic and non-enzymatic systems for protecting cells against oxidative damage, and are responsible for disease resistance. in response to biotic stress, these proteins also act as the primary defence mechanism against oxidative stresses caused by pathogens, therefore preventing damage of ros to cellular membranes. however, the activities of pod and sod were not elevated in heat treated pericarp when compared to control pericarp, which might be caused by the lower h2o <dig> content in heat treated pericarp. also, other proteins involved in scavenging ros were down-regulated in heat treated pericarp when compared to control pericarp, including oxidoreductase , oxidoreductase , aldo/keto reductase , 2-oxoacid dehydrogenase , superoxide dismutase . this suggests ht induced a level of resistance to pathogens attacking fruits by causing a decline in fruit h2o <dig> content and by down-regulated scavenging ros enzymes.

role of sugars, organic acids and amino acids in improving storability
in this study, the profiling of primary metabolics showed ht induced the accumulation of sugars at early stages of storage . soluble sugars, especially sucrose, glucose, and fructose, accumulated when fruits were subjected to stress, and accumulated soluble sugars play an obviously vital role in the response of fruit to a number of stressors  <cit> . soluble sugars do not only act as nutrients and metabolites, but also act as signal substance in the modification of redox homeostasis  <cit> . however, less information was available on how other sugars are involved in the stress response, especially arabinose, mannose, galactose, and ribose.

moreover, primary metabolic data shows ht reduced organic acids and amino acids content especially at 2 h after treatment in this study. although organic acids and amino acids play an obvious central role in energy and metabolism at the cellular and whole-organism levels, there seems to be a rapid conversion from organic acids and amino acids to sugars in heat treated pericarp. however, little is known about the decreased levels of organic acids and amino acids seen during a stress response, and further study will be required to validate this response.

CONCLUSIONS
this study provides a broad picture of differential accumulation of proteins and metabolites, and gives a new insight into how ht increases fruit stress resistance during subsequent storage of citrus fruit. in metabolic substrates, the up-accumulation of secondary metabolites played vital roles in increasing the ability of fruit to deal with stress. flavonoids are directly involved in the response to external stress. the increased lignin and decreased h2o <dig> contents involved in ht probably increased fruit resistibility in response to external stress.

