BACKGROUND
rhipicephalus  microplus  causes large economic losses in livestock production in subtropical and tropical regions of the world through direct effects of feeding and by transmission of significant cattle diseases, such as babesiosis and anaplasmosis -reviewed by  <cit> . the application of chemical acaricides is the conventional method for tick control however there are implicit drawbacks including the release of acaricides into the environment and the development of tick acaricide resistance  <cit> . this has prompted on-going research to develop new sustainable tick control methods  <cit> .

vaccination has become a potentially effective alternative for controlling tick and tick-borne diseases as demonstrated by the commercial vaccines  derived from the bm <dig> antigen of r. microplus  <cit> . the development of new tick vaccines with greater protection than the bm <dig> derivatives has to date been slow due to the limited number of suitable target antigens identified  <cit> . the development of novel tick control strategies requires enhanced knowledge about the proteins expressed by different r. microplus stages during development, in particular during tick interactions with the host.

there are approximately  <dig> tick species  <cit> , divided into three families: ixodidae , argasidae  and nuttalliellidae . the tick life cycle occurs in two phases with the first phase entirely independent of the host where eggs hatch into larvae. the second phase involves host attachment of larvae, nymph and adult  stages. in one host, ticks such as boophilus spp., all  <dig> instars remain on the bovine host. consequently, the larvae of these species are the key stage for host finding, host recognition, attachment and initiation of feeding. all tick species are obligate blood feeders and female adult ticks need to ingest large amounts of blood to produce eggs to oviposit and continue the life cycle  <cit> . the recent rapid development of genomic technologies is having an impact on tick - host interaction research and can help to identify potential antigens for tick vaccine development. the availability of tick genomic resources and the current status of these technologies were recently reviewed  <cit> . a r. microplus est database was assembled from over  <dig>  expressed sequence tags  into the gene index bmigi, [http://compbio.dfci.harvard.edu/tgi/cgi-bin/tgi/gimain.pl?gudb=b_microplus;  <cit> . this gene index consists of  <dig>   <dig> unique transcripts derived from various tick life stages and tick strains exposed to various environmental conditions. there are also databases of cdna sequences for haemaphysalis longicornis  <cit>  and the salivary gland of amblyomma variegatum  <cit> . targeted est collections have been obtained from salivary gland cdna libraries from ixodes pacificus  <cit>  and i. scapularis  <cit> . the first draft of the i. scapularis genome became available early  <dig> and will be the first available complete tick genome sequence  <cit> .

engorgement is the most important phase of tick parasitism and the initial steps are critical to success. tick host feeding behaviour has four stages: tick-host finding behaviour, contact and host identification, attachment site selection, and attachment and feeding  <cit> . r. microplus has only one host and must survive the consistent pressure of the host immune response; hence the study of proteins and genes expressed by r. microplus during its early feeding stages is important in developing new and efficient control methods against this ectoparasite. recent reports describe the identification of proteins expressed during the tick attachment process  <cit>  which have contributed to the assembly of a two dimensional  database of expressed larval proteins. similarly, a proteomic analysis of i. scapularis nymphs after  <dig> hours of host feeding was reported by narasimhan  <cit> . further reports have been published describing the molecular changes in the sialomes of r. microplus, i. scapularis and i. ricinus  <cit> , and from different tick feeding instars and/or from salivary glands  <cit> . all of these reports have contributed to the knowledge of the repertoire of molecules produced by ticks and have assisted in the identification of proteins which elicit a host immune response, or proteins related to pathogen transmission such as lyme disease  <cit>  and babesiosis  <cit> .

comprehensive understanding of the molecular mechanisms which regulate the initial process of tick feeding would be incomplete if we excluded environmental effects on tick host selection and the impact of the host breed in tick genome expression. tick resistance in cattle is generally tested by placing a standard number of larval ticks on animals and subsequently counting the number of ticks that reach maturity. bos indicus  cattle appear to develop a strong natural tick resistance whereas many bos taurus breeds such as holstein-friesians do not  <cit> . studies to determine the environmental influences on gene expression pattern during the tick/host interaction on such divergent hosts have not yet been addressed.

in this study, the r. microplus gene expression microarray  <cit>  was used to compare the influence of tick resistant and susceptible bovine breeds, b. indicus  and b. taurus , respectively, on the transcriptomes of r. microplus larvae and adult females. we report that unfed larvae have elevated expression of  <dig> transcripts compared to larvae exposed to b. taurus host for  <dig> hours but not allowed to feed  and adult ticks feeding on b. indicus cattle have elevated expression of  <dig> transcripts compared to adult ticks feeding on b. taurus. finally, a global analysis of the gene expression microarray of unfed larvae, frustrated larvae and adult ticks of r. microplus demonstrates that a total of  <dig> ests are highly expressed in the early stages of r. microplus feeding on b. indicus cattle  compared with ticks feeding on b. taurus . this is the first tick functional genomic study providing new insights to describe the complex interaction of host specificity and host breed effects on r. microplus gene expression.

RESULTS
1-assessment of gene expression on primary stages of unfed and frustrated larvae
a) transcripts highly expressed b-fl and h-fl versus unattached/unfed larvae
the tick attachment and feeding process involves sequential behavioural and molecular changes which can be examined both during host recognition of newly hatched larvae and during larval host attachment while responding to feeding stimuli following host recognition. in this microarray comparison, unattached/unfed larvae  versus frustrated larvae obtained after  <dig> hrs of exposure to bos indicus  and b. taurus  cattle resulted in the identification of  <dig> transcripts highly expressed in frustrated larvae on brahman and holstein-friesian . the clusters of transcripts low expressed in unattached/unfed larvae were similar in these microarray comparisons with differences only in the number of transcripts per protein family group .

in both experimental groups of frustrated larvae there were highly expressed transcripts associated with ggy domain proteins. for example, h-fl had two transcripts related to ggy proteins and b-fl had a total of six transcripts, all with significant e-values . ggy proteins are associated with the tick cement proteins and/or with antimicrobial activity  <cit> . however, the presence of ggy transcripts at the early stages of r. microplus seeking a host  suggests an important role in the process of tick-host attachment. interestingly, all of the highly expressed r. microplus ggy domain transcripts had the same protein hit  at varying degrees of similarity, and the two transcripts identified in frustrated larvae on holstein-friesian were also highly expressed among the ten ggy related ests from frustrated larvae on brahman cattle. microbial defence transcripts were similar in b-fl  and h-fl  . in b-fl these transcripts included a putative microplusin, lipocalins , female histamine binding proteins  and only one transcript member of the protease category, metis- <dig> . defence transcripts in h-fl samples were a microplusin, a lospin  <dig> related to lospins from amblyomma americanum  <cit> , lipocalins , a plancitoxin- <dig> that has been associated with dnase ii activity  <cit> , and an ixoderin which is similar to the lectin dorin m  <cit> . the protease category in h-fl was represented by three transcripts, carboxypeptidase, serine proteinase and a metalloprotease - metis 3-which is also highly expressed in b-fl .


                                 transcript category
                                 brahman cattle
                                 holstein-friesian cattle
                                 brahman cattle
                                 holstein-friesian cattle
                                 references
data set access link: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/query/acc.cgi?acc=gse <dig> 

microplusin, highly expressed in b-fl and h-fl, is an antimicrobial peptide related to tick immunity commonly found in sialotranscriptomes of related blood-feeding arthropods  <cit>  . lipocalins expressed in both frustrated larval samples are commonly associated with the modulation of the immune responses, regulation of cell homeostasis and in the clearance of endogenous and exogenous compounds. also, they play roles in retinol and pheromone transport, olfaction, invertebrate coloration and prostaglandin synthesis. therefore, lipocalins can perform a number of functions during tick-host interactions as they bind small molecules, interact with membrane receptors or form macromolecular complexes by binding to soluble proteins  <cit> . differential expression for transcripts encoding for tick histamine binding proteins was not evident in the h-fl samples. conversely, serine protease inhibitors  were differentially expressed in h-fl but not in b-fl . a lospin  transcript was highly expressed in h-fl. it is related to the  <dig> serpins or lospins from a. americanum expressed ubiquitously in the midgut, salivary glands and ovaries with lospins - <dig>  - <dig>  and - <dig> expressed at higher levels in the midgut  <cit> . these inhibitors, found in egg and larval stages of r. microplus, demonstrate moderate inhibition of blood coagulation enzymes, . furthermore, r. microplus serine proteinase inhibitors bmtis from larvae have been reported as active inhibitors of trypsin, neutrophil elastase, plasmin and plasma kallikrein  <cit> . these inhibitors have a role in the modulation of the proteolytic activity identified in r. microplus larval life stages. the induction of protease inhibitor transcript was statistically significant in r. microplus larvae attaching to the b. taurus host indicating a host breed influence on these genes  <cit> .

ixoderins highly expressed in h-fl  are lectin proteins primarily expressed in tick haemocytes and salivary glands. lectins are an essential part of non-self recognition, haemaglutination and in the transmission of pathogens in both soft and hard ticks  <cit> . metis  <dig> transcripts were identified in both b-fl and h-fl  and members of this metalloprotease family are involved with blood meal digestion. metis proteins are expressed by salivary glands during adult stage blood feeding in h. longicornis female ticks   <cit>  and also in the i. scapularis male tick  <cit> .

a group of putative secreted salivary gland proteins were highly expressed similarly in both experimental groups compared to unfed larvae  . in b-fl there were three highly expressed transcripts compared with larvae that were associated with heat shock proteins  with another five transcripts identified as hemelipoglycoproteins , cytochrome c oxidases  and one glutathione s-transferase  transcript . hsp transcripts , a hemelipoglycoprotein and cytochrome p <dig> were highly expressed in h-fl . hsps are required to stabilize proteins when temperature changes from approximately 20° c to 38° c occur as the tick is ingesting warm host blood or when the tick is in contact with the skin of the warm-blooded bovine host  <cit> . hemelipoglycoproteins and cytochrome c are involved in the detoxification process or energy production of larval stages  <cit> . the major functions of gsts include the detoxification of xenobiotics, digestive processes, and prostaglandin synthesis and they are also associated with a series of reactions essential to protect cell constituents from oxidative attack by oxygen and oxygen-associated free radicals  <cit> . however, further work is needed to understand the physiological role of gsts in tick metabolism as well as to evaluate its function during tick-host interaction.

b) high expressed ests in unfed larvae  versus b-fl and h-fl
a comparison between unfed r. microplus larvae versus b-fl and h-fl was conducted. gene expression comparison between l and b-fl revealed a different transcriptome pattern compared with the differences described below for h-fl. there were only  <dig> transcripts highly expressed in l compared to b-fl . all of these highly expressed transcripts had no significant similarities to known proteins .

a total of  <dig> genes had an elevated expression in l compared to h-fl  seventeen transcripts had hits to unnamed proteins and twenty had no significant similarities to other proteins. transcripts for serpin- <dig> and serpin- <dig> cluster in the defence group  and were highly expressed by larvae not feeding or sensing a host . serine protease inhibitors or serpins are members of a ubiquitous superfamily, which target proteases, causing irreversible losses in the enzymatic activity by distorting the protease structure. serine proteinase inhibitors are present in the arthropod haemolymph to protect their hosts from pathogens or parasites by inhibiting fungal or bacterial proteinases  <cit> . also, the serine protease inhibitor gene family is involved in the regulation of several physiological functions such as the blood clotting cascade, clot resolution, the inflammatory response and complement activation  <cit> , hence serine protease inhibitors are important factors which disrupt defensive host processes. therefore, serpins play important roles prior to tick attachment as previously described  <cit> . however, serpins in resting larvae  may also function to defend against potential pathogens.


                                 transcript category
                                 highly expressed 
                                 references
esterases are highly variable and multifunctional hydrolytic enzymes. in insects, these enzymes are involved with various physiological activities such as regulation of juvenile hormone levels  <cit> , digestive processes, reproductive behaviour, functioning of the nervous system, metabolism and sequestration of pesticides  <cit> . there was only one member of the esterase family in this comparison identified at a significant e-value. the role of this enzyme at this particular stage is involved in digestive processes and optimal functioning of the nervous system during early tick development stages  <cit>  .

the transcript corresponding to tc <dig> was identified as hemelipoglycoprotein with high similarity to vitellogenin. tick vitellogenin sequesters heme and transfers the heme to eggs  <cit> . the heme biosynthesis pathway is absent in ticks, therefore they are obligate blood-feeders. vitellogenin is an unusual heme-binding protein which is critical to embryo development because it provides ticks access to heme in the absence of a host. hence, the biological function of the vitellogenin present in this tick instar as a storage protein related to the maturation process  <cit> . the remaining transcripts were genes from different metabolic pathways and genetic information storage processes.

these results suggest that some important metabolic activity in these 'resting unstimulated' larvae changes upon sensing the host. low expressed genes were observed in frustrated larvae within the first  <dig> hours of larval contact with the host. possibly, this provides preliminary evidence of gene expression regulation mediated by tick adaptation to the new environment whereby certain metabolic activities required for sustaining the larvae in the absence of the host need first to be down regulated. perhaps if left for longer than  <dig> hours, these host stimulated larvae would have started to show evidence of a new gene expression pattern associated with host recognition and attachment. it was recently reported that a  <dig> h period of larval 'frustration' demonstrated a high metabolic activity compared to the resting unstimulated larvae  <cit> . the down regulation of several genes in frustrated larvae after  <dig> hours of b. taurus host exposure was recently corroborated in a parallel study undertaken within our group demonstrating a decrease in number of identified mirnas also at this stage . evidence of similar changes but at protein level was observed in the protein expression patterns induced by the host-parasite interaction in adult r. appendiculatus ticks that were physically detached and reattached onto the host  <cit> .

feeding behaviour has been characterized in different tick species and it is regulated by two main biological factors - the nature of the sensory input obtained by a larvae and the central nervous system processing of that input. the localization and morphology of most of the sensory receptors involved in feeding behaviour and the ultrastructures of tick neurons has been studied, but not at the transcriptome level  <cit> . the difference in the gene expression patterns between b. taurus and b. indicus frustrated larvae compared to unfed larvae could be a result of differences in host specific stimuli during the larval attachment phase on these breeds. in summary, transcripts differentially expressed in the unstimulated larvae  were largely related to important metabolic pathways or transport mechanisms necessary for sustaining the ectoparasite's physiological resting state. the role of some transcripts in unfed larval stages such as serpins remains to be studied.

c) highly expressed ests in b-fl versus h-fl
a comparison of frustrated larvae exposed to brahman  versus frustrated larvae exposed to holstein  demonstrated elevated expression of  <dig> transcripts in b-fl . the majority of these high expressed genes were transcripts with no significant similarities and unnamed proteins ; three transcripts were associated with ggy proteins, tc6059; tc5802; tc <dig> at e-values ranging from  <dig> x10- <dig> to  <dig> x10- <dig>  respectively. additional transcripts were members of the lipocalin family similar to the r. appendiculatus histamine binding proteins  and a serine protease inhibitor, serpin  <dig>  all at highly significant e-values . histamine is released from mast cells and basophils, often but not always mediated via an ige-dependent mechanism, and is also released by the platelets of many mammals. additionally, histamine is a regulator of t cell responses where binding to the lymphocyte h <dig> receptor results in a positive th <dig> response while binding to h <dig> receptor results in inhibition of th <dig> and th <dig> responses  <cit> . therefore, histamine binding proteins have an important role in the manipulation of host immune response together with a protease inhibitor such as serpin  <dig> that acts against host clotting systems and protease from the complement system  <cit> . it is feasible that some serpins are associated with specific tick histamine binding proteins and hence are over expressed during their activities, for instance when larvae are responding to brahman cattle. serpins comprise a large gene family in ticks, but the differential expression of different serpins in h-fl and b-fl do suggest different functions. however, the significance of this observation remains to be confirmed. the identification of highly expressed transcripts related to the lipocalin family - as histamine binding proteins-in larval r. microplus differs from results obtained by chmelař with i. ricinus where transcripts for the lipocalin family were mainly detected during the later phases of adult feeding. only one i. ricinus transcript was identified after  <dig> h of host feeding. the others were identified at  <dig> and  <dig> days of host feeding and no transcripts from the lipocalin family were differentially expressed in unfed larvae  <cit> . the difference in lipocalin expression pattern could be explained by the fact that r. microplus is a one host tick where the tick is exposed to the same host for a prolonged period of time during its whole life cycle. in contrast, i. ricinus is a three host tick with its larval stages feeding on small reptiles, mammals, and birds. the adult ticks feed only on large mammals, including cattle, sheep, and deer. thus r. microplus may need to apply similar strategies in both the larvae and adult stages in order to combat host immune responses, which would differ from other tick species that parasitise multiple hosts.

other transcripts differentially expressed in b-fl compared to h-fl were similar to the dermacentor variabilis hemelipoglycoprotein  with highly significant e-values . cuticle protein transcripts  were only highly expressed in b-fl and not h-fl. cuticle proteins are a very important family particularly for immature stages of endopterygote insects which increase gradually in size during an instar  <cit> . in this comparison cuticle transcripts with an elevated expression in b-fl were found to be similar to tachypleus tridentatus  and i. ricinus  cuticle sequences. the remaining transcripts were mostly genes associated with metabolic processing .

2- microarray comparison of the differential expressed transcripts in r. microplus feeding on brahman versus holstein-friesian
the main objective of this study was to compare gene expression of r. microplus larvae exposed to tick susceptible and resistant breeds of cattle. the analysis of changes in gene expression in all r. microplus stages revealed that r. microplus ticks feeding on and sensing tick resistant brahman  have a total of  <dig> transcripts highly expressed   compared with r. microplus ticks feeding on tick susceptible holstein-friesian cattle  . this analysis showed that ticks feeding on b. indicus  exhibited in general a high expression of genes associated with amino acid , lipid , nucleotide metabolism , general metabolism , signal transduction , and genes related with genetic information storage and processing , exemplifying a high level of physiological activity of r. microplus tick attached and feeding on the b. indicus host. the majority of the high expressed transcripts represented in this comparison were of unknown function  and no significant similarities . the higher physiological activity of ticks feeding on brahman cattle was also evidenced by the identification of transcripts high expressed that were: member of transport pathways , and cell wall and membrane  such as acetylcholinesterase, and a vitellogenin receptor .

r. microplus has developed various mechanisms to modulate their host's haemostatic and immune defences as part of its adaptation to a blood feeding environment  <cit> . ticks have developed an arsenal of molecular strategies to overcome these haemostatic mechanisms and immune defences. in our survey,  <dig> transcripts from defence and protease categories involved in modulating the host defences, represented 7% of the total transcripts expressed at high levels in ticks feeding on b. indicus cattle . for example, thrombin inhibitors  were previously reported in the saliva of r. microplus as: bmap which blocks the thrombin active site  <cit> , microphilin which interacts with thrombin exosite i  <cit> , and more recently, another thrombin inhibitor was identified specific to r. microplus gut which could assist to keep the blood from clotting during digestion  <cit> . a slight increase in tc <dig> gut expression was determined using qrt-pcr . a transcript similar to lospin  <dig>  could be important in the evasion of host defences. lospins/serpin are ubiquitously expressed in the midgut, ovary and salivary glands and have been reported in a. americanum  <cit>  and i. scapularis  <cit> . another two transcripts were identified as cystatins which are reversible inhibitors of papain-like cysteine proteases only recently discovered in ticks  <cit> . this inhibitor family is subdivided into three closely related subfamilies: family  <dig>  family  <dig> and family  <dig>  among them, only family  <dig> cystatins are intracellular. the physiological function of these proteins has been proposed to be the regulation of protein turnover and defence against pathogens as well as producing a balance in the host-parasite immune relationship  <cit> . in r. microplus only cystatin family  <dig>  named bmcystatin has been biochemically characterized and its function could be related to the prevention of premature degradation of vitellin  <cit> . the sialostatin l  from i. scapularis was present in saliva and actively affected host proteolytic activity at sites of infestation. this protein also displayed an anti-inflammatory role and the inhibition of cytotoxic t lymphocyte proliferation in the host, thus contributing to the successful feeding of the tick  <cit> .


                              transcript category
                              highly expressed
                              low expressed
                              references
histamine, a principal mediator of inflammatory reactions, is released by the host in response to tissue damage. it is mainly secreted by mast cells and basophils and binds to h <dig> and/or h <dig> receptors on the surface of target cells increasing the permeability of post-capillary blood vessels allowing wound repair factors to pass into the co-damaged tissues. blood sucking arthropods have adopted a different strategy to control histamine salivary gland extracts, with rhipicephalus species of ixodid ticks showing an uncharacterized "histamine-blocking" activity  <cit> . also the one host tick r. microplus remains feeding on the host prolonging its exposure to host defences, including inflammatory and immune responses. in resistant animals, rejection of ticks is often based on cutaneous hypersensitivity reactions  <cit> . acquired resistance to ticks can be reduced by the in vivo administration of synthetic h <dig> and h <dig> receptor antagonists, implicating histamine in this rejection process  <cit> . in blood sucking arthropods, many lipocalin related sequences, expressed in the salivary glands, have been identified. several have been characterized, notably rahbp <dig> . tc <dig>  was confirmed as highly expressed in qrt-pcr analyses in the female salivary gland . the lipocalin proteins are implicated in the completion of the blood meal, interfering with platelet aggregation, blood coagulation, activation of the complement system and inflammation  <cit> . in tick feeding on b. indicus, transcripts associated with lipocalin or specifically with histamine binding proteins  have an elevated expression compared with ticks on b. taurus. the differences in expressed genes in this comparison could be associated with the necessity for r. microplus to overcome a stronger innate immune response observed in b. indicus compared to b. taurus cattle  <cit> .

transcripts related with immunoglobulin binding  were highly expressed in ticks feeding on b. indicus cattle  compared with the unfed larvae and the frustrated larval stages on the same host. immunoglobulin-binding proteins are present in the tick haemolymph and salivary glands of r. appendiculatus, a. variegatum, i. hexagonus and i. ricinus and it is thought that these proteins are responsible for host immunoglobulin-g excretion via salivation, during the parasite feeding  <cit> .

there is a significant increase in protease genes expressed by ticks on b. indicus cattle  which is probably influenced by the tick's need to penetrate the host skin in order to reach the blood vessels. perhaps these proteins are stimulated in a host specific manner, as their expression was absent in the same stage ticks sampled in this study from b. taurus breeds. proteases can damage the capillaries and small vessels causing a bleed, which will increase the blood volume for feeding. thus, proteases directly interfere with the blood clotting and the platelet aggregation systems of their hosts by the action of these proteases and protease inhibitors. these enzymes are probably responsible for promoting a pre-oral or even an oral digestion, acting also in the maintenance of blood in its liquid form  <cit> . also, the high expressed protease transcripts could be related to degradation of collagen which is over expressed in b indicus with respect to b taurus cattle  <cit> . this phenomenon contributes to the efficiency of the tick feeding process that will be completed by the gut enzymes. in this context, metalloproteases are emerging as substances with toxic effects that disturb the haemostatic system and degrade the cellular matrix proteins of the host  <cit> . ticks feeding on b. indicus had five transcripts identified as metalloproteases at high levels of significance as highly expressed in b. indicus compared to b. taurus ticks. tc <dig> was confirmed as highly expressed in adult tick salivary gland tissue using qrt-pcr . also, serine protease transcripts were highly expressed  with high significance. in addition, transcripts corresponding to putative secreted salivary proteins  had an elevated expression in r. microplus feeding on b. indicus and  <dig> different transcripts coding for p <dig> proteins which represents 4% of the total differentially expressed transcripts. p <dig> proteins are analogous to troponin i like proteins involved in actin regulation  <cit> . however, p <dig> from hyalomma asiaticum is more similar to histamine binding proteins secreted in tick saliva  <cit>   including a transcript with significant similarity to a putative glutathione s-transferase  <cit> .

the gradual increase in size during an instar is a characteristic of the immature stages of r microplus. cuticular synthesis is at a high level in this arthropod and there is an increase in thickness as well as an increase in area of the cuticle. during tick feeding on brahman cattle, there were genes differentially expressed described as cuticle proteins  . all these genes are necessary for the cuticle adaptations that r. microplus requires for each instar stage, for instance adult females can increase in weight from 10- <dig> mg to 150- <dig> mg in less than  <dig> hrs. throughout this time the procuticle undergoes rapid stretching while the epicuticle unfolds to allow the increase in volume  <cit> . a possible explanation to this difference is that ticks feeding on either host require expanding upon blood feeding therefore cuticle gene expression timing could be different for the ticks collected from the different breeds, or these genes are induced by factors related to the interactions with a specific host breed. a group of transcripts with unknown function  and a transcript related with genetic information storage and processing were found to be expressed at low levels in brahman compared to holstein - friesian ticks . these were utilised to assess the relative abundance of transcripts in the larval and adult tick stages. the cdna samples used for qrt-pcr were different to those prepared for the microarray survey as 'methods'. those selected to compare the larval samples included: histamine binding protein of  <dig>  kda , ggy domain proteins , atsp , lipocalin-like protein , unknown , serpin- <dig>  and a serpin- <dig> precursor . the global r. microplus gene expression microarray comparison showed that there are  <dig> genes with elevated expression in ticks feeding on and sensing brahman cattle compared with ticks feeding on and sensing holstein-friesian cattle. the highly expressed ests selected for qrt-pcr evaluation of brahman vs holstein-friesian ticks  included: histamine binding  <dig> , immunoglobulin g binding protein b , unknown protein , and a putative salivary protein . the qrt-pcr demonstrated an increase in expression as determined by the arrays under the conditions of this study. of the assays selected eight  had a high correlation with the microarray experiment at  <dig> . when all assays are included in the statistical analysis a lower correlation  <dig>  is observed. this could have been influenced by a number of factors including the fact that a third set of samples were used in the qrt-pcr analyses and not a pool of the original microarray samples. furthermore, the selection of housekeeping genes for r. microplus expression normalization is not yet a standardised technique. most researchers utilise a single housekeeping gene  <cit> ;  <cit> , though, for accuracy in quantitative gene expression analyses, it is recommended to add housekeeping genes until stable fold change is observed  <cit> . stable fold change levels were not obtained in this study for all transcripts , using three housekeeping genes for normalization. however, there are currently few known housekeeping genes available for r. microplus expression analysis as confirmed in a recent publication  <cit> . as more tick microarray data is now available, this will enable the identification of stable housekeeping genes to standardise r. microplus qrt-pcr in the future .

aqrt-pcr was conducted with a third cdna preparation  of the different tick stages.

bthese qrt-pcr assays demonstrated a high correlation at  <dig>  with the microarray data 

CONCLUSIONS
in this study we provide the first transcriptome evidence which demonstrates differences in the transcripts expression pattern of ticks feeding on tick resistant and susceptible cattle breeds. r. microplus ticks express genes differentially as life stages change and some of these differences can be influenced by host breed. larvae stimulated by the b. indicus host expressed a higher number of proteins involved in tick attachment such as putative cement-associated proteins , proteases required for blood meal digestion, oxidative stress adapting proteins, and defences against the host mediators, such as anticoagulants, immunosuppressants, and histamine-binding proteins. as feeding progressed in the adult female stage, a new set of transcripts had an elevated expression on brahman cattle including immunoglobulin binding proteins and cuticle proteins, as well as transcripts with similar functions to those highly expressed during the initial larval attachment phase. r. microplus ticks on resistant brahman cattle exhibited similar patterns of gene expression as ticks on susceptible holstein-friesian in respect to gene categories with some changes in the number and types of transcripts differentially expressed. many of the high and low expressed transcripts identified could not be assigned function as a fully annotated tick genome is not yet available. the qrt-pcr for evaluation of the gene expression corresponded well with the microarray gene expression analysis. this is the first study to demonstrate molecular evidence for the basis of differences in tick gene expression on tick resistant versus susceptible hosts.

