BACKGROUND
commercial strawberry has a value of  <dig>  billion dollars in the united states, and represents a significant regional crop throughout the world. despite its value, fewer than  <dig> annotated sequences existed in public databases in early  <dig>  the information discrepancy is a consequence of limited molecular study in the challenging octoploid cultivated varieties. the thin public informatics base hence represents a barrier to meaningful study of functional genomics, genetic mechanisms, as well as the molecular-systematic relationships between the octoploid strawberry, the rosaceae and other species. the lack of basic sequence information hinders the development of transgenic technologies that would advance molecular-physiological studies and potentially benefit the grower and consumer. overall, the dearth of sequence information has limited agile molecular resolution studies in this important crop plant.

to remedy this discrepancy ~ <dig> expressed sequence tags  were sequenced from a whole-plant cdna library derived from various tissues of the strawberry festival cultivar. this cultivar was chosen because of its east-coast and west-coast lineage as well as its range of favorable horticultural attributes. 'strawberry festival' produces large, uniform, firm fruit, and is resistant to botrytis cinera, the causative agent behind gray mold  <cit> . it is a predominant cultivar grown in florida, and has been well studied in many reports of fungicide use, disease resistance and post-harvest fruit quality. the study of an important commercial variety will provide tools to directly aid breeding and probe genetic mechanisms in these cultivars.

strawberry has unrealized potential as a research model and tool, and the lack of molecular markers for breeding and the eventual need for genetic improvement of the current suite of cultivars makes sequence examination especially timely. information gained from the octoploid will also translate to defining molecular markers to facilitate mapping in both the diploid species  as well as octoploid cultivars. a strong sequence database is the cornerstone of functional genomics studies, and this information will aid development of such tools in fragaria and in the rosaceae in general. definition of expressed gene sequence variation in the octoploid may aid in the understanding of polyploid evolution and/or silencing of component genomes. sequence information constitutes a basis for eventual reverse-genetic and activation-tag studies. both the diploid and octoploid species are excellent candidates for such studies as they are efficiently transformed and regenerated  <cit> , possess a diploid genome that is slightly larger than that of arabidopsis thaliana  <cit> , and can be rapidly propagated from seed  or runners  <cit> . strawberry also may be an excellent candidate as a bioreactor, a system to manufacture specific compounds of interest. a presentation of the elements of the strawberry transcriptome facilitates the initiation of such studies.

despite strawberry's crop value and potential as a research tool, a formal analysis of est data has not been reported. in this report we identify over  <dig> unique transcripts assembled from  <dig>  ests derived from whole-plant vegetative tissues  <dig> h after salicylic acid treatment. the cdna library was prepared from total rna pooled from roots, petioles, stolons, leaves and meristems to generate a diverse set of transcripts with limited redundancy. multiple analyses, such as developing a unigene set, annotation with putative function and identification of ssrs, opens additional paths that will speed research into strawberry physiology, evolution, genetics and genomics. this represents the first major est report from fragaria and can now serve as a baseline for these further studies.

RESULTS
the fragaria × ananassa est library
the lambda zap cdna library was generated from whole-plant tissues from mature plants  <dig> after salicylic acid treatment. the details of salicylate treatment, plant materials and library construction are presented in methods.

est processing and assembly
a total of  <dig> of ests were sequenced, resulting in  <dig> high-quality trimmed sequences which were submitted to genbank on august  <dig>   <dig>  representing a success rate of  <dig> %, these sequences have an average length of  <dig> bp and a phred quality value of  <dig>  assembly of the sequences into a unigene was performed in order to reduce redundancy of the sequences and identify those coding for the same protein . the total unigene consists of  <dig> singlets for a total of  <dig> unigenes.

contigs were assembled from est sequences. the final unigene has  <dig> contigs,  <dig> comprised of two or three merged ests. eight contigs were assembled from four individual ests. contigs assembled from five or more ests may be useful to deconstruct in the interest of studying allelic diversity in the octoploid. in diploid species alleles represent heterozygousity at a given locus as well as gene duplication and subfunctionalization of a given coding region. allelic diversity is potentially enriched in the octoploid, since the octoploid maintains the alleles maintained from at least three donor diploid genomes. expression of specific alleles may be informative, as patterns may be traced back to the diploid genome contributors, allowing description of expression from within, or between, donor genomes.

for instance, contig  <dig> represents psal, a nuclear-encoded subunit of the photosystem  <dig> reaction center. the contig was assembled from five ests, two of which  are identical in sequence yet vary in length. the other members contain snps, especially 18c <dig>  which maintains five unique base changes over a  <dig> bp alignment of all five ests. others contain a single alteration in this relatively conserved gene sequence. similar results were observed for contigs  <dig> and  <dig>  which were assembled from seven and nine ests, respectively.

other contigs have been assembled from many ests, such as contigs  <dig> and  <dig>  these contigs encode light-harvesting, chlorophyll-binding  proteins and a non-specific lipid transfer protein, respectively. the ests corresponding to these genes arise from small multigene families within a diploid genome in most species, making these constructs less useful for studying between-genome polymorphisms.

functional annotation
computational tools are now regularly used to infer function based upon significant sequence similarity toexperimentally verifiedproteins or putative proteins. these analyses implement fasta and blast comparisons against non-redundant databases as well as go annotation. the est sequences were compared against known databases using these tools.

protein homology searches were performed in order to identify the putative function of the ests . ncbi's non-redundant  protein and rosaceae est databases searches were run on february  <dig>   <dig> using the fastx <dig>  algorithm  <cit> . the nr database contained  <dig> protein amino acid sequences at the time of the search. of the  <dig> unigenes,  <dig>  or  <dig> % of the set, had significant matches to this database . a comparison against swiss-prot was performed on july  <dig>   <dig>  yielding a lower number of significant matches. swiss-prot is a curated, highly-annotated, smaller database of  <dig>  proteins of demonstrated function.  <dig> of the unigenes  had significant matches . only  <dig> of the unigenes did not match a protein in either of these two protein databases . upon close scrutiny the est sequences did not contain significant open reading frames, suggesting that the est sequence represents long untranslated regions, structural rnas, or bona fide proteins, unique to fragaria based on current comparisons.

comparisons to rosaceae ests
characterization by gene ontology
the fragaria unigenes were further annotated by gene ontology  assignment based on the single "best hit" match against the swiss-prot database. all  <dig> ests with hits to swiss-prot have matching go-terms . the three categories are function , process , and component . for molecular function, the strawberry ests were assigned to eight categories. the majority  of the ests were assigned to "catalytic activity" . for biological process, the ests were assigned to four categories with the majority  representing genes participating in metabolism . when grouped according to likely cellular component, the ests were assigned to six categories and 93% were covered by two go terms: "intracellular"  and "membrane" . the full chart of the assignment of est's to specific go term categories may be viewed on the gdr website  <cit> .

homology to mapped peach ests
linkage relationships have been identified for many peach ests and have facilitated placement on the peach genetic map. comparison of the fragaria unigene to this set of ests presents a basis for developing linkage relationships between the established peach, and growing fragaria, linkage maps. a series of peach ests have been conclusively anchored to genetic maps by sharing bacs with genetic markers previously used for bac hybridization  <cit> . of the  <dig> mapped peach ests  <dig>  showed a significant match with the strawberry unigene .

computational analysis for ssrs and orfs in the ests
simple sequence repeats  were identified in the strawberry unigene data set . in this study, ssrs are defined as dimers with at least  <dig> repeats, trimers with at least  <dig> repeats, tetramers with at least  <dig> repeats, and pentamers with at least  <dig> repeats.  <dig> unigene sequences  were found to have one or more repeat, and  <dig> different motifs were identified within the set of clones. a total of  <dig> ssrs were found with trimers being the most common motif length . the frequency of motifs for all the possible dimers and trimers is listed in table  <dig>  to examine the distribution of ssrs in the putative coding region and the utr, we detected open reading frames in the unigenes using the flip program . when the longest open reading frame was selected as the putative coding region,  <dig>  of these microsatellites were found inside putative coding regions. when filtered for the most optimal primer candidates  a total of  <dig> ssr-flanking sequences met the criteria . these optimal candidates can be downloaded via the gdr ftp site  <cit> .

discussion
fragaria × ananassa is complex polyploid, arising from a spontaneous cross between fragaria virginiana and fragaria chiloensis. the genome contains contributions from at least three diploid species  <cit> . over the past century cultivation of octoploid strawberry has progressed solely on the careful efforts of breeders, physiologists and biochemists. this complex genome and coincident awkward genetics has slowed the development of molecular markers and other tools that would benefit breeding efforts and understanding of strawberry genomics. this report details a starting point to advance the traditional strawberry research avenues using modern molecular tools to forward structural-and functional-genomics studies in this important crop species. as important, it demonstrates that computational tools may be used to comprehensively mine large quantities of important data from a relatively small data set. as these tools become available as web-based applications, small sequencing efforts may extract valuable information that may shape research questions in under-represented crops like strawberry.

recent efforts demonstrate the importance of sequence information as the basis of functional-genomics studies. previous reports of gene expression in strawberry have been dependent on the discovery and characterization of specific genes of interest, such as an o-methyltransferase associated with flavor  <cit> , enzymes that influence fruit firmness  <cit> , as well as several others  <cit> . current technologies have the capacity to assess genome-wide transcriptome changes associated with a given treatment or developmental process  <cit> . recent studies in cultivated strawberry have implemented proprietary sequence information in a microarray format to unveil the transcriptome that coincides with fruit ripening  <cit> . these studies have identified critical regulators of fruit flavor. the first study identified strawberry alcohol acetyl transferase as a critical enzyme in the production of volatiles esters. the associated transcript increased during fruit ripening and the recombinant protein catalyzes the appropriate syntheses from a variety of substrates in e. coli  <cit> . a recent functional-genomics study characterized nerolidol synthase  <dig>  the enzyme that catalyzes the formation of the flavor compounds linalool and nerolidol from geranyl diphosphase and farnesyl diphosphate, respectively. the enzyme is expressed in the receptacle of ripening fruit, not in leaves, and is highly expressed in cultivated species relative to wild species. the report concludes that selection of cultivated varieties for fruit flavor fixed mechanisms to express and localize terpene-associated enzymes that favorably affected flavor, while repressing those that make fruits less desirable  <cit> . although the factors leading to fruit flavor in strawberry have been studied for decades, a transcriptome survey produced the most definitive results, owing again to the usefulness of a sequence database in fragaria.

the transcripts characterized from this project will allow development of genomics resources for the study of other important physiological responses. a subset of these ests is shown in table  <dig>  these ests are relevant to processes of interest to the strawberry industry and may represent important molecular tools to researchers. the first set represents a series of ests with sequence homology to genes associated with the photoperiodic control of flowering. these include close homologs to constans , a likely transcription factor that induces specific meristem identity genes under the appropriate photoperiod  <cit> . a homolog of a critical regulator of meristem identity agl20/suppressor of co overexpression was also identified. this gene encodes a mads-box transcription factor that likely functions downstream of co in conferring light signals to the promoters of meristem identity genes  <cit> . an est representing vernalization insensitive  <dig> also was identified in this library. vin <dig> is a protein shown to function downstream of co in regulating seasonal flowering responses  <cit> . vin <dig> is a chromatin-remodeling protein that represses flc, a protein that negatively-regulates co function  <cit>  allowing the plant to appropriately time flowering relative to seasonal chilling.

analysis of this dataset revealed a suite of likely homologs to pathogenesis-related  genes, such as thionins, ndr <dig>  β 1-3-glucanase and chitinases, and lrr proteins. the prevalence of this family of proteins was not surprising as the plants were treated with salicylic acid  <dig> h before rna harvest to enrich for pr genes in the library. these genes are of particular interest to plant scientists because of their potential to help define the mechanism of disease resistance and susceptibility. it is possible that these genes may be especially useful targets for antisense or overexpression in unveiling these agriculturally-important traits, or possibly in the design of transgenic plants with heightened resistance to common plant pathogens. all of these facets are important, as strawberry cultivation requires copious application of fungicides and/or bacteriostatic compounds to ensure proper fruit set.

of interest to this laboratory are homologs of genes associated with photomorphogenesis, such as hy <dig> and non-phototropic hypocotyl  <dig>  these both play roles in early light development, yet hy <dig> also has been shown to influence downstream developmental processes such as fruit ripening and pigmentation  <cit>  and also binds to the promoters of genes associated with circadian clock progression  <cit> .

the information distilled from all of these analyses can now be used to design strawberry-specific probes to assess gene expression patterns and develop transgenics to directly test gene function. these important studies are underway and will facilitate comparisons between the biological sensory/response mechanisms in strawberry to those of model systems.

the apparent sequence conservation between fragaria and other rosaceous tree crops suggests that cross-species microarray studies may be productive within the rosaceae. this study demonstrates that less than 11% of the ests are unique to strawberry. this value is likely inflated, as ests by nature contain variable untranslated regions and other features that may preclude efficient identification of homologs. of the  <dig> ests,  <dig> have strong homology with other rosaceae ests. those featuring over 85% homology over  <dig> bases are between  <dig> and 100% identical to transcripts isolated from other rosaceae, with an average identity of 91% . the high degree of similarity may be a useful platform for comparisons between molecular-mechanistic differences exhibited between diverse species with little sequence variation. here, the diversity within the rosaceae is likely due to variation in gene expression, and est data and microarray technologies are an idea platform to study these patterns.

the relatively extensive genetic mapping in prunus has delineated linkage associations between genes of the genus, those in select rosaceae species and even arabidopsis  <cit> . physical maps have also been developed from transcript mapping  <cit> . the ests from this fragaria collection were compared to the mapped peach genes, and  <dig> agreed with strong homology . these relationships are important as they present the basis to study structural relationships between cousin species within the rosaceae. since these loci are mapped in peach, they represent excellent loci to also add to the growing diploid strawberry linkage map  <cit> , and eventually map in the octoploid.

mapping efforts may also be hastened from identification of ssrs. ssrs derived from ests provide a basis to assign linkage relationships to known gene products, and such studies have been initiated in diploid strawberry  <cit> . in the est collection presented herein, a number of ssrs are present in transcripts correlating to putative allergens, regulators of the circadian clock, and general housekeeping genes. these transcripts can now be readily mapped in the diploid using existing populations, and such studies are currently underway. furthermore, specific genes of interest can be studied for variation within diploid species or for intron-specific polymorphisms that will allow their assignment to the diploid strawberry linkage map. these studies will ultimately facilitate the generation of molecular markers to follow traits/genes of interest in the commercial cultivars, adding the resolution of molecular tools to complement conventional breeding strategies.

the general proportions of the different functional groups  reflect well the expected state of the mature plant transcriptome as reported in previous studies. transcripts encoding enzymes associated with the cell cycle, cytoskeleton or cell walls are not abundant as mature plants are less reliant on processes governing greater cell number or cell size. approximately half of the transcripts associated with photosynthesis are members of the chlorophyll a/b binding protein family; the other half typically contains plastid-encoded transcripts. as expected, the majority of transcripts detected represent enzymes of general metabolism.

CONCLUSIONS
although a small est set, the complete suite of analyses performed herein demonstrate that a finite transcriptome snapshot may provide ample resources to seed additional study. here a relatively small number of ests has provided sufficient information to engage in further molecular, physiological and genetic studies. for instance, the pretreatment with salicylate likely enriched the expression of pathogenesis-related transcripts that can now be used to study disease progression in specific strawberry cultivars with large variations in sensitivity and resistance. clearly, the development of a comprehensive ssr catalog allows characterization of these potential genetic markers in the progeny of polymorphic cultivars, in an important crop species virtually devoid of linkage associations. unlike other markers, est-derived ssrs by definition originate from a sequence that is expressed, adding functional resolution to linkage groups built on structural polymorphisms. more importantly, the same suite of tools used to perform these analyses will be soon available through a public interface at the gdr, making comparable analyses possible. these applications are an important rationale for sequencing and analysis of a limited est set, as even a small research program may find sufficient resources to initiate molecular-genetic study of an under-represented crop species.

