BACKGROUND
mscs are cells with high in vitro expansion potential and self renewal capacity which were first isolated from bone marrow  <cit> . beside their ability to differentiate into multiple mesoderm-type lineages, e.g. osteoblasts, chondrocytes and adipocytes, bone marrow derived-mscs are also able to differentiate into endothelial cells in vitro  <cit> ; this opens new possibilities for promoting angiogenesis through cell-based therapeutic strategies.

occlusive vascular disease is the most important cause of death and morbidity in industrialized countries. treatment of end-stage disease, such as myocardium infarction, is usually accomplished by angioplasty, surgery, bypasses and other palliative interventions. however, patients with occlusive vascular disease develop a prominent collateral vascular network below the occlusive site through spontaneous arteriogenesis and angiogenesis to which contribute bone marrow derived-mesenchymal stem cells   <cit> .

however, considering the invasive procedure related to this source, there is an increasing interest in investigating the presence of mesenchymal stem cells with angiogenic potentiality in adult and fetal tissues as well as in placenta, umbilical cord blood and vein, wharton's jelly and amniotic membrane  <cit> . recently human umbilical cord blood-derived msc proved to have the ability to differentiate into endothelial cells in vitro  <cit> .

amniotic membrane is the innermost layer of placenta and consists of a thin epithelial layer, a thick basement membrane and an avascular stroma. in the amniotic membrane two cell types are present of different embryological origin: amnion epithelial cells derive from embryonic ectoderm and amnion mesenchymal cells from embryonic mesoderm  <cit> .

experimental and clinical studies have demonstrated that amniotic membrane transplantation promotes re-epithelialisation, decreases inflammation and fibrosis  <cit>  and modulates angiogenesis  <cit> . several growth factors produced from amniotic membrane are involved in these processes, such as transforming growth factor-β , basic fibroblast growth factor   <cit> , epidermal growth factor , transforming growth factor-α , keratinocyte growth factor, and hepatocyte growth factor  <cit> .

zhang et al. described the presence of mesenchymal stem cells in human placenta able to differentiate into osteogenic, adipogenic and chondrogenic lineages and able to suppress t-cell proliferation  <cit> . these results were confirmed by yen et al., who found that placenta-derived stem cells share embryonic stem cell surface markers such as ssea- <dig>  tra-1- <dig>  tra-1- <dig> and are also able to undergo neurogenic differentiation. the same authors documented a significantly higher proliferative rate by placenta-derived cells than by their bone marrow counterpart  <cit> .

in 't anker et al. first showed that amniotic membrane contains a high number of mesenchymal stem cells with bi-potential osteogenic and adipogenic differentiation  <cit> . moreover portsmann-lanz et al. demonstrated that placental mscs isolated from the first and third trimester were able to differentiate into chondrogenic, myogenic and neurogenic lineages as well, with major differences among cell types in relation to the different fetal sources   <cit> . the opportunity of having a fetal tissue that is usually discarded without any ethical conflict, and the high-yield in stem cell recovery, makes amniotic membrane a truly exciting alternative source, and one that reveals new prospects of increasing the number of clinical applications. here we characterized the capability of term amniotic membrane-derived cells to differentiate towards adipogenic, chondrogenic, osteogenic, skeletal myogenic lineages and assessed whether these cells may encompass the potential for angiogenic commitment.

in agreement with the recommendation of the international society for cellular therapy, we have named the mesenchymal cells derived from amnion amniotic membrane-human mesenchymal stromal cells   <cit> .

RESULTS
isolation of hmscs from amniotic membrane
connective tissue elements, seen in the amniotic membrane sheets by light microscopy , were mechanically and enzymatically released.

after three-four weeks of culture a population of homogeneous mesenchymal cells was isolated from human amniotic membrane and reached confluence. this population was morphologically indistinguishable from the bm-hmsc population and was easily expanded in vitro for at least  <dig> passages without any visible morphological alterations and with a high percentage of mitotic figures .

moreover the presence of the oct- <dig> transcript, coding for a relevant regulatory protein involved in the maintaining of stem cell renewal capacity and undifferentiated state in the embryonic stem cells  <cit> , was revealed through rt-pcr analysis in am-hmscs and the level of expression was higher than in bm-hmscs .

the proliferation capacity of mscs was studied through  <dig> different assays: first, am-hmscs were maintained in a sub-confluent condition  in order to determine their expansion capacity . second, the proliferation rates of am-hmscs and bm-hmscs were compared . as shown in figure 3a, passage three am-hmsc expanded approximately 300-fold in  <dig> days and yielded  <dig>  million cells.

furthermore, at each time point the number of cells in am-hmsc cultures was significantly higher than in bm-hmscs .

immunophenotypical characterization
the immunophenotypical profile of am-hmscs was consistent with that reported in the literature for bm-hmscs. thus characterization by flow cytometry revealed that am-hmscs were positive for sh <dig> , sh <dig> and sh <dig> , cd <dig>  cd <dig>  cd <dig>  and negative for the hematopoietic markers cd <dig>  cd <dig>  cd <dig> .

differentiation potential
cells isolated from amniotic membranes were cultured, under specific conditions for targeted commitments, so as to differentiate into multiple cell lineages as described in methods.

chondrogenic differentiation was inferred after  <dig> weeks' induction by the appearance of abundant extracellular matrix. such a conclusion was strengthened by immunohistochemical analysis, which showed the presence of human type ii collagen .

osteogenic differentiation was revealed as early as the first week of induction by morphological changes and, at the end of the induction period, by the formation of mineralized matrix. cells became flattened and showed calcium deposits as demonstrated by von kossa staining, suggesting a close similarity with bm-hmscs .

no significant differences were found from the in vitro differentiation obtained by bm-hmscs as described in the literature and confirmed in our lab .

adipogenic differentiation showed single adipocytic multivacuolar cells together with small and large colonies, the size increasing with the time of induction. large-sized aggregates displayed an intensive secretion of large neutral lipid drops which was never observed with bm-hmsc adipogenic differentiation .

no osteogenic, adipogenic or chondrogenic differentiations were seen in the same cells when cultured with the control medium.

myogenic differentiation was assessed by rt-pcr for the myogenic-specific transcription factors myod and myogenin. as indicated by muguruma et al.  <cit> , the presence of myod was investigated after  <dig> days' culture, while myogenin appeared one week later . the skeletal protein desmin was detectable after  <dig> weeks' induction, in line with the fact that lineage-specific cytoskeletal filaments are synthesized during late myogenesis. immunocytochemical staining was used to highlight desmin-positive cells .

the matrigel assay provided evidence for remarkable features concerning the angiogenic potential.

am-hmscs cultured with the specific medium and seeded on top of matrigel  showed morphological changes after  <dig> hours , while capillary-like structures were evident after  <dig> hours . moreover, cells maintained viability and tube organization for at least  <dig> days . unstimulated cells  were able to give rise to capillary-like structures following the same kinetics but with less organizational efficiency than induced cells . analysis of vegf receptors expression yielded a number of interesting observations. first, vegf receptors  <dig> and  <dig>  were both found in am-hmscs. confirming the endothelial differentiation of the cells, flow cytometry analysis revealed an increased expression of flt- <dig>  kdr, icam- <dig> and the appearance of cd <dig> when cells had been cultured with vegf . akin to these findings, immunofluorescence analysis revealed that cell treatment with vegf increased the expression levels of both vegf receptors and was associated with a clear cytoplasmatic granular positivity for von willebrand factor  as compared with untreated cells .

discussion
human mesenchymal stem cells  are pluripotent adult stem cells residing within the bone marrow microenvironment. mscs can differentiate not only into osteoblasts, chondrocytes, adipocytes, neurons, cardiac myocytes, but also into vascular endothelial cells. despite these appealing properties of bone marrow-derived mscs, the cell source may become an issue for a broad clinical application of cell therapy, because expansion of autologous bone marrow cells could represent a cumbersome and low-yield approach. moreover, recent evidence has indicated that age and disease state may affect the collection of sufficient healthy autologous bone marrow for transplantation  <cit> . thus, the availability of pluripotent cells that can be implanted without manipulation or expansion in an allogenic setting would have obvious biomedical implications and may hold promise for "off the shelf" approaches to cell therapy.

in the present study, we directed our attention towards an alternative source that is easily accessible, high in yield and ethically acceptable: term amniotic membrane. in particular, we succeeded in isolating a multipotent stem cell population that is still of fetal origin and may be superior in proliferation and differentiation potential to cells deriving from adult tissues. cells were easily isolated through mechanical and enzymatic digestion and showed the fibroblast-like morphology usually observed with mesenchymal stem cells deriving from bone marrow. furthermore, these cells revealed the characteristic antigen expression pattern of culture-expanded mscs, since they were positive for the common well-defined hmsc markers  <cit> . amniotic membrane is the only source of mscs without any contamination from non-fibroblastoid cells, unlike what has been described for umbilical cord, cord blood or placenta  <cit> . in particular, a variable percentage of hematopoietic and endothelial cells is usually present in cultures of cord blood- or placenta-derived cells, while such contamination is avoided in the case of am-hmscs, since amniotic membrane supporting connective tissue is truly devoid of any vasculature.

moreover, the isolation procedure removes epithelial cells through the first digestion step as demonstrated via morphology analysis by phase-contrast microscopy and in line with the findings of bilic et al. who used a similar protocol  <cit> .

amniotic membrane has many additional advantages, since such tissue is usually discarded, yet easily accessible, and allows a very high recovery of cells. under our experimental conditions, from day  <dig> of culture onwards, the cellular yield of am-mscs obtained from a very small area  of amniotic membrane was considerably higher than the yield obtained from the same number of bone marrow-derived cells. the number of cells yielded by the primary culture following our procedure  ranged between  <dig>  and  <dig>  ×  <dig>  considering the whole area of am , ideally the cell number obtained could be about  <dig> ×  <dig>  a suitable amount for cell therapy in a human clinical setting  <cit> . am-hmscs expressed the oct- <dig> mrna at higher levels than bm-hmscs: this is noteworthy, as the oct- <dig> transcript is normally found in totipotent embryonic stem cells and the expression of the gene is downregulated during differentiation  <cit> . the higher level shown by am-hmscs could potentially place these cells in a higher position within the stem cell hierarchy compared with mscs derived from adult tissues.

we confirmed the osteogenic and adipogenic differentiation capacity of am-hmscs reported by in't anker et al.  <cit> ; we also demonstrated that am-hmscs are able to differentiate into chondrogenic lineage. thus amniotic membranes may represent a reservoir of multipotent mesenchymal stem cells every bit as good as bone marrow, while other sources that have been investigated have displayed only a lower differentiation potential. we found, for example, that dental pulp-derived mesenchymal stromal cells failed to differentiate towards the chondrogenic lineage  <cit> .

in adipogenic commitment experiments an unusual growth pattern of adipocytic colonies was observed. during the first  <dig> weeks of culture, small colonies were found and the accumulation of lipid drops was evident. during the last week of induction, large compact aggregates secreting abundant amounts of neutral lipids became evident. to our knowledge, this intensive secretion has never been described for mesenchymal stem cells deriving from any sources.

these lipid-secreting aggregates could afford an intriguing in vitro cell differentiation model for the analysis of adipocytokines. alterations to such molecules have been found in some diseases involving both the adipogenic and the hemopoietic systems  <cit> .

again, skeletal muscle differentiation has been obtained with mesenchymal stem cells isolated from lipo-aspirates and umbilical cord blood  <cit> .

we demonstrated that am-hmscs are able to differentiate towards the skeletal myogenic lineage under physiological culture conditions without the addition of demethylating drugs. these results were comparable to those obtained for human bone marrow-derived multipotent adult progenitor cells by muguruma et al  <cit> . these cells could be a candidate for the treatment of muscular dystrophies, for which corticosteroids still remain the only effective treatment  <cit> , due to their easily accessible localization and their high in vitro expansion potential.

myocardial infarction, peripheral arterial occlusive disease with critical ischemia, and stroke are the most important clinical consequences of end-stage occlusive vascular disease for which present-day therapies prove inadequate and treatment remains a palliative.

in this context, the development of a regenerative medicine based on stem cell therapy may hold unprecedented prospects  <cit> .

classical studies by asahara et al. demonstrated the existence of circulating endothelial progenitor cells  within the blood and later their contribution to compensatory vessel growth  <cit> . more recently human bone marrow-derived and umbilical blood-derived mscs revealed the ability to differentiate into the endothelial cell lineage after having been conditioned with angiogenic growth factors such as vegf  <cit> . therefore it is evident that alternative cell sources for attempting therapeutic neovascularization in adults are available but it should be emphasized that the efficacy of such options remains to be determined in humans.

here, we provide evidence for the first time that am-hmscs display angiogenic potential and may therefore arise as new candidates in cell therapy for vascular diseases. am-hmscs spontaneously form capillary-like structures when cultured in semisolid medium . this behaviour was enhanced by exposure to vegf, and the endothelial commitment of the cells was demonstrated by the expression of von willebrand factor. it should be noted that vwf was only expressed in vegf-induced cells, so the capillary-like structures formed by uninduced cells are probably due to the hybrid epithelial-mesenchymal ultrastructural phenotype demonstrated in the amniotic membrane  <cit> . another interesting finding was that am-hmscs expressed cd <dig> and showed increased expression of flt- <dig> and kdr when cultured in the presence of vegf: such expression, which recapitulates the basic phenotypic profile of circulating endothelial progenitor cells , is further evidence that am-hmscs have an angiogenic potential; the fact that, under the same culture conditions, am-hmscs did not express the cd <dig> surface molecule helps to distinguish these cells from the bone marrow-derived progenitors  <cit>  .

the fact that am-hmscs have angiogenic abilities, despite amniotic membrane being an avascular tissue and endothelial cells not being present in the original tissue, raises the issue of whether such an angiogenic potential could be related to the embryonic origin of the hemangioblast. in this respect, it is now evident that in the mouse embryo even the placenta is a site of hemogenic endothelium  <cit> . an additional worthful finding was the intense expression of icam- <dig> we found following vegf stimulation; icam- <dig> is a member of the ig superfamily ca++ dependent transmembrane proteins, whose increased expression has proved to facilitate leukocyte-mediated angiogenesis  <cit> . furthermore, it has recently been found that icam- <dig> is critical in driving cell mobility during angiogenesis  <cit> ; thus it appears that am-hmscs not only have the ability to differentiate into endothelial cells but also have some inducible properties which are necessary to regulate angiogenetic processes.

we do not know whether all am-hmscs have such angiogenic potential or whether this ability is specific to a subset of endothelial cell progenitors comprised within the am-hmsc primary isolate. the fact that the amniotic membrane is avascular is against this latter possibility. moreover, wide-ranging transcriptional profiling with serial analysis of gene expression  performed on single cell-derived colonies of undifferentiated bm-hmscs showed that a clonal population of hmscs is molecularly heterogeneous, simultaneously expressing transcripts characteristic of multiple mesenchymal cell lineages. these observations provided further evidence for the stem-like nature of mscs  <cit> . we cannot exclude that these conclusions may also apply to am-hmscs. addressing this issue will require targeted clonogenic studies and is a subject for our future investigations.

CONCLUSIONS
the present observations, focusing on the expansion and differentiation potential of am-hmscs, suggest that this population may be a remarkable source of pluripotent cells available for future efforts in cell therapy. bm-hmscs may not be the elective choice due to the highly invasive donation procedure and the decline in msc number and differentiation potential with aging. further studies are required to fully understand the potential of am-hmscs as a candidate in cell therapy strategies. their inducible angiogenic potential may open a new therapeutic approach, based on tissue-engineered vascular grafts, to treating various forms of ischemic vascular diseases.

therapeutic neo-angiogenesis, may be a strategy to restore tissue damaged because of myocardium infarction, peripheral occlusive vascular diseases, and other different arteriopathies.

in order to develop future treatments based on regenerative medicine, it may be worth noticing that the currently reported yield of am-hmscs resulted from a very small area, which is about 1/ <dig> of the total area of amniotic membrane. this result, in addition to the fact that both collagenase and trypsin, which have been used throughout the initial steps of cell isolation, are currently available as gmp-grade enzymes, suggests that a remarkable potential for up-scaling the overall procedure for clinical use could be envisaged  <cit> .

