BACKGROUND
arabidopsis thaliana is a plant in the mustard family that has been frequently chosen as the organism model in research on plant science. it possesses small size, diploid genetics, small genome and relatively short generation time. the life cycle of arabidopsis from vegetative to reproductive growth is an important developmental step that is under tight genetic control. in the meanwhile the floral transition state has shown to be integrated by a complex gene regulatory network.

for arabidopsis, floral organ specification has been successfully linked to spatial gene expression patterns according to floral transition and floral development. this model has five pathways that can explain various external  and internal  conditions to regulate the floral transition through an elaborated genetic network  <cit> .

recently, gene expression data sets have become available for the genes involved in the regulation of floral transition and flower development in arabidopsis. in  <cit> , time series of gene expression were presented for each class of genes in the floral transition group. for most floral transitions, the majority of which are members of arabidopsis, namely apetala  and leafy , are transcription factors where the way in which they are activated was known from experiments  <cit> . furthermore, it has been shown that in regulating the flowering time in arabidopsis, these two information sources open the door for mathematical model development.

to inference gene regulatory networks from time course data has been one of the main challenges in systems biology. in recent years, technological advances have driven the development of systems biology in experimental methods that generate in vivo time course data to characterize regulatory interactions. in the last years there has been a significant increase of publications in the area of model construction. some examples include: cell fate determination in arabidopsis flowers  <cit> , model study of role proteins  in shoot apical meristem of arabidopsis <cit> , integration of developmental and hormonal pathways in the arabidopsis flower  <cit> , and gene regulatory network models for plant development  <cit> .

however, a major challenge with such models is that the detailed transcript binding process in a microscopic picture is usually unclear; therefore these models may be deviated from the reality. in addition, a dynamic model requires extensive mathematical formula and large amount of experimental data that are not available. alternatively, a large-scale gene regulation model can be constructed based on stoichiometry without a large number of fitted parameters. although these models can be used to predict the regulation behaviour using flux analysis, they failed to capture the transient behaviors of genes. for instance, mahadevan  <cit>  proposed the dynamic flux balance analysis for situations where there is knowledge available; yugi  <cit>  proposed a method that aims to simplify the number of kinetic parameters in building a dynamic model.

many studies on dynamic simulation of gene regulation systems have been reported in the literature. spieth  <cit>  used linear weight matrices, s-system and h-systems model, and different optimization algorithms to model a nonlinear dynamic system. rafael et al.  <cit>  compared michaelis-menten model, power-law and generalized mass action to represent an e. coil central carbon metabolic network.

in this study, we modeled the regulatory interactions in the flowering of arabidopsis with a series of kinetic functions. the first case considers the conditions that mrna is produced immediately after transcript factor binding. this process is formulated as a mass action model. the second case assumes that a complex state is formed between the transcription factor and its target gene. the production of mrna is delayed due to the stability of the complex state. this process is formulated as a michaelis-menten model. the third case assumes that the binding process of the transcript factor is limited by 1-d and 3-d diffusions, and the production of mrna is dominated by a diffusion-reaction process. accordingly s-system was adopted in this study to model such a mechanism.

RESULTS
comparison of the models
table  <dig> presents the reaction mechanisms depicted in the flowering time regulatory network of arabidopsis. this gene regulatory network describes the flowering time  in arabidopsis thaliana. the core of this regulatory network includes:

 <dig> the photoperiod activates the co gene.

 <dig> after co activates the expression of flowering locust  probably by binding to the ft regulatory regions and the bzip transcription factor fd, the ft/fd complex activates the expression of soc <dig> 

 <dig> soc <dig> and agl <dig> form a positive feedback loop and up-regulate lfy.

 <dig> ap <dig> and lfy are ultimately resolved in the up-regulation of the floral meristem identity genes.
arabidopsis 
according to the reaction scheme depicted in figure 4

in this study, we compared three dynamic models to reconstruct the behaviour of the flowering time regulatory network of arabidopsis. the governing differential equations are listed in the following:

s-system
 x˙1=α1x9g19-β1x1h11x˙2=α2x1g21-β2x2h22x8h28x˙3=α3x2g32x8g38-β3x3h33x˙4=α4x3g43x6g46-β4x4h44x˙5=α5x3g53-β5x5h55x˙6=α6x4g64-β6x6h66x˙7=α7x6g76-β7x7h <dig> 

x˙ <dig> and x˙ <dig> are constants.

micharlis-menten model
 x˙1=vm1·x9km1+x9-dk1x1x˙2=vm2·x1km2+x1-dk2x2x˙3=vm3·x2x8km3+x2x8-dk3x3x˙4=vm4a·x3km4a+x3·vm4b·x6km4b+x6-dk4x4x˙5=vm5·x3km5+x3-dk5x5x˙6=vm6·x4km6+x4-dk6x6x˙7=vm7·x6km7+x6-dk7x <dig> 

x˙ <dig> and x˙ <dig> are constants.

mass-action model
 x˙1=kr1x9-dk1x˙2=kr2x1-dk2x˙3=kr3x2-dk3x˙4=krx34a·krx64b-dk4x4x˙5=kr5x3-dk5x˙6=kr6x4-dk6x˙7=kr7x6-dk <dig> 

x˙ <dig> and x˙ <dig> are constants.

table  <dig> summarizes the total number of parameters used in each model. due to the complex nature of the s-system model,  <dig> parameters were used to describe the floral transition pathway, whereas the micharlis-menten model and the mass action model used  <dig> and  <dig> parameters, respectively. among them the s-system used the most parameters because the reaction rate was described by a non-linear function for the reactant concentration.

parameter estimation has been considered as a reverse engineering problem, which may be performed based on local optimization methods and global optimization methods. in this study, three different optimization methods were employed including local hj , ep and pso . the o and mre were used to measure the quality of the fit for the estimated parameters. the values of ocalculated for the three models and the three optimization methods with four experimental data sets are shown in figure  <dig>  the result suggests that the pso method was most suitable for our dynamic models.
o 
calculated for the three models and three optimization methods in four experimental data sets:  
o 
calculated for the 
col 
experimental data;  
o 
calculated for the 
ler 
experimental data;  
o 
calculated for the 
co 
experimental data; and  
o 
calculated for the 
ft 
experimental data.

the values of the mre calculated for the three models and the four experimental data sets are presented in table  <dig>  the result suggests that the s-system model could achieve the best performance compared with the other two models, as the s-system has the smallest mean relative error .
mre 
calculated for the three models with four experimental data sets.

the aic calculated for the three models, namely the s-system , michaelis-menten model  and mass-action model , are presented in table  <dig>  the result suggests that among the three, the mass-action model is the simplest and has the least parameters. it is therefore less complex with the smallest aic value.

these results suggest that the s-system model represents an option to simulate the dynamics of our gene regulatory network. it is understood that a limitation of the s-system model is that the parameters may not be identifiable when the concentrations and reaction rates are very small. however, considering that the cell interior is homeostatic, this condition is unlikely to occur during the flowering time of arabidopsis. another possible difficulty with the s-system is the low sampling intervals of the genes required for parameter identification, which is also a challenge for all other kinetic models. for parameter estimation we assumed that all the  <dig> genes are measurable.

the estimated parameter values are listed in additional file  <dig>  figure  <dig> shows the simulated time course data for the following genes: constans , flowering locus t , protein fd , suppressor of constans overexpression  <dig> , apetala <dig> , agl <dig> and leafy . it is noted that the discrepancies between the s-system predicted values and the mrna expression levels were relatively small for all of the modeled genes, suggesting that it may successfully replace the other two models to simulate time course data.
arabidopsis constans , flowering locus t , protein fd , suppressor of constans overexpression  <dig> , apetala <dig> , agl <dig> 
and 
leafy  for the expression data of 
ler 
 and other models .

performance of the three models
in this study, we compared three alternative models: the s-system, michaelis-menten model, and mass-action model, for the flowering time regulatory network of arabidopsis. both the michaelis-menten model and mass-action model ignore the diffusion effect in the reaction. the mass-action model assumes that the tf initiates mrna transcription immediately, whereas the michaelis-menten model describes tf binds with dna first and with the active mrna later. the s-system models this process by adopting the 1d and 3d diffusion-reaction mechanisms. the 1d diffusion-reaction mechanism assumes the tf binds with the target site then activates the mrna. the 3d diffusion-reaction mechanism describes that the tf binds with the dna first then diffuses along the dna to search for the target site, activating the mrna transcription process during the final stage.

shown in figure  <dig> and figure  <dig> are the mre and o calculated for the seven floral transition genes. the results indicate that the s-system, when compared with the real experimental data, achieved the best prediction.

sensitivity analysis of the models
sensitivity analysis can be applied to estimate the effect of parameter changes, while mre gives an estimate of a model’s rate of change based on local sensitivity analysis. in this section, we report the results of the time dependent sensitivity analysis  for a time period of  <dig> seconds.

as shown in figure  <dig>  it is obvious the sensitivity measure is positive for every gene. this implies that the mrna concentration increases due to perturbation. the reason is that all of the interactions were activations. the results of the s-system show that fluctuations are limited to the first  <dig> seconds only, which is relative short compared to  <dig> seconds for the michaelis-menten model or mass action model . this in turn suggests that the response is a transient effect at most. a sensitivity value near zero means that gene activity is not sensitive to parameter perturbation at all. for a given gene, the response curves for the rate constants reflect the effect of perturbation on the transcription rate. for the kinetic order response, the sensitivity results indicate the effects on the strength of the activation or suppression.
a 
and 
b 
are system function parameter vectors  consisting of rate constants, and 
g 
and 
h 
are kinetic orders for genes 
constans , flowering locus t , protein fd , suppressor of constans overexpression  <dig> , apetala <dig> , agl <dig> 
and 
leafy .


although an ft/fd complex formation measurement was not available, as long as we assumed a steady state approximation, i.e.,  = k, the s-system was still capable of giving a reasonable fitting for the complex’s regulated genes: soc <dig> and ap <dig> 

in this study, we focused on the experiments for fitting the parameters. with the sensitivity analysis we identified the most sensitive parameters and sampling time intervals; this may provide some directions for future experimental design for model refinement.

discussions
production of mrna is dominated by the binding process between tf and its target gene. this binding process can be described by a diffusion-reaction mechanism. although the michaelis-menten model has been widely used in gene regulation models, the results based on the mre values show that the s-system is a better dynamic model for describing the flowering time of arabidopsis. but the aic values for the s-system  were larger than those of the mass-action model, which implies an over-fitting may occur in parameter estimation.

the deviation is significant between the simulated data and experimental data for genes agl <dig> and soc <dig> in all the three models. these two genes form a feedback loop in the regulatory network; therefore such interactions degrade the performance of the three models. for a more complex regulation model, additional factors should be considered in the transcription mechanism. the values obtained from the sensitivity analysis were all positive, which indicate that the mrna production rate is proportional to the collision frequency as well as the binding force between the tf and its target gene.

one may suggest that the performance effect is more due to the modeling technique rather than the equation system. this study only compared three possible models for one dynamic system. as the mass-action model and michaelis-menten model techniques do not consider diffusion, they did not perform as well as the s-system. while the s-system seems to be most promising, a general conclusion that it is a better approach for modeling complex large-scale networks is yet to be established.

we used three reaction mechanisms to describe the process that a transcription factor binds on the promoter to generate mrna. the mass-action model assumes that this is a simple second-order reaction; the michaelis-menten model assumes that there is an intermediate product; and the s-system considers the diffusion effects in one dimension and three dimensions. among the three, the mass-action model is the simplest and has the least parameters. it is therefore less computation-intensive with the smallest aic value . the disadvantage, however, is that it assumes the system is homogeneous which is not the case in our study. the michaelis-menten model also assumes the system is homogeneous and ignores the intracellular protein transport process. the s-system model does describe the diffusion effects which is the main driving force for mass transport in the cell. a disadvantage of the s-system is that it involves the most parameters. the largest aic value of the s-system also implies an over-fitting may occur in parameter estimation.

we also considered the use of the hill equation. in general the hill equation is employed to describe the phenomenon that binding of a ligand to a macromolecule influencing the other ligands binding on the same macromolecule, which is known as cooperative binding. the hill coefficient is used to quantify this effect, where a value of  <dig> indicates a completely independent binding, a value greater than  <dig> indicates a positive cooperativity, and a value less than  <dig> indicates a negative cooperativity. that is to say, a plurality of the same or different transcription factors are bound in the promoter region of a gene, and the first transcription factor affects the subsequent transcription factors in the promoter region. however, in our gene regulatory system, the number of transcription factors for the regulating genes is mostly one, and all the transcription factors have only one binding site on the promoter region. therefore the hill equation was not applicable in our study.

CONCLUSIONS
one of the major problems of establishing large-scale dynamic models is the lack of experimental data. the parameters are usually unknown, so are the specific reaction rate laws. moreover, for a large number of reactions, the parameters are only available in the literature whose values have to be obtained in in vitro conditions.

in this study, we focused on the molecular mechanism of transcription to propose models for describing the gene regulatory interactions of the flowering transition processes in arabidopsis. the s-system has the best performance. although we assumed that the best performance had come from the consideration of diffusion effects, its highest aic values indicated a possible over-fitting in parameter estimation. it is therefore necessary to carefully apply the s-system for modeling complex gene regulatory networks. the diffusion effects may as well be included in the parameters for the mass action model and the michaelis-menten model.

