BACKGROUND
clostridium difficile infections are the major causative agent for infective antibiotic associated diarrhea  <cit> . infections are most commonly acquired in healthcare settings although community acquired infections are increasingly being reported  <cit> . in addition to recent use of antibiotics, other risk factors include old age, use of gastric acid suppressing drugs and underlying chronic disease including inflammatory bowel disease  <cit> . the numbers of infections have been rising during the last decade with estimated health care costs in the billions  <cit> .

the standard treatments for c. difficile infection consist of metronidazole, vancomycin, or fidaxomicin, which results in a rate of recurrence at about 20 %; after a third recurrence, the risk of further episodes is even higher . fecal microbiota transplantation  for treatment of recurrent c. difficile has had remarkable success rates for alleviation of the symptoms and restoration of health .

the reason why fmt is so effective in restoring a microbiome in the gastrointestinal tract of the patients is unknown. presumably, an effective long-term stable reconstruction would require the commensal microbes in the fmt to access and occupy the niches in the gastrointestinal space following transplantation  <cit> . although there have been numerous reports on the composition of the patients microbiota following fmt, there have been no studies to examine the potential of the donor microbes to colonize the recipients post transplant. to gain insights into this issue, we have examined this aspect of microbiome reconstruction following fmt by transplanting human fecal samples into gnotobiotic mice. since these mice are devoid of microbes, previous studies have shown that the unoccupied  niches in the gastrointestinal tract readily accept fecal transplantation and recapitulate the major elements of the human microbiome in the gnotobiotic mice  <cit> . from the analysis of fecal samples from gnotobiotic mice with transplanted with donor, recipient and post fmt samples, we demonstrate that the microbiota of recipient early post fmt possess the capacity to reconstitute gnotobiotic mice with a microbiome community that is similar to the donor.

RESULTS
three patients that had undergone fecal transplants were chosen for this study. all of the three recipients were positive for c. difficile at least once and had undergone several rounds of antibiotic treatments without complete resolution of the repeated episodes of colitis. the characteristics of the recipients with respect to age, antibiotic treatment and comorbidities in addition to the c. difficile infection can be found in the additional file 1: data set s <dig>  each recipient agreed to a fecal transplant with individual donors, usually a spouse or other family member. the transplants were accomplished by nasogastric administration. the details for preparation of the donor sample and administration can be found in additional file 2: text s <dig>  for all three transplants, fecal samples were collected from donor, recipient and recipient post transplant . by convention, for a given specific transplant  we refer to the donor , recipient  and recipient post transplant  with a prefix letter and the specific transplant number . the recipient post transplant samples also carries a suffix which represent time post transplant i.e. rpt1w <dig> means that the sample is taken 2 week post fecal transplant. the human samples when transplanted in mouse carries a prefix “m” . the list of all human and mouse samples used for microbiota analysis is presented in additional file 1: data set s <dig> 

a total of  <dig> samples from three human donors, recipients and rpt were collected and transplanted into gnotobiotic mice each as three replicates . a total of  <dig> samples were sequenced with an average sequence depth of  <dig>  reads per sample . after quality filtering the sample depth across all samples was normalized to  <dig>  reads per sample and used for analysis. a total of  <dig> operational taxonomic unit  were identified.

comparison of donor, recipient and rpt microbe communities
comparison of the microbe communities from recipient and donor samples using principle coordinate analysis  generated from weighted unifrac metrics revealed each formed separate clusters . the microbe communities from the post fmt patients  generally clustered in between the donor or recipient samples on the pcoa plot. the donor samples showed a high abundance of commensal microbes from the families bacteriodaceae  and lachnospiraceae . the bacteriodaceae and lachnospiraceae were almost absent in recipient samples . the recipient samples contained enterobacteriaceae, lactobacillaceae, enterococcaceae in relative abundance of  <dig>   <dig>  8 % respectively  . following fmt, the rpt samples from all three patients at 2– <dig> weeks showed an increase in the proportional abundance of both bacteriodaceae and lachnospiraceae to approximately 7 %. in addition, the rpt samples showed a decrease in the abundance of families enterobacteriaceae, lactobacillaceae, enterococcaceae. the shannon’s diversity metric of the recipients  was also found to be significantly lower than the donor population  . the rpt samples show increased diversity  when compared with the recipients . collectively, our analysis demonstrates that the microbe compositions of the donor and recipient pre fmt are clearly different. most importantly, the microbe composition 2– <dig> weeks after fmt in the three recipients differs from both the donor and pre fmt microbiota.fig.  <dig> comparison of the microbial diversity of human donors and recipients pre and post fmt. principal coordinate analysis is used to generate 3d pcoa plot  for the fecal samples from the donor  and recipient  and post fmt 

fig.  <dig> taxa distribution of human donors and recipients pre and post transplant. a stacked bar plot depicting the taxa distribution at the family level of the fecal samples of individual samples from the donors and recipient pre and post fmt



transplant of donor and recipient pre and post fmt microbiota into gnotobiotic mice
it has been previously shown that gnotobiotic mice accept and recapitulate the major elements of the human microbiota after transplant  <cit> . we wanted to use this feature of gnotobiotic mice to examine the colonization potential of the microbiota from the recipients prior to and after transplant. following transplant, the mice were housed for 4 weeks for equilibration and the microbiome from fecal samples from each mouse was then analyzed.

similar to what we observed from the analysis of the microbiome composition of the donor and recipient pre fmt, the beta diversity comparison using pcoa plots of the weighted unifrac analysis showed separate clustering of mouse transplanted donor  from the mouse transplanted recipient  . the microbiota of md samples was found to be statistically different  than the mr samples. the pattern was consistent with all three cases . the transplantation of the fecal samples from rpt from all three of the fmt patients into gnotobiotic mice  resulted in a microbe composition in the mice that clustered with the donor : no statistical difference between md and mrpt samples was found .fig.  <dig> comparison of the microbiota community in gnotobiotic mice transplanted with fecal samples from donors, recipients pre and post transplant. gnotobiotic mice were transplanted with the human fecal samples from donor, recipient and rpt samples from fmt  <dig>   <dig> and  <dig>  panel a pcoa plot of the fecal samples from all the gnotobiotic mice. the mice transplanted with donor, recipient, and rpt are named as md, mr and mrpt, respectively. the orange colored spheres are from mice transplanted with the recipient  samples , the blue spheres are from mice transplanted with donor   and the yellow spheres are mice transplanted with fecal samples of the fmt . panel b, c and d individual pcoa plots of donor, recipient and rpt from set  <dig> ,  <dig>  and  <dig>  transplanted into gnotobiotic mice. each panel represents the pcoa plot of individual mice transplanted with the donor and recipient pre and post fmt 



the taxa analysis substantiated the microbe clustering seen on the pcoa plots. in particular, the composition of the mrpt from each of the samples from the mice was similar to the composition of the md with respect to the abundance of the predominant families of commensal microbiota bacteroidaceae and lachnospiraceae . in contrast, transplantation of the recipient samples into gnotobiotic mice resulted in a microbe composition with an abnormally higher proportion of unclassified clostridiales  at an average abundance of 55 %. this relative abundance is approximately  <dig> times increased from the relative abundance in the recipient samples . thus, the microbes within the unclassified clostridiales in the recipients have the capacity to colonize and amplify following transplantation into gnotobiotic mice. further examination of the sequences from the unclassified clostridiales revealed two major otus. one otu  shows 100 % similarity to c. difficile  while the second otu  shows 100 % similarity to bacterium nlae . consistent with the increased abundance of the unclassified clostridiales in the mr samples, there was a lower shannon’s diversity  as compared to md . the shannon metric of diversity of the mrpt samples was higher than that of the mr samples and similar to that of the md .fig.  <dig> taxa distribution of the microbial composition of mouse transplanted with donor, recipient pre and post fmt. a stacked bar plot depicting the taxa distribution at the family level of the fecal samples of individual gnotobiotic mice transplanted with samples from the donors and recipient pre and post fmt

fig.  <dig> shannon diversity for gnotobiotic mice transplanted with donor, recipient pre and post fmt. alpha diversity  for gnotobiotic mice transplanted with the donor , recipients pre  and post fmt  microbiota presented as a box plot



to further highlight the commensal microbe expansion in the gnotobiotics, we next compared the relative abundance of the bacteriodaceae and lachnospiraceae in the human and mouse transplants. the microbes of the human donor samples demonstrated the capacity of the bacteriodaceae and lachnospiraceae to colonize gnotobiotic mice following transplantation . even though the rpt samples had lower abundance of bacteriodaceae and lachnospiraceae, the abundance of both increased following transplant into gnotobiotic mice to a similar abundance as gnotobiotic mice transplanted with the donor samples, highlighting the capacity of both bacteriodaceae and lachnospiraceae to effectively colonize and even expand following transplantation . in parallel, we found the relative abundance of microbes of the unclassified clostridiales also increased in the mrpt from the human rpt to an average abundance of 10 % from  <dig>  % . however, this increase was only  <dig> times greater that that found in the human rpt samples as compared to the  <dig> times greater for the transplant of the recipient samples in gnotobiotic mice .fig.  <dig> comparison of relative abundance of selected taxa . the human samples are colored in blue and the gntobiotic mice samples are colored orange. panel a the relative abundance of bacteroides in the human donors and post fmt and their corresponding transplants in gnotobiotic mice. panel b the relative abundance of lachnospiraceae in the human donors and post fmt and their corresponding transplant in gnotobiotic mice



discussion
previous studies have analyzed the microbiome of donor and fmt recipient pre and post-transplant . similar to the results we found with our three patients, these studies found that before fmt, the microbial composition of the recipient was of low diversity and different from the donor . similar to our observation, shahinas et al. studied 2-week post-fmt samples and noted 50 % samples show noticeable early reconstitution  <cit> . it is not surprising in our study then, that early after fmt the microbe composition of the recipients was different from both the donor and the recipient.

one of the early events for a successful transplant is the ability of the transplanted microbiota to access the gastrointestinal niches  <cit> . once the donor microbes reach the niches, they must also compete for nutrients and space to expand their numbers. to gain insights into the reconstitution of the microbial community in the fmt patients, we took advantage of the capacity of gnotobiotic animals since these mice are devoid of microbes and all of the niches in the gastrointestinal tract would be open for colonization .

we first analyzed the microbe communities in mice transplanted with the donor or recipient fecal samples. the microbial composition of the mice transplanted with the donor did not cluster with that of mice transplanted with the recipients, consistent to what we saw from the analysis of the donor and recipient obtained from humans. furthermore, we did not find a difference in the relative abundance of bacteroidaceae and lachnospiraceae in the human and compared to the gnotobioitic. as evidenced from the analysis of the recipient’s microbiota, the microbe composition was very different from that of the donor with increased relative abundance of families enterobacteriaceae, lactobacillaceae, enterococcaceae, consistent with a dysbiotic microbe composition  <cit> . transplantation of the recipient fecal samples into gnotobiotic mice though revealed a different composition from that of the recipient with an increase in the relative abundance of the unclassified clostridiales. thus, even though the unclassified clostridiales microbes represented a minor percentage of the recipient microbes, they had the capacity to amplify and occupy the vacant niches in the gntobiotic mice. the reason why these microbes were not major constituents of the recipient microbe population is unknown. one possibility is that the unclassified clostridiales might have a selective growth advantage in the mouse gut over the other microbes in the recipient’s sample . additional experiments will be required to address this possibility.

we next characterized the colonization potential of the recipient’s fecal sample at early times post fmt. even though the microbe composition 2– <dig> weeks after fmt in the three recipients differs from both the donor and pre fmt microbiota, the transplantation of the rpt fecal samples into gnotobiotic animals resulted in a microbe composition that clustered with the donor. we found the proportion of the commensal microbes of the families bacteroidaceae and lachnospiraceae were increased following transplantation into the gnotobiotic mice to levels similar to that of the mice transplanted with the donor samples. this result suggests that the commensal microbes, represented by families bacteroidaceae and lachnospiraceae, in the rpt transplanted into the gnotobiotic mice with the open niches probably out compete the non-commensal microbes present in the sample after fmt for niche space in the gnotobiotic mice. support for this conclusion comes from previous studies that have shown commensal gut microbes such as bacteroides, have evolved species-specific physical interactions with the host that mediate stable and resilient gut colonization .

one of the important functions of the commensal gut microbes is to provide an environment to protect against over growth of pathogenic microbes  <cit> . indeed, the use of multiple antibiotic treatments to treat c. difficile is thought to stress the regenerative properties of the gut microbiota that can promote conditions conducive for over growth of pathogens leading to the dysbiotic microbe composition. it was clear though from the analysis of the rpt transplants in gnotobiotic mice that the microbes of the families bacteroidaceae and lachnospiraceae had the capacity to reconstruct a microbe community that had the capacity to inhibit the expansion of the unclassified clostridiales still present in the fecal samples. in the mrpt samples the presence of the microbes of the families bacteroidaceae and lachnospiraceae  resulted in  <dig> fold expansion of unclassified clostridiales as opposed to the  <dig> fold expansion on the recipient sample that had reduced amounts of the families bacteroidaceae and lachnospiraceae . it is not clear whether the reduced expansion of the unclassified clostridiales is due solely to the bacteroidaceae and lachnospiraceae out competing for niche space since from the studies of the recipient transplants in gnotobiotic mice the unclassified clostridiales have the capacity to colonize the gnotobiotic mice. another possibility is that the mouse diet, which is known to impact the gut microbiome composition, might have favored the further expansion of the bacteroidaceae and lachnospiraceae over the unclassified clostridales. additional studies will be needed to understand the community dynamics that controls the continued reconstruction of the microbe community at these later times following fmt  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
numerous studies have reported on the remarkable success of fmt for treatment to resolve dysbiotic microbiomes that are a result of extensive antibiotics to treat c. difficile infections . our results using transplantation of gnotobiotic mice as a model demonstrates the increased colonization potential of commensal microbes  compared to microbes found in the dysbiotic recipient microbiota. the increased colonization potential of these commensal microbes for the gastrointestinal tract provides a framework to understand the success of fmt to reconstitute the gut microbe community of patients with recurrent c. difficile infections.

