BACKGROUND
scots pine  is one of the most widespread forest tree species in the northern boreal zone of eurasia, where its distribution area ranges from the atlantic coast of europe in the west to the pacific coast near the sea of okhotsk in the east  <cit> . it is also cultivated on a large scale and has a major economic importance in the timber, pulp and paper industry. however, insect pests and microbial pathogens pose a serious threat to the extensive monospecific scots pine plantations. among them, the large pine weevil  is regarded as one of the most important pine pests, causing damage and mortality of young seedlings  <cit> . the weevil breeds predominantly in the bark of roots of felled conifers. it is a typical ‘silvicultural’ pest of plantation forestry, as it occurs at low density in natural habitats. however, high weevil populations develop on the abundant root-stumps left in the ground after clear-cuts  <cit> . adult weevils feed on the bark of conifer seedlings during whole summer season, causing high seedling mortality by damaging the bark of the main stem. the adult beetles can live from two to three years. females lay eggs in june, and feeding is the most active immediately before and at the time of the breeding season. in august, new adult weevils emerge from roots of pine stumps. together with adults of earlier generation, they feed on plant bark in august – september before moving below ground to hibernate in october  <cit> .

during their lifetime, conifer trees are exposed to numerous herbivorous insects with different feeding strategies and preferences . to protect themselves against the insect attacks, trees have developed a broad arsenal of effective protection mechanisms, including the production of specialised compounds exerting repellent, antinutritive, or toxic effect on herbivores. moreover, the formation of special anatomical features to store and transport those chemicals, and the synthesis of pathogenesis-related proteins are efficient mechanisms to protect the tree from the herbivore attack  <cit> .

among others, coniferous trees use the oleoresin, a mixture of non-volatile diterpene acids and a large  volatile fraction of mono- and sesquiterpenes  <cit> , as a viscose defence tool against damaging herbivores and pathogens. the volatilisation of monoterpenes increases the viscosity of the oleoresin finally leading to the resin polymerisation and the formation of a protective solid plug. resin-storing conifers constitute an important source of volatile organic compounds  mainly dominated by the volatile monoterpenes. in the atmosphere, the conifer vocs have crucial ecological functions attracting e.g. many herbivorous conifer-feeding species and their natural enemies  <cit> . in atmospheric processes, the volatile terpenes react with ozone and oh and no <dig> radicals forming secondary organic aerosols  <cit> .

preformed mechanical barriers and chemical defences are expressed constitutively irrespective of the presence of herbivores, and they provide an efficient protection against many potential invaders. however, upon the perception of an insect attack plants deploy an active defence response at the site of the attack and often systemically throughout the whole plant body  <cit> . the induced defences are believed to be advantageous for the plant fitness, as they require lower resource allocation costs compared with the constitutive barriers  <cit> .

the activation of plant induced defences is a complex biological process that causes massive changes in gene expression throughout the genome  <cit> . previous studies have shown that hundreds of genes are either up- or down-regulated in response to the herbivore damage. several groups of genes have repeatedly been described as induced upon an insect attack, i.e. anti-nutritional proteins ; potentially toxic proteins ; pathogenesis-related  genes and genes participating in defence-related signalling  <cit> . most of the genome-wide transcriptomics studies were performed on angiosperm plants . transcriptomics studies on conifer trees have been substantially hampered until recently by lacking of their complete genome sequences  <cit> . mainly for this reason, there are very few reports describing the transcriptional responses of conifers to insect-induced damages  <cit> . responses of conifer trees to herbivory have been additionally analysed at the level of proteome, complementing the data available from transcriptomics studies  <cit> . the scarcity of the available information emphasises the necessity for the further work in this direction. in our experiment, we have combined the microarray-based analysis of changes in the gene expression in scots pine upon weevil feeding with the analysis of voc emitted by pine trees. this combined approach should provide better understanding of the underlying mechanisms of the pine’s induced chemical defences and pinpoint the key genes implicated in the defence against herbivores.

RESULTS
voc emission
hylobius feeding significantly increased the total bark voc emissions  when compared to the intact control plants . the total monoterpenes  emissions  were marginally significantly increased  in the weevil-damaged plants. the emissions of 3-carene  and limonene  were significantly increased in damaged plants compared to the control. the emissions of total sesquiterpenes  were also significantly increased  as well as were the emissions of several individual sqts from the weevil-damaged plants compared to the control. finally, six individual sqts emitted by the hylobius-damaged seedlings were not detected in the control plants .table  <dig> 
mean  voc emission rates measured from the bark surface of the intact control and the
hylobius
-damaged scots pine saplings
a



emission )
control
damage
p
-value
 α-pinenet
 campheneu
 sabineneu
 β-pineneu
 3-carenet
 <dig> 
 limonenet
 <dig> 
 β-phellandreneu
  <dig> -cineoleu
 camphoru
 bornyl acetatet

 total monoterpenes
t
 β-selineneu
 longicycleneu
 <dig> 
 longifolenet
 <dig> 
 
trans-β-caryophylleneu
 <dig> 
 
trans-β-farneseneu
 <dig> 
 aromadendreneu
 α-muuroleneu
 <dig> 
 α-farneseneu
 δ-cadineneu
 <dig> 
 
total sesquiterpenes
t
 <dig> 
nonanalt
 <dig> 
methyl salicylatet
total vocst
 <dig> 

astatistical analysis was performed by independent sample t-test  and by mann–whitney u test . bzero values indicate emission rates below the detection limit. emboldened values indicate statistical significance. voc emission data was temperature standardized at 30°c.



transcriptome response
the weevil feeding-induced damage has caused substantial changes in the pine gene expression. during the initial analysis of the microarray data, we have identified  <dig> differentially expressed genes . out of those,  <dig> genes were up-regulated and  <dig> genes were down-regulated. however, the adjusted p values for all the genes identified in this way were above  <dig> . trying to find a reason for the low statistical support of our results, we noticed that the gene expression pattern in the sample h <dig> was remarkably different from the two other h samples  as well as from all three control samples . therefore, we decided to exclude this sample from the further analysis. when the analysis was repeated without taking the sample h <dig> into account, we identified  <dig> genes that were significantly differentially expressed  , of which  <dig> genes were up-regulated more than 4-fold, whereas  <dig> genes were down-regulated more than 4-fold. out of those,  <dig> genes  returned annotation results from blast2go . the distribution of the weevil-induced genes among go categories indicates large-scale changes in the plant metabolism occurring in response to the insect attack . additionally, more than  <dig> genes were associated with the responses to stimuli and/or stress responses.figure  <dig> gene ontology  analysis. comparison of go terms from the  <dig> scots pine genes significantly induced upon weevil feeding. biological process go tags with at least  <dig> entries per tag are shown.



twenty-five weevil damage-induced genes with the highest fold change are listed in the table  <dig>  among them, putative protease and peptidase inhibitors constitute the most abundant group with  <dig> representatives, emphasising the role of this class of proteins in the defence against herbivorous insects. on a global scale, many of the pine genes induced by the weevil attack showed a similarity to genes, which are up-regulated in other plant species in response to different types of biotic  and abiotic stresses . based on the similarity to the arabidopsis genes, they were classified in several functional groups. some of those groups  were represented by a high number of transcripts that will be discussed in more details below.table  <dig> 
twenty five pine genes most highly up-regulated by weevil feeding-induced damage



seq_id
a
log2_fc
b
adj.
p
-value
hit name
c
hit description
c
e-value

aseq_ids correspond to the names of the sequences in the ptnewbler <dig> assembly available from the conifer dbmagic database  <cit> . bbinary logarithm of the fold change value. ccorrespond to the best hit of blastx searches against the arabidopsis information resources  database.



genes with a role in signal perception and signalling pathways
perception of pests and pest-induced damage is of a vital importance for the development of induced plant defence responses. in plants, the signal perception is mainly performed by different classes of the leucine-rich repeat  receptors, either membrane-anchored or soluble ones. the lrr receptors can activate signalling cascades via a physical interaction with protein kinases or, alternatively, they might contain their own kinase domain. in our experiment, we have observed up-regulation of  <dig> transcripts showing similarity to lrr receptors and  <dig> genes encoding putative lrr receptor-like kinases. it should be noted, however, that a number of the predicted lrr receptors  and lrr receptor-like kinases  were down-regulated upon the weevil feeding .

signalling molecules , salicylic acid  and ethylene) play a crucial role in the regulation of plant responses to biotic and abiotic stresses. among them, ja and ethylene are the key players in the formation of plant response to wounding and insect-induced damage. in our experiment, we have observed the induction of several genes with a known role in the octadecanoid pathway, a biochemical route used by plants to produce ja and methyl jasmonate : allene oxide synthase , 12-oxophytodienoate  reductase  and putative opda-coa ligase . additionally, genes showing similarity to a. thaliana daf <dig>  the positive activator of chloroplastic phospholipase a <dig> expression, and to a. thaliana wr <dig>  the nitrate transporter involved in the ja-dependent signal transduction, were also up-regulated in response to the weevil feeding compared to the control. however, we have also observed an increased expression level of several genes that are known either to attenuate the jasmonate signalling cascade or to negatively control the expression of ja-regulated genes, i.e. the cytochrome cyp94b <dig> functioning as jasmonoyl-isoleucine-12-hydroxylase and thus reducing the level of ja-ile , and jaz proteins jaz <dig> , jaz <dig> , jaz <dig> , jaz <dig>  and jaz <dig> . some of these genes have been previously reported to be induced by wounding and/or by a fungal infection. their activation might also be a part of a negative feedback control pathway.

the weevil feeding caused also the induction of a gene with similarity to acetyl coa:-3-hexen-1-ol acetyltransferase , an enzyme catalysing the formation of -3-hexen-1-yl acetate  <cit> . this compound is the major volatile released upon mechanical wounding or herbivore damage of green leaves as well as conifer needles  <cit> . it induces plant defence reactions and may also participate in the plant-to-plant signalling, but its functional role in conifers received very little attention so far.

genes involved in transcriptional regulation
the activation of signalling pathways eventually results in the transcriptional induction of certain target genes. it is usually achieved via activation of the specific transcription factors. the weevil-induced damage resulted in the up-regulation of a number of genes encoding predicted transcription factors  compared to the undamaged control. these tfs showed similarity to the families erf , bhlh , nac , myb , wrky  and bzip  . members of these groups have been reported to play an important role in plant responses to biotic and abiotic stresses  <cit> .

genes involved in the regulation of plant hormone homeostasis
several genes with a potential function in the regulation of the plant hormone homeostasis were up-regulated in our study. among them, we can name 9-cis-epoxycarotenoid dioxygenase, a key enzyme in the biosynthesis of abscisic acid  ; two auxin udp-glycosyltransferases , two indole-3-acetic acid -amido synthases , two predicted auxin transporters , gibberellic acid  methyltransferase , a predicted gibberellin receptor  and genes with similarity to two arabidopsis proteins involved in ga signalling, sleepy <dig> and lbd <dig>  .

secondary metabolism genes
the phenylpropanoid pathway occupies a central position in the plant defence reactions. in addition to its primary function, the supply of precursors for the lignin biosynthesis, it produces a number of important metabolites, e.g. flavonoids, anthocyanins, stilbenes, condensed tannins and phenolics. our results demonstrate the transcriptional induction of multiple genes involved not only in the phenylpropanoid pathway itself, but also in the upstream shikimate and phenylalanine biosynthesis pathways . the up-regulated genes showed similarity to the bifunctional 3-dehydroquinate dehydratase/shikimate dehydrogenase , arogenate dehydratase , phenylalanine ammonia lyase  , 4-coumarate-coa ligase , cinnamyl alcohol dehydrogenase  and cinnamoyl-coa reductase . we have also observed induction of the genes encoding putative chalcone synthases , pinoresinol reductase  and two groups of genes with a predicted role in the flavonoid biosynthesis, which are members of the cyp75b <dig> subfamily of cytochromes p <dig>  and udp-glucose glycosyltransferase . interestingly,  <dig> isotigs showing a similarity to kfb <dig>  the negative regulator of phenylpropanoid pathway that targets pal for the degradation, were also up-regulated in our experiments. the induction of these genes might indicate the activation of the negative feedback loop controlling the first step of the phenylpropanoid pathway.figure  <dig> cluster analysis of genes involved in phenylpropanoid pathway. the scheme illustrates expression values of the genes with a predicted role in phenylpropanoid pathway as well as predicted genes encoding laccases and dirigent proteins . colours on the scheme correspond to the binary logarithms of the expression values of the depicted genes; genes shown in black have the lowest expression levels, whereas genes shown in bright-red have the highest expression values.



terpenoids also play an essential role in the constitutive and induced chemical defence of conifer trees against pathogens and herbivores. however in our experiment, the expression of genes involved in the terpenoid biosynthesis pathway remained largely unaffected by the weevil feeding . the only gene that was significantly induced  encodes a predicted terpene synthase. it shows the highest similarity to the dual function -α-farnesene synthase/-β-ocimene synthase from interior spruce   <cit>  and to the farnesene synthase from norway spruce   <cit> .figure  <dig> cluster analysis of genes involved in terpenoid pathway. the scheme illustrates expression values of the genes with a predicted role in terpenoid biosynthesis pathway . colours on the scheme correspond to the binary logarithms of the expression values of the depicted genes; genes shown in black have the lowest expression levels, whereas genes shown in bright-red have the highest expression values.



cell wall reinforcement
the formation of lignin from phenylpropanoid pathway-derived monolignols is mediated by the combined action of several classes of proteins. it is generally accepted that both laccases and class iii peroxidases are involved in the monolignol oxidation and radicalisation  <cit> , whereas dirigent proteins are believed to control the radical-radical coupling  <cit> . in our experiment, we have observed the massive induction of all the three classes of genes involved in the lignin formation. in total,  <dig> isotigs showing similarity to the class iii peroxidase genes,  <dig> putative laccase isotigs and  <dig> isotigs with similarity to the dirigent genes were strongly up-regulated in response to the weevil feeding . additionally, a number of genes with a potential role in the cell wall remodelling were induced by the weevil-caused damage, including genes with a similarity to pectin methylesterases  and uclacyanin .

defence-related genes
this group encompasses genes encoding proteins presumably implicated in the active defence against herbivores and pathogens. many of them are known as pr  proteins, but we also included here some unclassified proteins with a potential role in defence reactions. one of the most prominent classes of the defence-related genes in our analysis was represented by protease inhibitors. in total, we identified  <dig> genes up-regulated by the weevil herbivory and showing similarity to various types of protease inhibitors . remarkably,  <dig> out of the  <dig> genes showing the highest fold change in our experiment were represented by the predicted protease inhibitor-encoding genes . we also observed the induction of genes encoding putative β- <dig> -glucanases  and three different classes of chitinases: class iii , class iv  and class v . other pr genes up-regulated in response to the weevil damage include genes encoding thaumatin- and osmotin-like proteins , lipid-transfer proteins  and germin-like proteins  . genes belonging to the family pr- <dig>  were massively induced in our experiment, and they have been discussed earlier together with other proteins contributing to the cell wall reinforcement. we have also observed the up-regulation of several genes that might have their primary role in defence reactions, but are not formally classified yet as the pr genes, e.g. genes showing similarity to the a. thaliana acid phosphatase with anti-insect activity   <cit> , to the arabidopsis heat-stable protein with antimicrobial activity   <cit>  or to a putative pathogenesis-related protein  . several other induced genes might contribute to the plant defence in different ways. the cysteine peptidase  may disrupt the peritrophic membrane protecting insect gut epithelium, whereas lipoxygenase   may covalently modify dietary proteins  <cit> .

validation of microarray results with qpcr
in order to evaluate the reliability of the microarray data, we designed gene-specific primers and performed qpcr analysis for  <dig> genes. the genes were selected based on their expression pattern , high fold change and potential biological significance. as a control, we have used two reference genes, α-tubulin and elongation factor ef1-a. overall, the results of the qpcr experiment were in good agreement with the microarray results . however, three genes  showed no significant changes in expression in the qpcr experiment, whereas their differential expression in the microarray experiment was statistically significant. additionally, in several cases the observed gene expression fold change was higher in the qpcr experiment than it could be deduced from the microarray data. the cross-hybridisation between closely related genes of the same gene family might be one of the factors affecting the results of the microarray analysis.figure  <dig> qpcr analysis of  <dig> selected genes and  <dig> reference genes. shown data are based on two technical replicates. error bars represent standard deviations. genes marked with asterisks show statistically significant differences in expression level: a single asterisk  indicates genes with p value  <dig>  < p <  <dig> , and double asterisk  indicate genes with p value p ≤  <dig> . predicted functions of the genes are based on their blastx hits with known function.



discussion
the transcriptomic responses of plants against herbivores were extensively studied on several model species of angiosperms, in particular on arabidopsis, tobacco, tomato and maize  <cit> . however, to our best knowledge, only two reports describing the transcriptional response of conifer trees to insect attacks have been published so far  <cit> . both of the previous works used spruce species as their experimental models. results of our experiments, therefore, provide a first insight into the intrinsic mechanisms of the defence reactions against herbivorous insects in such important forest tree species as scots pine. the coverage of the microarray platform used in our study  significantly exceeds the coverage of the platforms used for spruce previously . the better coverage should allow the detection of novel defence-relevant genes that might have escaped their identification in the earlier experiments. furthermore, the high correlation of transcript level for the same tissues between p. sylvestris and p. taeda   <cit>  permitted differential screening to be done using the loblolly pine arrays with rna obtained from scots pine.

the gene expression pattern in one of the weevil-damaged saplings  was considerably different from the pattern observed in the five remaining plants. this was the main reason to exclude this sample from further analysis. we do not have a definite explanation for the deviating pattern of the sample h <dig>  this could be a result of technical error during sample processing or hybridisation, but we also cannot exclude that it was due to genotype-specific differences between the plants used in our experiments.

the results obtained in this study clearly show the large-scale changes in the pine transcriptome upon the weevil feeding. many of the identified genes have been previously demonstrated to be induced upon insect attack in other model species. in particular, components of the phenylpropanoid pathway, the ja biosynthesis and signalling pathways, numerous transcription factors, genes involved in the cell wall reinforcement and several types of protease inhibitors were strongly up-regulated. the simultaneous induction of a high number of genes emphasises that the defence against herbivores is a highly complex process involving numerous metabolic and signalling pathways and thus requiring a high degree of coordination between them. in particular, the up-regulation of genes encoding diverse groups of transcriptional factors reflects the massive rearrangements in the host plant’s transcriptional profile in response to the insect attack and correlates with the need for the rapid simultaneous induction of hundreds of genes.

plants have the ability to detect herbivorous insect attacks via perceiving the so-called herbivore-associated molecule patterns . the hamps can originate from plant cell components modified as a result of the herbivore-produced damage or, alternatively, they can be represented by the insect-specific elicitors, e.g. derived from insect oral secretions. regardless the nature of the hamps, their recognition is achieved via binding with the specialised receptor proteins. most of plant receptors belong to the so-called leucine-rich repeat  type receptors. we have observed induction of a number of genes encoding predicted lrr receptors and lrr receptor-like kinases in our experiment. at the same time, several genes of this group were down-regulated. the observed repression might be caused by insect-derived effectors, as it has been proposed recently that herbivorous insects are capable of partly supressing the defence genes of their host plants  <cit> .

the jasmonate pathway has a dominant role in regulating the plant defence reactions in response to insect herbivory  <cit> . our data have also demonstrated the induction of several components of the ja biosynthesis and signalling pathways upon the weevil feeding. however, we could also observe the up-regulation of a number of genes that might be a part of a negative feedback control over the ja signalling. some of them were previously reported to be induced by the wounding, and their induction might be a part of a mechanisms controlling the intensity of plant’s defence response.

plant secondary metabolites play a central role in the constitutive and induced chemical defence against herbivores. in our experiment, we have documented a massive induction of genes involved in the different branches of the phenylpropanoid pathway, as well as into some upstream steps. this finding once again emphasises the central role of this pathway in the plant defence response. also, numerous genes involved in the conversion of monolignols into lignin polymer, i.e. class iii peroxidases, laccases and dirigent proteins, were strongly up-regulated. at the same time, the transcriptional response of the terpenoid pathway remained rather weak, as only a single predicted terpene synthase was significantly induced. this is rather unexpected as a resin flow was observed in the damaged area. it might be partly explained by the fact that the resin in the beetle-wounded bark area of the attacked pine is primarily transported from the constitutive resin storage in other parts of the canal system  <cit> . furthermore, the availability of voc data only from the earlier time point in the growing season does not provide sufficient information for any definitive conclusions on the relationship between the transcriptional control of terpene biosynthesis in the twig phloem and the terpene emission. we cannot exclude that the differences in the physiological stage of the saplings at the time points of the voc emission analysis and the sampling for the transcriptome analysis  affected the results of those experiments, making more difficult a direct comparison between them.

earlier experiments with conifer seedlings  <cit>  have demonstrated that the voc production in the needles is induced stronger than in the stem base where the h. abietis damage occurred. this observation suggests that in young pine trees the synthesis of terpenes might occur predominantly in the photosynthesising tissues, followed by the fluid resins allocation to the constitutive resin storage close to the damaged area. if this suggestion is correct, our sampling strategy may have biased the microarray results, as we have isolated rna only from the phloem of the damaged twigs, and not from the needles. alternatively, the regulation of enzymes of the terpene biosynthesis in pine might predominantly occur at the different level, e.g. at the level of translation or post-translationally. interestingly, in another experiment the changes in the pine terpenoid pathway upon fungal infection were less pronounced as compared with spruce  <cit> . however, additional experiments will be required to figure out whether there are some fundamental differences in the regulation of the terpenoid biosynthesis between these two genera of conifer trees.

we observed that the weevil herbivory induced several classes of the defence-related proteins. among them, the protease inhibitors occupied an outstanding position due to the high fold change in their expression levels. remarkably,  <dig> out of the  <dig> most highly up-regulated genes encode predicted protease inhibitors. this observation is in line with previous reports on the important role of protease inhibitors in the defence against herbivores  <cit> . it is assumed that they affect the insect’s digestive physiology by inhibiting gut proteases  <cit> . other up-regulated defensive proteins might affect the insect digestion system in a different way, e.g. cysteine protease was reported to disrupt the peritrophic membrane of insect gut epithelium, whereas lipoxygenases can modify dietary proteins reducing their nutrition value.

it has been reported that the pine weevil feeding on stem bark of scots pine seedlings increased the emission of monoterpenes and sesquiterpenes from damaged bark by nearly 4-fold and 7-fold, respectively  <cit> , whereas our results showed an increase in the emission of mts and sqts by 3-fold and 8-fold, respectively, from the healthy bark, just below the damaged area. this might be an indication of a systemic response of the terpene synthesis to the bark damage which was earlier reported as the increased terpenoid emission from needles of the hylobius-damaged pine  <cit>  and norway spruce  <cit>  saplings. additionally, several sqts , which remained below the detection limit in the control group, were emitted by the weevil-damaged plants. the emission of trans-β-farnesene has repeatedly been shown to be induced by insect herbivory or oviposition  <cit> , and this compound is also known to attract parasitoid and predatory insects  <cit> . thus, the weevil herbivory in our experiment has resulted not only in quantitative, but also in qualitative changes in the spectrum of compounds emitted by pine saplings. it was partly unexpected that we did not find a clear transcriptional response in the terpene biosynthesis-related genes in the weevil damaged area. it would be interesting to investigate the specificity of the only terpene synthase gene  significantly induced in our experiment to address the question of the correlation between its induction and changes in the emission spectrum. the gene shows the highest similarity to the dual function -α-farnesene synthase/-β-ocimene synthase from interior spruce   <cit> ; however, the deduced amino acid sequence of the protein encoded by isotig <dig> is only 86% identical to the sequences of the previously characterised enzyme, and it is known that even few amino acid changes can dramatically alter the product spectrum of a terpene synthase  <cit> . taking together, these observations suggest that in conifer seedlings the majority of terpenes released from the damaged tissue are synthesised elsewhere and transported to the damage site.

in our experiment, we have observed the induction of a putative gene for acetyl coa:-3-hexen-1-ol acetyltransferase , an enzyme catalysing the formation of -3-hexen-1-yl acetate. however, we could not detect the presence of this compound in our voc samples. it is possible that the compound is predominantly emitted by needles, as has been demonstrated before  <cit> , whereas its levels in bark emissions remained below the detection level.

the presented results provide an important insight into the defence mechanisms employed by scots pine to counteract insect attacks. this study will improve our understanding of the defence reactions in conifer trees and provide a framework for new pest control strategies. the data can also be used for the identification of new resistance marker of potential importance in tree breeding.

CONCLUSIONS
in this work, we present the results of the gc-ms analysis of induced pine-emitted volatiles and the analysis of the pine transcriptional response to the insect herbivory. weevil-induced damage resulted in massive increase of voc emissions by pine saplings. not only the amount of emitted volatiles, but also their composition was influenced by insect herbivory.

our data show an extensive similarity between the responses to herbivory in pine, spruce and flowering plants. many of the genes identified in our experiment have been previously shown to be induced upon herbivore attack in other plant species, and their biological role is well-understood. at the same time, numerous up-regulated genes could not be annotated due to their low similarity to the known proteins, and those are particularly interesting as they might represent novel, previously uncharacterised components of the pine’s defence machinery. additional experimental efforts will be required in order to elucidate their biological role.

the obtained data are important for the large-scale comparative analysis of transcriptional responses to the herbivory in conifers and flowering plants. the improved  <dig>  k pine microarray used in this work represents a significant advancement over the microarrays used in previous studies on conifer trees. the better coverage allows for the identification of many novel hits of potential interest. the presented data will improve our understanding of the defence reactions of conifer trees. they are also of importance for the development of novel markers for the breeding of tree cultivars with the improved resistance against herbivores.

