BACKGROUND
transposable elements  are mobile genetic elements that constitute large portions of the genome in eukaryotes
 <cit> . in primates including humans, for example, about 50% of the genome consists of tes
 <cit> . vast genome size differences among species are directly related to the te content
 <cit> ; thus te abundance and diversity are characteristic features of plant and animal genomes
 <cit> .

transposable elements play an important role for genome organization and evolution as substantial providers of large scale mutation events, creating genetic variability that natural selection can act upon
 <cit> . they can affect both single genes and entire genomes
 <cit>  by chromosomal rearrangements including insertions, duplications, deletions, and recombination events
 <cit> . although most te-caused mutations are expected to be deleterious, some are neutral or even adaptive. te-derived sequences such as promoters
, polyadenylation signals and termination sites
, and smrnas
 <cit>  are involved in regulation of gene expression at both the transcriptional and post-transcriptional level
 <cit> . in addition, te proliferation is thought to create new regulatory networks and to participate in the rewiring of pre-established regulatory networks
 <cit> .

little is known about the regulation of te activity. large scale elimination and suppression of retroelements have both been documented for the genome of the pufferfish
 <cit> . several factors have been shown to be responsible for te silencing, such as rnai
 <cit> , especially by pirnas
 <cit> , and dna methylation
 <cit> .

in some cases activation of tes seems to be environmentally mediated. there is evidence, for example, that retrotransposition activates the expression of stress response genes thus providing a positive feedback under stressful conditions to promote survival related genes
 <cit> .

transposable elements are generally classified into class i elements , which use an rna intermediate for transposition; and class ii elements, which replicate without an rna intermediate, either by a cut-and-paste mechanism , by rolling circle dna replication , or by so far unknown mechanisms . among the class i elements two major subclasses are recognized:  retroelements  with long terminal repeats  and  elements without ltrs 
 <cit> . in this study we focus on ltr res, which can be classified into four major families, namely bel/pao, ty1/copia, ty3/gypsy, and retroviruses
 <cit> . a common ltr retrotransposon typically encodes two polyproteins, termed gag and pol. the group-specific antigen  usually contains matrix, capsid, and nucleocapsid domains; pol consists of aspartic proteinase , reverse transcriptase , ribonuclease , and integrase  domains, the latter three  are responsible for retrotranscribing cdna from rna intermediates and inserting it into the host genome.

endogenous retroviruses  constitute a specific class of ltr res that additionally contain an open reading frame  for an envelope protein , which enables ervs to move from one cell to another. in contrast, all other ltr res either lack or contain a remnant of an env gene and can only reinsert into their own host genome
 <cit> . there are, however, ervs that secondary lost their env gene and thus their infectious ability. such ervs are retrotransposing instead of infecting other cells as do typical retroviruses
 <cit> .

as a precondition for understanding the role of ltr res in shaping genomes the diversity of these elements has to be systematized
 . for this purpose several computer programs have been developed to automatically detect ltr res
 <cit> . some of these computing methods have made it possible to detect and identify previously unknown elements
 <cit> ; however, only a few comprehensive studies on ltr re diversity have been carried out on non-model organisms. furthermore, many genomes still host remnants of inactive retrotransposons corresponding to ancient retrotransposition events. these “genomic fossils” have accumulated mutations through time; many of them are difficult to identify because they have lost some of their characteristic features, thus making them imperceptible to automatic searches.

in this study we analyze the abundance and diversity of ltr retrotransposons found in the genome of the western clawed frog silurana  tropicalis and compare it to a full depth coverage transcriptome of an advanced frog species, the european pool frog pelophylax  lessonae. amphibians are a very important evolutionary link between lunged and gilled vertebrates; they are also amongst the animals with the largest genomes
 <cit> . the sequencing of the silurana genome revealed a high diversity of tes, even higher than in many other eukaryotes and vertebrates studied, including all four major families of ltr res
 <cit> , thus making the frog genomic and transcriptional landscapes excellent environments to study the variability and dynamics of ltr res. we were able to effectively estimate the abundance of the ltr re families and clades within the silurana genome, systematized them into clades on the basis of phylogenetic analyses, which we then used to analyze the diversity and expression patterns of ltr res in the transcriptional landscapes of different tissues obtained from p. lessonae, s. tropicalis, and of eight individuals of cyclorana alboguttata.

based on rnaseq data we show that certain elements are tissue-specific expressed and for the first time that the expression patterns of ervs change during embryonic development of silurana. finally, we discuss factors that may affect the transcription of ltr res in the context of tissue- and genome-specificity.

RESULTS
transcriptome assembly
four transcriptomes were assembled. the largest transcriptome comprised the libraries of silurana developmental stages
 <cit> , which spanned  <dig> million bp and  <dig> thousand sequences with an n <dig> of  <dig>  the largest assembled sequence originated from the p. lessonae transcriptome and consisted of 94519 bp, it included an orf of 93336 bp coding for  <dig> amino acids , a full length frog ortholog of titin , the largest known vertebrate gene/protein. the presence of this unusually long transcript indicates the good assembly quality of the p. lessonae transcriptome.

ltr re diversity and abundance in the siluranagenome
phylogenetic reconstructions  based on rt domains, revealed the presence of ltr res of all four classes  in the genome and transcriptomes of s. tropicalis and the transcriptomes of p. lessonae and c. alboguttata . we were able to identify at least eleven types of ltr res , some of them either unknown or else previously neglected in the silurana genome.figure  <dig> 
classification and structure of ltr retroelements in the frog genome and transcriptomes. maximum-likelihood  trees calculated on the basis of  <dig> known rt domains of eukaryotic ltr res including amino acid sequences obtained from the silurana tropicalis genome  and the transcriptomes of pelophylax lessonae
. diagrammatic presentation of ltr res  found in the silurana genome  and in the transcriptome of p. lessonae . the thin lines represent the overall length of the retroelement including the ltrs, while thick bars depict open reading frames for aspartic proteinase , chromo domain , envelope protein , group-specific antigen , integrase , rnase , and reverse transcriptase . frameshifts are indicated by asterisks .


ltr retroelements detected in the genome of
silurana tropicalis



total
1180
1329
1257
 <dig> 
based on the results of two genome search methods  the average amount of elements , the average element length , and the percentage  of the elements in the genome were calculated.

two types of bel/pao elements  were found in the silurana genome . a kobel-like element was present in multiple copies  in the silurana genome; it was transcriptionally active in silurana, pelophylax, and cyclorana . hydra  <dig> -like elements were present with  <dig> copies in the silurana genome but absent in the frog transcriptomes analyzed.table  <dig> 
ltr retroelements discovered in the genome of
silurana tropicalis
 and different transcriptomes of
s. tropicalis
,
cyclorana alboguttata
, and
pelophylax lessonae
 with remarks on the occurrence and distribution of these elements among animals, plants, and fungi



bel/pao

ty1/copia

ty3/gypsy

retroviridae


three types of ty1/copia elements  were found in the frog genome and transcriptomes . hydra <dig>  and mtanga-like elements were detected in the silurana genome with  <dig> and  <dig> copies, respectively. zeco-like elements, however, were found only in the transcriptome of p. lessonae together with transcripts of hydra <dig> - and mtanga-like elements.

we found four types of ty3/gypsy elements  in the silurana genome . in total we identified over  <dig> copies of amn-san elements, about  <dig> copies of cer-like elements, ca.  <dig> copies of gmr1-like elements, and approximately  <dig> copies of mag-like elements. multiple transcripts of these elements were also found in pelophylax, silurana, and cyclorana tissues .

among the retroviridae elements, three types  were found in the silurana genome and the frog transcriptomes analyzed . a muerv-l was present in 1- <dig> copies in the silurana genome and in the p. lessonae transcriptome. moreover, we were able to locate about  <dig> copies of snrv-like elements within the silurana genome and recovered a complete env-less element of this virus in the p. lessonae transcriptome. a xen <dig> was present in the silurana genome with ca.  <dig> copies and several transcripts were present in the transcriptomes of pelophylax, silurana, and cyclorana .

genome colonization and proliferation of ltr elements
the diversity of ltr res is largely the same in silurana and pelophylax . there is evidence, however, that at least two elements  have been acquired or lost since their last common ancestor. our results clearly demonstrate that ty3/gypsy and bel/pao are the most prolific ltr re families within the silurana genome , while elements of ty1/copia and retroviridae show less success in fixation. among all frog ltr res, amn-san elements are the most abundant, with multiple genomic copies  followed by gmr <dig> and kobel ; some of the copies show very low sequence divergence as indicated by the average relatedness values calculated on the basis of the nucleotide and aa sequences of the rt domain .figure  <dig> 
diversity and expression patterns of ltr retroelements in the frog genome and transcriptomes.  diversity of ltr res in the genome of silurana and in the frogs transcriptomes analyzed.  number of ltr re copies in the silurana genome;  proliferation patterns based on average relatedness of ltr res in the silurana genome. the average relatedness was calculated on the basis of amino acids as log ), in which a higher relatedness score indicates that the elements within that group are closer related to one another.  arithmetic means of relative nrc values calculated for brain , heart , liver , and muscle  of s. tropicalis  and p. lessonae .  relative amount of ltr res in different frog transcriptomes.



transcript abundance and differential expression
our results clearly show that ltr res from all four families  are differentially transcribed. ty3/gypsy appears to be the most active ltr re family as indicated by both the number of copies and nrc  values .

in adult individuals of silurana and pelophylax, the expression of some elements exhibit tissue specific patterns ; significant differences in expression were observed for three elements  in silurana and for two elements  in pelophylax . hydra <dig> , for example, exhibited the highest relative nrc values in brain and lowest in muscle transcriptomes in both pelophylax and silurana . it is also noticeable that snrv is over-expressed in the tongue tissue of p. lessonae showing a circa  <dig> time higher relative nrc value than in the other tissues investigated . in muscle of both silurana and pelophylax most elements were on average less expressed than in other tissues . muscle tissues of eight c. alboguttata individuals, however, showed only little similarity in both the relative amount and diversity of transcribed ltr res .

in the embryonic development of s. tropicalis transcription of ltr res begins as soon as the embryonic genome is activated, ca. 6- <dig> hours after insemination of eggs at developmental stage  <dig> , i. e. at the midblastula transition 
 <cit> , figure 
3; here stage  <dig>  is included in stage 9). while ty3/gypsy, bel/pao, and ty1/copia elements did not show clear differential expression patterns during embryonic development, retroviral elements, particularly muerv and snrv, were most actively transcribed during gastrulation and neurulation, and xen <dig> during organogenesis.figure  <dig> 
normalized read counts and relative amount of expression of ltr retroelement  transcripts throughout the developmental progression of
s. tropicalis
progession. the presence of each type of ltr re found within the transcriptome of s. tropicalis throughout  <dig> distinct developmental stages is summarized.



ltr re annotations
predicted ltr res from the silurana genome and ltr re transcripts from all frog transcriptomes exhibited many orfs which contained protein domains normally associated with retrotranscription of ltr res and their reinsertion into the genome. the preliminary annotation of these genomic elements further revealed specific domains for each type of ltr re that are linked with cell regulation in animals .table  <dig> 
examples of protein domains found in ltr res predicted from the genome of
silurana tropicalis
which might play a role in gene regulation and transcriptional networking


zinc fingers zf-h2c2_ <dig> 
pfam: protein family database.



discussion
ltr retroelement diversity in the genomic and transcriptomic landscapes of frogs
based on two different genomic search methods we have found between  <dig> and  <dig> ltr res of four distinct families within the silurana genome, containing at least ltrs and a retrotranscriptase orf. ltr elements, however, constitute only a small fraction of total nuclear silurana dna compared to non-ltr res and dna transposons, which comprise up to one third of the silurana genome
 <cit> . calculating the average length of each element and multiplying the average number of each element , it can be suggested that around  <dig> %  of the silurana genome assembly  <dig>   is composed of ltr res. this estimation is concordant to the  <dig>  mbp calculated by smit et al.
 <cit>  using the repeat masker silurana genomic dataset  but differs from the value  published by hellsten et al.
 <cit> ; this discrepancy probably reflects a lower threshold used by hellsten et al. to identify ltr res.

besides elements typical for vertebrate genomes such as amn-san, gmr <dig>  and retroviruses, we have identified ltr res of the ty1/copia and bel/pao clades, which have so far only been found in the genomes of phylogenetically distant aquatic animals. the hydra <dig>  element, for example, was first described from the genome of a freshwater animal hydra magnipapillata; kobel-like elements are known from the genomes of basal protostomes and deuterostomes
 <cit> .

amn-san elements were most abundant in all of our data sets. they account for about  <dig> % of the genome size in silurana and can be considered as the most successful ltr res in the silurana genome. this assumption is evidenced by the coexistence of multiple copies with high sequence similarity, speaking for relatively recent bursts in activity of one or even several active master elements or recurrent genomic invasions. besides closely related amn-san elements, we found copies with higher sequence divergences that may trace back to older and now inactive elements. large numbers of ltr res have also been found in the giant genomes of salamanders, primarily ty3/gypsy elements
 <cit> , which supports our results that these ltr res, particularly amn-san, are the most numerous elements and account for nearly half of the ltr re content in the silurana genome. moreover, our silurana genomic dataset contained twice as much bel/pao elements as had been previously reported by de la chaux and wagner
 <cit> , who used a more selective pipeline and different reference sequences to identify ltr res.

colonization of the amphibian genome by ltr res
very little is known about genome colonization by ltr res or about their evolutionary dynamics which is thought to encompass both gradual and vertical processes, as well as distinct modular, salutatory, and reticular events
 <cit> . as indicated by the similar ltr re spectrum in the genomes of silurana and pelophylax, most of the res were already present in the genome of their last common ancestor, which presumably lived ca.  <dig> million years before present
 <cit> . it can be assumed, however, that genome colonization by ltr res predates the split between rhinophrynidae + pipidae and neobatrachians because members of all re families except retroviridae are widely distributed among the genomes of plants, fungi, and animals
 <cit> .

ltr res are usually inherited vertically from generation to generation; there is also evidence for a horizontal transfer of such elements between species
. a successful spread of ltr res assumes a stable integration into the germline of the host, which can be achieved when eggs or early embryonic stages are infected. the underlying transfer requires a vector; it was speculated that parasites may transmit nuclear dna including tes
 <cit> . the mechanisms of the transmission process, however, remain obscure. in this context it should be noted that cer elements found in the genome of silurana and the transcriptome of pelophylax showed closest relationships to elements described from the genome of the nematode caenorhabditis elegans
 <cit> 
. we do not know whether these cer elements originated directly from frog genomes or from the genomes of putative parasites. the latter possibility is more parsimonious because highest expression of cer elements was observed in muscle and testis; both tissues are known to be colonized by parasitic flatworms
 <cit> .

differential expression of ltr res
the expression of ltr res in vertebrates is thought to depend on a variety of genetic and epigenetic factors as indicated by specific spatiotemporal expression patterns, i.e. differences in the expression profiles of distinct elements  between tissues, sexes, ontogenetic and age stages, individuals, and species
. tissue-specific expression patterns of single ltr res, especially hydra <dig>  and muerv, have been observed in the frog transcriptomes analyzed. the most enigmatic example for tissue-specific expression is the snakehead retrovirus , which was highly expressed in the tongue of p. lessonae but at very low levels in the other tissues investigated. the significance of this pattern is not yet understood just as this erv is not well studied either.

similar patterns of cell type specific expression have been reported for the zferv virus of the zebrafish; for this erv the thymus appears to be a major tissue for retroviral activity
 <cit> . pervasive, tissue-specific re transcription is likely to have functional consequences on the protein-coding transcriptome
 <cit>  and is thought to be directly linked to the role these elements may play in physiology of organs
 <cit> .

evidence for individual differences of ltr re expression comes from the cyclorana dataset; here a small number of kobel-like elements were transcribed in muscle tissue of only some individuals. this suggests that expression of ltr res may play a role in the process of individual adaptation and may affect phenotypic variability. because the silurana transcriptomic datasets are pooled from several specimens
 <cit> , individual effects should be minimized as indicated by similar expression profiles of ltr re transcripts in s. tropicalis eggs and embryos obtained from two different clutches . moreover, there is evidence for species-specific expression of ltr res. for example, xen1-like elements exhibited only minor transcription in pelophylax and silurana, but were relatively highly expressed in the muscle tissue of cyclorana compared to the other elements.

our analyses clearly demonstrate that ltr res are differentially expressed during ontogenetic development of s. tropicalis; there are clear transitions between three ltr re communities at particular stages of development. transcription starts abruptly at the mbt . before the mbt silurana embryos undergo  <dig> rapid synchronous cleavages; this phase is also characterized by the absence of cell motility. at the mbt the blastomers become motile and the cell cycle becomes more complex. while low levels of transcription are known to occur before the mbt, especially of genes associated with phosphorylation, the cell cycle, signal transduction, and apoptosis
 we did not find significant expression of viral-related transcripts before stage  <dig> . the significant change of ltr re transcription profiles during embryogenesis indicates that ltr res are probably involved in cell differentiation and organogenesis in s. tropicalis as has already been demonstrated by sinzelle et al.
 <cit>  for the erv xterv <dig> 

for mammals there is increasing evidence that ltr res are involved in gene regulation and developmental processes. in mouse oocytes and preimplantation embryos, for example, retroviruses exhibited a high contribution to the maternal mrna pool and different ltr res had specific, developmentally regulated expression patterns
 <cit> . in a 2-cell  stage embryo cdna library prepared by peatson et al.
 <cit> , the bulk of interspersed repeat ests were muerv, similar to the situation observed in gastrulation and neurulation stages of silurana. in mice the 2c stage is the critical phase when the embryo switches from a maternal to a zygotic transcriptome
 <cit>  comparable to the mbt in silurana
 <cit> . in mouse 2c-like embryonic stem cells  the expression pattern of murine erv elements with leucine t-rna primer  overlapped with more than  <dig> 2c-specific genes that have co-opted regulatory elements from these retroviruses to initiate their transcription
 <cit> . more than 25% of the nearly  <dig> muervl copies were activated, and  <dig> genes generated chimeric transcripts with junctions to muervl elements. similar observations were obtained from human escs in which herv-h was highly expressed but became silenced on differentiation into embryoid bodies
 <cit> . based on these results it can be suggested that ervs may have an important gene regulatory role already in early mammalian development by contributing to the specification of cell types.

in contrast to the mouse genome, only 1- <dig> muerv copies were found in the genome of silurana where they were highest expressed from stage 13- <dig>  to stage 22- <dig> . one of these copies carried an orf of unknown function and an env protein.

during embryonic development ltr res operate as alternative promotors, enhancers
, first exons for a subset of host genes
 <cit> , and as targets of transcription factors
 <cit> . retroelements are even able to serve host functions for genes over longer distances as the example of the human erv- <dig> demonstrates
 <cit> . the ltr/pol ii complex of this erv appears to mediate the long range transfer of proteins from the ltr to the ß-globolin gene. moreover, re derived mrnas are important sources for small rnas, which are known to be necessary for regulation of gene expression
 <cit> .

based on the fact that ltr res are apparently involved in key and early stages of embryonic development in silurana, we hypothesize that ltr res including ervs, were already exapted as regulators of embryonic development in lower vertebrates, i.e. long before the earliest mammalian genomes evolved.

ltr res as evolvability toolboxes
there is increasing evidence that ltr res have greatly contributed to generate the adaptive genetic diversity observed in living organisms
 <cit> . beside the fact that ltr res are common components of transcriptional networks, the protein domains they carry are known to be essential for genome maintenance and dynamics such as transcription regulation, mrna trafficking, intracellular signaling, cell survival, and differentiation
 <cit> . ltr res typically include highly specific rna binding domains 
 <cit> ; domains for catalysis of dna integration into the genome ; peptide cleavage , rna and dna cleavage 
 <cit> ; and reverse transcription ; in addition some carry group specific antigens 
 <cit> ; chromatin organization modifiers 
 <cit> ; and trans-membrane glycoproteins . the domain composition is element-specific , for example chromo domains were only found within am-san elements; more than half of the gmr elements exclusively contained a scan domain, while zinc finger and zinc knuckle domains were only identified in retroviruses. moreover, ltr re derived glycoproteins, in particular from ervs, are thought to act as blocking receptors against exogenous infective viruses 
 <cit> .

a not yet discussed putative function concerns the env domain of ervs which is responsible for cell entry
 <cit>  and also has an immunosuppressive function
 <cit> . we found that the env domain of muerv was only expressed during embryogenesis but not in adult tissues of silurana. this fact indicates that muerv still possesses the capability to overcome cell membranes during embryogenesis and predisposes one to believe that ervs might play a general role in signal transduction pathways and thus for coordination and regulation of ontogenetic processes in frogs and probably also in other vertebrates. because of the relative low copy number of ervs in the silurana tropicalis genome , this species could serve as a suitable model to study the effects ervs have on ontogenesis and cell differentiation.

taking the known and putative functions of ervs and remnant ltr elements into consideration, the common view that they have to be considered as fossil representatives of retroviruses extant at the time of their insertion into the germline
 <cit>  has to be questioned. because complex phenomena such as molecular orchestration of embryonic development, placentation, and immunity are closely accompanied by ervs and their derivatives we are more inclined to believe that ltr res and in general tes significantly contributed to the rise and diversification of vertebrate animals.

CONCLUSIONS
we here present the first comprehensive study on the diversity of ltr res in frog genomes. we found ltr res of all four families  in the genome of silurana and in the transcriptional landscapes of silurana and pelophylax. ty3/gypsy and bel/pao are the most abundant ltr re classes within the frog genome and transcriptome. amn-san elements from the ty3/gypsy class are the most prolific with over  <dig> full-length genomic copies. it has been shown that ltr res are differentially transcribed not only across different tissues of the same frog, but also across different species of frogs and across different individuals of the same species. differential expression of ltr res occurred also during the embryonic development of silurana, where transcription of ltr res begins as soon as the embryonic genome is activated, followed by clear transitions between three ltr re communities at particular stages of development. their involvement in key and early stages of development suggests that ltr res, especially ervs, were already exapted as regulators of embryonic development in lower vertebrates, i.e. before the earliest mammalian genomes evolved.

measured in terms of the huge amount and variability of ltr res, only little is known on their specific genomic functions. therefore, experimental approaches are urgently needed to better understand the roles ltr res play for cell function, gene regulation, and organismic development, separately and in concert with other genes and genetic factors. future efforts should also include studies focused on the functions of the protein domains encoded within each ltr re type, and particularly the env domain of ervs.

beside the fact that ltr res are transcriptionally active, their cell type-specificity and differential expression during ontogenetic development emphasize once again their importance for organismic development in vertebrates as intrinsic components of regulatory networks.

