BACKGROUND
human infection with t. cruzi, a vector-borne protozoan parasite, is the cause of chagas disease, which is a potentially fatal malady endemic to much of latin america. t. cruzi is a member of the order trypanosomatida, and, like other members of this early diverged group of eukaryotes, is diploid and has a primarily clonal population structure which is extremely diverse  <cit> . the broad host range of t. cruzi, which includes over  <dig> species of both wild and domestic mammals  may also contribute to its remarkable phenotypic and genetic diversity.

the population structure of t. cruzi has been examined by sub-genomic methods, such as multi-locus sequence typing  and microsatellite analyses, resulting in the classification of t. cruzi strains into six discrete typing units , type i and types iia-e . a change in nomenclature from these dtu names to tci-tcvi has recently been suggested  <cit> . however, in the interest of clarity we will heretofore use the more familiar nomenclature of type i and types iia-iie. although an asexual replication mechanism best explains the population structure of t. cruzi as it is currently understood, molecular analyses support the occurrence of at least two hybridization events in the past resulting in mosaic genomes in two of the dtu  and hybrid genomes in another two , one of which  was used as the type strain for the t. cruzi genome sequencing effort  <cit> .

the genotypic diversity evidenced by sub-genomic methods of analysis suggests that whole genome analyses of t. cruzi strain diversity would be fruitful, especially for elucidating the underpinnings of strain diversity in biological characteristics, such as variability in complements of large gene family members. nearly one half of the t. cruzi genome contains repeat sequences largely comprised of thousands of members of large gene families, including trans-sialidases, mucin associated surface proteins , mucins, retrotransposon hotspot  proteins, dispersed gene family  <dig> proteins , and surface protease gp <dig>  <cit> . many of these have been shown to be important targets of immune responses in infected hosts  <cit> . isolates of t. cruzi  appear to show a near limitless range of variation in important biological characteristics, among these, the numbers of parasites in the blood and tissues of various hosts, the focus and location of inflammation and thus the morbidity and mortality in these hosts, and susceptibility of these isolates to anti-t. cruzi drugs. the current genetic classification cannot fully account for this variation  despite the fact that a substantial proportion of this variation is almost certainly based upon genetic differences among isolates.

to date only the reference strain, cl-brener, has been fully sequenced  <cit> . moreover, the genome sequence of the cl-brener strain has only recently been assembled into chromosome-sized pieces that will facilitate genome-wide strain comparisons  <cit> . to further explore the degree of genetic variability between t. cruzi isolates, and to examine the relationship between genotypic and biological diversity on a genomic scale, we used whole genome oligonucleotide tiling arrays to determine copy number variations  in  <dig> t. cruzi strains by competitive hybridizations using the cl-brener strain as reference. our results partially support the proposed type i - type ii dichotomy in the t. cruzi population structure but also reveal similarities and differences between t. cruzi strains that cannot be explained by the current dtu scheme. these findings suggest that either coevolution of distinct, chromosome-specific cnvs frequently occurs in different t. cruzi strains or that chromosome exchange between t. cruzi strains is much more common than currently thought. the results also suggest that t. cruzi is remarkably permissive to substantial cnv, including whole chromosome cnv.

RESULTS
whole genome oligonucleotide tiling arrays  were designed as described in the methods section, using the only fully sequenced t. cruzi strain, the hybrid cl brener, as a template. because of the hybrid nature of the cl brener strain, with its "esmeraldo-like"  and "non-esmeraldo-like"  alleles, it was possible to design allele-specific probes for many regions of the genome. regions of the genome that are rich in genes that are members of large gene families have relatively few probes because the sequence similarities among family members did not permit the design of gene-specific probes.

as a validation of the accuracy of the arrays we performed hybridizations comparing wt t. cruzi strains with gene knockout parasite lines generated in our laboratory  <cit> . additional file  <dig> shows the cgh data for one of these hybridizations comparing a knockout strain for enoyl-coa hydratase/isomerase family protein  vs wt t. cruzi. the cnv resulting from single knockout of one copy each of these two tandemly arrayed genes is obvious at the whole chromosome view of chromosome  <dig>  panel a. moreover, the close-up view in panel b reveals overlap of the esm and non-esm probes  within the coding portions of the genes, but divergence of esm and non-esm ratios for the intergenic region. this reflects the fact that the esm and non-esm alleles for these two genes are nearly identical, but the esm and non-esm sequences for the intergenic region are not.

genomic dna samples from  <dig> t. cruzi strains were compared to genomic dna from the cl-brener strain by competitive hybridizations on this array and the complete set of figures for all  <dig> chromosomes for each of the  <dig> strain comparisons are shown in additional file  <dig> and the full dataset can be viewed in additional files  <dig> and  <dig>  the data have also been deposited in the gene expression omnibus  under the accession gse <dig>  the most striking feature of these results is the very large number of both segmental  and whole chromosome aneuploidies, representative examples of which are shown in the hybridization results for chromosome  <dig> for  <dig> strains . probes with log2ratios approximating zero are present in equal copy numbers in both the test and reference  strains and probes with positive log2ratios have higher copy number in the test strains versus the reference strain, and thus represent amplifications in the test strain. probes with negative log2ratios indicate deletions in the test strain and/or sufficient sequence divergence to result in decreased hybridization in the test channel. segmental aneuploidies  and shared, focal deletions in multiple strains are readily evident . sequence divergence resulting in decreased hybridization intensity can be seen in the esmeraldo panel where the green dots  have positive ratios and blue dots  have negative log2ratios . however, note that the average log2ratio for all probes is near zero in the esmeraldo panel, suggesting that esmeraldo is homozygous for the esmeraldo haplotype as would be expected and that the total number copies of chromosome  <dig> in this strain is  <dig> . the presence of apparent deletions in the test strains that are shared between many genetically divergent test strains  suggests that such instances are bona fide deletions rather than sequence divergence.

to identify the regions of the t. cruzi genome that are most prone to cnv, we annotated segments of the genome that had cnvs relative to the overall average of all strains . 'hotspots' of cnv were readily evident and were present on every chromosome, although much more prevalent on some  than others . the cnv were also focal and widespread, frequently associated with gene family rich regions of the genome , but also in core regions. due to the scarcity of probes within the gene family rich regions a statistical test of the significance of the bias of hotspot regions being located in gene family rich regions of the genome was not possible.

the classes of genes mapping to these hotspot regions are ranked in order of frequency of cnv in table  <dig> . perhaps not surprisingly, genes that are members of large families of surface proteins, such as the mucins, trans-sialidases, mucin-associated surface proteins , and surface proteases are among those with the highest number of cnv among the strains tested, with type ii mucins showing cnv over 70% of the time. interestingly, protein kinases, a large and diverse family of related genes, as well as hypothetical proteins were the gene groups with the least association with hotspot regions, suggesting that all or nearly all of them may be under strict copy number control. other genes that are relatively stable in terms of copy number included genes for ribosomal proteins and dna repair, consistent with their expected essential roles. cnvs in gene groups represented by less than  <dig> genes are shown in additional file  <dig> 

 <dig>  # genome occurrences = number of instances for the annotation in the genome.

 <dig>  # array occurrences = number of annotated genes with probes on the arrays.

 <dig>  # array candidates = number of annotated genes represented by probes on the arrays and which had probe density of  <dig> unique probes per  <dig> bp. genes could have insufficient probe density due to repeat regions or they could have too few probes due to length of the gene .

 <dig>  # sig cnv = cnv with a minimum log <dig> ratio difference of +/-  <dig> , for a minimum of  <dig> probes over a segment size of  <dig> bp in at least  <dig> test strains.

the typing of t. cruzi into  <dig> discrete typing units  is based upon a relatively small number of loci, including small subunit rrna, elongation factor 1α, actin, dihydrofolate reductase-thymidylate sythase, and trypanothione reductase among others  <cit> . to determine if this dtu classification system matched to patterns of cnv among typed strains, we 'typed' chromosomes based on their cnv patterns, creating cnv signature types  and then grouped these cnv-typed t. cruzi strains by similarity in the number of shared chromosome types . the typing results suggest that there is substantially more genetic diversity among the type i strains than there is among the type ii strains. this is consistent with recent microsatellite analyses of type i strain diversity  <cit> . however, the apparently greater diversity among type i versus type ii strains observed in our study could be a result of the feature selection. features for typing were selected by an unbiased computational method, but not all of the nearly limitless possible combinations of available cnv features were used in the typing. although type i and type ii strains grouped together in the classification, on an individual chromosome basis some type i strains clearly had chromosomal cnv patterns matching those in type ii strains and vice versa. for example, on chromosome  <dig> esmeraldo, m <dig>  and tu <dig>  each have a cnv that is shared among all of the type i strains . yet the other type ii strains, including y strain which is also type iib, do not have this cnv. this cnv, a deletion, corresponds to the locus for proline racemase that may be a target of immune selection  <cit> . taken together, these data suggest that either there is extensive homoplasy among t. cruzi strains  or that chromosome exchange has occurred more frequently in t. cruzi than the current two-hybridization event theory would suggest  <cit> .

discussion
in this study, we used whole-genome tiling arrays to catalog the diversity in gene copy number among  <dig> t. cruzi strains with widely varying biological characteristics. the overwhelming conclusion from this work is that there is substantial and widespread variation in gene copy numbers among t. cruzi isolates. the observation of cnvs in t. cruzi is not surprising. the relative infrequency of sexual recombination, coupled with the near absence of transcriptional promoters in t. cruzi means that both the generation of genetic diversity and the regulation of the level of proteins is determined in part by within-isolate gene recombination and amplification. nevertheless, the extent of variation in a relatively small set of isolates is quite dramatic. this variation is evident from the level of entire chromosomes down to individual genes, and cnvs tend to cluster in regions that are heavily populated with repeat sequences, including those encoding the members of gene families of the surface proteins, trans-sialidases, mucins, mucin associated surface proteins , as well as retrotransposon hot spot  proteins, the dispersed gene family  <dig> , and protease gp <dig>  multicopy genes are frequently sources of mitotic recombination resulting in amplification and deletion of duplicate genes  <cit>  so their relationship to regions of cnv is also not unexpected. the surface protein families in particular are known to be the major targets of protective immune responses and this selective pressure presumably drives their expansion and variation among strains.

in addition to the expected association of cnv with genes that are under immunological pressure, the presence and absence of cnv among other gene groups may be informative as to their functions and unique activities in t. cruzi. a relatively high fraction of serine carboxypeptidases, tryptophanyl aminoacyl trna synthetases, beta galactofuranosyl transferases and mitogen-activated protein kinases show cnvs among the t. cruzi isolates studied. the tryptophanyl aminoacyl trna synthetases are expanded to  <dig> distinct genes  in t. cruzi whereas t. brucei and leishmania each have only two, a cytoplasmic and a mitochondrial version. interestingly, aminoacyl-trna synthetase genes in other eukaryotes have been reported to be increased in number and to acquire a diverse set non-enzymatic functions, including as inflammatory and angiogenic cytokines  <cit> . the location of this expanded set of the tryptophanyl trna sythetases genes in hotspots for recombination in t. cruzi also suggests that they may be modified and selected for as yet undetermined secondary functions. similarly, t. cruzi has  <dig> beta-galactofuranosyl transferase genes. located in regions of high between-strain cnv. these enzymes are involved in the synthesis of glycans on mucins in t. cruzi. mucin glycan structure is complex and heterogeneous between t. cruzi strains, again consistent with the expansion and variation in transferases among t. cruzi strains noted herein  <cit> . conversely, only  <dig> of  <dig> protein kinases that passed the data filters for this analysis and <2% of the nearly  <dig>  hypothetical proteins were associated with hotspot regions, suggesting that variation, amplification and recombination of these genes is not tolerated or provides no selective advantage.

although this analysis suggests extensive occurrence of whole chromosome aneuploidy in t. cruzi, the range of chromosome numbers as well as the absolute number of individual chromosomes in each strain cannot be estimated based upon our analysis. the decreased signal intensities evident across whole chromosomes in this cgh analysis would appear to be deletions but could also be in part due to sequence divergence in the test strains relative to the cl brener reference sequences. since individual isolates or strains of t. cruzi are thought to evolve without significant between-strain genetic exchange due to the relative absence of sexual recombination  <cit> , the accumulation of sequence variants would be expected. normally, traditional cytological methods such as metaphase spreads would be used to resolve karyotypic differences between isolates. however, this approach is not possible in the case of t. cruzi because t. cruzi replicates via endodyogeny, where the nuclear membrane does not break down and chromosomes do not fully condense during replication  <cit> . nevertheless it seems highly unlikely that sequence divergence alone could explain our observations of chromosomes with significantly decreased signal intensities in many of the test strains relative to the cl-brener reference. and certainly whole chromosome increases in signal relative to the reference strain cannot be accounted for by sequence divergence, since the target probes are based upon the reference strain sequence and diverged sequences are unlikely to out-compete the homologous sequences. for example, y, colombiana, m <dig>  wtcl, and teda <dig> each appear to have an extra chromosome  <dig> . it is most reasonable to interpret significant deviation from a log <dig> ratio of zero for test strain vs. reference strain over the length of a chromosome as being indicative of a real difference in the number of copies of that chromosome in the test and reference strains, supporting the conclusion that t. cruzi karyotypes are highly variable between strains and suggesting that there is perhaps no 'euploid' state for t. cruzi. this karyotypic plasticity may be another mechanism t. cruzi uses to generate diversity in spite of apparently being asexual or nearly so and may to some extent parallel what has been observed for the pathogenic yeast, candida glabrata. array cgh and pulsed field gel electrophoresis analyses of this haploid, asexual organism revealed extensive variability in the karyotypes of c. glabrata strains and suggest that this variability may be linked to drug resistance  <cit> .

the biological characteristics of t. cruzi strains have been used to classify isolates into biodemes  <cit>  and as well the dtu classification has been associated to certain transmission and virulence characteristics of isolates  <cit> . nevertheless, the link between dtu type and the biological characteristics of a strain are not strong  <cit> . likewise, we find that the dtu organization of strains is a poor predictor of patterns of cnv in individual chromosomes. thus, clear and specific patterns of amplifications and deletions in chromosomes are observed among strains, but these specific patterns are almost never restricted to or predictive of dtu type. this result has two important implications. first, the substantial and even continuous variation in biological characteristics of t. cruzi isolates will be difficult to account for using a limited number of genetic markers. patterns of cnv provides another tool, but this too is not sufficient to predict behaviors that likely have a complex genetic basis. nevertheless, these typing approaches do provide insights into the population structure of the species and the evolution of individual "strains" that are thought to be genetically isolated from each other. the results of typing of chromosomes by cnv patterns that we present herein provides new insights but also new questions related to genetic exchange in t. cruzi. the observation of shared patterns of cnv that do not track with the dtu type of a strain and are not consistent between chromosomes within the same strains can be explained in two ways: either such similar patterns of cnv are arising independently in isolates, perhaps due to common selective forces, or chromosomes of t. cruzi are being resorted or exchanged between isolates at a much higher frequency than is currently appreciated. the similarity and complexity of cnv would seem to favor the latter of these possibilities but a mechanism by which such exchange would occur is not clear. the full sequencing of additional t. cruzi isolates, as is currently underway, should help discriminate between these possibilities. moreover, cgh arrays designed from the sequences of multiple t. cruzi strains, analogous to multi-species taxonomic arrays for saccharomyces cerevisiae may help resolve the extent and nature of genetic exchange between t. cruzi strains and reveal heretofore undiscovered instances of introgression  <cit> .

in addition to these insights into the biology and evolution of t. cruzi, the identification of "hot spots" for cnv within the t. cruzi genome should also provide guidance in the selection of candidates for vaccines and for targets for drug development. although selecting candidates that are encoded outside these hot spots does not guarantee the absence of variation or the development of variation between isolates, avoiding genes that are in such hotspots would seem prudent.

CONCLUSIONS
cnv among t. cruzi strains are substantial in number, widespread throughout the t. cruzi genome, range in size from a few hundred base pairs to whole chromosomes , and are discordant with traditional dtu assignments for the strains tested. taken together, these results suggest that there is much more genotypic diversity among t. cruzi strains than can be fathomed using traditional typing methods and that genetic exchange, possibly by the proposed "fusion then loss" mechanism  <cit> , occurs between t. cruzi strains much more frequently than current dogma supposes. the large number of cnv shared between divergent dtu supports the genetic exchange hypothesis over the hypothesis that the shared cnv arose due to homoplasy.

cnv in t. cruzi tended to be concentrated in gene family rich regions of the genome, suggesting that the highly repetitive nature of the sequences in these regions is a strong driver of mitotic recombination in t. cruzi whether occurring within diploid strains or in strains resulting from hybridization events.

neither the traditional dtu assignments for the t. cruzi strains used in this study nor the strain groupings based upon cnv patterns are currently good predictors of the biological characteristics of these strains. thus, further cgh and sequencing studies of a larger panel of well-characterized t. cruzi strains is warranted to determine appropriate genotypic markers of t. cruzi biological diversity. moreover, it would seem prudent to use the cnv data reported herein when selecting targets for drug and vaccine studies in order to avoid genes in hotspots of cnv occurrence.

