BACKGROUND
rice is the world's most important agronomic plant. in asia, home to 70% of the world's poor, rice provides up to two-thirds of the population's daily caloric intake and as much as 60% of the daily protein intake  <cit> . efforts to improve our understanding of rice genetics, thereby improving the breeding and cultivation of rice, have led to numerous international collaborations, culminating in the completion of a publicly available genome sequence of rice in  <dig>  <cit> . this sequence provides a powerful tool for the identification of agronomically important genes in rice, as well as for the identification of orthologous regions in other crop species. with a sequence in hand, the focus for rice geneticists has shifted to the integration of rice physical and genetic maps <cit> , and comparison of the rice genome to genomes of other species, both for comparative gene cloning efforts and evolutionary studies  <cit> .

the genus oryza, of which cultivated rice  is a member, includes  <dig> species from a widely diverse range of habitats. wild rice species can be found in central and south america, australia, africa, and asia, while o. sativa is distributed worldwide, in both temperate and tropical climates  <cit> . rice research is now looking to the wild rice species to help answer questions about domestication, speciation, polyploidy, and to furnish genes for breeding purposes  <cit> . however, there are no plans at this time for an international full genome sequencing effort of these species. therefore, other methods must be employed to harness the knowledge hidden in these wild rice genomes.

recent comparative genomics studies in animals have used overgo  probes to construct sequence-ready contigs of large-insert clones in multiple species. thomas et al.   <cit>  designed probes from conserved regions of human-mouse alignments and used them to construct sequence-ready, bacterial artificial chromosome -based physical maps for six other mammalian species. more recently, kellner et al.   <cit>  reported improved probe design algorithms that are being used to design overgo probe sets which can identify most genes or regions of interest in placental mammals, birds, and reptiles. these probes are again constructed using whole genome alignments between human, mouse, and rat as the basis for probe design. in order to build bac-based physical maps of wild rice, we used the rice sequence to design overgo probes for hybridization to bac libraries of eleven wild rice species. because no other monocot species has been completely sequenced, we could not use multiple-species sequence alignments for probe design, and instead relied on hits to plant est databases to design probes from putatively conserved regions.

cultivated rice is a diploid species  of the aa genome type  <cit> . the wild rice species used in this study represent a diverse evolutionary background, including both diploid and tetraploid species encompassing 8– <dig> million years of divergence  <cit>  . in addition to the oryza species, we tested the effectiveness of rice overgos when hybridized to sorghum bicolor l. moench, a species within the gramineae but outside of the genus oryza that diverged from rice 40– <dig> million years ago  <cit>  .

we will discuss the success rates of our overgos in hybridizations to o. sativa, the species from which the overgos were designed, to eleven wild rice species in the genus oryza, and to the more distantly related grass s. bicolor. we will then report on the use of these overgos for ongoing physical and comparative mapping projects in two of the wild rice species and for comparative mapping in s. bicolor.

RESULTS
overgo design and hybridization success in oryza species
the goal of this project was to design overgo markers from the rice  genomic sequence  <cit> , hybridize those overgos to bac libraries constructed from wild oryza species, and use the data generated, in conjunction with bac fingerprinting and bac end sequencing data generated by the oryza map alignment project   <cit> , to link the physical maps of the wild oryza species to the o. sativa reference genome sequence. the first step toward achieving this goal was to identify potential overgos from the rice reference sequence. in total,  <dig> of the potential overgo marker sequences spanning all sequence contigs of o. sativa chromosome  <dig>  were identified as having fit our selection criteria. while our optimum target density was one overgo every  <dig>  bp along rice chromosome  <dig>  the spacing between selected overgos along the chromosome ranged from  <dig>  bp apart to  <dig>  bp apart, for a mean spacing of  <dig>  bp between overgos . to test the efficacy of overgos designed from sequences of other rice chromosomes, an additional  <dig> overgos were designed from chromosome  <dig> and were spaced an average of  <dig>  bp apart .  <dig> of the selected overgos  were used for bac library hybridizations. data from  <dig> of the  <dig> overgos hybridized, whose failures were traced to laboratory errors, were not included in the further analyses.

we labelled an overgo as successful if the overgo identified at least one positive clone. figure  <dig> shows the success rates of overgos hybridized to the o. sativa library as determined by three methods. the first two analyses shown on the chart were performed to provide an estimate of the success of overgos in one dimension when used as pooled probes. previous studies have defined overgo success as an overgo identifying at least one positive clone, regardless of whether the clone actually hybridized to the sequence from which it was designed. in addition to doing the same analysis in our study, we desired a more accurate picture of overgo success in terms of whether overgos are actually hybridizing to the sequences in the regions from which they were designed. while some clone data in fpc and bes alignments to the rice sequence data is ambiguous, these alignments can provide an estimate of overgo success, defined as an overgo successfully hybridizing to the clone to which we expect it to hybridize. predicted clone data from the alignments of the fpc and bes maps to the rice pseudomolecule were used to calculate the percentage of overgos that identified at least one fpc or bes clone, respectively, in at least one dimension. the list of bac clones identified by a twelve-overgo pool was compared to a list of clones expected to be detected by a given overgo from that pool, based on either fpc or bes data. if at least one predicted clone was found by the pool, the overgo was counted as successful. these two analyses can only be used for o. sativa, the positive control species, because that is the only species for which we have complete, sequence-anchored fingerprint  and bes data. overall, 82% of the  <dig> overgos tested found at least one fpc-predicted clone in at least one dimension, while 78% of the overgos found at least one bes-predicted clone in at least one dimension. broken down by chromosome, 83% of the chromosome  <dig> overgos tested found at least one fpc-predicted clone in at least one dimension, while 77% of the overgos found at least one bes-predicted clone in at least one dimension. 78% of the chromosome  <dig> overgos tested found at least one fpc-predicted clone in at least one dimension, while 80% of the overgos found at least one bes-predicted clone in at least one dimension. two-dimensional success rates were consistently lower than either of the one-dimensional rates. this result is expected, as the failure of an overgo in either of the two dimensions would result in an overall false negative result. as seen in figure  <dig>  60% of the tested overgos identified at least one bac clone in both dimensions. based on the average one-dimensional percentages, the maximum expected percentage of overgos that would detect at least one overgo in two dimensions is estimated to be  67%. therefore an estimated 7% of overgos overall were successful in one dimension but failed in the second dimension, although the chromosome  <dig> overgos had a 16% higher two-dimensional success rate than the chromosome  <dig> overgos.

aspecies are listed in phylogenetic order according to ge et al.   <cit> , with the species most closely related to o. sativa at the top of the table and the most distant relative at the bottom.

hybridization of overgos to sorghum
to determine the ability of probes to detect sequences of a more distantly related member of the grass family we conducted a pilot study using sorghum bicolor. previously, klein et al.   <cit>  constructed an integrated genetic and physical map of sorghum and demonstrated extensive colinearity over the lengths of chromosome  <dig> and rice chromosome  <dig>  <cit> . for the current experiment,  <dig> physically mapped sorghum bac clones, spanning ~ <dig> mb of chromosome  <dig> , were hybridized with  <dig> randomly selected overgo probes. sixteen probes  successfully identified at least one bac clone, consistent with the trend of decreasing hybridization success rate with increasing evolutionary distance from rice. to better understand the relationship between hybridization success rate and sequence conservation we examined the level of probe-target mismatches in available sorghum sequences. although available sequence of sorghum is limited, we were able to identify est and genome survey sequences corresponding to regions of rice that encompass  <dig> of the  <dig> probes, and these were subsequently examined by blastn to determine the level of mismatches. as shown in figure  <dig>  fewer than 4% of probes had zero mismatches, while approximately half had six or greater mismatches. we note that this sample of probes is biased toward greater conservation than the probe set as a whole since it excludes probes targeted to regions of rice for which no homologues exist in sorghum. among probes for which we were able to obtain mismatch data, the hybridization success rate was 23% . this was significantly higher  than the success rate of probes for which no mismatch data was obtainable, which was 3% . we further found that among the nine positively-hybridizing probes for which we have mismatch data, all but one had six or fewer mismatches, while the success rate among all  <dig> probes having six or fewer mismatches was 40%, compared to only  <dig> %  for probes having greater than  <dig> mismatches .

comparative mapping of the rice and wild rice  genomes
clone data from the overgo probe hybridizations, in conjunction with clone fingerprint data, was used to construct physical maps of the rice chromosome  <dig> orthologues in o. nivara and o. officinalis. the o. nivara physical map of chromosome  <dig> is shown in figure  <dig>  while in most cases it is not possible to ascertain whether overgo markers were solely responsible for contig builds or merges in the physical map, we have determined that at least  <dig> of the overgo markers shown in figure  <dig> confirmed the in silico alignment of the bes to the corresponding pseudomolecule of o. sativa chromosome  <dig>  providing robustness to the physical map. close inspection of the physical maps also revealed areas where overgos aided in the assembly of contigs, especially by bringing together clones in areas of low coverage. three examples of these areas are shown in figure  <dig> 

the assembly and alignment of physical contigs from a wild rice species to the reference genome is often made more difficult by lower degrees of synteny between the two species in these areas, as well as by the presence of repetitive elements and rearrangements. in these cases, overgo markers confirmed orthologous tracks in the chromosomes of the wild species in reference to o. sativa. one example of this can be seen in o. officinalis. contig  <dig>  shown in figure 8a, was merged with o. officinalis contig  <dig> , based on the hybridization of overgo 7jp <dig> to bac clones from both contigs. after this merger, fingerprint data then pointed to a merger of contig  <dig> with contig 15/ <dig>  a merger that could not be made from fingerprint data alone, but which was driven by overgo 7jp <dig> . in the process, the data from the same overgo resolved a false inversion that had been observed in contig  <dig> prior to the merger.

comparative mapping of the rice and sorghum genomes
based on the probe-to-bac hybridization data and the integrated genetic and physical maps of sorghum  <cit> , we drew a comparative map of sorghum chromosome  <dig> and rice chromosome  <dig>  shown in figure  <dig>  the map displays long-range colinearity between the two chromosomes, with the exception of one locus showing evidence of having relocated in one lineage relative to the other. in addition, the map detects an inversion event that was previously shown to encompass most of the short arms of each chromosome  <cit> . these results are in agreement with previous findings of a syntenic relationship between these chromosomes, with small-scale changes resulting from movement of individual or small clusters of genes  <cit> .

discussion
overgo probes have been gaining popularity as markers for large-scale physical mapping of both plant and animal genomes. they are particularly useful for screening large-insert libraries to identify clones belonging to regions of interest, or to identify clones to sequence and fingerprint for contig assembly  <cit> . one disadvantage of overgos is that good quality sequence information must be available from which to design the probe. in addition, repeat databases that can be used to filter out repetitive probes are also essential. on the other hand, overgo probes can be designed from sequences that are too short for optimal pcr primer selection when a hybridization probe from the region is needed. overgo probes can also be labelled to a high specific activity and can be pooled easily, making them ideal candidates for high-throughput physical mapping  <cit> .

the criteria used to select overgos for hybridization experiments play a huge role in the success of these markers. most of the studies reported to date in both plants and animals have used overgos designed from the sequence of one species to probe clone libraries of that same species  <cit> . in animals, where comprehensive sequence data is available for many species, overgos have been designed from the conserved regions of aligned sequences from multiple species  <cit> . the overgo design process for our rice comparative mapping project presented a unique problem. as evidenced in the studies cited above, it is necessary to design overgos as much as possible to conserved regions for successful cross-species hybridizations, yet the plant community does not have the large repository of complete sequence data that exists for animal and microbial species. at the time this study began, arabidopsis thaliana  heynh. was the only plant species that had been sequenced to completion, although rice chromosome  <dig> had been completed and the rest of the rice sequence was soon published  <cit> . while a multispecies alignment approach to overgo selection is preferable, these resources were not available, so we selected overgos with a bias towards hits to available plant est databases.

the success rate of overgos in this study was 82%, a rate that is comparable to the rates reported by other studies  <cit> . our two-dimensional overgo success rate also closely matches the rate we would expect based on the overall success of overgos in one dimension. additionally, these rates are supported by the fact that overgos not only had to positively hybridize to a clone, but that the clone must map to the expected location in the fpc and bes maps, criteria not used by prior studies using overgos. the two-dimensional success rate could be improved in future experiments by the addition of additional dimensions, possibly coupled with an increase in the number of overgos per pool. using three dimensions and requiring a positive result in two of the three dimensions, for example, would increase the success rate by reducing the number of false negatives due to the failure of an overgo in one of the dimensions. in addition, our data point to a need for the continuous improvement of available sequence databases within the plant community, particularly est databases; the continued sequencing of other genomes that could be aligned to rice to disclose regions of sequence conservation will also contribute to improved overgo design and an increase in probe success. we have shown that this is particularly important for cross-species hybridizations. for example, while only 26% of the overgos successfully hybridized to o. coarctata bac clones, 83% of the overgos that were successful were designed from est sequences. this fact was also shown by our sorghum data, in which 40% of rice overgos with six or fewer mismatches to sorghum yielded positive hybridization results, compared to only  <dig> % of overgos with greater than six mismatches. the improvement of repeat databases to screen out overgos designed from repetitive regions will also be crucial to future cross-species overgo success.

even given the current overgo design constraints, this study shows that overgos can be used successfully as markers for the construction of physical maps, as evidenced by our data from o. nivara and o. officinalis. besides confirming the placement of clones into contigs using fingerprint data, we have shown here the use of these overgo markers to resolve conflicts in the chromosomal assignment of contigs and to drive the merges of contigs during physical map construction. in addition, we have shown evidence that overgos can be used successfully to confirm the placement of contigs in and around regions containing suspected rearrangements in comparative maps, a possibility that will be examined in greater detail in future investigations. as evolutionary distance increases relative to the reference genome, it becomes more difficult to design overgos that will be able to successfully hybridize to the genomes of other species. yet even in sorghum, a species outside of the genus oryza, overgo probes were successfully used in this study to aid in the construction of a comparative map between rice and sorghum, and were able to show micro-synteny between regions of the sorghum and rice genomes.

CONCLUSIONS
overgos have been used successfully for physical mapping in animals, but their utility for physical and comparative mapping in plants has not been studied as extensively as in animals. the study presented here shows that overgos can be successfully hybridized cross-species, and can even be used with limited success in species as distantly related as rice and sorghum. of particular interest will be the possibility of using overgo probes to target potential regions of chromosomal rearrangements and to target gaps in the physical maps to drive the merging of contigs and the placement of singletons in those maps. the improvement of sequence databases, including est databases, and repeat databases will be instrumental in the successful design of these probes for cross-species hybridizations.

