BACKGROUND
emerging diseases have been a matter of great concern recently: the sudden appearance of sars and the recent spread of bird's flu raise the question of how microbes evolve into pathogens to human not only an important but also an urgent question to answer. most microbes have a benign symbiotic relationship with humans and only cause infections to healthy individuals under limited conditions. staphylococcus epidermidis is such an opportunistic pathogen which is a common member of the normal flora of our skin and mucous membranes. but on certain occasions, the presence of s. epidermidis as a contaminant of medical devices, or breach of the skin by trauma or inoculation needles, makes it emerge as a causative agent of infections  <cit> . as biomedical devices are increasingly used in medical practice, a major complication due to s. epidermidis infection when using these devices is affecting several millions of patients worldwide each year  <cit> .

the pathogenic process of foreign-body-associated infections with s. epidermidis is characterized by the ability of this species to colonize polymer surfaces by the formation of multilayered cell clusters, which are enveloped and protected by an amorphous slimy material to form a biofilm  <cit> . most genetic and biochemical evidence has shown that polysaccharide intercellular adhesion  production  <cit> , mediated by the icaabcd operon  <cit> , is crucial in biofilm fomation. s. epidermidis does not produce components that are easily recognized as virulence factors, such as toxins or aggressive degradative exoenzymes  <cit> . genetic manipulation of s. epidermidis has been difficult so far, limiting efforts that would elucidate the molecular basic of its pathogenicity. the analysis of bacterial genome sequences provides us with an alternative way to investigate some of the constraints that might pave the way from commensalism to pathogenicity in this species.

staphylococcus epidermidis is one of the most commonly isolated bacterial pathogens in hospitals because of its large numbers and ubiquitous distribution. environmental s. epidermidis strains differ significantly in their invasive and ability to form biofilm. two complete genomes of s. epidermidis strains have been sequenced, one is atcc  <dig>  a non-biofilm forming/non-infection associated strain, and another one is rp62a , an infectious and biofilm forming strain  <cit> . both strains are highly similar in genome sequence, and we tried to see whether some particular features might be correlated with the surviving ability of the organisms in certain environment, allowing us to uncover processes that might be important for the transition between a commensal life style, and a pathogenic behavior. in previous comparative genomics studies, the most obvious differences between these genome pairs revealed the loss or gain of large dna segments  <cit> . further comparative studies of s. epidermidis with other staphylococcal species indicated that the majority of the genes unique to a given strain or species is also related to the presence or absence of prophages and genomic islands. in the absence of other criteria to define virulence, some of these genes were proposed to be the main causes of pathogenicity and virulence  <cit> . however, acquisition of those genes has repeatedly been reported to be insufficient to trigger a pathogenic response  <cit> . for example, it has been discovered that the atcc <dig> and rp62a strains share most of the possible pathogenic factors. as a case in point, the cap operon encoding the polyglutamate capsule and being recognized as a major virulence factor in bacillus anthracis, has been found to be integrated into the genomes of both s. epidermidis rp62a and atcc <dig>  while the latter is a non-infectious strain  <cit> . in addition to gross differences displayed as genomic islands and unique genes, single nucleotide polymorphisms  have also been found to widely exist in the chromosomes of the two strains, especially in some genes with cell envelope functions  <cit> . therefore, pathogenicity appears to be a complex phenomenon which could be accounted for not only by large genetic differences, but also by small variations in gene contents. this prompted us to perform a detailed snps comparative analysis between s. epidermidis atcc <dig> and rp62a, complementing the previous approaches used to differentiate pathogenic strains from non-pathogenic ones  <cit> . assuming that pathogens have evolved recently  <cit> , the amount of small genetic variations that would be accumulated in the genome sequences might not have had time to undergo purifying selection, thus revealing some of the genes that are important for pathogenic processes. analyzing those variations, mostly snps, we expected to find genes bearing landmarks of recent evolution, and which may contribute to the pathogenesis of the bacterium. in this paper, we focused on the systematic snp analysis between a pair of infectious and non-infectious strains of s. epidermidis, in particular by comparing synonymous and non-synonymous mutations in orthologous gene pairs. the genes displaying higher dn/ds rate, including genes of unknown function, were analyzed in relation with function possibly associated to pathogenicity.

RESULTS
small variations between the genomes of two s. epidermidis strains
the s. epidermidis rp62a and atcc <dig> chromosomes are  <dig> , <dig> bp and  <dig> , <dig> bp long, respectively  <cit> . beside large segments coding for genes present in one genome and absent in the other, many small scale genetic variations which affected an individual gene or a small numbers of genes  were dispersed throughout nearly all of both chromosomes, revealing extensive divergence between both species. the comparison of the insertions and deletions  differentiating the two genome sequences showed that such events generally involved small-scale variations . in addition to indels, a total of  <dig>  snps were found in the genome of s. epidermidis atcc <dig> when compared to that of strain rp62a  <cit> . these small-scale variations, mostly snps, might contribute to the different phenotypes of the two strains. we therefore focused on the snps of the orthologous genes to explore how they could contribute to adaptation of the bacteria to various environmental stimuli allowing them to shift from commensalism to pathogenicity.

the s. epidermidis rp62a and atcc <dig> chromosomes contain  <dig>  and  <dig>  predicted protein-coding sequences , respectively  <cit> . of the  <dig>  predicted genes encoded by the atcc <dig> chromosome,  <dig>   have an ortholog in rp62a . most of those genes are almost identical in sequence between both organisms. snps were detected in  <dig> pairs of orthologous genes with identical gene length, accounting for approximately 45% of the orthologous genes set . among those orthologs with snps and of identical length,  <dig> pairs were identical to each other at the amino acid level, while the other  <dig> pairs  displayed some changes in their amino acid sequence. in addition, more complex insertion/deletion events and related variations were observed in  <dig> pairs of orthologs.

pathogenicity-related genes and highly expressed proteins genes evolve differently
pathogenicity in warm blooded vertebrates is expected to have arisen recently . mutations occurring during that period should have started more or less randomly, while selection pressure would have retained only some of them. this prompted us to measure the contribution of synonymous mutations  as compared to non-synonymous mutations. in order to assess the effect of non-synonymous mutations upon the intraspecies differentiation of the two s. epidermidis strains, we calculated the ratios of total non-synonymous snps  vs total synonymous snps  of all genes, with some emphasis on virulence factors, surface proteins  <cit>  and translation, ribosomal structure and biogenesis-related proteins . this comparison would be a first proof of concept, while we were trying to uncover genes' illuminating or unexpected functions that would, in this way, suggest a participation in the evolution of pathogenicity. the n/s ratios for virulence factors and surface proteins differed significantly from that of all snps. in contrast, translation-related proteins also showed a significant bias when compared to total snps, but displayed mostly synonymous substitutions, indicative of a selective stabilization process leading to purifying selection. this analysis shows that virulence factors and surface proteins evolved quickly, in parallel with the pathogenicity environment. that this is significant is emphasized by the observation that translation, ribosomal structure and biogenesis-related proteins, which are submitted to considerable structural and functional constraints and are highly expressed, evolved slowly   <cit> .

to identify groups of snps genes differing in their evolution pattern, the ds and dn of each snps pairs of the two s. epidermidis strains were calculated and the distribution of individual snps pairs were analyzed using the one-tail z  test . among  <dig> pairs of orthologs with snps,  <dig>  pairs had a majority of non-synonymous substitutions , while the remaining  <dig>  pairs had a majority of synonymous mutations . this suggested that the majority of orthologs with snps suffer considerable selection constraints, indicative of adaptation to similar environments for both strains. the others, in contrast, may contribute to the bacterial pathogenesis process during the establishment of infection. in those synonymous pairs, we therefore restricted our analysis to the confidence interval of p <  <dig>  of ds/dn to find what kinds of genes significantly suffered purifying selection pressures. as mentioned above, many genes of the translation machinery and energy production were found in that category. it is worth noticing that genes involved in the translation machinery, such as ribosomal proteins and trna methyltransferases, are expected to be expressed at a high level in many transcriptome studies  <cit> .

genes potentially involved in pathogenicity
a total of  <dig> genes showed a significantly disproportionate distribution of dn vs ds with p-value <  <dig>  . in standard statistical analyses, p <  <dig>  is the level traditionally considered significant; however, if we represented the relative amount of those genes, the plot distribution of dn/ds  shows a continuum that is worth exploring and may be relevant as providing putative signatures of adaptation to pathogenicity. because the organisms we have chosen are extremely similar, leading to very few differences between the two genomes, the advantage of using a stringent statistical constraint for discarding false positives will put aside false negatives under conditions where we need to explore as many paths as possible. indeed, from the figure we can see that  <dig>  genes of the  <dig> snp ortholog pairs are under positive selection , consistent with the observation of other works  <cit>  and strongly suggesting that most, if not all of the retained non-synonymous mutations are significant. furthermore, the accumulation of mutations in some genes can be the result of several independent processes, with some submitted to positive selection for variation, while others would only be affected by drift, precluding, at this stage, a refined statistical analysis. we therefore decided for a compromise, and chose a slightly larger sample, still significant at the p <  <dig>  level , in order to see whether the genes in that category pointed at particular functions non randomly, which would indicate that they are indeed significant. this approach is meant to propose genes as candidates for further study of pathogenicity, and a small number of false positives should not hinder further research in the domain, while false negatives would eliminate important candidates. interestingly, the genes thus identified included phenol-soluble modulin  family peptides , a clp protease , as well as genes involved in osmoprotection. finally,  <dig> of the non-synonymous significant genes were of unknown function. careful analysis of these genes revealed however that they were likely to belong to functions important for pathogenicity, as indicated in table  <dig>  several of those genes were counterparts of proteins generally conserved in firmicutes , yheb, yqfn, ylaf, ykya, yfmm, yhfk and yqge) and sometimes in larger bacterial clades . yvcd is a tpr-repeat protein, which might interact with nucleic acids; ykya has a lipoprotein signal, and is similar to cell wall binding proteins; yqge is similar to multidrug efflux proteins and finally yfmm is likely to code for polyphosphate-amp phosphotransferase. the very fact that they belong to this class of non synonymous snps makes them interesting candidates for further studies of pathogenicity.

although the sequencing technique is quite accurate, the error frequency in a finished sequence is thought to be one error  in  <dig> to  <dig> bases  <cit> . to confirm the snp sites identified in this study, we chose the top  <dig> pairs of mostly non-synonymous substitutions proteins and carried out pcr experiments on their cognate gene to validate the corresponding sequences. sequences of the pcr products confirmed all the snp sites we identified from the orthologs analysis.

two main groups were observed in the cluster of  <dig> orthologous pairs made of proteins with mostly non-synonymous substitutions: surface proteins, which are likely under pressure to escape the host immune system, and other genes that should be considered in priority as important for pathogenicity. two conserved hypothetical proteins  predicted to localize in the extracellular medium and several transmembrane proteins, such as transporter family proteins, belonged to the first group. ykya, which contains a lipoprotein signal and a hydrolase domain, might also be recognized by the host immune defense. in the second group, several proteins involved in lipid metabolism, likely to be important for s. epidermidis multiplying on skin, apparently evolved faster in the pathogen. genes encoding fosfomycin resistance protein fofb and beta-lactamase detected in this group also may have evolved fast to benefit bacteria trying to survive in their host. genes involved in the formation of biofilms and osmoprotection were also found in this group. psms belong to the class of surfactant peptides with putative biofilm-inhibitory properties. repression of expression of psms in the biofilm stage enables bacterial cells to adhere together and to evade the host immune system. several gene products were involved in dna recombination and repair  suggesting adaptation to some chemical stress. a gene  involved in repair of reactive oxygen species  damage, a process supposed to be significantly expressed upon infection  <cit> , also suffered a high mutation rate. this prompted us to study the specific involvement of this process in the establishment of pathogenicity. although the exact in vivo process of methionine oxygenation is not well established, it is supposed to be derived from ros, in particular from reactions producing superoxide or h2o <dig>  <cit> . in an attempt to explore whether this prediction could be substantiated, both strains were challenged with increasing paraquat and h2o <dig> concentrations: interestingly, we observed that s. epidermidis atcc <dig> is indeed more sensitive to both paraquat  <cit>  and h2o <dig> than s. epidermidis rp62a, as predicted .

finally, genes are often grouped in operons, forming functionally consistent transcription units. if our hypothesis for the detection of genes important for pathogenesis is correct, then we should expect that a mutation bias would generally span entire operons when the corresponding genes participate to the process of pathogenicity. we found that genes making potential operons often displayed a collective increase in non-synonymous mutations . this is the case, for example, of pota  and potb , which code for the spermidine/putrescine abc transporter.

discussion
while an important topic for human health, pathogenicity is not the most prevalent development process for living organisms. often, this particular way of life happens as a new ecological niche  is colonized by organisms that were previously indifferent or simple commensals. previous work concluded, in general, that genome segments, often named pathogenicity islands, were the landmarks of pathogenic processes  <cit> . these islands are generally supposed to be the result of horizontal gene transfer . hgt is a general process of gene acquisition by bacteria, where it may be associated to control of the background mutation level  <cit> . in firmicutes, hgt is often the result of phage infection  <cit> . bacteriophages can subsequently remain in the genome as functional  or more or less defective prophages . in the case of s. epidermidis, this type of analysis led gill et al. to conclude that hgt was the major contribution to pathogenicity in the pathogenic strain they analyzed  <cit> . however, acquisition of virulence genes has repeatedly been found to be insufficient to trigger a pathogenic response. as a case in point, the cap operon, encoding the presumably virulence-associated polyglutamate capsule is present in both the commensal and pathogenic s. epidermidis strains  <cit> . the absence/presence of the ica operon that produces a biofilm exopolysaccharide was taken as the clearest genetic difference contributing to the different phenotype of two s. epidermidis strains  <cit> . however, the prevalence of icaadbc in commensal strains did not differ from that in invasive strains, indicating that other factors should been involved in pathogenesis  <cit> . all this indicates that important information about the development of pathogenic processes has been overlooked by the standard approaches focusing on hgt analysis. the small-scale variations which pepper the chromosomes of the commensal and pathogenic strains were not explored in detail. in order to gain further insight into the pathogenicity process, we studied the single nucleotide polymorphisms  between the orthologous gene pairs of the pathogenic and the commensal s. epidermidis strains of interest.

snp analysis rests obviously on the quality of the genome sequences determination. the error frequency in a finished sequence has rarely been precisely measured. a common belief is that anywhere between one error in  <dig> to  <dig> bases, depending on the project. in order to evaluate the impact of sequencing errors on our analysis, approximately  <dig> kb of dna sequence was re-sequenced after pcr amplification of  <dig> pairs of orthologs from both strains.  <dig> new snp sites  were retrieved when the new sequences were compared to published genome sequences. if we take those new sites as sequencing errors, and not pcr errors or recent mutations, then the average error frequency is  <dig>  errors in  <dig> bases. this shows that, while we may have missed some interesting genes, our approach is validated with the present available quality of genome sequences.

analysis of the ratios of total non-synonymous snps vs total synonymous snps showed that n/s ratios for virulence factors and surface proteins differed significantly from that of total snps. while random mutations and evolutionary drift should not favor one type of mutation over the other one, genes related to pathogenic processes may have evolved recently due to positive selection to fit the pathogenic conditions  <cit> . their evolution could be compared to that of genes belonging to translation, ribosomal structure and biogenesis , which are submitted to purifying selection because of the general optimization of the translation process in the course of evolution. as expected, the latter were mostly submitted to synonymous mutations. this is remarkable and consistent with the interpretation of drummond and colleagues who argued that highly expressed proteins evolve slowly because of the severe selective pressure on highly expressed proteins to avoid misfolding even when they are mistranslated  <cit> . this interpretation further supports the hypothesis that non synonymous mutations may be the landmark of proteins involved in pathogenic processes.

the percentages of identical vs. non-identical genes among the orthologs of those groups  were also compared . interestingly, the ratio of non-identical vs. identical genes coding for surface proteins differs significantly from that in translation-related genes and total genes, following the same trend as the ratio of non-synonymous vs. synonymous substitutions. this is not the case for virulence factors. the percentage of non-identical vs. identical genes reflected differences at the nucleic acids level, while the non-synonymous vs. synonymous differences emphasized the dna mutations that result in a change protein sequences. proteins are the ultimate functional entities in an organism, and this makes it reasonable to focus on the dna mutations that change the coded amino acids, rather than silent mutations.

of the  <dig> snps orthologous pairs identified in this study, a total of  <dig> genes showed a disproportionate distribution of dn/ds. most are probably significant, as we consistently found that when present the imbalanced dn/ds distribution extended to genes common to an operon. that they may play important roles in pathogenic processes is suggested by the presence in the list of genes coding for proteins that are likely to influence pathogenicity, such as phenol-soluble modulin  family peptides  or the clp protease . psms, a class of surfactant peptides with proinflammatory and putative biofilm-inhibitory properties, presumably represent key factors controlling the switch between the colonization and disseminative stages of the pathogen. suppression of production of psms in the biofilm stage enables cells to stick together and to evade the host immune defense  <cit> . atp-dependent clp proteases are involved in regulation processes by proteolysis in many bacteria. they consist of a proteolytic subunit, clpp, which confers substrate specificity through association with atpase subunits. signature-tagged mutagenesis screening experiments have demonstrated that atp-dependent proteases are key factors in bacterial adaptation to environmental stress, including ros  <cit> . little is known about clp gene regulation in pathogenic bacteria, despite the fact that many of these genes play important roles in virulence, such as clpx in staphylococcus aureus  <cit>  and clpb in leishmania sp.  <cit> . it seems plausible that these bifunctional chaperones/proteases may also modulate the activity of other virulence factors  <cit>  and it is therefore interesting to have observed that a member of this class is evolving fast in the s. epidermidis pair studied here. genes involved in osmoprotection which may respond to high salt conditions in cell agglomerations on human skin, such as gbsa  were also found among the non-synonymous significant genes.

surface proteins play a fundamental role in the interaction between the bacterial cell and its environment. in the present case, several of the  <dig> non-synonymous genes, in particular some genes with unknown function, have features suggesting that they code for surface proteins under the pressure of escaping the host immune system. interestingly, se <dig> and se <dig> are orthologous to surface proteins experimentally identified in one of group a streptococcus  strains   <cit> . it may also be significant that two ribosomal proteins, for which there is also some evidence of extracellular functions, were also found in their surface proteome. this makes rpsl  and rplc , the two ribosomal proteins which have more non-synonymous substitutions than expected in our analysis more interesting. rpsl, protein s <dig> of the small subunit of the ribosome is known to control accuracy of translation, and this might indeed play a role in pathogenicity  <cit> . further work is required to investigate this aspect as we can expect that some of the genes identified are simply the result of random deviation from the average.

yao et al have used microaray-based genome-wide comparison of clinical and commensal strains to identify putative virulence factors in s. epidermidis  <cit> .  <dig> genes were found to be more frequent among clinical strains than commensal strains. interestingly, we find that after detailed comparison our  <dig> high-non-synonymous substitutions genes have no overlap with those  <dig> high-frequent genes in clinical strains. this is probably not unexpected, for the following reasons. firstly, we looked for conserved genes rather than genes that would differ in a variety of strains, and our study involves only orthologous pairs of genes in the two stains, while yao et al focused on those genes which showed disproportionate difference in distribution between clinical and commensal strains. second, our  <dig> high non-synonymous substitution genes were identified because they carry snps, small differences which may not be detected by hybridization with the oligonucleotides of the microarray.

under laboratory growth conditions, with plenty of metabolites available, bacterial gene expression is typically dominated by the highly expressed genes involved in transcription, protein biosynthesis, maturation and folding. in contrast, as shown for example in a study by rollenhagen and bumann, most of the genes highly expressed in salmonella enterica cells recovered from the caecum differ considerably from those highly expressed in bacteria located in the spleen  <cit> . the overall functional profile of highly expressed genes suggests a marked shift in transcriptional activity upon change in growth environment. in this respect, some pathogenicity related genes are likely to be highly expressed during infection to fight against the host. interestingly, we found that one of the non-synonymous significant genes of the present study, gene se <dig> encoding dihydropteroate synthase and recovered as a virulence-related antigen of a gram-positive fish pathogen  <cit> , was significantly more expressed in rp62a than in atcc <dig> .

since pathogenicity is a recent form of lifestyle for an organism in evolution, we expected that genes involved in the process would show a significant mutation pattern  <cit> . furthermore, we could expect that many of the corresponding mutations would not yet be adapted to the "self" of the bacteria, as they would result from non-synonymous mutations in codons, leading to alteration of the polypeptide sequence of the corresponding genes. our observations substantiated this hypothesis, showing a significant number of genes, often grouped in operons, affected by non-synonymous mutations. in parallel – and this can be seen as an internal validation of our hypothesis – we observed that genes of the translation machinery, expected to be expressed at a high level  were indeed mutated, but that the corresponding mutations were usually of the synonymous class. this is easily accounted for by the enormous selection pressure operating on the translation machinery , which cannot easily accommodate mutations resulting in alteration of the corresponding proteins. even if important for pathogenicity, these genes would become invisible because the functional constraints would result in a purifying selection process. however not all genes can be equally submitted to purifying selection and our approach reveals several genes of the general cell machinery, as possibly important for pathogenicity. as a case in point, we found one gene  coding for peptide methionine sulfoxide reductase, involved in protection against ros, which could probably be such an important candidate for adaptation to pathogenicity  <cit> . as the clpb gene found in our non-synonymous set also may point to adaptation to ros, we explored the differential resistance to h2o <dig> and paraquat of the environmental species as compared to the pathogen  and our experiments substantiated the interest of our approach to identify specific pathways of evolution to pathogenicity. in the same way a  cation transporter se <dig> might be involved in the scavenging of divalent metals such as magnesium, manganese, iron or cobalt during infection. gene se <dig> might code for polyphosphate-amp phosphotransferase, an observation that would support interest for the poorly explored role of polyphosphate in cells and its possible involvement in pathogenicity  <cit> . others are involved in biofilm formation, an important contribution to virulence in several pathogenic bacteria  <cit> , as they considerably limit the success of both antibiotic treatment and the human immune defense. gene expression profiling of the s. epidermidis biofilm was analyzed and some significant metabolic shift was found between the planktonic and the biofilm modes of growth  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
in this paper, a snps comparative approach was developed to identify conserved genes possibly involved in pathogenicity by measuring their selective pressure in the gene pairs of non-infection associated s. epidermidis strain atcc <dig> and biofilm-forming strain rp62a. our approach identified new genes that may be involved in pathogenesis, including some genes with unknown function. these results may provide fresh insight into discovering the genes that determine the success of s. epidermidis as an opportunistic pathogen. complementing the previous methodologies which mainly focused on horizontal gene transfer, extensive snps investigations on more pathogens will facilitate our understanding of the path from commensalism to pathogenicity, a crucial prerequisite for designing therapeutic interventions directed to control pathogen infections.

