BACKGROUND
all human somatic cells contain, in principle, the same genome sequence, a generally static store of information. the regulation of gene expression in each cell, however, is a highly dynamic process, which depends on a complex of factors including the cell cycle phase, the cell type, developmental state, intracellular signalling state, and other factors  <cit> . histone modifications are one of the major mechanisms regulating gene expression, acting in combination with other mechanisms such as alternative promoter usage  <cit> , alternative splicing  <cit> , and micrornas  <cit> . dna is packed within the nucleus around histone octamers, a protein complex consisting of two copies each of four different histone proteins. eight types of histone modifications are known . each type of modification is specific to certain residues and has a different mechanism of function, and accordingly different functional consequences. there is no simple one-to-one correspondence between the type of modification and the functional consequence, but rather the combination of modification type, enzymatic activity, affected residue and the dna sequence in the immediate vicinity of the affected histone determine the functionality of the modification in a very complex manner.

the same type of modification can be enhancing or repressing transcriptional activity, depending on which histone and residue it occurs: methylation is generally enhancing transcription when it occurs on h3k <dig>  h3k <dig>  and h3k <dig>  but repressing transcription when it occurs on h3k <dig>  h3k <dig>  and h4k <dig>  even the same type of modification, on the same histone and residue, can be activating or repressing depending on the underlying sequence context; for example, methylation of h3k <dig> is enhancing transcription if the affected histone resides in the coding region of a gene, but it is a repressing mark in the promoter region  <cit> .

histone acetylation, one of the most thoroughly studied histone modifications to date, occurs on the n-termini of the protein octamers and neutralizes the basic charge of the affected lysine. as a consequence, the association between the dna and the octamer becomes weaker, unravelling the dna and making the genomic dna more accessible for rna polymerases and transcription factors. like all histone modifications, acetylation can work on two different scales. globally, the acetylation state of large genomic regions helps to define euchromatin and heterochromatin within the nucleus. acetylation can also function locally, being restricted to short sequences of the genome, where it is associated with upregulated transcription of individual genes  <cit> . it is currently not understood if the formation of euchromatin and locally accessible regions on one hand, and heterochromatin and locally inaccessible regions on the other hand, are results of active gene transcription or if gene transcription is activated and suppressed as a result of the histone modification state.

deepcage  <cit>  is an improvement over the cage  protocol  <cit> , which determines precise gene transcription start sites  and promoter expression through sequencing of the 5' ends of mrna transcripts. the fantom  <dig> and encode projects have shown that transcription of genes is generally not initiated from single tsss defined on a basepair-exact resolution  <cit> . rather, each gene has an abundance of close but different tsss with each unique starting site having a certain frequency of transcription initiation. these alternative starting sites, which are detected as deepcage tags, are not to be confused with alternative promoters, the latter by definition being much farther apart from each other than deepcage tags within a promoter  <cit> . the distribution of deepcage tags within a promoter can be classified into different shape classes  <cit> , the two most prominent classes being single peak  and broad promoters . single peak promoters have the majority of their cage tags concentrated in a narrow region, while broad promoters have a more even, widespread distribution of start sites within the promoter. sp promoters are associated with the tata box binding motif and tissue-specific expression, while br promoters are associated with cpg islands and ubiquitously transcribed genes including housekeeping genes  <cit> .

histone modifications can be determined on a genome-wide scale by chromatin immunoprecipitation , followed by array hybridization  or sequencing . in fantom  <dig>  we performed genome-wide chip-chip analysis of histone  <dig> lysine  <dig> acetylation  and rna polymerase ii binding to dna in the myeloid leukemia cell line thp- <dig>  h3k9ac is a well-known marker of transcription initiation sites of actively initiated and transcribed genes  <cit> , and so is rna polymerase ii binding by the nature of its function.

in this work we address the relationship between regions of dna accessibility as detected by h3k9ac and their relative location compared to tsss. h3k9ac activity is confined to tsss  <cit> . are there characteristic classes of h3k9ac patterns around the promoters? if so, are the promoters in these classes associated with genomic sequence features and promoter architecture? the combination of h3k9ac data in combination with deepcage data from the same cell line allowed us to address these questions on a genome-wide scale. we used clustering of deepcage promoters according to their surrounding acetylation level to identify groups of promoters that share similar h3k9ac patterns, and then analyzed the clustered promoter regions for common genomic features.

RESULTS
however, when inspecting the h3k9ac levels around individual promoters, the distribution of acetylation level often does not resemble the average genome-wide situation: around individual promoters the h3k9ac level may be more concentrated upstream ) or downstream ) of the promoter, may show a distribution which resembles the genome-wide distribution ), or have other configurations.

clustering of deepcage promoters according to their surrounding h3k9ac signal reveals three clearly separated clusters with a comparable number of members
to determine whether there are characteristic groups of promoters having h3k9ac enrichment at different positions relative to the transcription start site, we clustered  <dig>  deepcage promoters according to their surrounding h3k9ac level using k-medoids clustering.

deep sequencing of cage tags as well as h3k9ac and rna polymerase ii chip-chip experiments were performed on a culture of undifferentiated thp- <dig> cells . a second set of deepcage and chip-chip data was produced for thp- <dig> cells which have been treated with phorbol myristate acetate  to stimulate the cells to differentiate into a macrophage-resembling phenotype. this second dataset has been used for validation.

before clustering according to the surrounding h3k9ac signal, the deepcage promoters were filtered in order to minimize the effects of two types of confounding factors: missing probes and proximal promoters. the chip-chip experiments were performed using genome-wide tiling-arrays with probes of length  <dig> bp, spaced at  <dig> bp. however, there are no tiles in the repetitive regions of the genome, which may include promoters. such missing tiles around the promoter region result in missing data. to address this, we divided the region around each promoter into eleven bins of size  <dig> bp, in a window of  <dig>  bp around the promoter. each core promoter has one tag starting site defined as its representative position, which contains the majority of tag starts in this promoter , and this representative position has been chosen as the exact center of the  <dig>  bp window. only promoters with at least one tiling array probe in each bin were retained. a second factor that potentially can confound the analysis is proximal promoters: if there are two or more promoters within a  <dig>  bp window the chip-chip signal in these bins is a compound signal of all promoters, which can not be unambiguously decomposed. we discarded all such cases of proximal promoters, reducing the initial  <dig>  deepcage promoters in the fantom  <dig> dataset to  <dig>  promoters retained for analysis after the two-stage filtering.

k-medoids clustering will classify the input  into any predetermined number of clusters . those items that are close to each other using a distance measure are classified as belonging to the same cluster. to determine the distance between any two promoters, the average h3k9ac signal strength in each bin was determined and a cumulative normalized distribution across all bins reflecting the strand orientation of the promoter was calculated. for each possible pair of promoters, the kolmogorov-distance between the corresponding two cumulative distributions of h3k9ac signal strength was taken as the distance between those two promoters. the kolmogorov distance between two cumulative distributions essentially measures the similarity in shape of the two original graphs. a matrix containing the distances between all possible promoter pairings was then used as input for the k-medoids implementation, to cluster the  <dig>  promoters. a variety of different clustering parameters and different sizes of bins were assessed, and we observed that using three classes as the predetermined number for the k-medoids algorithm produced three clearly distinct clusters. clustering with smaller bins and/or more clusters led to decompositions that had similar shapes as the three clusters but were decomposed into sub-clusters with different acetylation strength. however, they did not show any fundamentally new shapes or any striking new features in terms of peaks or depletions . we therefore decided to focus the remainder of the analysis on these three clusters as the separation between them is clear and conceptually simple.

we refer to these three clusters as upstream, centered, and downstream, figure  <dig>  each cluster contained a comparable number of promoters: upstream  <dig> , centered  <dig> , downstream  <dig>  members.

by excluding proximate promoters, we also exclude bidirectional promoters on purpose in this study. genome-wide histograms of general histone  <dig> acetylation as reported in  <cit>  show a typical bimodal distribution as described above. an analysis of the h3ac signal around bidirectional promoters has shown that the weaker, upstream peak of h3ac is in fact often a downstream peak of the corresponding promoter on the antisense strand; i.e. h3ac generally occurs downstream of promoters  <cit> . although we removed bidirectional promoters from our dataset, we obtain one cluster  that shows a bimodal signal distribution which would be expected to occur from bidirectional promoters. the promoters in the centered cluster may therefore contain cases of bidirectional promoters, where the corresponding antisense promoters have not been detected by deepcage, either because they are lowly expressed or because they belong to uncapped transcripts.

membership of promoters to clusters of h3k9ac and rna polymerase ii with similar shape
the clustering of promoters according to their surrounding rna polymerase ii binding activity was performed in the same way as for h3k9ac. this clustering also revealed three well-separated clusters to which we refer to again as upstream, centered, and downstream . table  <dig> shows the concordance between h3k9ac and rna polymerase ii clusters. a substantial part of the promoters which fall into the centered and downstream clusters are co-localized; i.e. the majority of promoters which fall into the centered cluster of the h3k9ac clustering also fall into the centered cluster of the rna polymerase ii clustering, and the majority of promoters in the downstream cluster of h3k9ac also fall into the downstream cluster of rna polymerase ii. only the promotes in the upstream cluster of h3k9ac are more likely to fall into the downstream, instead of the upstream cluster of rna polymerase ii. our expectation of a statistically significant, strong correlation between the cluster assignment of promoters in the two datasets could not be confirmed; however, this data hints at that there might be at least a very weak tendency for promoters to fall into clusters with the same shape of h3k9ac/rna polymerase ii signal distribution when comparing the two experiments.

genomic features associated with the clusters
we next investigated whether the promoters in different clusters coincide with different genomic sequence features. to investigate this, we checked how many of the promoters in each cluster are single peak or broad promoters, whether they have a tata-box binding motif upstream of the tss, whether they overlap with a cpg island, and whether the promoter belongs to an annotated gene. also, we were interested in how many promoters in each cluster overlap with a repeat element, and if there is a bias for certain types of repeat elements. these features were selected because the association of single peak promoters with tata-boxes and broad promoters with cpg-islands are typical aspects of deepcage promoter architecture  <cit> , and the chosen features all have a fundamental relationship to transcription initiation, of which h3k9ac is a well-known epigenetic marker.

here, we use a modified version of the definition of single peak and broad promoters from fantom  <dig>  <cit> , adapted to the fantom  <dig> dataset: single peak promoters are defined as promoters that express 50% or more of their total gene expression level from tsss  which are contained in a window of no more than  <dig> nucleotides, while all other promoters were classified as broad. figure  <dig> shows the result for all  <dig>  promoters: the upstream cluster is enriched in single peak promoters, whereas the centered and downstream clusters are enriched in broad promoters ). these results suggest that there are several different typical acetylation states, as depicted in figure 4: while in all three clusters broad promoters are most prevalent ), single peak promoters still occur in more than 40% of the cases where the h3k9ac signal is concentrated in the upstream region ). a concentrated activity of h3k9ac in the centered ) and downstream regions ) is more prone to lead to a broad and less defined mode of transcription initiation.

tata-box binding motifs are located upstream of the rna polymerase ii binding site  <cit>  and play an important role in the formation of the pre-initiation complex  <cit> . the clustered promoters were annotated for the presence of a tata-box binding motif by searching for a match  to the tata-box position weight matrix from jaspar  <cit>  in the region - <dig> to - <dig> of the representative position of each core promoter. single peak promoters in our filtered dataset of  <dig>  promoters had highly significant  enrichment for the tata-box binding motif, a confirmation of previous findings  <cit> . in connection with the proposed model above, we expected an additional enrichment of tata-box promoters in the upstream cluster. however, we did not find any statistical significant enrichment of tata-box promoters in any of the clusters.

cpg islands have previously been shown to be highly acetylated  <cit> . figure  <dig> shows how the centered and downstream cluster are enriched in cpg islands compared to the upstream cluster. as the centered and downstream clusters are also enriched in broad promoters, this observation is consistent with the findings from  <cit>  where the association of broad promoters with cpg islands was first noted.

about 16% of the entire  <dig>  promoters identified in the thp- <dig> cell line do not have annotation based on the entrez gene prediction dataset in the  <dig> kb-downstream region  <cit> . around half of these un-annotated promoters are evolutionary conserved across mammals and are therefore likely to be promoters of yet undetected genes, including functional non-coding rna genes.

large intergenic noncoding rnas   <cit>  are a group of multi-exonic, functional rnas that show strong conservation across mammals and are thought to be involved in various cellular processes, including embryonic stem cell pluripotency and differentiation  <cit> , the establishment of chromatin states and down regulation of gene expression in concert with chromatin modifying enzymes  <cit> . to specifically test if the putative novel promoters in our dataset code for lincrnas, we examined how many out of the  <dig>  lincrnas collected in  <cit>  start in a window -300/+ <dig>  bp downstream of the representative position of the core promoters. only  <dig> promoters of the full dataset of  <dig>  promoters identified in fantom  <dig> have a lincrna in the region considered here. the lincrnas identified to date have been determined in cell lines other than thp- <dig> and represent only a subset of the entire functional noncoding transcriptome; despite the lack of overlap it is still reasonable to assume that many of the un-annotated core promoters belong to ncrna genes, yet undetected protein-coding genes, or may be alternative promoters of already annotated genes. we therefore consider un-annotated promoters as putative novel promoters.

the centered and downstream cluster are enriched in promoters which belong to known genes, while the upstream cluster is enriched in putative novel promoters ). this is consistent with the abovementioned observation that the centered and downstream clusters have a stronger enrichment of broad promoters than the upstream cluster; genes with broad promoter architecture have previously been shown to be associated with abundantly expressed, housekeeping genes  <cit>  which are more likely to be contained in gene annotation datasets like refseq than genes which are only expressed in certain tissues.

the association between the clusters and the three tested genomic features promoter architecture , cpg islands and gene annotation is highly significant for these three features shown in figure  <dig> .

repeat elements are widely expressed in mammalian genomes and have global impact on gene expression regulation by acting as alternative promoters, by cis-regulating protein-coding genes, and performing other proposed functional roles  <cit> . we assessed how many promoters in each cluster overlap with repeat elements ), and if there is significant bias for repeat elements in general, or any particular class of repeat element, in any of the clusters. regarding repeat elements as a general group without distinguishing the particular type of repeat, there is a very slight but still significant  depletion of repeat elements in the centered cluster. when examining the repeat elements found in all three clusters, simple repeats  and low complexity repeats were found to be the two most prevalent groups, but there is no significant bias for any specific type of repeat in any of the clusters.

h3k9ac signal strength corresponds to gene expression level
in order to investigate the relationship between gene expression level and h3k9ac signal shape and strength, we separately examined three subsets of clustered promoters, selected by their gene expression level. figure  <dig> shows boxplots visualizing the gene expression level for the three clusters. we sorted the  <dig>  filtered promoters by their expression level in the undifferentiated stage , and selected the 10% weakest promoters  and 10% strongest promoters , and a third group containing all promoters with an expression level that lies between the lowly and highly expressed genes. figure  <dig> shows the h3k9ac signal strength of the three extracted groups. the promoters of lowly expressed genes on average have a weak h3k9ac signal, while the highly expressed promoters have an overall enriched acetylation signal when compared with the clustering for all promoters, confirming a similar finding from  <cit> . apart from the different levels in acetylation strength, there is still a very clear separation between the three clusters. also, the clusters retain their characteristic shapes.

it is interesting to note that when comparing only the highly expressed to the promoters which have low and medium gene expression level, the acetylation strength of the downstream and centered clusters  increase to a lesser degree with increasing expression, while the upstream cluster increases dramatically. this suggests a more direct link between h3k9ac and gene expression level in the upstream cluster, than in the centered and downstream clusters. this can be interpreted within the model of three main epigenetic modes of transcription initiation  <cit> : genes experiencing initiation and elongation, genes experiencing transcription initiation but not elongation, and genes experiencing neither. the mechanisms of gene-regulation in these three groups may belong to the initiation or elongation phase of transcription, respectively. this model in combination with our observations suggests that genes having the h3k9ac concentration in the centered and downstream region could predominantly be regulated at post-initiation steps. such post-initiation regulation could be based on two general classes of regulation mechanisms  <cit> : in one class, transcriptional pausing of rna polymerase ii, poor processivity, or abortive initiation prevents elongation. in the second class, transcription does take place but is immediately degraded by gene silencing.

features of subsets filtered by gene expression level
with the extracted subsets of weak and strong promoters, we again performed the correlation analysis between clusters and genomic sequence features. there was no statistically significant enrichment for the distribution of the selected sequence features in any of the subsets of clusters filtered by gene expression level. however, some interesting general aspects could be observed which are valid for the overall subsets, although not for the clusters.

the lowly expressed promoters overall show a lower level of refseq annotation compared to the whole clustered dataset. this was to be expected, since lowly expressed genes are difficult to detect and therefore have a tendency to not be contained in gene annotation databases like refseq.

the vast majority  of the highly expressed promoters are of the broad type; broad promoters tend to regulate genes with a higher gene expression level than peak promoters ), and thus by selecting a subgroup of highly expressed promoters, we could expect this group to contain more broad promoters than the total clustered set. accordingly, many of the highly expressed promoters  lie on cpg islands. there is available refseq annotation for more than 80% of all promoters in each cluster of this group. the high association of these promoters with annotated genes can be explained by the fact that proteins of highly expressed genes can be expected to be contained in gene prediction data sets.

repeat elements increase with gene expression level
with increasing promoter expression level we observed an increase in the number of promoters overlapping with repeat elements. only ~ <dig> % of all lowly expressed promoters overlap with any of the repeat elements. for medium gene expression, ~ <dig> % of the promoters overlap with a repeat element, and for the promoters regulating highly expressed genes the result was ~ <dig> %.

analysis based on deepcage and chip-chip data performed on differentiated thp- <dig> cells confirms the findings
to confirm our findings, we repeated the entire analysis using core promoters determined by deepcage, and h3k9ac and rna polymerase ii chip-chip of thp- <dig> cells  <dig> hours after pma treatment. at this time point, the thp- <dig> cells have differentiated from monocytes to a phenotype resembling macrophages  <cit> . all findings of the study using the  <dig> hour time point were confirmed. this implies that the found correlations of sequence features and acetylation signal distribution are stable in the two cell phenotypes.

CONCLUSIONS
k-medoids based clustering of promoters according to their surrounding acetylation signal, as described in this paper, is a promising approach for the genome-wide study of histone modifications. we clustered  <dig>  deepcage promoters into three clusters, and extracted three subsets filtered by low, medium and high gene expression level. in all three promoter subsets, our clustering method revealed clearly separated clusters with distinct shapes. the upstream, centered, and downstream clusters are associated with different genomic features. a similar approach, based on k-means clustering, for the classification of promoters according to the relative distribution of another histone modification signal  has recently been described in  <cit> . such a strategy can be applied to chip-chip as well as to more precise chip-seq data, and it is also viable apply the clustering to relative anchor features other than promoters; for example, a clustering relative to transcription factor binding sites or the 3' ends of genes  <cit> . further investigations along these lines can be expected to advance our understanding on the interplay between histone modifications and sequence features of genes, and how this interplay is coupled with the regulation of gene expression.

the analysis of the upstream, centered and downstream clusters showed a significant bias towards promoters with different characteristics: the upstream cluster is biased towards putative novel promoters and single peak promoters. we propose that it may be regulated primarily during the initiation phase of transcription. the downstream cluster, on the other hand, is enriched in known genes, cpg islands, and broad promoters. here we propose that regulation of promoters in the centered and downstream clusters occurs mainly in the post-initiation phase of transcription. repeat elements are more likely to occur on core promoters with increased gene expression level, but there is no bias of repeat elements to any particular cluster. the main findings of our study are valid using experimental data from thp- <dig> cells in two different stages of differentiation, meaning that the number of genes changing their acetylation state during the  <dig> hours of differentiation is small.

our findings suggest a functional link between the spatial distribution of h3k <dig> acetylation and genomic as well as transcriptomic features. promoters belonging to the centered and downstream clusters appear similar in characteristics and are associated to features previously identified  <cit>  as hallmarks for ubiquitously expressed housekeeping genes )), and accordingly are more likely to correspond to previously identified protein coding genes ). in contrast, the upstream cluster is enriched in peak promoters when compared to the other two clusters, and depleted in genes overlapping with cpg islands; these features are commonly seen in promoters of genes specific to distinct tissues and cell types. the well defined tsss of peak promoters, and distinct conditions under which they are expressed, are indicative of strict mechanisms for their regulation, and spatial distribution of open chromatin may constitute an additional mode of regulation of these genes. conversely, an open chromatin configuration downstream of the core promoter  may be either favourable for, or a consequence of, transcription from less well defined tsss . the precise mechanisms of this suggested additional mode of regulation remain to be elucidated.

