BACKGROUND
mycobacterium tuberculosis is the causative agent for the infectious disease tuberculosis , which kills about  <dig> million people annually, making it a leading cause of infectious death worldwide. one of the active research areas in the tb field is to investigate the gene regulatory mechanism in m. tuberculosis in response to different environmental stimuli it encounters as it adapts and replicates in the human host. however, these adaptations are still poorly understood due to a lack of knowledge of the regulatory cascades controlling the expression of subsets of genes, or regulons. in vitro studies aid interpretation of in vivo gene expression studies and help to dissect the complex cascades of direct and indirect regulation of regulons.

the success of m. tuberculosis as a pathogen is to a large degree due to its ability to persist for long periods within the body, a state referred to as latent or dormant disease. understanding the environmental cues that initiate latent tb and the subsequent transcriptional response of m. tuberculosis will provide markers that are specific to latency, enabling us to refine our search for treatment of this stage of disease. hypoxia has been identified as a potential stimulus for triggering dormancy. in vitro studies have looked at differential gene expression of m. tuberculosis in culture under different oxygen tensions and generated lists of genes that are up or down regulated  <cit> . from these studies a two component sensor regulator, known as dosrs, was shown to be stimulated by hypoxia. further mutational studies revealed that  <dig> genes are controlled by the regulator dosr. computational sequence analysis revealed a promoter sequence consensus recognised by dosr  <cit> . dosr-controlled genes may have multiple binding sites.

a study published by bacon et al.   <cit>  showed that a low oxygen environment triggers the expression of the dosr regulon in actively dividing cells growing in continuous culture revealing that the dosr regulon may not be specific to latency but will respond to shifts to a low oxygen environment during early infection when m. tuberculosis is actively replicating. different investigations to determine the response of m. tuberculosis to low oxygen have observed stimulation of different numbers of dosr-regulated genes and have identified some additional genes putatively controlled by dosr. all these data taken together indicate that the dosr regulon is not a single, synchronous regulon but is in fact differentially regulated depending on the environment. the different numbers of dosr-binding sites upstream of the dosr-dependent genes  also indicates differential regulation.

to address the question whether dosr-regulated genes are induced all at once or in a temporal cascade, we exposed m. tuberculosis to a sudden drop of oxygen from a high level of 10% dissolved oxygen tension  to a low level of  <dig> % dot and extracted samples from chemostat culture to obtain gene expression values from dna microarrays. samples were taken at nine time points over a period of  <dig> minutes and the corresponding dot recorded. through a carefully tailored statistical analysis of the microarray data, we were able to examine the detailed temporal gene expression patterns of the dosr regulon at various oxygen tensions.

replicates at time points are often not available in sufficient numbers due to the difficulties in obtaining biological samples. fortunately, in the case of time course data, regression based methods can borrow information for error estimation across time points  <cit> . here we outline an analysis strategy based on fitting regression splines with step basis functions to time course data. this method allows us to detect at which time point and hence under which oxygen tension each dosr-mediated gene was induced, providing new insights into the genetic program of dosr mediated gene regulation.

for comparison, we also applied the clustering tool stem  <cit>  which was specifically designed for the analysis of gene expression time course data with few time points. stem has many statistically attractive features such as significance tests for clusters based on bootstrapping. nevertheless, this tool failed to detect as many biologically relevant gene inductions as our approach. we chose a bayesian approach since such an approach provides probabilities that time points are points of induction for particular genes. probabilities are usually easier to interpret than significance values.

in the following sections we present the results of the change point analysis of the m. tuberculosis data and discuss our findings. all methodological aspects, experimental as well as computational, are presented in the methods section, where we also apply our change point model to simulated data to assess its performance.

RESULTS
change point analysis of the dosr regulon in the oxygen time-course data
the aim of this study was to determine whether the induction of the dosr regulon unfolds as a cascade of events as the differential expression of subsets of genes is stimulated by different oxygen availabilities rather than a single synchronous event.

to answer this question we analysed the time-course gene expression data of a set of genes/transcription units previously identified as being under the control of dosr. we fitted regression splines with step functions as basis functions to the time-ordered measurements. the positions of the possible steps or change points were placed at time points where measurements were taken. for the statistical analysis we took a bayesian approach, which allowed us to compare all possible change points in a single probabilistic framework and to obtain probabilities that gene expression is induced at particular time points. bayesian modelling has two major advantages which were relevant for our aim:  <dig>  it allows us to compare all competing models within a single probabilistic framework;  <dig>  occam's razor  <cit>  is automatically embodied for finding a trade-off between good fit to the data and model simplicity, that is, fewer change points. the details of the model and priors chosen are outlined in the methods section.

in this study, we focused on  <dig> genes which were shown previously to be over-expressed under the regulatory control of dosr in a low oxygen environment   <cit> . these genes are referred to as the dosr regulon in the literature  <cit>  and can be further grouped into  <dig> transcription units . the transcription unit map of m. tuberculosis was obtained from the biocyc database  <cit> . the microarray data for the dosr regulon were preprocessed as described in the methods section.

seven genes of the dosr regulon which showed high experimental variability were filtered prior to analysis according to a criterion detailed in the methods. the change point model was applied to the remaining  <dig> genes in  <dig> tus. in microbial organisms, genes in the same tu are considered co-transcribed, but in practice there might be some discrepancy in expression levels of the genes in the same tu due to the limits in microarray technology and intrinsic biological variation. typically, expression levels drop off towards the end of an operon due to the reduced efficiency of the transcription process. in the following, we therefore take the first gene in each tu to represent its expression pattern.

change points of expression of transcription units in the dosr regulon
using the first gene to represent each tu, figure 1a shows the expression profiles of the  <dig> tus. figures 1b to 1d show the clusters of tus grouped by the detected change points. table  <dig> lists the change points of the first gene in each tu at which the genes showed marked up-regulation except the three time points marked with ↓ where the corresponding genes were down-regulated. sixteen tus show marked up-regulation at time point  <dig> at  <dig> % dot , another  <dig> tus show more complex behaviour than the previous group by including one or two other change points besides the time point  <dig> , and the final group  comprises  <dig> genes with no change at time point  <dig>  including  <dig> genes with fairly flat expression levels across all time points.

shown are the change points from the model with the highest probability, stem cluster number , dosr-binding motif scores and numbers of motifs, and for the  <dig> tus. all change points are upregulated except the ones indicated with arrows.

we define change points according to the change point model with the highest probability, including a model with no change points . an alternative approach to defining change points is to use model averaging and consider all possible change point models weighted by their probabilities. more specifically, the probability that a particular time point is a change point is the sum of the probabilities of all those change point models that contain this time point as a change point. the resulting estimates of probabilities are shown in table  <dig>  fortunately, for most genes the two methods of selecting change points agree quite well. the only exception is rv <dig>  for which the probability of  <dig>  for time point  <dig> is slightly higher than the probability of  <dig>  for time point  <dig>  although the latter and not time point  <dig> is in the change point model with highest probability. we could have chosen a cutoff on these probabilities to define change points, but it would have necessitated the selection of an arbitrary threshold value, while using the regresion model with the highest posterior probability to determine change points can circumvent the problem.

shown are the marginal posterior probabilites of each time point being a change point for genes in the dosr regulon as derived from model averaging.

in the following, we analyse change points according to whether the binding site pattern for dosr is present in the upstream region of the corresponding gene or not.

change points of transcription units with dosr-binding sites
the details of scores and numbers of dosr-binding sites for each gene were taken from the previous study  <cit>    <cit> ). table  <dig> displays the number of motifs and scores for each gene. in the case of multiple sites the sum of scores of each site in that tu is listed. in addition to the above previously detected binding sites  <cit> ), we also found several additional highly scoring sites; they are listed in table  <dig>  the table shows the motif sequences, location and scores of these sites in the promoter region of tus.

lower case characters in sequences show disagreement to the dosr motif consensus ttsgggactwwagtcccsaa. locations are the start of the sequences with respect to the translation start site.

the mean induced gene expression fold changes are displayed in park et al. while in our study the fold changes between t <dig> and t <dig> are listed except for rv1737c whose fold change is between t <dig> and t <dig> 

there are  <dig> tus containing a dosr-binding site. most of them showed marked up-regulation at time point  <dig>  and were up-regulated from time point  <dig> or  <dig>  there are just four tus deviating from this pattern in the time-course presented here.: rv1733c, rv <dig>  rv2031c and rv3134c, which were up-regulated from time point  <dig> or  <dig> on, earlier than the other tus with dosr-binding sites . closer inspection of their binding scores shows that they are among the top  <dig> genes with highest motif scores, suggesting that their early upregulation might be is caused by a strong promoter affinity .

however, among these top  <dig> genes, there were two tus, rv1737c and rv <dig>  which showed normal up-regulation from the time point  <dig>  despite their high motif scores, and do not follow the trend of early upregulation of high affinity genes . an examination of the locations of the motifs of the tus suggests an explanation for this exception. gene, rv1737c shares the motifs with rv <dig>  and rv2031c shares the motifs with rv <dig>  it seems that the common motifs shared by two divergently transcribed tus have more influence on early transcription of only one of the tus in the pair, while the other is transcribed later with the majority of tus. this hypothesis is supported by the fold-changes in the gene expression levels of the above two divergently transcribed tu pairs. in both our study and the previous study  <cit> , it is observed that the changes in the induced gene expression levels of rv <dig> and rv2031c were much stronger than those of rv1737c and rv <dig> . mapping the transcriptional start sites would provide useful information about the differential expression of these divergent genes. the evidence of early induction shown in the time-course we present here, combined with the high motif scores and high levels of induction of these two genes provides an interesting hypothesis that warrants further investigation. it is intriguing that rv <dig> and rv2031c are induced by 8% dot and their expression level then decreases to increase again when the dot reaches  <dig> %. the expression levels would be expected to continue to increase with dot decrease. it is possible that these genes are subject to dual regulation. recently it has been shown that sensor kinases, doss and dost, function in response to subtly different signals  <cit> . gene, doss functions as a redox sensor, whereas dost functions as a hypoxia sensor demonstrating the existence of dual control within the dosr-regulon.

change points of transcription units without dosr-binding sites
there are nine tus in the dosr regulon which contain no obvious dosr-binding sites in their promoter region. four of these tus  show little changes in their expression profiles and no change points have been assigned to them by our algorithm. these genes were not induced in continuous culture during steady-state growth under low oxygen conditions  in our previous study  <cit> . the explanation for the genes' induction in other studies and the lack of induction in our two low oxygen studies using the chemostat could be that these genes do not respond to low oxygen, but have responded to other environmental factors in previous batch models  where the environmental conditions are fluctuating. the gene rv <dig>  however, shows a gene expression pattern quite distinct from that of other dosr-controlled genes. as the change point analysis reveals, the expression level went up at time points  <dig>  and  <dig>  and then levelled off until the last time point at which it was markedly down-regulated. four more tus  lacking dosr-binding sites were up-regulated from time point  <dig> . this might be due to indirect dosr regulatory control. the details of detected change points and binding motif scores for each gene are displayed in table  <dig> 

clustering tus in dosr regulon using stem
for comparison, we also analysed the expression profiles of the first genes in the  <dig> tus using the clustering software stem, which was designed for clustering short time series gene expression data  <cit> . briefly, stem first selects m template profiles from all possible profiles on levels -c, ...,  <dig>  ..., c, for a constant c, that are as different as possible. each gene expression profile is then assigned to one of the m template profiles, namely the one to which its correlation is highest. once clusters are formed a permutation test provides significance values for clusters of unusual size.

the default settings of  <dig> for the number of template profiles and  <dig> for the number of distinct expression levels was used. two genes, rv <dig> and rv0571c, were excluded by stem prior to clustering as the expression changes were smaller than the default threshold of one unit  in stem. in our change point analysis, gene rv <dig> was also flagged as non-differentially expressed, while rv0571c was identified as having a change point at time point  <dig>  gene rv0571c was shown to contain dosr-binding motifs in the promoter region in the previous study  <cit> .

stem analysis results in  <dig> non-empty clusters. the cluster memberships of genes are listed in table  <dig> . the largest cluster contains  <dig> tus and their expression profiles are shown in figure  <dig>  the remaining  <dig> tus were assigned to  <dig> clusters of which  <dig> contain only one gene. three of these singular genes have no change points according to the bayesian change point model. however, for genes rv <dig> and rv0572c our change point analysis showed a clear change point at time point  <dig>  in stem, the significance was determined by the size of the actual clusters and the expected number of genes in each cluster based on the permutation tests. hence the clusters with a larger number of genes seem more likely to be significant while small sized profiles are penalised.

both the bayesian model and stem analysis show that the expression levels of  <dig> genes in cluster  <dig>  were induced and share a similar profile but the bayesian model further reveals the subtle differences in the expression patterns of these genes, for instance, despite being in a similar profile, the expressions of some genes  started to change as early as time point  <dig> while others remained unchanged until time point  <dig> 

CONCLUSIONS
changes in oxygen tension encountered by the pathogen during the time-course experiment are likely to reflect those at the different sites of the host's body. for example, upper lobes of the lung, the most oxygenated region could correspond to the aerobic condition at the first time point. other oxygen deprived regions, such as the granuloma and the macrophage, are akin to the experimental conditions with low oxygen tensions at subsequent time points. the change point analysis of the oxygen time-course has revealed for the first time that the induction of the majority of dosr-regulated genes is triggered by a very low dot  and not a minor shift in dot. these data also reveal that these genes respond to a sudden drop in oxygen tension in addition to the adaptive response previously demonstrated.

however, our change point analysis has highlighted genes within the dosr regulon that do not fit the currently recognised profile for this regulon. some genes in the dosr regulon were already up-regulated at dot levels as high as 8%. this analysis suggests these data indicate that not only do some of the dosr-dependent genes respond to very low levels of oxygen, associated with the hypoxic environment of the granuloma in advanced disease, they also respond to small fluctuations in oxygen availability. such fluctuations are more likely to be encountered in the early stages of infection when the organisms are actively replicating. previous chemostat studies have shown that the majority of the dosr regulon is induced under low oxygen in exponentially growing cells. we have also identified genes , the expression of which does not appear to respond to low oxygen at all in either our time-course or steady-state studies and yet has previously been shown to be induced by hypoxic conditions and controlled by dosr  <cit> .

our analysis has added further information to the previous study  <cit>  indicating that acr-co-regulated genes rv1737c/rv <dig> and rv2031c/rv <dig> are temporally regulated. in each pair of divergent genes one of the genes is up-regulated prior to the induction of the other gene in the pair. static experiments previously have not revealed these subtleties, which may be required for a flexible response to a constantly changing environment in the host. these observations, however, are based on a single time course experiment and further experiments are necessary to confirm our preliminary findings.

the clustering algorithm stem  <cit>  used here failed to tease out subtly different expression patterns of the tus in the dosr regulon detected by the change point model. the change point model is proving to be a valuable complementary analysis tool to current clustering methods and is able to provide additional insight into the dynamics of gene expression. the temporal regulatory patterns of the dosr regulon observed in vitro has provided some clues as to the spatial regulatory patterns of the dosr regulon in vivo. functions now need to be assigned to these genes to enable us to further understand how these genes are employed during the infection process. this in turn will lead to an understanding of whether the entire regulon serves as a marker of latent disease or whether it is just a proportion of the regulon that is specific to this disease state.

