BACKGROUND
prospective memory  is one of the most important cognitive domains in daily life. pm involves remembering to carry out intended actions at appropriate points in the future  <cit> . even minimal reflection prompts the realization that the texture of our daily existence is inextricably bound to pm tasks. these tasks include mundane demands such as remembering to pick up bread on one's way home, remembering to mail the letter in one's briefcase, remembering to give one's housemate the message that a friend called, and remembering to load one's bicycle into the car for a ride after work. theoretically, pm is considered a complex process involving at least four phases. the first phase is planning and encoding intention. the second phase is keeping the intention in mind and monitoring the environment to detect prospective cues while working on other tasks. the third phase is recognition of such cues, while recalling the intention and the intended action. finally, the fourth is interruption of ongoing activity and then execution of the intended action  <cit> . pm thus appears to be a complex cognitive process depending on both the frontal system and hippocampal system  <cit> . this theory is supported by the findings of several neuropsychological studies  <cit>  and a number of neuroimaging and neurophysiological studies performed to clarify the neuronal basis of pm  <cit> . in these activation studies, experimental pm trials were carefully designed to be adequate psychologically and suitable for pm in real-world situations  <cit> .

diffuse axonal injury  is one of the mechanisms of traumatic brain injury . dai comprises primary microscopic injury of axons caused by acceleration-deceleration injury force, the pattern of which is more accurately described as multifocal, appearing throughout the deep and subcortical white matter and particularly common in midline structures including the splenium of the corpus callosum and brainstem on post-mortem pathological examination  <cit> . cognitive sequelae of dai are frequently observed, as is pm failure, which leads to problems in everyday life  <cit> . the pathophysiology of the cognitive sequelae of dai is believed to stem from multiple injury of intracerebral connections. diffusion tensor magnetic resonance imaging  has recently emerged as a valuable additional technique for evaluation of survivors with dai. by measuring the degree of water diffusion anisotropy, quantitative information on the integrity of axons can be obtained at voxel level in the whole brain. it is reported that fractional anisotropy , which is the best rotationally invariant scalar metric for measuring diffusion anisotropy, is broadly reduced in the white matter after dai  <cit> . furthermore, dti parameters are now established as potential quantitative biomarkers for evaluation of the severity of axonal injury and prediction of functional abilities after dai  <cit> .

the purpose of this study was to clarify the neuronal basis of pm. we hypothesised that the pathological lesions contributing to pm failure could be mapped in patients with dai by performing voxel-based regression analysis between fa values and pm scores. in this study, pm failure was measured by a clinical pm assessment battery, enabling us to determine the neuronal basis of pm in everyday life.

RESULTS
neuropsychological assessments
basic patient characteristics and cognitive measurements are shown in table  <dig>  the average verbal intelligence quotient  was  <dig>    <dig> ), performance intelligence quotient  was  <dig>  , and full-scale intelligence quotient  was  <dig>  . the rbmt standardized profile scores were in the range of 7- <dig> . the pm scores were in the range of 2- <dig> . no correlation was observed between pm score and duration from onset  or glasgow coma scale  at the time of injury . although a correlation was observed between pm score and years of education , there was no correlation between pm score and viq , piq , or fsiq .

f: female, m: male, gcs: glasgow coma scale, wais-iii: wechsler adult intelligence scale-iii, viq: verbal intelligence quotient, piq: performance intelligence quotient, fsiq: full-scale intelligence quotient, rbmt: rivermead behavioural memory test, sps: standardized profile score, pm: prospective memory, n.a.: not applicable. a: mean , b: median 

voxel-based regression analysis with pm score
clusters with significant positive correlation with pm score were mapped in the right inferior parietal lobes  coordinates x =  <dig>  y = - <dig>  z = 26; nearest brodmann's area  40), left parahippocampal gyrus , left inferior parietal lobe , and left anterior cingulate gyrus  .

p <  <dig> , minimum cluster size =  <dig> voxels, voxel size  <dig> ×  <dig> ×  <dig> mm; x, y, and z values localize regions according to montreal neurological institute stereotactic coordinates. 

visual checking of extracted clusters revealed that the cluster located in the right inferior parietal lobe was in the sylvian fissure, which resulted in lower fa values in subjects whose pm scores were lower. it appeared that reduction of fa in this region did not reflect axonal injury, and instead cortical atrophy. we therefore excluded the cluster located in the right inferior parietal lobe from the group of significant clusters.

the other three clusters located in the left parahippocampal gyrus, left anterior cingulate, and left inferior parietal lobe consisted mainly of subcortical white matter with partial involvement of cerebral cortex. the correlation coefficients between fa value and pm score in each of these clusters was following; left parahippocampal gyrus , left inferior parietal lobe , and left anterior cingulate , respectively. moreover, there was no significant difference in fa value between dai subjects with full pm score  and normal volunteers in these clusters  . there were no significant correlation between fa values and times from the injury in each cluster .

discussion
multiple axonal lesions of varying severity are scattered throughout the white matter in the brains of dai patients, and various cognitive sequelae are observed depending on the severity and location of such lesions. since pm function depends on intact intra-cerebral networks in several cognitive domains, disruption of these connections results in the failure of pm. dti is a suitable method for detecting such disconnections, and is therefore considered useful for identifying certain domains associated with pm. we believe it is possible to determine the brain region attributable to each cognitive function affected in these patients by comparing cognitive parameters and fa values, which can be used to evaluate the severity of axonal injury at voxel level. with this hypothesis, we sought to locate lesions attributable to pm failure after dai. to the best of our knowledge, no previous study has mapped the lesions attributable to pm failure through voxel-based lesion-symptom analysis using dti. in this study, three clusters significantly correlated with pm failure were found in the left parahippocampal gyrus, left inferior parietal lobe, and left anterior cingulate.

of the clusters correlated with pm failure, that in the left parahippocampal gyrus is consistent with the findings of previous neuroimaging studies with loading of experimental pm tasks. in previous pet studies, activation of the left parahippocampal gyrus was observed during loading of experimental pm tasks, and activation of this region was thought to play a role in recognition of cues triggering the performance of intended actions  <cit> . the second cluster correlated with pm failure was detected in the left inferior parietal lobe. voxel-based regression analysis with trail making test-b, which was conducted in the same dai subjects, showed that the cluster correlated with trail making test-b was in the left inferior parietal lobe, in a location close to the cluster correlated with pm . in functional neuroimaging studies, cortical activation in this area was observed on loading of the wisconsin card sorting test and trail making test, suggesting that neuronal activity in this region reflects the cognitive process of set shifting  <cit> . set shifting is believed to participate in pm, e. g. in monitoring of the environment for cues to re-instantiate an intention while performing other tasks  or inhibiting other activities at the critical time for performance of the intended action . it also appeared that lesions in the left anterior cingulate worsen pm function. this finding is consistent with a previous lesion-symptom analysis study using computed tomography. in that study, lesions in the left anterior cingulate causing pm failure were associated with failure of recall of the intention and intended action  <cit> . these findings suggested that pm failure after dai might reflect operation of the supporting retrospective components of pm, as well as those related more specifically to maintenance of an intention.

previous studies using functional neuroimaging and event-related potential recording have revealed a relationship between the right inferior parietal lobe and pm function  <cit> . in the present study, a correlation between fa value and pm score was found for the cluster in the right inferior parietal lobe. however, post-hoc testing revealed that lower fa values in this cluster could be assigned to the cluster beyond the sylvian fissure. further study using accurate voxel-based morphometry is needed to determine whether atrophy of this region contributes to pm failure in patients with dai.

the localization of the clusters correlated with pm failure was strikingly similar to that of regions activated during experimental pm tasks in previous activation studies, except for anterior prefrontal cortex , which has been suggested to be of central importance to pm by several researchers  <cit> . on post-hoc testing, the reduction of fa value in white matter close to apfc was not significant compared with that in normal controls . it is likely that an artifact originating from air in the frontal sinus masked the lesion in apfc determined by fa value.

the present study is the first to evaluate the neuronal basis of pm using voxel-based regression analysis with fa maps in dai subjects. an advantage of our methodology is that no experimental pm task was required; we could instead adopt the widely used clinical pm assessment battery. however, among the regions elicited by our method, we could not discriminate that attributable to core pm from that attributable to supportive function for pm.

other limitations of our study include the following. first, we examined a relatively small number of subjects. future studies with larger samples of patients are needed to augment the reliability of our findings. second, dti data were acquired with diffusion weighting encoded along only  <dig> independent orientations. to obtain more accurate tensor parameters, a larger number of gradient sampling orientations must be adopted in further studies. third, the interval between injury and testing varied widely between  <dig> to  <dig> months. in a previous study, longitudinal decline of fa values was observed in brains subjected to trauma  <cit> , suggesting that longitudinal changes in fa values may have affected our results. however, post-hoc examination revealed no significant decline in fa value with time from injury. hence, fa values were not adjusted for time from injury. despite these limitations, we believe that we were able to map the neuronal basis for pm performance in a daily life situation.

CONCLUSIONS
using lesion-symptom analysis, we demonstrated that lesions in the left parahippocampal gyrus, left inferior parietal lobe, and/or left anterior cingulate resulted in pm failure. these structures may thus be included in the neuronal circuit of pm. our findings reinforce those of previous activation studies with loading of experimental pm tasks.

