BACKGROUND
species diversity emerges from the combination of both past and ongoing evolutionary and ecological processes driving speciation  <cit> . however, it is challenging to determine the relative contributions of historical and ecological factors in causing genetic differentiation  <cit> . the traditional classification of modes of speciation  within a spatial context  <cit>  is currently revisited in the light of recent studies that integrate phylogenetic, ecological, and geographical data  <cit> . in the last decade, evolutionary biologists have focused on discerning the mechanisms leading to reproductive isolation, and the field has witnessed major advances in determining the relative contribution of historical geographic barriers to diversification thanks to the possibility of linking geological and phylogenetic data  <cit> . in contrast, the elucidation of the contribution to diversification of ecologically-based divergent selection due to environmental differences has been hindered until recently by the difficulty of simultaneously gathering genetic, phenotypic, and environmental data within the framework of a single study  <cit> . however, the recent accumulation of environmental data and the development of ecological niche modelling allow overcoming these limitations and provide the basis for an integrative approach that combines phylogenetic and biogeographic data in order to explain the origin and large-scale distribution patterns of biodiversity  <cit> . integrative analyses provide new insights on the factors driving diversification and speciation, and allow disentangling the effects of environment from those of historical barriers  <cit> . in particular, it is possible to test explicitly whether diversity can evolve in allopatry and under similar ecological conditions  or whether different ecological environments  that promote divergent natural selection are at the root of diversification  <cit> .

here, we integrate phylogenetic, phenotypic, geographic, and environmental data to investigate the contributions of historical geographic barriers and environmental differences to speciation and divergence in the spanish sand racer . the current distribution of p. hispanicus includes the iberian peninsula, and the french mediterranean coast with an upper altitudinal limit at  <dig> m a.s.l.  <cit> . the broad distribution of this group, which inhabits regions with very distinct habitats as well as areas with complex geological histories, makes it a suitable model to investigate how vicariant events due to geographical barriers and niche divergence due to selection have influenced diversification. p. hispanicus fitzinger,  <dig> consists of two subspecies, namely p. hispanicus hispanicus fitzinger,  <dig> and p. hispanicus edwardsianus . the iberian peninsula hosts a second species of the same genus, p. algirus , consisting of two divergent eastern  and western lineages, the latter including african, as well as northwestern  and southwestern  iberian clades  <cit> . other species of the genus psammodromus are p. blanci  from algeria, morocco, and tunisia, and p. microdactylus  endemic to morocco.

based on a representative sampling of p. hispanicus in spain, we first reconstructed phylogenetic relationships among sampled populations using both mitochondrial  and nuclear markers, and dated major cladogenetic events, comparing patterns observed in p. hispanicus with those of p. algirus. second, we investigated differences between molecular lineages in phenotypic traits using multivariate analyses. third, we performed ecological niche modelling and applied different procedures to assess niche divergence and the spatial structure of shared environmental conditions among lineages, in order to investigated the evolutionary and ecological processes that promoted genetic and phenotypic differentiation in the spanish sand racer. more specifically, we tested whether niche divergence and/or allopatric speciation may explain the observed diversity. under the niche divergence hypothesis we predicted that two closely related taxonomic groups would live in habitats characterized by different environmental conditions. under the allopatric speciation hypothesis we predicted genetic, but not necessarily ecological divergence, and thus that environmental niches of sister species should be more similar than under ecological speciation. finally, we speculate which geological events may have led to the observed diversity.

RESULTS
phylogenetic relationships within psammodromus
phylogenetic analyses of the mitochondrial  cytochrome b  data set were based on a  <dig> bp alignment with  <dig> variable positions and  <dig> parsimony-informative sites. the maximum likelihood  reconstructed tree is shown in figure  <dig>  the bayesian inference  tree recovered identical internal nodes to the ml tree and differed only in the arrangement of terminal nodes, which did not receive strong statistical support in either analysis. two nuclear loci  were included in the nuclear data set. phylogenetic analyses of the nuclear data set were based on a  <dig>  bp alignment with  <dig> variable positions, and  <dig> parsimony-informative sites. the ml and bi reconstructed trees were identical in topology to each other  regarding internal nodes, and differed in the arrangement of terminal nodes . phylogenetic analyses of the combined data set, which included mt cytb, mt nad <dig> and the two nuclear loci, were based on a  <dig>  bp alignment with  <dig> variable positions, and  <dig> parsimony-informative sites. the ml reconstructed tree is shown in figure  <dig>  the bi tree was identical in topology to the ml tree regarding internal nodes and differed only in the arrangement of terminal nodes, which did not receive strong statistical support in either analysis.

all recovered trees  indicated that p. hispanicus and p. algirus form two sister clades. bayesian relaxed clock dating using the combined dataset estimated the split at approximately  <dig>  ±  <dig>  mya ± se . the recovered trees support the split of p. algirus into at least two main clades, which separated around  <dig>  ±  <dig>  mya . one of the clades represented the eastern lineage . the other clades included p. algirus from morocco, and the southwestern  and northwestern  clades. these latter two clades were identified based on a nadh dehydrogenase subunit  <dig> -phylogenetic tree, which included our specimens and six specimens with homologous sequences available in genbank that belonged either to the northwestern  or the southwestern  clades  <cit> . although there was good statistical support for the monophyly of nw and sw clades , that of the african clade was not strong . the nw and the sw clades diverged around  <dig>  ±  <dig>  mya . the geographic distribution of the nw and sw clades ranged from huelva to galicia and from huelva to extremadura respectively, whereas the eastern lineage ranged from granada to zaragoza .

phylogenetic relationships and phylogeography of p. hispanicus
p. hispanicus split into two well-supported lineages approximately  <dig>   mya , one hereafter referred to as p. hispanicus hispanicus western lineage , and the p. hispanicus hispanicus central lineage  + p. hispanicus edwardsianus lineage . the split between the central lineage and the edwardsianus lineage was dated  <dig>   mya . the monophyly of both the central lineage and the edwardsianus lineage received strong statistical support in all phylogenetic analyses . the two mt and the two nuclear minimum-spanning networks support the existence of three independent lineages .

within the western lineage southern populations  formed a paraphyletic assemblage with respect to northern populations. within the edwardsianus lineage, southern populations  were recovered as the sister group of the northern populations . the southern-northern splits received strong statistical support in the combined analyses, and were further supported by statistically significant differences in the amova . while in the western lineage and edwardsianus lineage most of the genetic variation was found among northern and southern groups, there was significant variation among populations and within groups in the edwardsianus lineage . the main split within the central lineage had no clear geographical correlation .

the spatial distribution of mt cytochrome b  , mt nad <dig> , nuclear suppressor of swi <dig>  <dig>  and nuclear clone  <dig> diversity  showed current allopatry for the three main lineages recognized within p. hispanicus. there were statistically significant differences in the longitudinal distribution between the three lineages , but no differences in the latitudinal distribution . the edwardsianus lineage inhabits the eastern part of spain , the central lineage inhabits the central part , and the western lineage the western part . in general, more different haplotypes and more haplotypes per geographic area were found in the southern populations compared to northern populations . the cytb haplotype  and nucleotide diversity  were higher in southern than in northern spain . h was significantly different in one and π in two lineages. the cytb minimum-spanning network indicated northward range expansion in all three main lineages , while this pattern was less obvious in the nuclear network of the suppressor of swi <dig>  <dig> . tajima's d and fu's fs showed negative and statistically significant values for northern populations of all lineages, indicating population expansion, and non-significant values for southern populations in the central lineage and the edwardsianus lineage . additionally, in the western lineage tajima's d was negative and statistically significant in southern populations suggesting population expansion. overall all lineages, none of the two neutrality tests was significant .

*p ≤  <dig> , **p ≤  <dig> 

tajima's d and fu's fs tests of selective neutrality on cytb data according to the three major lineages and northern and southern populations. given is the nucleotide diversity , the haplotype diversity , tajima's d, and fu's fs. test statistics are based on  <dig> simulations. analyses were run for all individuals, for all lineages and for northern and southern populations of each lineage.

phenotypic differences within p. hispanicus
results from the permutational manova  showed that there were statistically significant differences in phenotypic traits between all three major lineages of p. hispanicus . pairwise comparisons showed that each lineage differed from the other two lineages .

discriminant function analyses yielded two functions, the first explaining  <dig> % of the variance and the second  <dig> %. the first discriminant function separated edwardsianus from the other two lineages, whereas the second function discriminated between the central and the western lineage. factor loadings  showed that the number of femoral pores, the nuptial coloration, and the number of throat scales were important determinants of the first discriminant function. the second discriminant function was mainly determined by the number of ocelli, the snout shape, and again by the nuptial coloration. the presence/absence of a supralabial scale below the subocular scale could not be included in the discriminant function analysis since no variance existed within lineages. in fact, all specimens belonging to the edwardsianus lineage showed a supralabial scale below the subocular scale whereas those from the other two lineages showed no scale below the subocular scale .

akruskal wallis test; bbehrens fisher test

a. factor loadings of each linear function  derived from discriminant function analyses. b. means  per lineage of the measured traits used for the phenotypic analyses. c. results of univariate anovas. d. post-hoc tests allow understanding what lineages differ in what traits. all p-values are adjusted for multiple testing using bonferroni procedures.

results from univariate anovas are shown in table 3b and 3c. in brief, there were statistically significant differences between all three major lineages in the number of femoral pores, in the number of throat scales and in the snout shape. the number of ocelli differed between the central lineage and the other two lineages, but no differences were present between edwardsianus and the western lineage. the snout-to-vent length , svl ratio, body mass, the number of ventral scales, and the number of collar scales differed between edwardsianus and the central lineage, and there were no differences between the western lineage and the two other lineages. there were statistically significant differences between the edwardsianus lineage and the other two lineages in head ratio and nuptial coloration, and no differences between central and western lineage.

ecological niche modelling within p. hispanicus
five out of eight sampled populations  that were previously unknown to the authors were located in  <dig> ×  <dig> km squares where p. hispanicus has not been recorded previously  <cit> . this indicates that the distribution of p. hispanicus is underestimated, and thus biogeographic modelling may be importantly hindered when using presence/absence data. in this regard, the spanish atlas of amphibians and reptiles  <cit>  does not discriminate between presences belonging to the different lineages. consequently, we used modelling techniques that do not require absence data to link our presence records with environmental predictors and run ecological niche factor analysis  based on a systematic population sampling  that included  <dig> populations .

model evaluation
we evaluated the model error of the niche models using an independent data-set obtained from the official spanish atlas of amphibians and reptiles  <cit> . the model omission error was  <dig> % with respect to the currently known presences of p. hispanicus, which is reasonably small. we further determined the importance of the sampling points for the lineage predictions using jackknife methodology, in order to investigate whether sampling points of a given lineage may be more important than in other lineages and thus whether differing sample sizes among lineages may have biased our predictions and conclusions. the average proportional habitat suitability  difference was similar among lineages , indicating similar population representativeness among lineages and no bias due to unequal sample sizes. these are important conditions for comparing niche divergences/similarities and overlaps among pair combinations of lineages.

assessment of predictor relevance
most of the variation explained by ecological niche factor analysis  was included in the two first factors . enfa showed that the distribution of the edwardsianus lineage was best predicted by the mean temperature of wettest quarter, minimum temperature of the coldest month, and precipitation of the coldest quarter . mean temperature of the driest quarter and annual temperature range best predicted the distribution of the central lineage, whereas the mean temperature of the driest quarter best predicted that of the western lineage .

univariate anovas of environmental predictors showed significant differences between lineages in environmental parameters . the edwardsianus lineage inhabited habitats with higher mean temperature of the wettest quarter and higher minimum temperatures during the coldest month than the central lineage. both, the precipitation of the coldest quarter and minimum enhanced vegetation indexes  were significantly smaller than for the western lineage, but did not differ from the populations of the central lineage. the ecological niche of the central lineage was characterized by lower minimum temperature of coldest month than the edwardsianus lineage , lower precipitation of coldest quarter than the western lineage , lower precipitation seasonality than the other two lineages and lower minimum evi than the western lineage. the western lineage occurs in habitats with lower mean temperature of wettest quarter than the edwardsianus lineage, higher precipitation of coldest quarter and higher minimum evi than the other two lineages, and higher precipitation seasonality than the central lineage .

anus-
sianus-
atest statistics correspond to transformed variables, estimates correspond to the untransformed variable

univariate anovas testing for differences between the three major lineages of p. hispanicus and the  <dig> different box-cox transformed parameters measured at each sampled population and used for the ecological niche modelling.

predictive maps of habitat suitability and suitability overlaps
for the edwardsianus lineage the highest habitat suitability  scores were located in eastern spain  ranging from the french border to the southernmost tip of spain. suitable habitat was located in the proximity of the east coast and also along the rivers flowing out into the mediterranean sea  and atlantic ocean . suitable habitat was also predicted in central spain mainly close to the tajo river and the guadiana river. suitable habitat for the central lineage was predicted in central spain , and for the western lineage in western spain and along the mediterranean and cantabrian coastline . the zoomed potential contact zones  showed no connectivity between the edwardsianus and the central lineage through hs values obtained from the edwardsianus model  and for the central lineage suitability prediction . similarly, there was also a clear gap between the central lineage and the western lineage in both suitability predictions . the maps of the overlapping habitat suitability showed overlap between the edwardsianus and central lineage in central spain and close to the ebro river  , that the habitat suitability distributions of the edwardsianus and western lineage overlapped over an important part of their distributions , and that almost no overlap existed between the central and the western lineage .

ecological niche divergence within p. hispanicus
we first assessed niche divergence among lineages based on the principle of interpredictivity among lineages . there existed statistically significant differences between lineages in hs scores obtained for the sampled edwardsianus populations . post-hoc comparisons showed that the hs scores of sampled edwardsianus populations were higher than those of the other two lineages , and no significant differences were present between central and the western lineage populations . similarly, the hs for the central lineage were significantly different between lineages . post-hoc comparison showed that hs scores for the central lineage populations were higher than for populations of the other two lineages  and again no statistically significant differences were present between the other two lineages . hs scores derived for the western lineage were also significantly different among lineages , and post- hoc test showed that populations of the western lineage had higher values than populations of the other two lineages  whereas no statistically significant differences existed between populations of the other two lineages . the prediction of the hs for the central lineage  showed high values for the central lineage  and almost no predictability for the other two lineages . the predictions for the other two lineages showed highest hs for the modelled lineage, lowest hs for the central lineage, and intermediate hs for the remaining lineage.

second, we estimated the overprediction of lumped models compared to the corresponding overlaid split models  and found that the central clade's niche was the most divergent niche, which is in line with the above findings. models of the central lineage lumped with one of the other lineages predicted on average  <dig> % more suitable habitat than the overlaid split models , which is  <dig> % more than overprediction when modelling the edwardsianus and western lineage. similarly, the difference in false-positive rates between lumped and overlaid split models was on average higher when the central lineage was included  than when comparing the western and the edwardsianus lineage . lumped models including the central lineage had on average a false positive rate that was  <dig> % higher than the one when comparing the edwardsianus and western lineage.

% overprediction of lumped models with respect to the prediction of split models is given for each lineage pair. false positive rates were based on presence data of the official spanish atlas of amphibians and reptiles .

finally, our results of ensemble predictions showed that enfa results of predictive maps, niche divergences and geographic overlaps are robust to inter-model variability arising from different algorithms used for model building .

discussion
here, we address how geology, climate, and ecology shaped current diversity in psammodromus hispanicus using a multidisciplinary approach including phylogenetic, phenotypic, phylogeographic, and ecological niche analyses.

species status and phylogenetic relationships within iberian psammodromus
we reconstructed congruent mt- and nuclear-based phylogenies  that confidently recovered three major lineages in p. hispanicus, corresponding to p. hispanicus edwardsianus, p. hispanicus hispanicus central lineage, and p. hispanicus hispanicus western lineage. the molecular clock indicates that the age of divergence of the central and the edwardsianus lineages was about  <dig>   mya, which, together with phylogeographic and phenotypic evidence, strongly suggest that these two lineages reflect independent evolutionary units. the divergence between these two lineages and the western lineage was estimated to have occurred about  <dig>   mya. altogether, the rather old age of divergence, the lack of haplotype and geographic overlap, as well as the existence of phenotypic differentiation, and ecological niche divergence , allow postulating that both the central and the western lineage may be valid species.

there is significant phenotypic differentiation among the three lineages. the western lineage was phenotypically intermediate between the edwardsianus and central lineages, which showed higher phenotypic differentiation. the latter two lineages differed in  <dig> of the  <dig> studied traits  whereas the western lineage differed from the edwardsianus lineage in five traits  and from the central lineage in four traits . the western lineage showed trait values that were intermediate between those measured in the central and the edwardsianus lineages in  <dig> of the  <dig> measured traits . moreover, all specimens of the edwardsianus lineage could be distinguished from the other two lineages by the presence of a supralabial scale below the subocular scale. this finding is in line with previous taxonomy, where its presence has been used to distinguish between the two subspecies, p. hispanicus hispanicus and p. hispanicus edwardsianus  <cit> .

for p. algirus, phylogenetic analyses based on molecular data provide evidence for the existence of four statistically supported lineages, two corresponding to the sw and nw clades of p. algirus  <cit> , another corresponding to the nominate lineage of p. algirus , and the oldest one corresponding to the eastern lineage of p. algirus  <cit> . the molecular clock showed that the nw and sw clades split only around  <dig>   mya, and that the eastern lineage split around  <dig>   mya. the former divergence estimate is similar to the oldest divergence times inferred for the clades within the edwardsianus and central lineage  and  <dig>   mya, respectively; figure 3), whereas the latter estimate coincided with the split of the clades within the western lineage  mya; figure 3). the younger datings correspond to the pleistocene, suggesting a role of glaciations at the origin of the different lineages. interestingly, there is geographic overlap between northern and southern populations of the central and the edwardsianus lineage, as well as between the sw and nw clades of p. algirus, suggesting that in both cases reproductive isolation among lineages/clades may exist. within lineages, the recovered trees and network, as well as population genetic analyses suggest northward expansion of p. hispanicus from southern refugia  <cit> , and incipient and ongoing genetic isolation, while the pattern is less clear within p. algirus.

biogeographic implications
according to our results, the p. algirus group likely had an iberian origin, and first split into eastern and western lineages . within the western lineage, a second split separated the iberian ancestor of the northwestern + southwestern clades from moroccan p. algirus, suggesting that p. algirus colonized africa from the iberian peninsula. these inferred biogeographic patterns confirm previously reported results based on partial 12s rrna, 16s rrna and cytochrome b sequences  <cit> . however, our molecular dating suggests that the eastern lineage split from the other lineages slightly later than previously estimated . unfortunately, we cannot determine whether the origin of the genus psammodromus was iberian or north african since our phylogeny did not include two key african species, p. blanci  and p. microdactylus.

differentiation of the western lineage from the ancestor of the other two p. hispanicus lineages occurred in the miocene when a progressive uplift started to close the east of the betic straits, and formed the guadalquivir basin   <cit> . during the same geological period, there were hypothesized splits in several other iberian reptile and amphibian genera such as lissotriton  <cit> , alytes,  <cit> , and blanus  <cit> , producing in some of them  a similar east-west differentiation pattern. the split between the central and the edwardsianus lineages dates back to the miocene/pliocene boundary and thus close to the messinian salinity crisis and the opening of the gibraltar strait. during this period an uplift of the spanish central system occurred that led to the current configuration of the iberian peninsula's main river drainages  <cit> , indicating that major geologic and climatic changes occurred. accordingly, pliocene diversification has been reported for many iberian groups including freshwater fishes  <cit>  and amphibians  <cit> .

the spatial distribution of mt cytb, nad <dig>  nuclear suppressor of swi <dig>  <dig>  and nuclear clone  <dig> diversity showed current allopatry for all three p. hispanicus lineages suggesting a vicariant event at their origin . a decrease in cytb diversity with increasing latitude was observed, which likely indicates northward range expansion of all three lineages. the large, negative, and significant test statistics of the neutrality tests in the edwardsianus and central lineage further supported this result. however, statistical support for a northward range expansion in the western lineage was low, most likely due to the small sample sizes obtained from the southern peninsula  and the rather homogenous haplotype distribution on the northern peninsula . similar patterns were observed in the suppressor of swi <dig>  <dig> diversity. the observed range expansions may be the result of post-glacial range expansions  <cit>  from glacial refugia located south of the guadiana and the júcar river. according to the molecular clock, range expansions may have occurred around  <dig>   mya, which coincides with the pleistocene glacial and interglacial periods  <cit> . similar pleistocene patterns of range expansion during interglacial periods have been reported for reptile species  <cit>  and also for insects, molluscs, amphibians, mammals, and plants  <cit> .

niche modelling within p. hispanicus
we performed ecological niche modelling for each of the three identified lineages to obtain predictive maps of habitat suitability, and assess predictor relevance and niche divergence. the habitat suitability maps fitted the realized niche reasonably well, and the model omission error was only  <dig> % with respect to the p. hispanicus presences cited in the official spanish atlas of amphibians and reptiles  <cit>   and no sampling bias could be detected.

for all comparisons among the three p. hispanicus lineages, habitat suitability scores in the sampled populations were significantly different among lineages and highest in the lineage populations for which the distribution was modelled. these results indicate that lineages tend to differ in the optimal portions of their niches. according to the spatial prediction models, the mean temperature of driest quarter was one of the most important predictors of the observed distributions of the central and the western lineage. in contrast, mean temperature of wettest quarter, minimum temperature, and precipitation of coldest quarter were the most important predictors of the edwardsianus lineage's distribution. this pattern was in line with the finding that the edwardsianus lineage inhabited areas with lower vegetation cover on the generally warmer and drier eastern coast of the iberian peninsula. the central lineage inhabited central peninsular habitats characterized by intermediate vegetation cover, precipitation and temperature in wettest quarter, and with the lowest minimum temperatures of coldest quarter and precipitation seasonality. the western lineage lived in habitats with the highest vegetation cover, winter precipitation, precipitation seasonality, and winter minimum temperatures, and with the lowest temperatures during the wettest quarter, corresponding to the more humid and climatically more stable western parts of the iberian peninsula.

we used different approaches to assess niche divergence between the three lineages, and analyses revealed the same overall pattern. interpredictivity, differential model overprediction among hierarchical taxonomic groups, and the extent of geographic overlap of the model predictions, showed that the ecological niche of the central lineage was most divergent, whereas ecological niches of the western and edwardsianus lineages were more similar. based on the reconstructed tree topologies and following the principle of parsimony, we can infer that the ancestor of the central and edwardsianus lineages likely occupied a niche similar to that of its sister group, i.e. the western lineage. hence, niche divergence occurred during the evolution of the central lineage.

there is suitable climatically suitable habitat for the edwardsianus lineage in the west of the guadalquivir river, and suitable habitat was predicted for the western lineage on the eastern iberian peninsula . the spatial predictions showed important overlap between the edwardsianus and the western lineage on the southern and southwestern iberian peninsula , where both lineages share potentially suitable ecological conditions on both sides of the guadalquivir river. this suggests that a barrier between málaga and the guadalquivir river may prevent population mixing and led to vicariant diversification by impeding dispersal, from the betic uplift in the late miocene/early pliocene until the present. earlier findings in amphibians  are in agreement with this hypothesis.

when comparing the central lineage with the edwardsianus lineage, suitable habitat for both lineages was located in the centre of the iberian peninsula , and there was no connection through hs values in the estimated contact zone . in contrast, the central lineage showed almost no habitat overlap with the western lineage  , which indicates that niche divergence may be an important force preventing the mixing of these lineages.

in summary, these results show that the western lineage and the ancestor of the central and edwardsianus lineages may have been geographically isolated due to a barrier  <cit>  that still may prevent mixing of the western and edwardsianus lineages, and that niche divergence may have played a limited role in the separation of these two lineages. in contrast, our analyses provide evidence that niche divergence was more prominent in the central lineage, potentially preventing gene flow with its sister lineage.

integrating phylogenetic, phenotypic, geological, and environmental data
determining the relative role of historical and ecological factors as evolutionary drivers of diversification is a central question in evolutionary biology. in this work, we performed a multidisciplinary approach to delimit current diversity of p. hispanicus, and to understand its origin and maintenance. phylogenetic  and phenotypic data allowed us to differentiate three lineages, which showed important differences in phenotypic traits. the early splitting of the western lineage may coincide with a vicariant event, which is the initiation of the betic uplift and the formation of the guadalquivir basin at the end of the tortonian about  <dig> mya, but the large confidence intervals hinder more precise dating. interestingly, ecological niche modelling shows large overlap in suitable habitat between the western and the edwardsianus lineage, which contrasts with the phylogeographic cytb, nad <dig>  suppressor of swi <dig>  <dig>  and clone  <dig> haplotype distribution that show no spatial overlap of the two lineages. the molecular clock together with genetic, geological, and niche-modelling data suggest that an event related to the betic uplift at the miocene-pliocene boundary hindered until present gene flow of psammodromus. the important niche overlap together with the limited gene flow supports a diversification model of niche conservatism in allopatry for the early divergence of the western lineage and the common ancestor of the central and the edwardsianus lineage.

the split between the central and the edwardsianus lineage in the early pliocene coincides with the uplift of the spanish central system, which resulted in a change of the drainage patterns from internal to external, and the forming of the present river systems in the iberian peninsula  <cit> . these geological changes produced major climate changes ranging from dry climate during the messinian salinity crisis to more humid habitats in the early pliocene. these climate changes may be responsible for diversification within p. hispanicus. the finding that the ecological niche of the central lineage was most divergent with respect to those of the edwardsianus and western lineages , implies that niche divergence and ecologically-based divergent selection were involved in the diversification process. however, since the central lineage diverged from the edwardsianus lineage when major climatic changes happened, the possibility that a climatic barrier and initial niche conservatism could have been responsible for the initial splitting cannot be fully discarded  <cit> .

the large overlap of suitable habitat between the edwardsianus and the western lineage compared to the small overlap with the central lineage should be reflected in those phenotypic traits that are adaptive. we explored two phenotypic traits that may be under natural selection in lizards . vegetation cover may determine which colours are cryptic and which ones are conspicuous, and thus, background matching to avoid predation may be the cause for the evolution of colour differences  <cit> . the western and the central lineages do not differ in their nuptial coloration, which is greener than that of the edwardsianus lineage. a second example is the number of throat scales. since smaller scales and more numerous scales reduce skin water exchange  <cit> , differences in the number of throat scales may have evolved due to precipitation differences. here we found that the edwardsianus lineage shows an increased number of throat scales with respect to the western lineage, whereas the central lineage shows the lowest number of throat scales. when comparing the ecological scenarios derived from phenotypic traits  with real differences in environmental parameters , there was a general lack of correlation between environmental parameters and known phenotypic traits under selective pressure, which is in line with previous findings that phenotype does not necessarily predict ecology. thus, our results suggest that the use of phenotypic traits as a surrogate for ecology in studies dealing with phylogenetic niche conservatism may be problematic  <cit> , but see  <cit> . the complexity in phenotypic variation found here, encourages future studies that aim at partitioning phenotypic variation into independent contributions of ecology, phylogenetic inertia, and phylogenetically structured ecological variation, as proposed for higher taxon levels  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
our results indicate that divergence due to both historical geographic barriers and environmental differences may have led through time to the evolution of three p. hispanicus lineages, and that these processes are still acting now to prevent population mixing over the largest part of their allopatric distributions. our preliminary results on the phylogeographic patterns observed in p. algirus suggest that similar patterns may also exist in other related lizard species, as previously suggested. here, we highlight the importance of taking a multidisciplinary approach for disentangling the relative roles of vicariant and adaptive divergence in generating currently observed biological diversity. we found that a vicariant event was at the origin of the first splitting event, which was followed by a second splitting event  in which the role of ecologically based divergent selection  may have been more prominent. this indicates that diversity in a lineage is the result of different temporally separated evolutionary processes, which is concordant with patterns observed in other groups .

