BACKGROUND
peripheral whole blood is an attractive source of mrna for the identification, examination, and development of disease biomarkers via microarray-based gene expression  <cit> . in fact, many studies have explored the utility of gene expression patterns in whole blood for the purposes of classifying or predicting clinical conditions  <cit> . however, the sensitivity and specificity of microarray assays using peripheral whole blood are reduced due to the relatively high proportion of globin mrna present in total rna, which obscures the detection of transcripts expressed at low levels in whole blood  <cit> . while globin reduction assays have been shown to overcome these effects when used in conjunction with affymetrix microarrays  <cit>  and the standard illumina direct hybridization assay  <cit> , globin reduction assays require large amounts of total rna  <cit> , fail to completely eliminate globin transcripts  <cit> , and may induce distinct gene expression profiles  <cit> . consequently, methods of developing blood-based gene expression biomarker panels that do not involve globin reduction are needed. developing a microarray-based gene expression assay that does not rely on globin reduction or other methods of sample fractionation, such as the isolation of pbmcs or other cell types from the blood, should reduce sample variability introduced by sample handling and preparation. this will result in a more accurate reflection of the transcriptome at the time of blood draw, and will reduce time and cost.

there are ways to eliminate the need for globin reduction including  <dig> ) the removal of globin probes from the microarray; and  <dig> ) the elimination of globin transcript amplification. originally developed for the profiling of partially degraded and fixed rna samples, the highly sensitive and reproducible illumina cdna-mediated annealing, selection, extension and ligation  assay  <cit>  uses random priming and a modifiable oligo pool for cdna synthesis. random priming in conjunction with pcr amplification may allow for the increased detection of low abundance transcripts. in addition, removing globin-specific oligos from the dasl assay oligo pool  should decrease noise associated with the high abundance of globin mrna transcripts and potentially eliminate the necessity of globin reduction. currently, the dap is available with and without globin-specific oligos. in order to assess the need for globin reduction with the illumina dasl assay, we compared microarray gene expression profiles of peripheral blood total rna and globin-reduced rna amplified via in vitro transcription -based direct hybridization, dasl with globin-specific oligos, and dasl without globin-specific oligos.

methods summary
peripheral whole blood samples were collected from eight human donors in paxgene blood rna tubes. rna was isolated after freezing and storage and then prepared for gene expression analysis using the illumina human-ref <dig> v <dig>  beadchip. alpha and beta globin were reduced from a portion of the total rna using the globinclear assay . two methods of microarray target preparation were examined: illumina ivt-based direct hybridization  and illumina whole-genome dasl  . the differences between ivt and wg-dasl are outlined in table  <dig>  two dasl assay oligo pools  were utilized for dasl target preparation: the dasl assay oligo pool with globin probes  and the dasl asssay oligo pool without globin probes . comparisons involving the number of genes whose expression levels were detected and the actual levels of expression of the genes were made across the different platforms. a more complete description of the methods is provided in the methods section.

target preparation
selection, extension and
total rna input
RESULTS
comparison between ivt and wg-dasl with and without globin reduction
following target amplification as outlined in figure  <dig>  samples were hybridized with the illumina human-ref <dig> v  <dig>  following the manufacturer's instructions. each target preparation method was assessed for performance by the number of probes detected as present  . probes are generally detected as present if the probe intensity is significantly increased in comparison to the array background intensity. as noted, high levels of background due to the presence of globin transcripts in whole blood are known to decrease the number of significantly detected probes. the wg-dasl target preparation method significantly improved detection sensitivity compared to ivt ). globin reduction decreased probe detection variability with both ivt and wg-dasl target preparation methods. the removal of globin probes from the dasl assay oligo pool  resulted in a moderate increase in the number of probes detected but had no significant affect on detection variability  as compared to the dap+ target preparation method. overall,  <dig> probes were detected across all samples by the five target preparation methods , but only  <dig> probes were detected by ivt alone.  <dig> probes were detected by wg-dasl alone.

nanodrop spectrophotometer 260/ <dig> ratios were moderately decreased following globin reduction with an average ratio equal to  <dig>  prior and  <dig>  post globin reduction . however, raw intensity correlations indicate that whole and globin-reduced blood yield similar expression profiles with both ivt and dasl dap+ assays. overall raw intensity values increased in globin reduced samples  despite the failure of globinclear to completely eliminate the two most abundant globin transcripts, hemoglobin alpha  and hemoglobin beta . the removal of globin probes from the dasl assay oligo pool   had little effect on gene expression profiles compared to dap+  despite the near complete elimination of hba <dig> and hbb.

rna quality was assessed before and after globin reduction as well as before and after amplification. trna: total rna; gc rna: globinclear treated rna or globin reduced rna.

expression patterns maintained across target preparation methods
ivt target amplification is approximately linear while wg-dasl is approximately exponential, making it difficult to compare expression intensities directly. thus, it was important in our analyses that the sample-to-sample relations are maintained among each target preparation method. despite the differences in target amplification, sample relations were preserved across the five target preparation methods as shown by unsupervised hierarchical clustering . for example, with both ivt and wg-dasl, expression profiles for sample  <dig> and sample  <dig> exhibited the greatest differences from the other six samples, while for the ivt or wg-dasl whole blood rna clustered separately from globin reduced rna.

discussion
the analysis of whole blood, microarray-based gene expression profiles is often hindered by low sensitivity and high variability due to high levels of globin mrna transcripts. these issues have been addressed by the development of globin-reduction methods, which specifically target and remove globin transcripts prior to array hybridization. however, studies have shown that globin reduction, like other methods of sample fractionation, may alter expression profiles  <cit> , require large amounts of sample input, increase sample variability  <cit> , and lead to increased costs. thus, the ability to assay whole blood without sample fractionation or globin reduction may result in improved gene expression profile quality and decrease cost.

here we describe the utility of a highly sensitive, whole-genome assay in the assessment of whole blood gene expression. our results suggest that gene expression detection sensitivity is significantly increased with the whole-genome cdna-mediated annealing, selection, extension and ligation  assay as compared to ivt-based direct hybridization . the increased detection sensitivity of wg-dasl may be due to,  <dig> ) random priming allowing for cdna synthesis along the length of mrna transcripts, or  <dig> ) the ability to produce larger amounts of cdna with pcr amplification. regardless, attempts to further improve detection sensitivity and decrease expression variability through the selective removal of globin probes from the dasl assay oligo pool  did not exhibit any large improvements over globin-probe positive dasl . our study also confirms the positive effect of globin reduction on microarray quality when used in conjunction with the illumina beadchip and standard ivt-based hybridization  <cit> , while showing that the positive effect of globin reduction extends to wg-dasl as well. however, as shown by unsupervised hierarchical clustering analysis, globin reduction appears to mildly influence gene expression profiles produced by both ivt and wg-dasl assays. whether this is due to the induction of a globin reduction-specific profile  <cit> , reduced rna quality due to globin reduction, or the result of decreased noise is unknown, and should be taken into consideration while planning blood-based gene expression experiments.

CONCLUSIONS
overall, our results suggest that the detection sensitivity of the wg-dasl assay is higher than the ivt-based direct hybridization assay, with or without globin reduction, and should be considered in conjunction with globin reduction methods for future blood-based gene expression studies. however, further investigation into the ability of the wg-dasl assay to distinguish between disease populations using whole blood is needed, as our study was not designed to address such issues.

