BACKGROUND
parkinson’s disease  is a degenerative disorder of the central nervous system caused by the selective loss of dopaminergic neurons  in the substantia nigra , a region of the midbrain. the neuronal loss, which can be as high as approximately 70%, is accompanied by the loss of the physiologic functionality of the dopaminergic system, leading to the emergence of severe motor symptoms, such as bradykinesia, muscular rigidity and resting tremor. a central pathological hallmark of pd is the formation of inclusions, known as lewy bodies , caused by the accumulation of aggregated proteins in various regions of the brain and importantly in the surviving neurons of the substantia nigra. the main components of lbs are aggregates of the protein alpha-synuclein , a  <dig> amino acid pre-synaptic protein that has been genetically linked to parkinson’s disease. in particular, missense mutations  in the asyn gene  have been correlated with familial pd  <cit> . however, the multiplication of snca has been also linked to the disease and polymorphisms that cause modification of the asyn transcription have been shown to increase the risk for sporadic pd development, suggesting that even the wild type  form of asyn, if overexpressed, could contribute to the development of pd  <cit> .

numerous experimental findings have been published in recent years concerning asyn-related mechanisms that may be responsible for the observed neurodegeneration. for example, a correlation between the over-expression of wt asyn and the observed cell loss has been shown in sh-sy5y cells  <cit> , a human neuroblastoma cell line that upon treatment with retinoic acid assumes a neuronal phenotype; sh-sy5y cells have often been used to model pd following various toxicological or molecular insults. moreover, a main characteristic of asyn is its propensity to form soluble oligomers, which are thought to be the intermediate steps in the formation of the fibrils found in lbs  <cit> . this oligomerization capacity has been observed both in vitro  <cit>  and in vivo  <cit> . there is evidence that the soluble oligomers are the toxic species and not the insoluble fully fibrillar forms of asyn  <cit> . moreover, it is believed that the formation of lbs could be a protective mechanism triggered by neurons in order to isolate the toxic soluble oligomers from the other cytoplasmic species and organelles  <cit> . this is also in agreement with the detection of lbs in the remaining surviving neurons in the sn. supporting these hypotheses, it has been shown that oligomers, in the absence of fibrils or aggregates, are capable of disrupting the homeostasis of differentiated wt asyn-overexpressing sh-sy5y cells, leading to their degeneration. this was shown through the use of the oligomer-stabilizing agent scyllo-inositol, which reversed the cytotoxic phenomena caused by the over-expression of wt asyn  <cit> . this suggests a correlation between asyn oligomers and cell death. furthermore, since the main pathological phenomena of pd occur in the dopaminergic neurons of the sn, a relationship between the presence of dopamine  and the development of the disease could hypothetically exist. numerous in vitro or in vivo studies have provided evidence , that da can modulate the oligomerization process of asyn. more specifically, it is shown that the potential modification of asyn by da, inhibits  the formation of asyn fibrils and the aggregation of the protein, leading to the accumulation of soluble oligomers. furthermore, this modification was found to have a causal role in the observed inhibition of wt asyn on chaperone mediated autophagy   <cit> , one of the major pathways contributing to the proteolysis of asyn  <cit> . a central molecular entity in the cma proteolytic pathway is the lysosomal-associated membrane protein 2a  receptor. cma substrates are transferred to lamp2a, with the help of cytosolic chaperones, and then are internalized into the lysosomes in order to be degraded. one of the known substrates of cma is asyn. however, as shown in  <cit> , the da-modified forms of asyn, despite binding to the lamp2a receptor, do not get internalized into the lysosomes, and thus cause an aberrant occupation of the receptor which inhibits the normal function of cma. this inhibition of cma functionality was shown to be correlated with the observed cell death of differentiated sh-sy5y cells  <cit> . the involvement of da in wt asyn-mediated cytotoxicity in this model was confirmed, since the repression of da production reversed the dysregulation of lysosomal proteolysis and, more importantly, cell loss  <cit> . altogether, the above data suggest that the da-mediated modification of asyn may have a central role in the induction of neurodegeneration. as for the contribution of other proteolytic machineries in the degradation of asyn, there is significant evidence that both macroautophagy  <cit>  and the proteasome  <cit>  contribute to the removal of various asyn species . however, it should be mentioned that in our experimental setting  the contribution of the proteasome to the degradation of monomeric asyn was not found to be significant  <cit> . however, it is also believed that the latter mechanism could be impaired by specific asyn species of higher molecular weight   <cit> .

it is worth mentioning that many other asyn-related pathogenic phenomena have been reported in the literature. amongst others, asyn overexpression is found to modulate neuronal calcium homeostasis  <cit>  and its oligomers could lead to an increase of calcium influx  <cit> . also, these asyn species are believed to be able to disrupt various types of cellular membranes, such as those of mitochondria  <cit>  or even the plasma membrane  <cit> .

despite the accumulated knowledge concerning the involvement of asyn in molecular mechanisms underlying the development of pd, there is substantial information missing before a cure can be found. systems biology approaches could play a crucial role in integrating and further utilizing the current knowledge and the first pd-related models have already appeared. in  <cit>  a mathematical model of the effects of asyn oligomerization on cells’ homeostasis has been proposed, however, this model focused only on proteasome dynamics. in  <cit>  an existing model of protein aggregation regulation via uch-l <dig> has been extended to simulate this process with asyn. although several of the phenomena described above, such as cma and proteasome inhibition, have been modeled in  <cit> , the role of da has not been taken into account and efforts have focused primarily on the formation of inclusions, whose role in mediating neurodegeneration is debatable. in a more recent study a dynamic model that linked mutated asyn, mitochondrial function, and glutathione  metabolism has been proposed  <cit> . however, the focus of this study was on asyn aggregation phenomena in the presence or absence of oxidative stress and not on da-modified asyn dynamics. the scope was the exploration of possible points of drug intervention for reducing cell apoptosis following asyn aggregation.in the present study, we sought to create a holistic model capable of simulating the dynamics of asyn overexpression and oligomerization, and integrating the fundamental lysosomal and proteasomal degradation pathways, as well as the modifications conferred by da. in this model, we have correlated these phenomena to the aberrant function of intracellular asyn. to develop the model, we used recent experimental findings on the role of asyn in pd development, combined with the experience gained by previous asyn-related modeling efforts. in our modeling approach, we focused on the dynamics of da-modified asyn species and on phenomena previously correlated with neurotoxicity . using data derived by experimentation, mainly from the sh-sy5y cell line, we managed to reproduce the experimental system’s behavior in silico. this allowed us to investigate, by stochastic simulation, the neuroprotective potential for a number of hypothetical interventions in the system. the phenomena and the interactions that were modeled are pictorially summarized in figure  <dig> and are discussed in detail in the model development section of results and discussion.

RESULTS
modeling approach and objectives
to describe the intracellular asyn dynamics we developed a biomolecular reactions network capturing the interactions of modeled species. this is then translated to a set of ordinary differential equations . next, we performed experimental measurements of asyn species levels  after inducibly over-expressing asyn by a tet-off system  and the collected data was used to fit model parameters. by calibrating the model we aimed to reproduce the dynamics of over-expressed wt asyn, its oligomerization and its interplay with cma , proteasome and macroautophagy pathways. using computer simulations, we sought to investigate, in silico, the roles of these pathways as well as the contribution of da in the aberrant function of asyn. the calibrated model was finally used to predict the biological system’s behavior in a number of hypothetical intervention scenarios, none of which was previously used for model calibration.

model development
the developed model comprises of five major components  which interact with each other: asyn production and modification oligomerization, degradation by cma, degradation by macroautophagy and degradation by the proteasome.

in a similar approach to  <cit> , it is assumed that both wt asyn and da are produced at a constant rate from a “source”. this entity  accounts for the protein synthesis machinery of the cell. we also assumed that the production rates of asyn and da are a combination of their transcription and translation rates. this assumption was made due to restrictions imposed by the experimental protocol used to produce the data. more specifically, in our experimental system, wt asyn was expressed by a tet-off system   <cit> , making the modeling of the exact procedure extremely complicated since both endogenous and ectopic expression should be taken into account. thus, a complex combinatorial process was modeled by introducing the “source” entity and related rates. similarly, and to overcome the complex da expression dynamics in neuronal cells, da was assumed to be produced by the same source. figures  <dig>   <dig>   <dig>   <dig> provide a graphical depiction of all biomolecular interactions in the system. the distinct sub-models given in these figures when taken all together constitute the entire model and are defined inside a shared compartment, which refers to the cell’s cytosol . the consolidated graph is given in additional file  <dig>  it was produced using the systems biology graphical notation  standard  <cit>  and it was implemented in celldesigner  <cit> . moreover, a pure sbml version of the model, derived from the additional file  <dig> in celldesigner, is given in additional file  <dig> 

as shown in figure 2a, the released da reacts with wt asyn to produce a new modified molecular entity. at the same time, part of da is turned over at a constant rate. the oligomerization of asyn and its da-modified form is modeled as follows : the formation of oligomeric species  and their dissociation  are executed by adding or removing a monomer, respectively. although in vitro detailed modeling studies of asyn aggregation, such as the one performed in  <cit> , do exist, the aforementioned da-mediated modification of the procedure has not previously taken into account. thus, the simplest possible way to model the oligomerization procedure  was adopted so as to avoid further unverified assumptions.

moreover, figure 2b suggests that the oligomerization of wt asyn and its modified form take place in parallel. they follow the same motif but only non-modified wt asyn can form higher molecular weight species . these forms may be considered as aggregates and they can increase in molecular weight with the addition of monomer units, but lack the ability to decompose themselves . although in  <cit>  there were no hmw species detected in sh-sy5y cells , it was nevertheless deemed appropriate to include them in our model. this would allow us to capture their behavior as described in other biological and modeling studies  <cit>  and retain the ability to test different hypotheses regarding their role in neurodegeneration. however, it should be mentioned that during the parameter estimation procedure , specific constraints have been set to ensure that hmw species levels remain insignificant to meet our experimental findings.

in  <cit>  all species higher than hexamers were considered insoluble, while in our model the same applies only to hmw species higher than nonamers. our approach is based on the experimental findings in  <cit>  that show soluble forms of asyn with molecular weight of approximately 130 kda. moreover, it has been suggested  <cit>  that the involvement of da in the oligomerization process of asyn mainly affects species with molecular weights between ~15 kda and ~150 kda, matching the molecular weight spectrum of asyn monomers to asyn nonamers. based on these findings we have made the assumption that da-modified asyn can form complexes up to nonamers and species of higher order should only be a product of the unmodified asyn oligomerization process.

in the next system component, the lysosome , we captured the known interactions related to the degradation of asyn by cma. based on  <cit> , monomers and dimers of un-modified asyn bind to the lamp2a receptor and form a complex . as soon as they enter the lysosome they are degraded into amino acids without affecting the normal functionality of cma degradation. asyn oligomers  also bind to lamp2a  but they are quickly released before entering the lysosome . during the binding of oligomers to lamp2a, the receptor is not allowed to bind to any other entities . however, as shown in  <cit> , this repression is not permanent. we have also modeled the ability of asyn which is bound to lamp2a to form low molecular weight  oligomers, up to nonamers  <cit>  .

there is evidence  <cit>  that monomers of da-modified asyn show much higher affinity to lamp2a in comparison with species of un-modified asyn. thus, for reasons of simplicity, we have considered in our approach that only monomers of the da-modified protein can directly form complexes with the receptor. any oligomers bound to the receptor are formed on site as described above . in contrast to the unmodified monomer and dimer species, the complex does not enter the lysosome, meaning that the binding to lamp2a is irreversible and it results in the suppression of the receptor. oligomers formed by da-modified asyn species bound on lamp2a also lead to permanent suppression of the receptor.

asyn species can also be degraded via macroautophagy, a distinct type of the autophagic pathway in which cytoplasmic components are degraded by lysosomes. in this pathway, cytosolic regions are sequestered into autophagosomes that deliver their contents to late endosomal and lysosomal compartments for degradation. these species cannot interact with other entities in the surroundings, e.g., they cannot form oligomers by reacting with cytosolic asyn species. in this sense, a new compartment was incorporated into the system to account for the autophagosomes formed during the action of the macroautophagic proteolytic machinery. as shown in figure  <dig>  the procedure has been significantly simplified and the complex dynamics of autophagosome formation and its transition to autophagolysosome have been omitted. here, the autophagosome is responsible for the internalization and degradation of asyn and its modified by da forms via macroautophagy. the modeling procedure is the same for both forms of the protein and for all species from monomers to octamers  <cit> .

the final component of the model, shown in figure  <dig>  incorporates the available knowledge regarding the interaction of asyn with the proteasome. here, again, two parallel processes were modeled; one for the wt protein  and one for its da modified form . experimental data suggest that this proteolytic machinery has specificity to the asyn species that it can degrade. thus, only trimers to nonamers of both forms are targeted to the proteasome  which is released after they get degraded  <cit>  . however, due to the high numbers and structural complexity of this type of species, it is believed that the proteasome gets over-occupied for long periods of time, leading to a delay on the degradation of other proteasome substrates, a process that could be considered as proteasome impairment  <cit> . on the other hand, higher molecular weight species of wt asyn could bind to the proteasome irreversibly , thus suppressing its function indefinitely. however, it should be mentioned that since higher molecular weight asyn species were not detectable in our experimental system , during the model parameterization procedure we tried to keep the levels of these species within ranges that could be considered experimentally undetectable .

mathematical definition of the model, initial parameter values and model calibration using experimental data
in order to build a model that could be simulated , we first needed to define the kinetic rate laws governing the model reactions. moreover, in order for the model to converge to the observed experimental behavior of the system, the underlying parameter values of the kinetic laws had to be precisely predicted. prior to that, estimated starting points of the parameter search space for these values had to be defined. the latter step consisted of an extensive search in the relevant literature while the former step was implemented using stochastic global optimization algorithms. a detailed description of all steps is provided in the methods. moreover, a depiction of the model’s mathematical definition and calibration steps is provided in figure  <dig> 

model validation
the next step of the in silico modeling process was to validate the model by testing if it can reproduce the behavior of the biological system and its components as observed in the laboratory. for this purpose, we used the gibson & brook stochastic simulation algorithm   <cit>  which is faster when compared to other versions of exact ssa algorithms  <cit> . figure  <dig>  shows simulation of the model over a 7 day  “lab time” course and the average species trajectories over  <dig> simulation runs along with the standard deviation bars at the time points where experimental data were collected. experimental data and their trends are also plotted  in the same figure. details pertaining to the nature of the experimental data and its collection are provided in the methods section.

as shown in figure 7a, simulated levels of the total amount of oligomers  and dimers  are very close to those from experimental observations. more importantly, simulations seem to accurately reproduce the trends of the available data. they also match the qualitative knowledge for those species in the cases where no quantitative information was available . specifically, levels of free lamp2a seem to continuously decrease and reach zero levels on day  <dig>  interestingly, cell death is also observed in the laboratory experiments on day  <dig>  as shown in figure 7a, fluctuations in free lamp2a levels indicate that the repression of cma activity is not exclusively caused by the permanent binding of modified species to lamp2a. it is also a result of the overload of the receptor caused either by the accumulated  unmodified monomers and dimers, or by the oligomers of un-modified asyn. therefore, two parallel processes for the repression of cma activity evolve, one that gradually reduces the levels of free lamp2a, and another that overuses the constantly declining levels of the free receptors. high molecular weight species of asyn  remain at low levels , significantly below the levels of oligomers . levels of oligomeric species in the proteasome also appear to agree with the available experimental findings .simulation outputs did not accurately match the laboratory data in the case of wt asyn monomers . nevertheless, the model’s behavior captured the trends of experimental observations and managed to reproduce the decrease of monomeric levels for the first few days and their subsequent rise after day  <dig>  considering that only the total levels of asyn species in the cytoplasm could be experimentally measured, we chose  to give priority to the accurate simulation of dimeric and oligomeric asyn, since these species are shown to induce the observed deregulations in neuronal homeostasis . in contrast, the levels of monomeric asyn are not significantly correlated with the pathogenic phenomena. in this sense, the lack of exact matching of their trends does not prevent us from valid qualitative conclusions from the model’s simulation results.

model predictions
the calibrated model was used as a testing platform for a number of hypothetical scenarios for which some experimental evidence was available either from the literature or from our lab. it is important to note that there was no update or prior calibration of the model with that experimental lab knowledge. although there was no quantitative information available for any of the species in the model to compare with the simulation results, it was still possible to draw some conclusions in regards to the neuroprotective potential of these interventions. these were based on our knowledge that cma suppression and the existence of soluble asyn oligomers  are responsible for reduced cell viability  <cit> . it is also important to note that all hypotheses were tested by changing the relevant parameters of the system and not any of the initial conditions. thus, our in silico experiments aimed at intervening with the model of over-expressed asyn system as this was structured and calibrated with the available experimental data. the long-term goal would be to unveil possible neuroprotective intervention strategies aiming at increasing cell viability in such ‘problematic’ systems.

non-toxic asyn oligomer levels and decreased cma inhibition are predicted when the asyn production rate is reduced
in the first scenario tested, the production rate of asyn was reduced by 50%. we aimed at checking whether the model recapitulates the association between wt asyn over-expression and toxic phenomena and more specifically the existence of significant levels of oligomers and the over-occupation of lamp2a receptors. as shown in figure 8a, levels of dimers and oligomers are significantly lower compared to those in figure 7a. in particular, during the last days of the experiment, where increased cell death is observed in vitro, these levels approach their initial values  where cell differentiation and protein overexpression begin. more specifically, we have recently shown that a significant difference in the number of intact nuclei between cells expressing endogenous asyn and cells over-expressing asyn starts to appear from the 5th day of culture  <cit> . on the other hand, the amount of free lamp2a, despite being continuously reduced, it does not reach zero levels in the last day . the levels of monomeric asyn plotted in figure 8b, are in general reduced compared to those in figure 7b. this is most likely due to the slightly higher concentrations of free lamp2a which aids the degradation of asyn monomers as well as the lower production rate of asyn. thus, taking into account that oligomers remain at lower levels and there is no absolute consumption of lamp2a, we can infer that the reduced production of asyn has a significant effect on increasing cell survival probability . this is in agreement with the correlation between asyn over-expression and cytotoxicity observed experimentally  <cit> .

tripling of lamp2a levels is predicted to be sufficient to reduce the asyn toxic effects on cma
when we tripled the initial amount of lamp2a receptors in the model  the model predicted that asyn dimers and oligomers would be at lower levels at day  <dig> compared with those at the beginning of the simulation . furthermore, the levels of free lamp2a at day  <dig> appeared to be significantly higher than zero  and reach levels similar to those at the beginning of the simulation where cma is not inhibited. the levels of monomeric asyn  during the last few days are significantly lower compared to the initial conditions . moreover, the trend of asyn monomers to recover during the last days of the simulation was abrogated. in conclusion, our model predicts an increased cell survival probability, and this agrees with experimental findings in our lab showing a higher turnover of asyn species  and significantly reduced asyn-mediated neurotoxicity when lamp2a is overexpressed. this was tested in three different experimental models: sh-sy5y cells, primary rat cortical neurons and the living rat brain  <cit> . the in vivo data in particular are striking, in that the dopamine deficiency state was completely reversed, indicating that both the predictions of cellular and computational models are supported by the in vivo findings.

shutting off dopamine production leads to significantly reduced toxic phenomena mediated by asyn oligomerization
it has been shown that inhibition of the da production pathway in sh-sy5y leads to reduced cell death and restoration of the lysosomal proteolytic mechanisms  <cit> . to test whether our model predictions are in agreement with such a behavior, we “shut off” da production in the system by setting its production rate from source to  <dig>  in order to simulate properly the experimental setup in which da was shut off in non-dopamine deficient cells, the initial levels of da were kept the same with those in the previous scenarios. the simulation outputs are presented in figures 8e and f. dimers again seem to return to their initial levels while oligomers appear in lower levels at the end of the simulation. in addition, levels of free lamp2a receptors do not completely disappear at day  <dig>  monomeric asyn species  have significantly lower levels and when compared to the other two scenarios they manifest the smallest increasing trend during the last days of the simulation. an interesting feature of this hypothetical scenario, as shown in figure 8e, is the increased levels of hmw asyn species . although at the end of the simulation the oligomers are significantly less, compared to those in the basic over-expression model, hmw species appear to remain in significant amounts. one possible explanation for this could be the exclusive oligomerization of asyn by the non-modified pathway. based on the hypotheses presented in  <cit>  a more thorough explanation could be that the formation of hmw species can actually have a neuroprotective role by storing excessive protein which cannot be completely degraded via cell proteolytic mechanisms.

CONCLUSIONS
we have presented a holistic biomolecular reactions model that successfully recapitulates the dynamic phenomena of asyn overexpression and oligomerization and predicts the biological system’s behavior for a number of in-silico intervention scenarios not used for model calibration. the model allows for the first time, the estimation, at least in a qualitative manner, of the levels of the protein species that are capable of deregulating homeostasis. it also enables us to generate new hypotheses for intervention that could be tested experimentally.

a unique aspect of the model is that it describes the dynamics of protein modification by dopamine and its interaction with cma, macroautophagy and proteasome pathways. the model has been validated by asyn overexpression data from sh-sy5y cells and predicted behaviors that indicate increased cell survival probability in three hypothesized intervention scenarios: halved production rate of asyn, triplication of lamp2a receptor levels in the lysosome, and cut-off of dopamine production. in all three cases the model predictions agreed with experimental lab results that were not presented to the model in advance. obvious next steps in the analysis are the extension of the model to include cell death related pathways which incorporate the observed initiation of apoptosis, its inhibition and the resulting autophagic cell death  <cit> . finally, the consideration of asyn secretion and uptake from neighboring cells will allow us to test the different mechanisms proposed for disease propagation and in the long term to use an extended multi-scale version of the model as an in silico test-bed for investigating different theories.

