BACKGROUND
nucleosome positioning refers to the position of a dna helix with respect to the histone core  <cit> . positioning has important roles in gene regulation, because packing dna into nucleosomes can limit the accessibility of the sequences  <cit> . high-resolution genome-wide nucleosome maps are now available for the genomes of yeast, worms, flies, and humans  <cit> . studies of these nucleosome position datasets have revealed some interesting characteristics, especially for promoter sequences. a typical nucleosome-free region  is near the transcription start site  and is followed by a well-positioned nucleosome  <cit> . low nucleosome occupancy is a significant feature of a functional transcription factor binding site   <cit> .

at the same time, computational predictions using dna sequence information have also advanced. since the report of the nucleosome positioning code  in yeast  <cit> , some models for predicting nucleosomes have been developed using dna sequence properties, such as dinucleotide periodicity, and structural information of the dna helix  <cit> . the successful predictions suggest that dna sequences partly encode nucleosomes themselves, although some deviations are observed between the predicted and the experimentally determined positions  <cit> . on further investigation, it was realized that dynamic positioning is a general rule in cells. dynamic remodelling of one or two nucleosomes was revealed in yeast promoters  <cit> . nucleosome reorganization of a gene might result from a cell-specific change or a condition-dependent change  <cit> . for cells from the same cell line, the first nucleosome downstream of the tss exhibits differential positioning in active and silent genes, and such nucleosome reorganization can be induced in resting t-cells  <cit> . relative positioning was also found to be a general characteristic in caenorhabditis elegans  <cit> .

such variations of nucleosome positions in vivo cast doubt on the reliability of predictions based on dna sequence characteristics  <cit> . moreover, a recent work in yeast showed that there is no genome code in nucleosome positioning; even intrinsic histone-dna interactions are not the major determinant  <cit> . also, the mechanism by which dna sequences guide nucleosomes positions is different between s. pombe and s. cerevisiae  <cit> . nucleosome organization at the 3' end of genes conforms to the principles of statistical positioning  <cit> .

however, some factors should be noted. firstly, the ~10-bp periodicity of dinucleotides aa-tt-ta/gc, which is identified as a positioning code in yeast, is also found in c. elegans, flies, and humans  <cit> . secondly, strikingly similar features, including the nfr near the tss, and the uniform spacing of internucleosomes downstream of the tss, are observed both in the predicted data and in the experimentally determined data  <cit> . low nucleosome occupancy is encoded around functional transcription factor binding sites  <cit> ). thirdly, some sequence-dependent models are suitable for predicting nucleosome positions in multiple genomes without additional information  <cit> . in addition, the chromatin remodelling complex can establish specific local chromatin structures by reading out dna features and targeting nucleosomes to specific positions  <cit> . all of the above highlight the importance of sequence preferences in positioning.

in this paper, using the curvature profile, a new model based on the curvature pattern of nucleosomal dna, nucleosomes positions were predicted for the human genome. patterns of nucleosomes near interesting sites, including tsss, tfbss, single nucleotide polymorphism  sites, and target sites of mirnas, were thoroughly investigated. the results also demonstrated the important roles of dna sequences in determining nucleosomes. moreover, we revealed that nucleosomes are not only functional in gene regulation, but also in genetic variation.

RESULTS
predictions of nucleosome positions and the estimation of sequence-dependence
nucleosomes positions were predicted by recognizing the curvature pattern of the core dna helix . the reconstructed curvature pattern of a nucleosome is shown in figure  <dig>  to test how representative the pattern derived from the crystal structures was,  <dig> well-positioned  nucleosome dna sequences were collected from zhao et al.'s experimental dataset  <cit> . an averaged curvature curve of the  <dig> sequences resembles the pattern in shape , indicating the pattern represents a canonical curvature of a nucleosomal dna helix.

using the curvature profile, nucleosomes positions were predicted for human chromosome  <dig>  a wavelet-based algorithm mscwt  <cit>  was employed in detecting exact dyad positions . in the curvature profile and kaplan et al.'s predictions, the averaged centre-to-centre distance of neighbour nucleosomes is ~ <dig> bp , close to value of  <dig> bp in the literatures  <cit> . for zhao et al.'s experimental dataset, due to the scarcity of the coverage, this value is  <dig> bp, which actually indicates nucleosomal repeats rather than the average distance.

a quantitative comparison between the predicted and the experimentally determined nucleosomes positions were carried out by measuring the distance between respective dyad positions . more than 53% of the experimentally determined nucleosomes were predicted by curvature profile, with a 40-bp deviation . using the experimental data as a standard, the curvature profile shows a slightly higher performance than kaplan et al.'s model, especially for a low deviation . importantly, both the curvature profile and kaplan et al.'s model has a much higher matching ratio for the experimental data than random positioning does. in comparison with the model nu-score  <cit>  on a 50k-bp sequence, the curvature profile exhibits a comparable performance . additionally, nucleosomes have a good match in activated and resting cd4+ t cells  , suggesting that most nucleosomes do not change in either type of cell; only a small number of nucleosomes, such as the first nucleosome downstream of a tss  <cit> , exhibit different position.

the curvature profile is based on the curvature characteristics of nucleosomal dna, and is therefore sequence dependent. subsequently, the curvature-dependent degree of nucleosome positioning was estimated using the nucleosome occupancy ratio of hexanucleotides in the whole of human chromosome  <dig>  the correlation between occupancy ratio of the predictions and the experimental data was  <dig>  . it should be pointed out that the curvature profile in fact reflects an indirect measurement of nucleosome position. thus, the dependence in this study only reflects the influence of the curvature of the dna helix on nucleosome positioning. we speculate that dna sequences might encode a default arrangement of nucleosomes and that reorganization of nucleosomes in vivo is based on this default arrangement.

nucleosome distribution in protein-coding promoters and independent mirna promoters
nucleosome positioning at promoters has been extensively investigated because of its role in occluding binding sites. a typical nfr locates around a tss, which allows the binding sites to be exposed to the pre-initiation complex   <cit> . the nucleosomes flanking the nfr also provide a steric match for the complex.

in this study, the averaged curvature profile  results in an ~150-bp nfr around the tss of  <dig> protein-coding genes, which is consistent with previous reports  <cit> . the nfr is also revealed by zhao et al.'s experimental data in activated cd4+ t cells . however, not all tsss are nucleosome free in vivo. using zhao et al.'s experimental data in the range of - <dig> bp to  <dig> bp from the tss,  <dig> tsss were divided into two classes by a k-means clustering method. this resulted in  <dig> occupied tsss  and  <dig> nucleosome-free tsss . both the curvature profile and the experimental data are consistent with nucleosome depletion at class ii tsss . around the class i tsss, no distinct positioning signal is observed in the curvature profile , while a positioned nucleosome is suggested by the experiment data. this difference between the prediction and the experiment indicates that positioning is not completely determined by dna sequences in vivo. the trough near the tss in figure 5b is slightly higher than that in figure 5c, suggesting that a minority of class i tsss are occupied by dna sequence-encoded nucleosomes. as shown above, the nucleosome-free state is the default configuration, partly determined by dna sequences at a tss; however, in vivo, due to the function of the remodelling complexes, some of tsss are occupied. this is why there are differences between the prediction and the experiment.

we computed the dinucleotide distribution near all the tsss. fraction of ww  dinucleotides decreased in a broad range near the tss , interestingly, in the range of ~ <dig> bp upstream of the tss, ww shows a sharp increase , also corresponding to an increase of poly  . we inferred that the increased poly  is associated with the nfr near the tss, because the poly  disfavors nucleosome formation  <cit> . the results suggest that dna sequence influences nucleosome positioning.

taking these results together, dna sequences partly encode a default nfr around a tss. due to the requirement of gene expression in vivo, some tsss are occupied through chromatin remodelling, while others are still in nfrs. the positioned nucleosome at a tss can block the binding sites of the pre-initiation complex, implying that a tss-occupied gene should exhibit a lower expression level. this implication was verified by examining mrna levels using gene expression data in cd4+ t cells  <cit> . as shown in figure 5f, the mrna levels of tss-occupied genes  are lower than those of nucleosome-free tss genes . a similar result is observed using zhao et al.'s gene expression data in activated cd4+ t cells . the results indicate that curvature-dependent nucleosomes partly determine gene expression level.

subsequently, nucleosome positioning at mirna promoters was investigated. we predicted nucleosomes of mirna promoters with the curvature profile and kaplan et al.'s model  <cit> . surprisingly, both models give a unanimous result . the mean of the deviations is less than  <dig> bp. moreover, the tsss of mirna promoters were exactly located in nfrs, which is similar to protein-coding promoters. two well-positioned nucleosomes flank the nfr. the results suggest that nucleosome positioning is involved in the regulation of protein-coding genes and of mirna genes.

it has been reported that there is a low nucleosome level near a tfbs  <cit> . this feature of nucleosome organization was also observed in the curvature profile. in figure 7a, a trough of nucleosome level is observed near tfbss, suggesting open chromatin is indispensable to the binding of transcription factors. due to the low resolution of the curvature profile, the trough in the curvature profile is broader than that determined by the experimental data.

as tfbss are most frequently located in the nfrs of promoters, the nfr will correspond to the region with a high density of tfbss  in promoters  <cit> . this hypothesis was verified for both protein-coding promoters and independent mirna promoters, by examining the relationship between the curvature profile and the average binding score profile of  <dig> human transcription factors  in the promoters. eight protein-coding promoters and thirteen human independent mirna promoters were used . as expected, the trough of the curvature profile corresponds well to the high binding scores of tfs, and regions with high levels of positioning signal  have correspondingly low binding scores . the mutually antagonistic relationship is obvious in the region of - <dig> bp to  <dig> bp for protein-coding promoters , and - <dig> bp to  <dig> bp for independent mirna promoters . outside of these regions, the relationship broke down, indicating that the regions mentioned above are important for tf binding. despite the small number of genes used, the results indicate that a positioned nucleosome limits tf binding for both protein-coding promoters and mirna promoters. most importantly, it strongly suggests that the dna sequences affect transcription, not only by providing special binding sites, but also by influencing nucleosome positioning.

recent findings suggest that the mechanisms by which dna sequences affect nucleosome positioning is distinct in some species  <cit> ; and the choice of the periodical dinucleotides differs considerably from one organism to another  <cit> , indicating the difficulty in finding a universal positioning code. however, it was observed that some important characteristics  revealed by dna sequence-based models are coincident with those observed in vivo  <cit> . dna structure-related periodicity  is suggested in yeast, fly, worm, and human genomes  <cit> . these indicate that dna sequence is one of the contributors to nucleosome positioning. the detail of how dna sequence affects nucleosome positioning requires further investigation. one should be very carefully in using features derived from one organism to predict nucleosomes in other organisms. recent studies showed that in rsc-depleted cells, nucleosomes move toward predicted sites  <cit> . taken together, we speculate that dna sequences partly determine a default pattern of nucleosomes positions, on which nucleosome reorganization is based. thus, feature-based models can provide a view of nucleosome configuration determined by dna sequences, and assist in finding certain key sites  when an experimental dataset is absent.

genetic variation and nucleosome positioning
patterns of nucleosomes near snp sites were investigated . snp sites are grouped into four classes, single, insertion/deletion , insertion, and deletion. near the sites of indels, insertions, and deletions, the curvature profile shows a large trough , indicating such mutation events favor linker-dna. importantly, a similar result was also observed using the experimental data. although the trough near the single snp sites is not as low as that near the other types of snp , nucleosome depletion is obvious. in the genome of oryzias latipes, genetic variation downstream of a tss occurs with an ~200-bp periodicity, and the insertion/deletion of more than  <dig> bp frequently occurs in the linker-dna region  <cit> , which is consistent with our findings in humans. moreover, we found that nucleosomes are also depleted near snp sites in the dog genome .

the above results suggest a link between nucleosome positioning and genetic variation. nucleosome positioning has a protective role for splice sites  <cit> . our findings show the opposite effect on sites depleted of nucleosomes. the sites without the nucleosomes are prone to mutations. in fact, a well-positioned nucleosome is observed at the target sites of mirnas, protecting the key sites .

nucleosome positioning at target sites of mirna
assuming that the target sites of mirnas are protected, the accumulation of genetic variation in target sites should be at a low level. thus, we examined the distribution of snps in mirna target sites . in range of - <dig> bp to  <dig> bp from the target sites, the snp counts obviously decreases, indicating that the target sites are conserved in evolution. taking into consideration the nucleosome depletion near snp sites, it is thought that nucleosomes have a role in protecting target sites of mirna.

as indicated above, nucleosome positioning protects some key sites, while allowing other sites to remain open. this selective protection facilitates both genome conservation and evolution. the patterns were revealed by curvature-dependent computations . therefore, genome sequences partly encode nucleosomes, and the latter allow mutations to occur at some sites and protect other special sites. thus, nucleosome positioning has roles in genetic variation.

CONCLUSIONS
in this study, human nucleosome positions were predicted with a curvature-dependent model; the curvature profile. the results indicate that the importance of dna sequences in determining nucleosome positions, providing a default pattern. dna sequence partly encodes an nfr near a tss. in vivo, the tsss of some genes are occupied by nucleosomes, and changes to nucleosome positioning will affect the genes' expression levels. in promoters, nucleosomes are depleted near tfbss, and the distribution of tfbss corresponds well with the nfrs. moreover, a selective protection role of nucleosomes was revealed. snp sites are enriched in nfrs, and mirna target sites are associated with well-positioned nucleosomes. our results indicate the vital role of the dna sequence in encoding nucleosomes, and that the functions of nucleosome positioning are probably involved in further biological processes.

