BACKGROUND
symmetry breaking in nature is fundamental to life and to many biological processes, occurring over a range of scales from the asymmetry of molecules through to large complex organs and the organism as a whole. understanding how the asymmetry at a molecular level is mechanistically communicated through to the cellular, tissue and organ scales presents us with a formidable challenge.

studies of gastrulation in xenopus <cit>  show that development of complex tissues requires a series of well-choreographed cellular movements and shape changes to generate complex tissue shapes. one requirement for any general tissue shape change is the formation of a three dimensional coordinate system, the cartesian coordinate axes x,y and z, for example. in a sheet of cells, the first axis that forms is the z axis perpendicular to the sheet. this is associated with the appearance of apical-basal polarity. once this axis is established, cells may then arrange themselves within the tissue plane and in doing so create the possibility of defining orthogonal x and y axes in the tissue plane. the associated in-plane polarity is referred to as planar polarity or planar cell polarity .

the fundamental nature of planar cell polarity means that its malfunction can have a major impact on an organism’s development. to date, pcp has been implicated in the correct development of many tissues, including the neural tube  <cit> , lung  <cit> , kidney  <cit>  and it has also been implicated in cancer  <cit> . unfortunately, these tissues are difficult to observe in vivo and they also lack easily visible polarity markers from which to build conceptual models.

drosophila, and the drosophila wing in particular, are much more experimentally tractable than mammalian systems and serve as a powerful experimental system for investigating the relationship between the molecular machinery required for coordinating local and global polarity. the majority of investigations in the drosophila wing that aim to determine the mechanism of planar polarity have used genetic mosaic analysis, in which small groups of cells  that lack the activity of a particular gene are generated. clones of cells that lack activity of the proteins fz or vang produce interesting polarity patterns, known as domineering non-autonomy  <cit> , imposing a prescribed polarisation on cells adjacent to the clone boundary. examples of domineering non-autonomous patterns are shown in both the adult and pupal wing for fz clones  and vang clones  in figure  <dig>  this domineering patterning is in contrast to wildtype wings and mosaic clones of factors that act autonomously  <cit> , where the cells organise themselves with common polarisation.

interpretation of these studies has led to the identification of a “core” group of planar polarity proteins which have conserved functions in vertebrates  <cit> , and serve the primary function of coordinating polarity between neighbouring cells  <cit> . the most important of these are the transmembrane proteins frizzled , flamingo  and van gogh . these proteins couple to the apical-basal asymmetry by localising together in the adherens junction zones of cells. here they mediate cell-cell interactions to establish the local in-plane cellular symmetry. this “core” pathway is also known to be mediated by three cytoplasmic proteins: prickle , dishevelled  and diego. in addition to the core pathway, studies in the drosophila abdomen and larval epidermis indicate that in some contexts the cadherins fat  and dachsous  and the golgi-localised protein four-jointed  can act independently to establish planar polarity  <cit> .

as well as local coordination between cells, polarisation on a global scale requires coupling to a non-local signal. this signal or cue that orientates or re-orientates polarity could arise from a morphogen gradient, a gradient of expression or activity of the core pcp proteins  <cit> , or could be due to cellular movement  <cit> , for example. there are two theoretical possibilities for how this might take place. the first is that the core pcp machinery can function independently of a global signal, with the global signal providing a guiding role. this is the basis of models presented for the roles of gradients of fat  and dachsous   <cit> . the second possibility is that the global signal is intrinsic to core pcp protein function, acting to generate both local intercellular and long-range polarisation. this is the basis of models proposing a fz gradient in global signalling  <cit> . cellular movement could involve either or both possibilities  <cit> . in all cases, the precise molecular functions are still unclear, with alternative evidence to support different possibilities.

experiments involving clones are particularly important for investigating the precise molecular roles of proteins as they create an environment where the local and global coordination machinery are potentially in conflict. this leads to the domineering non-autonomous phenotypes, where the hair orientation is locally nearly perpendicular to the clone boundary but relaxes to the wildtype tissue orientation over several cell diameters. the relative importance of molecular or physical factors that determine the local and global behaviour is difficult to assess without placing these factors within a quantitative mathematical model.

mathematical modelling has played an increasingly important role in the validation of conceptual models of cell polarity  <cit> . common to all cell polarity models is the presence of feedback loops, which are required to generate the asymmetric localisation of proteins that specify polarisation within the plane. feedback within a system or a model can be created through the direct inhibition of reaction species or ligand binding, as is proposed in the case of vang inhibition of fz  <cit> . alternatively, feedback can also be created by a preferential activation of one intercellular complex over another  <cit>  and more specifically a preference of fz-fmi receptor binding over vang-fmi at a particular cell edge  <cit> .

the principle drawback of the modelling approaches that have so far been applied to pcp is that by attempting to capture all the relevant biological and physical interactions model clarity is often compromised. this includes the introduction of many un-measurable parameters all of which create problems in their validation and interpretation. in this paper, we aim to show that modelling can be applied intuitively to wing hair phenotypes and used to infer the molecular function of proteins using genetic studies.

more specifically, the aims of this paper are to i) formally describe a cellular measure of polarisation, ii) build a functional model of planar cell polarity based on the concept of a cellular polarisation, iii) validate and parameterise the model using genetic clones that lead to domineering non-autonomous phenotypes in drosophila wings, iv) carry out a systematic in-silico “knock-out” of the model parts and v) compare the experimentally observed hair polarity phenotypes with those generated in-silico to identify the molecular function of proteins.

to address these issues, we have built a functional model of planar polarity in which the detailed molecular interactions have been integrated into a polarity measure m at the cellular scale and m at the group scale. the model includes mathematical terms that account for the cell’s ability to maintain its own intracellular polarisation , interact with the polarity of adjoining cells  and interact with a global cue , see methods and figures  <dig>   <dig> for details. in this way, we can step back from the detail and ask more general questions from our model in relation to the observed polarity phenotypes at the tissue scale. our approach is based on the ginzburg-landau method used routinely to understanding ordering processes within condensed matter physics  <cit>  and is similar to those used in the study of mouse hair patterning  <cit>  and drosophila hair swirling  <cit> . our application of this physical or functional model is original in that we have clearly identified the biologically relevant components and used polarity patterns in the vicinity of genetic mosaics and “clones” to infer protein function.

we have chosen to model the local ordering properties in a flat monolayer of hexagonal cells, analogous to the situation found in the drosophila wing. this model system has the unique advantage that the polarity is easily observed in terms of wing hair initiation or final hair orientation. we also restrict our focus to polarity patterns observed in the vicinity of clones on genetic backgrounds of the “core” planar polarity proteins  and those from the “ft/ds system” . this comparison will be primarily carried out using published images of pre-hair initiation sites whose location will be our polarity indicator. we believe these have advantages over adult hair polarity patterns in that pre-hair patterns are subject to fewer downstream effects and are more easily defined within our approach. adult hair patterns are however included wherever possible. protein expression patterns have not been included as they are more difficult to observe and interpret due to the technical difficulty of simultaneously imaging multiple proteins using fluorescent markers.

RESULTS
parameterisation
in order to parameterise our model it is important to remind ourselves what key features we are looking to reproduce in our simulations. the archetypal examples for attractive clones are a loss of fz <cit>  and for repulsive clones a loss of vang <cit> , shown in figure 1a and c respectively for adult wings and repeated in pupal wings in figure 1b and d. the polarity adopts a near locally perpendicular orientation at the clone boundary, which re-orientates towards the global or far field orientation within several cell diameters. quantitative measurements of this re-orientation do not currently exist in the literature, which focuses more on qualitative features. however, we have attempted to measure the range of values for re-orientation towards the global direction from published images. for pupal wings we found the relaxation, in the direction perpendicular to the proximodistal axis, took place over 3- <dig> cells  <cit>  and for adult wings the relaxation was slightly longer, over 4- <dig> cells  <cit> . angular measurements were subject to a less than  <dig> degree error. this has been incorporated into the cell range.

fortunately, it is not necessary to find absolute parameter values for our model since equilibrium polarity patterns can be completely defined in terms of the ratios of parameters. therefore we carried out a systematic exploration of parameter ratios that yield polarity patterns consistent with the archetypal fz and vang clones. to ensure that the patterns were quantifiably similar to those observed we also measured the distance over which the orientation relaxes to the proximodistal direction and the distance over which the magnitude of polarity is close to wildtype. the resulting plots or phase diagrams can be found in additional file 1: figure s <dig> and additional file 2: figure s <dig>  these plots calculate explicitly the length scales for re-orientation and polarisation generation, though we have attempted to represent them in a format accessible to biologists. these scales correspond to relaxation lengths in physics, whose derivation are beyond the scope of this paper.

additional file 1: figure s <dig> indicates that in order for patterns to exhibit a relaxation in the range of 3- <dig> cells then the parameter kalign, maintaining polarity alignment between cells, must be greater than or equal to basym, controlling the free energy costs of departures from the intracellular cell polarisation masym, i.e. the tendency of fz and vang not to colocalise within the cell. an additional constraint in determining a relaxation range of 3- <dig> cells is that the magnitude of the free energy required to maintain an individual cell’s polarisation basym, is approximately ten times greater than that to couple the cell polarity to the global signal cmediator gcue. for the purposes of our simulations we then choose the first point where both constraints were achieved i.e. basym = kalign and basym=  <dig>  × cmediatorgcue, as indicated in additional file 1: figure s <dig>  these parameters have been used to generate the in-silico attractive clone as shown in figure 4a  and a repulsive clone as shown in figure 4b . additional file 2: figure s <dig> provides assurance that this choice of parameters also leads to cells acquiring a wildtype level of polarisation magnitude, though not necessarily wildtype direction.

systematic investigation of polarity phenotypes
for the three model terms, for an attractive clone there are  <dig> combinatorial possibilities for complete in-silico ‘functional knockout backgrounds’ of masym, kalign and cmediatorgcue including one all wildtype and one all knockout. the wildtype background has already been presented in figure  <dig> and the all knockout background is not interesting as there is no polarity anywhere. we did not vary basym as it is always non-zero due to the thermodynamic constraints discussed in methods, though it could become important when comparing experiments carried out at different temperatures.

we therefore present both single and double in-silico background knockout possibilities and for attractive  clones only. the repulsive  clones create the corresponding reversed polarity patterns and can be directly inferred by reversing the arrows of the attractive clones. restricting ourselves to these two generic clones, and their associated patterns in the wildtype, is fundamental to our approach. it allows us to clearly infer functional roles induced by changing genetic backgrounds, assuming the clone boundary conditions remain unchanged.

intrinsic polarity generation absent 
the first single in-silico background knockout corresponds to each cell being no longer able to generate a naturally polarised state. physically, this might be due to the polarity system being no longer able to self-organise proximal and distal proteins asymmetrically within the cell without an external influence. figure 5a shows the in-silico polarity phenotype for an attractive  clone on a background of cells where masym=  <dig>  the clone is seen to induce some polarisation on cells in the direct vicinity of the clone, though the effect is short ranged. the global signal in this case is insufficient to generate measurable polarisation away from the clone. the polarity vectors extend a shorter distance in the proximal direction, which is due to the opposition of the global signal. this leads to a reduction in polarity on the distal side of the clone, close to the clone boundary.

the only comparable experimental observation that is similar to this phenotype is the pre-hair polarity pattern seen with a fz overexpressing clone in a dsh <dig> background  <cit> , see additional file 3: figure s3a. note that the arrows need to be reversed in figure 5a so that it can be compared to the overexpressing fz clone, which is repulsive in character. if we take this clone to be vang-like, then the implication from our model is that dsh is required for generating intrinsic polarity . if observed, adult patterns would most likely resemble figure 5a close to the clone, though it is not possible to predict the pattern further out.

polarity transmission absent 
the second single in-silico background knockout corresponds to an absence of polarity transmission between the cells. a cell can still generate polarisation and align to a global signal. however, cells are not able to physically transmit their polarity to their neighbours. figure 5b shows the resulting polarity pattern. it is fully polarised and aligned with the global field. however, the polarity is not influenced by the clone, appearing completely autonomous in character.

we found no matching pupal patterns in the literature, though similar observations have been found in the adult i.e. fz clones in fmi- <cit> , see additional file 3: figure s3b, and dsh- backgrounds  <cit> . the implication from adult wings is that fmi and dsh are required only to transmit cell polarity between cells . this is a different inferred role for dsh as compared to that in the pupal wing, which indicated it to be related to intrinsic cell polarisation.

global polarity cue absent 
the third single in-silico background knockout corresponds to either an absence of a global cue gcue or of a mediator cmediator that couples the cue to the local cell polarity. polarisation can still be generated within a cell and cell-cell interactions are still able to convey polarity to neighbouring cells. figure 5c shows the resulting polarity pattern. it is fully polarised, but complex in its appearance. close to the clone, the pattern is radial in character as it is determined by the clone boundary shape, similar to that observed when intrinsic polarity is absent . however, far from the clone there is near wildtype magnitude but nothing to influence the direction. this leads to a characteristic swirling patterns together with an interesting circular spiral  known in physics as a vortex singularity  <cit> . traversing a path around the singularity would be represented by the angle θ changing through plus or minus 2π, dependent on the sign of vorticity.

similar experimental observations are often described as having enhanced domineering non-autonomy. this enhancement is observed with fz clones in backgrounds lacking the activity of ds for both pre-hair patterns  <cit>  and in the adult  <cit> . it is also seen with pre-hairs for fz+ clones  in backgrounds lacking the activity of pkpk-sple <cit> , see additional file 3: figure s3c, or ft <cit>  and in adult hair backgrounds lacking the activity of pkpk <cit> . the implication from our model would be that both pre-hair and adult patterns indicate that ds, ft and pk are required as part of the global signal or at least required to mediate it .

we now go on to consider more complex knockout situations.

intrinsic polarity generation and transmission absent 
this double in-silico background knockout corresponds to the absence of molecular components that are necessary for establishing cellular polarisation and also those transmitting cell polarity to neighbouring cells. in figure 5a we observed that the clone was able to transmit polarity to adjacent cells even in the absence of intrinsic polarity . however in this case kalign=  <dig> as well, which additionally removes influence by neighbouring cells, including cells in contact with the clone boundary. this means that the polarity can only be generated by an external signal. figure 6a shows the resulting polarity pattern, which has negligible polarity everywhere, due to the external cue being insufficient to solely generate significant degree of polarisation.

similar experimental patterns are observed in pupal wings with fz clones in a vang- background and the reverse vang clone in a fz- background  <cit> , see additional file 3: figure s3d. adult wings  <cit>  for the same clone-background combinations look autonomous at short range  and swirl at longer ranges . no adult wings have been seen that resemble figure 6a, most likely due to the inappropriate nature of our polarity indicators for adult hairs. the implication from our model would be that fz and vang are required for both the intrinsic generation and transmission of cell polarity using the pupal indicator and that they are required for transmitting polarity transmission and the global cue using an adult indicator.

intrinsic polarity generation and global cue absent 
this double in-silico background knockout corresponds to the absence of molecular components that are necessary for generating cellular polarisation and also those required for responding to a global cue. naturally stable polarised cells are no longer possible, nor can they be influenced by global signals. figure 6b shows the resulting polarity pattern. we observed some polarity, though it was only present close to the clone and transmitted equally in all directions. this pattern is similar to that observed in the single masym knockout, figure 5a, though in that case the polarity was not equally transmitted along the proximal-distal axis.

the only comparable experimental observation that may match this phenotype is the polarity patterns observed in the pupal wing with a fz+ clone  in a dsh- background  <cit> , see additional file 3: figure s3a, which led us to assign an intrinsic polarity generation role to dsh. therefore the implication from our model remains that dsh is required for generating intrinsic polarity and that there exists a possibility that it may play a dual role in mediating the global cue .

polarity transmission and global cue absent 
this double in-silico background knockout corresponds to the absence of molecular components that are necessary for polarity transmission and also those required for responding to the global cue. figure 6c shows the resulting polarity pattern. the polarity is well developed in each cell, but it is randomly orientated.

interestingly, this pattern is not observed in any pre-hair or adult hair experiments.

therefore the implication from our model is that no single protein included within our study has this dual role or that there may be redundancy present.

the relationship between these results and the phenotype descriptions is summarised in table  <dig>  additional information relating to quantitative single and group order parameters, as described in methods: indicators of polarity can be found in supplementary additional file 4: table s <dig> 

model function is either assumed to be wild type , knocked out as supported by adult hair  or pre-hair initiation  observations. domineering non-autonomous is abbreviated to dna.

polarity generation
our simulations show that polarity is absent, except maybe close to a clone boundary, in all simulations that contained single or double mutant combinations involving masym = <dig>  therefore, we can eliminate any protein from a polarity generation role if we observe finite polarity away from a fz or vang clone.

we noted that polarity is observed in the pupal wing with pkpk-sple, ft and ds backgrounds  <cit> . the implication from our model would be that pk, ft and ds proteins are at most weakly required for polarity generation, but not necessarily to determine polarity direction.

by contrast, we can assign polarity generation to any mutant combination in which pre-hairs emerge from the cell centre. this is clearly observed in fz and dsh backgrounds  <cit> .

we are unable to repeat this process for adult wings as we cannot determine the magnitude of single cell polarisation.

logical inferences from the model 
the final modification that can be made to our model is the application of the boundary condition at the clone boundary. clones that lack a protein activity and appear like the classic fz  pattern can be placed within the proximal group, while those that appear like the classic vang  patterns can be placed into a distal group.

experiments for both pupal and adult wings which exhibit attractive  patterns include wildtype wings containing clones of only fz <cit> . experiments which exhibit repulsive  patterns include wildtype wings containing clones of vang  <cit>  and fj <cit> . ds <cit>  clones also look attractive  <cit>  and ft repulsive  <cit> , however, they are weaker than their respective fz and vang patterns.

the logical interpretation from our model is that the intrinsic proximal polarity group requires vang and fj and the distal group fz. the weaker response seen in ds and ft clones indicates that they either weakly modify intrinsic polarity or locally reverse the global cue, as suggested for fj <cit> .

the functional protein roles predicted by our model together with logical inferences are summarised in figure  <dig> 

discussion
mathematical modelling has long played a key role in developmental biology  <cit> . models allow us to formalise our understanding of a given system and validate that formalisation by testing whether our knowledge is consistent with the modelling framework. further, as increasingly large amounts of biological data accumulate, they allow us to manage our understanding to gain an overview of a system that may be too complex to hold in a head or lab notebook. modelling approaches should allow experimental scientists to design improved experiments and approaches which will lead to a better understanding of the system under study. in this paper we describe the application of a simple modelling framework to a particular experimental system - the introduction of mutant clones into the developing drosophila wing to analyse the genetic underpinnings of planar cell polarity. in doing this we organise and codify existing knowledge and, by showing that the results of our model are broadly consistent with the consensus view of the molecular functioning of the system, show that our modelling  framework is appropriate for understanding the processes occurring during the development of pcp, at least at a high level. however our analysis also identifies potential novel roles for two proteins, pk and dsh, which we suggest may be mediators of the global cue. by making predictions of the results of defects in underlying processes we show that the experimental approach we model does not always allow unambiguous identification of the functions of genes, as different combinations of defects can give rise to similar patterns of hair polarisation. this should act as a driver for the development of new experimental approaches, and we have outlined below some quantitative measures that could improve understanding of the processes involved in pcp. a further advantage of the approach we have taken is that the theoretical patterns we predict for different combinations of defect may be used as direct indicators of the roles of mutated genes in the pcp process. this is not true for other kinds of models which model the detailed molecular interactions involved in pcp  <cit>  and would need to be modified to characterise the roles of new components.

identification of molecular function
we generated six in-silico polarity patterns under different model conditions and compared them to drosophila pre-hair and adult polarity patterns under different genetic conditions. systematically knocking out model components has allowed us to annotate functional roles for proteins as defined by our model. we found that the “core” transmembrane proteins fz and vang are predicted to be required for simultaneously generating and transmitting polarity. this is almost certainly the case with fmi, however, without pupal wings lacking the activity of fmi-containing fz or vang clones we could not confidently attribute such a role. these results are consistent with current consensus  <cit> .

ds and ft were likely to be related to the global cue, though our model was unable to distinguish between a cue and/or mediation role. however, it looks increasingly likely that ds and ft are mediators with other experimental evidence arguing against a gradient role for ft and ds in the wing   <cit> . weakly domineering non-autonomous patterns are observed with clones lacking the activity of ds <cit>  and ft <cit> . this weak non-autonomy may at first glance appear to indicate a dual role in both “core” and “signal” roles. however, we do not think that this is the case for the following reason. a clone lacking a global signalling component would exhibit a step change in global signal strength . such a difference could be sufficient to influence the polarity at the clone boundary, giving a potential “core” like phenotype, though we have not confirmed this using our model.

a novel feature of this analysis is that we predicted more complicated roles for the “core” cytoplasmic proteins pk and dsh than their current consensus role of generating intrinsic polarity. we found that pk patterns compared more closely to our simulated cue knockout patterns than those involved in polarity generation. this may indicate the need for pk’s role to be broadened and there is some recent evidence linking different isoforms of pk to global patterning that support this  <cit> . we are less confident in our prediction for dsh. this is due to the experimentally observed dsh patterns looking similar to both our simulated single intrinsic polarity knockout , a role in agreement with current consensus  <cit> , and our simulated dual intrinsic and cue knockout pattern , indicating a new more complicated role for dsh. currently, we do not believe there are sufficient experimental observations to exclude an additional role for dsh in mediating the global cue and that this novel role should be tested experimentally. a possible approach to more easily distinguish between these roles would be by generating long clones orientated along the anterior-posterior axis.

randomly orientated polarity is expected when a protein has the dual role as a global cue or mediator  and polarity transmission . however, random orientation is not experimentally observed in our selected protein group or in any other genetic combinations within the literature. one possible explanation for this is that proteins involved in polarity transmission  are always intrinsically related to polarity generation . this is consistent with the generation and transmission roles for fz, vang and most probably fmi.

we focussed our attention to the polarity around clones. by doing so, we ensured that all terms in our model competed more or less equally together. despite this, some of the polarity patterns we generated looked very similar to each other and were difficult to match to experimentally observed phenotypes, of which few were isolated and clear for comparison. this difficulty in making qualitative comparisons between experimental and modelling results presents challenges in functional annotation. we believe this would be best addressed by experimental approaches that provide quantitative polarity measurements such as those suggested in methods  and relate to our simulations in additional file 4: table s <dig>  of equal importance is focussed experimental design to create complex clone geometries where possible. doing this would significantly aid an understanding of these spatially anisotropic processes. away from the clones or in backgrounds absent of proteins, the three terms in our model do not necessarily compete equally and there could be different inferred functions, which we have not considered. this might even include areas of the wing where there is a reversal of polarity  <cit> . we could easily account for such a reversal in the model by allowing the mediator within the cue term to be spatially dependent in its sign.

our model classified ds and ft as potential global signal mediators within the classic fz and vang pathway, and as fj acts biochemically by modifying ft and ds binding  <cit> , the non-autonomous phenotypes exhibited by fj clones are also likely to be mediated by effects on the global signal. nevertheless, fj, ft and ds also seem to be involved in the local coordination of polarity  <cit>  and this could also contribute to their domineering non-autonomous phenotypes. such a role of ft and ds in a parallel intersecting pathway to the fz/vang pathway is feasible, but cannot be directly tested in our current model. interestingly, there is good evidence for such a parallel function in the drosophila abdomen  <cit> .

pre-hair functional roles compared closely to the roles identified by our model for the adult hairs. this was near perfect when cellular polarisation was well established, though there were discrepancies when cellular polarisation was absent, in which case adult roles were assigned to polarity transmission and the global signal. the most likely explanation for the discrepancy is that our approach, in its current form, is not optimised for adult patterns. this is primarily because we are forced to assume only finite intrinsic single cell polarity for adult hairs. magnitude information is more easily extracted from pre-hair patterns, which was our reason for focussing our attention to these phenotypes. another explanation may be that the final adult polarity is guided, not by the fz-vang system, but by another mechanism or parallel polarity systems discussed earlier.

modelling
we based our deterministic model upon a single cell polarity measure, similar to  <cit> . this type of model is ideal for describing pre-hair initiation and adult hair orientation as it can often generate clear and reproducible phenotypic patterns. it does however, implicitly average stochastic effects within and between cells. we believe this to be a reasonable assumption as when others have included stochastic effects explicitly  <cit>  they have yielded similar results to deterministic approaches. in contrast to these other models, our model explicitly identifies functional terms that are fundamental for coordinating long-range polarity. this is a powerful approach in that it does not pre-determine the role of any molecular component within the model whilst still providing a framework for molecular components to be assigned functional roles based on the observed polarity. such an approach is also in contrast to models where the molecular interactions have been pre-assigned  <cit> .

in order to parameterise our model, we compared the in-silico polarity patterns to those created by fz and vang clones. we carried out this comparison in a qualitative manner paying attention to polarity in both a single cell and groups of cells. we found the parameter kalign to be at least the same magnitude as basym. this means that on the cellular scale the overall strength of molecular interactions that act to align polarisation intercellularly are of a similar magnitude as those that act to separate proximal and distal proteins intracellularly. this similarity in strength may suggest that they have molecular components in common. while the equality is not necessarily a proof of common mechanism, it is consistent with the genetic evidence that fz, vang and fmi are involved in both generating and transmitting polarity.

an additional constraint was that on a cellular scale the magnitude of the free energy required to maintain an individual cell’s polarisation basym is an order of magnitude greater than that needed to couple the cell polarity to a global cue, cmediatorgcue. this makes biological sense in that it would be difficult to maintain global cues as strong as those that could be generated across a single cell. finally, the magnitudes of the ratios of parameters were also not tightly constrained. consequently the system should be robust with respect to a degree of biological noise which might be expected to vary over the spatial scale of the wing.

our approach does have limitations. we chose to base our model and study on a relatively coarse polarity indicator i.e. the pre-hair initiation site rather than more detailed measures of protein distributions, which may provide a more precise indicator of polarity. we have also assumed a regular hexagonal grid and perfect exchange of polarity information. this is certainly not always the case  <cit> , with some geometries likely to require a stronger global cue to counter the effects of irregular cell packing. how the cells sense polarity has also not been addressed here. we are using the model only to infer a molecule’s broad function and not the specific details of any particular interaction. we only compared the final equilibrium polarisation state and not the dynamical aspect of establishment of polarisation which is clearly important  <cit> . this was in part due to the absence of dynamical data required to identify the relevant time scales and processes for incorporation within the model. we have not explicitly considered partial levels of protein expression, though they are implicitly included through the ratios of parameters. the resulting behaviour is captured in summary form using additional file 1: figure s <dig> and additional file 2: figure s <dig>  though the individual patterns are not shown.

we have presented only simulations of clones with regular shapes in this manuscript. we would expect, and preliminary data predict, that at large distances from the clone that shape makes practically no difference to patterns of polarity. however, at a closer distances the polarity may be significantly affected i.e. orientation and reduction in magnitude can be affected if the polarity field meets with a large clone wall perpendicular to the local polarity orientation. when meeting a wall at low angle the polarity should be maintained and the angle perturbed only slightly.

we presupposed the polarity on the clone boundary to remain unchanged from fz and vang in wildtype for each mutant genetic background under study. this is equivalent to assuming that fz and vang proteins are fundamental to polarity exchange between cells, currently the consensus.

this relatively simple model has enabled us to identify the majority of pcp protein functions using only  <dig> in-silico hair polarity patterns. this low number easily allows experimental researchers to formally assign high-level protein functions using experimental observations. other more complicated models may include more specialised functions, but validation would be more difficult due to the number of genetic experiments that would be required. interestingly, some of our results suggested that the model could be simplified further by combining the intrinsic polarity and transmission terms together. this would simplify the equation and implicitly link feedback loops to intrinsic polarisation involving adjoining cells. however, if we are to represent the feedback loops more directly it would require model development using more molecular-based approaches as has been considered elsewhere  <cit> .

we did not make any assumptions about the nature of a global cue within our model, though we did identify molecular components that we believe to be related to it . these components have been linked to a competing polarity system  which may define the global cue. other proposed mechanisms include hinge contraction and cell flow  <cit> . each mechanism would generate a stress field within the wing that could be accounted for by our cue term . an attractive alternative is that it is the interaction between cells that induces cell flow, tissue elongation and polarity along the proximal-distal axis. such a molecular interaction-induced flow is shown to occur in self organising liquid crystal phases  <cit> . cell flow that is induced by cell-cell interactions is still likely to require an external morphogen cue or an anisotropic stress field to align polarity along the p-d axis. therefore morphogen signals may still be essential for generating polarity on a global scale and also compatible with both stress and flow field theories.

CONCLUSIONS
we built a functional model of cellular polarisation and used it to identify the role of proteins involved in generating cell polarity in the drosophila wing. this model incorporates mathematical terms required for the asymmetric separation of proteins, the coupling of polarisation between cells and the coupling to a global cue, which we have validated against fz and vang clone wing hair phenotypes.

using in-silico knockdowns of combinations of each of the three model components, we have been able to systematically simulate polarity phenotypes which we compared to experimental clones’ patterns to predict protein function.

in agreement with the current consensus we predicted that fz, vang and dsh are required for generating intrinsic cell polarity and that fz and vang are additionally required for transmitting cell polarity between cells. ds and ft were predicted to be related to the global cue, though we were unable to identify whether their precise role was that of a cue or a mediator to it.

novel predictions from our model and approach are that the protein pk and possibly dsh are mediators of the global cue. this opens up the possibility that they could be involved in determining polarisation on a global scale.

given the success of our approach we believe that it could be straightforwardly applied to investigate protein function in the eye and abdomen by matching the results of novel gene modification experiments to likely underlying mechanisms, and can therefore serve as a useful tool for future experimental analysis. the model can be extended to incorporate cell flow and anisotropically induced stress fields.

