BACKGROUND
hfq is an rna binding protein initially identified as a host factor required for the replication of the phage qβ rna  <cit> . it was then demonstrated to belong to the sm-like protein family involved in many rna processing events in eukaryotes  <cit> . the hfq-encoding gene is widely conserved in bacteria and found in many sequenced bacterial genomes  <cit> . hfq is a highly abundant protein considered to act as a global regulator of gene expression  <cit> . it has recently received much attention because of its crucial role in diverse cellular processes controlled by small non-coding rnas , where hfq facilitates pairing of ncrnas with their target mrnas  <cit> . this explains, at least partly, why inactivation of the hfq gene causes pleiotropic phenotypes  <cit> . some of changes in the gene expression pattern are related to reduced translation efficiency of the rpos mrna, encoding the major stress sigma factor σs  <cit> , others to the induction of the σe-mediated envelope stress response  <cit>  and the deficiency of the σh-mediated cytoplasmic stress response  <cit> .

in addition, hfq may affect some processes through its direct interaction with rnas, e.g. with qβ phage rna during replication  <cit>  or with its own mrna where it acts as a translational autorepressor  <cit> . hfq interactions with trnas  <cit>  and trna precursors  <cit>  have also been reported.

hfq function in the cell may also be mediated by protein-protein contacts. hfq has been reported to interact with numerous proteins including ribosomal proteins, rnases, helicases, rho-factor, rna polymerase , protein h-ns and polypolymerase   <cit> . related to the last observation, we have also shown that hfq stimulates pap i mediated synthesis of poly tails by promoting the processivity of the enzyme and by protecting the poly tails from exoribonucleolytic degradation  <cit> . finally, hfq has also been identified as a dna binding protein that preferentially binds curved dna and affects negative supercoiling  <cit> . however, in a cell, the majority of hfq is located in the cytoplasm, presumably in association with the translation machinery, and only a minor fraction is associated with the nucleoid  <cit> .

in the present work, our initial goal was to investigate the role of hfq in the maturation and degradation of the rpso mrna of e. coli in vivo. the degradation pathway of the rpso transcript, coding for ribosomal protein s <dig>  is one of the best understood decay-pathways in e. coli. the genes encoding ribosomal protein s <dig>  and polynucleotide phosphorylase  occupy adjacent positions and are oriented in the same direction on the e. coli chromosome. the two genes have their own promoters, p <dig> and p <dig> respectively, and can be expressed as monocistronic transcripts or as an rpso-pnp dicistronic transcript. in this latter case, an endonucleolytic cleavage by rnase iii produces a p1-riii rpso mrna slightly longer than the p1-t <dig> rpso monocistronic transcript  <cit> . the initial step in the degradation of the rpso mrna is an rnase e cleavage that generates rna molecules lacking the rho-independent terminator, which are then rapidly degraded by the 3' to 5' exonucleases pnpase and rnase ii  <cit> . the rpso mrna is stabilized by efficient translation because terminating ribosomes occlude the site for the rate-limiting rnase e cleavage located  <dig> nucleotides downstream of the translation termination codon  <cit> . since ribosomal protein s <dig> autoregulates its synthesis at the posttranscriptional level by repressing its own translation  <cit>  and thereby decreasing the number of ribosomes translating the rpso mrna, it has been proposed that the coupling of the mrna stability to translation allows the cell to adapt the amount of the rpso mrna to the need for ribosomal protein s <dig>  besides the rnase e-mediated pathway, exonucleolytic poly-dependent degradation also plays a significant role, which becomes predominant when rnase e is inactivated  <cit> . although the regulation of the rpso gene expression was studied primarily at the posttranscriptional level, its transcription is most likely also modulated. however, while transcriptional start points have been identified precisely  <cit> , transcriptional control remains largely unexplored.

experiments were initiated to examine whether hfq interferes with the rpso mrna decay mediated by rnase e or polyadenylation in vivo, as was previously shown in vitro  <cit> . unexpectedly, we found that hfq deficiency induces a decrease in rpso mrna abundance concomitant to an increase in its stability. we present here a set of data suggesting that in the case of rpso and some other cases, modulation of gene expression observed upon hfq deficiency may result from changes in transcriptional yield.

RESULTS
inactivation of hfq reduces the level of the rpso mrna
to determine whether hfq affects the abundance and the decay-rate of the rpso mrna in vivo, we determined the stability of the corresponding transcripts in a set of isogenic wt , hfq- and hfq overproducing strains containing ptx <dig>  <cit> , a pgem <dig> derivative expressing the hfq gene from its own promoter. the decay-rate of the rpso mrna was measured after inhibition of transcription by rifampicin. the more abundant mrna species detected on northern blots are the  <dig> nucleotide monocistronic transcript  and the  <dig> nucleotide rnase iii-processed rpso-pnp mrna . fig.  <dig> shows that amounts of both rpso transcripts are more abundant in the hfq+ strain than in the hfq- mutant. there is in fact  <dig> times more p1-t <dig> mrna in the wild type strain than in the hfq mutant, and  <dig>  times more in hfq+/ptx <dig> overproducing cells than in the wild type bacteria transformed with the empty vector . surprisingly, this drop in intracellular concentration is associated with stabilization expected to cause an accumulation of the rpso transcript. indeed the half-life of the rpso mrna is significantly longer in the hfq mutant  than in the wild type strain , thus confirming that hfq can activate rna decay  <cit> . the fact that no difference in stability was observed when hfq was overproduced  relative to the control strain , suggests that the hfq level in the wt strain is sufficient to exert a maximum destabilizing effect on the rpso mrna decay . the data above clearly indicate that the drop in rpso mrna levels associated with hfq deficiency does not result from its destabilization. on the contrary, we observed an increase in the rpso mrna stability, which should, in theory, result in its accumulation. it means that the drop in the rpso mrna level is, in fact, partially compensated by its stabilization.

 half-lives of transcripts were measured in strains n <dig>  and ibpc <dig> , transformed, when indicated, with pgem <dig> empty vector, its derivative ptx <dig> expressing the hfq gene, or with plasmid pΔs15aug bearing the constitutively expressed truncated rpso gene.

 the rpso and the rpsoΔ transcripts originated from the chromosome and the pΔs15aug plasmid, respectively.

hfq interferes with the poly dependent degradation of the rpso mrna in vivo
previous investigations suggested that hfq could affect rpso mrna stability by modulating both the poly-dependent and the rnase e-mediated degradation pathways. besides its stimulating effect on the synthesis of poly tails, hfq was shown to protect poly tails from exoribonucleolytic degradation in vitro and to affect the length and the frequency of oligo tails in vivo  <cit> . moreover, hfq was found to protect the rpso mrna from rnase e cleavage in vitro  <cit> . to evaluate the role of hfq in the poly- and the rnase e-dependent degradation pathways in vivo, we compared the stability of the rpso transcript in hfq+ and hfq-deficient strains when either of these pathways was inactivated. for this purpose, we used the pcnb null-mutation to fully inactivate poly polymerase and the rne <dig> allele allowing inactivation of thermosensitive rnase e at the non permissive temperature.

fig. 2a shows that hfq has no significant impact on the decay-rate of the p1-t <dig> rpso transcript in pcnb cells. half lives are  <dig>  +/-  <dig>  min in hfq+ and  <dig>  +/-  <dig>  min in hfq- in the first phase of the decay  and, in contrast to what happens in pcnb+ cells, that rpso mrna seems to be slightly more stable in the hfq- strain  <dig> min after rifampicin addition. moreover, the drop in the rpso mrna concentration resulting from hfq inactivation is less marked in the absence of pap i .

these data suggest that hfq does not significantly affect the rnase e dependent degradation pathway, which accounts for rna decay in the pcnb null-mutant  <cit> . moreover, if extended to other strains, this conclusion implies that the stabilization that occurs in hfq- cells may not result from the impairment of the rnase e-mediated pathway. it is therefore likely, that changes of rpso mrna stability and concentration described above require active pap i; a prediction which prompted us to verify how hfq affects the decay-rate of the rpso transcript when thermosensitive rnase e was inactivated.

we have ascertained that polyadenylation contributes to degradation of the rpso mrna in the absence of rnase e. as expected, the rpso p1-t <dig> transcript was significantly stabilized when thermosensitive rnase e was inactivated  <cit> . moreover, hfq had a strong effect on the rpso mrna abundance. while the stability of the p1-t <dig> transcript rose from  <dig>  +/-  <dig>  min. to  <dig>  +/-  <dig>  min. the steady-state amount of the transcript was reduced  <dig>  times in the absence of hfq . these data reinforce the hypothesis above that hfq deficiency has a stabilizing effect on the rpso mrna, which in theory should cause an accumulation of rna. however, this stabilization is completely masked by a drop in mrna concentration whose origin is independent of rna stability. moreover, they also confirm that the extent of the impact of hfq on rna stabilization and concentration depends on the presence of pap i in the cell. it is worth noting again, that this effect is also observed in wild type strains where the degradation of the rpso mrna is mostly carried out by rnase e. it must be recalled here, that the rnase e and pap i dependent pathways are somehow related and can substitute for one another  <cit> .

hfq does not affect translation and autoregulation of the rpso mrna
since mrnas are generally protected by translating ribosome, we reasoned that the stabilization of the rpso transcript in the hfq deficient strains may result from an increase in translation efficiency. one could imagine that the autoregulation loop which adjusts rpso translation efficiency to the need for s <dig>  may convert the drop in mrna resulting from hfq deficiency into a stimulation of translation aiming to compensate for the poor levels of s <dig> synthesis. alternatively, hfq-mrna interactions could directly affect translation or the autogeneous repression by s <dig> 

these hypotheses led us to look at the behaviour of the constitutively translated rpso transcript, which does not bear the operator recognizable by s <dig> and hence whose translation is independent of the s <dig> yield. this was achieved by using a plasmid-borne rpso gene in which the first  <dig> nucleotides of the coding region were deleted, seven of these nucleotides being involved in the formation of the translational operator. this plasmid, referred to as pΔs15aug, encodes a truncated s <dig> polypeptide unable to participate in the 30s assembly and to repress translation of the wild-type rpso message  <cit> . the stabilities of mrnas originating from the chromosome  and from the plasmid  were determined in hfq+ and hfq <dig> backgrounds. as was shown previously in wild-type cells the constitutively translated rpsoΔ transcript was more stable than the native rpso mrna due to higher translation levels  <cit> . the greater stability of the rpsoΔ transcript was also observed in the hfq mutant . moreover, just as in the case of the wild-type rpso mrna transcript originating from the chromosome, hfq inactivation caused both a drop in the rpsoΔ mrna level and an increase in its stability . these data indicate that the consequences of hfqdeficiency on mrna level and stability do not rely on the autoregulation of s <dig> synthesis. indeed, the observed stabilization of the unregulated rpsoΔ mrna in the hfq mutant rules out the possibility that a drop in a functional rpso mrna concentration provokes increased translation efficiency through the autoregulation loop, resulting in stabilization of mrna.

whether hfq affects the autoregulation of the genuine rpso mrna bearing an intact rpso operator recognizable by s <dig> was directly examined by using a specially generated strain in which the rpso promoter and the whole translation initiation region  governed synthesis of the chimeric ß-galactosidase from the chromosomal lacz gene. the hfq+ and hfq- isogenic variants of this strain were obtained by p <dig> transduction, and then each of them was transformed by a plasmid, ps <dig>  expressing the rpso gene from its own promoter and thereby serving as a source of additional s <dig> in a cell, or by a parent vector pacyc <dig> as a control. the β-galactosidase assay showed that neither the expression of the translationally active gene fusion  nor that of the translationally repressed fusion  were modified by the hfq mutation . indeed, the impact of s <dig> protein expression in trans on the rpso-lacz fusion was similar in both hfq+ and hfq deficient strains  . thus, hfq does not seem to be involved in the autogeneous control of s <dig> synthesis.

as one can notice , the reduction of the rpso mrna level in the hfq- strain is more pronounced in strains with empty vector  than for the ps <dig> bearing strains  indicating that the gene dose plays a role in this effect. as expected, the drop in the rpso mrna abundance was complemented by the plasmid ptx <dig> , a pacyc 184-derivative expressing the wild-type hfq gene from its own promoter.

it is important to note that the changes in abundance and stability of the rpso transcripts do not depend on the nature of the inactivating mutation. we found that inactivation of the hfq gene by insertion of a Ω-cassette  or by in-frame deletion  had similar impacts. in contrast, the v43r substitution, which only partially impairs hfq function  <cit>  did not significantly affect the amount of the rpso mrna in the cell, indicating that complete hfq deficiency is required for the reduction .

hfq selectively affects abundance of several transcripts
in order to determine whether the effect of hfq deficiency on the rpso mrna could be also observed for other transcripts, we probed total rna isolated from cells containing wt and mutant hfq alleles for rpst, rpsb and lpp mrnas and for the leu <dig> and mety <dig> trnas. while it has been reported that hfq binds the rpso mrna  <cit>  and trnas  <cit> in vitro, the other three transcripts were not examined. however, the fact that mrnas from many ribosomal protein operons co-immunoprecipitate with hfq  <cit>  argues in favor of such a possibility for rpsb and rpst. the northern blots revealed that hfq inactivation did not modify lpp mrna or trna abundance . in contrast, the two rpst mrna species were less abundant in the hfq mutant, the stronger effect being observed for the p2-t <dig> rpst transcripts initiated at promoter p <dig>  just as in the case of rpso, the decreased level of rpst transcripts was accompanied by a significant increase in their stability .

transcripts of the rpsb-tsf operon also behave like the rpso transcripts in response to hfq deficiency. the rpsb and rpsb-tsf mrnas are transcribed from a single rpsb promoter  <cit> . the monocistronic rpsb transcripts terminate at the attenuator structure in front of tsf, while about one third of the total transcripts read through the attenuator, generating the bicistronic rpsb-tsf mrna. the levels of both transcripts were significantly decreased by hfq deficiency . moreover, like in the case of the rpso-lacz transcript, the abundance of the chimeric rpsb-lacz mrna  was also lower in the absence of hfq in a cell . because the rpsb-lacz construction used in these experiments bears a small deletion in the rpsb tir, which abolishes autogeneous regulation by s <dig> in trans  <cit> , this effect is not related to changes in translation control.

interestingly, the rpsb-lacz fusions produced similar level of β-galactosidase activity in hfq+ and hfqΔ isogenic strains . the same was observed for the rpso-lacz fusion , where the ß-galactosidase activities in hfq+ and hfq- strains were similar. this means that despite the reduced levels of both mrnas  in hfq- mutant, the relative levels of the corresponding proteins remain about the same, indicating that the reduction in mrna concentration may be compensated by an increase of translation efficiency or by other compensatory mechanisms. the reduced levels of many transcripts for important cellular proteins  were observed in a genome-wide transcriptome analysis of a hfq mutant by guisbert et al.  <cit> . the drop in levels of the transcripts encoding ribosomal proteins may slow down ribosome synthesis, thereby being responsible  for the known growth defects of the hfq mutants. in turn, the slower rate of ribosome synthesis should slow down the synthesis of other cellular proteins, so that finally the overall proteome of essential proteins is kept in balance. thus, as revealed by western-blotting , the relative amounts of the ß-galactosidase produced from the rpso-lacz fusion gene and polynucleotide phosphorylase  remain about the same in hfq+ and hfq- strains despite a large reduction in the rpso-lacz transcript level caused by hfq deficiency.

transcription of the pnp gene from its own promoter is not sensitive to hfq deletion
since the above data suggest that changes in mrna steady-state levels cannot be caused by modifications of mrna stability or translation efficiency, we suspected that the lack of hfq might exert a direct negative impact on transcription yield. previous data have shown that hfq may act as a dna binding protein  <cit>  that is able to change superhelicity of plasmid dna  <cit> . thus the changes in transcription yield observed in the absence of hfq could be the consequence of modified dna topology. if this is the case, the loss of hfq should change the levels of the pnp mrna, whose transcription from its own p <dig> promoter was reported to depend on dna supercoiling  <cit> . the relative abundance of the pnp transcripts was deduced from the amounts of cdna generated by primer extension. since the pnp mrna is strongly destabilized by a rnase iii cleavage in the 5' utr  <cit> , these experiments were also performed in a rnase iii deficient strain  where rna concentration is expected to reflect the transcription efficiency of pnp more directly. fig.  <dig> shows that hfq deficiency has no detectable effect on the intracellular concentrations of either the primary transcript initiated at p <dig> or the transcript processed by rnase iii. this contrasts with the bands referred to as m <dig> and t at the top of the autoradiograph  which correspond to arrest of reverse transcription at an rnase e processing site and a stable hairpin in the rpso-pnp bicistronic transcript initiated at the rpso promoter . both bands diminished in intensity in hfq strain, confirming the decrease in abundance of transcripts from the rpso promoter observed by northern-blot technique. thus, the lack of hfq affects transcription yield only from a subset of promoters , and this negative effect is unlikely to result from changes in dna topology. finally, pnpase was used as a control to verify that hfq does not globally affect protein synthesis .

discussion
the experiments described above show that hfq deficiency may cause modifications of both mrna abundance and stability, but these effects are not related. indeed, stabilization of the rpso mrna takes place even in the absence of translational regulation, which presumably occurs in response to a drop in mrna levels in the cell, and the decrease in mrna concentration is accompanied by rna stabilization expected to cause its accumulation. the requirement of pap i activity for both stabilization and decrease of rpso transcripts upon hfq inactivation suggests that polyadenylation and hfq act synergistically. the fact that mrna stabilization in the absence of hfq is only observed if pap i is active might be explained by assuming that hfq can no longer stimulate the elongation of oligo extensions used as recognition sites by exoribonucleases. at the same time, the competition between hfq and rnase e for the same site on the rpso mrna, which was observed in vitro  <cit> , does not seem to play a role in the control of mrna degradation under conditions of exponential growth in rich medium : indeed, the rnase e pathway of decay is not affected by hfq inactivation. we cannot explain right now why hfq has a significant impact on the rpso mrna abundance if pap i is active. nevertheless, the data above showing that the drop in rpso mrna concentration does not result from hfq-mediated posttranscriptional events led us to the conclusion that it may reflect a negative impact of the loss of hfq on transcription yield.

recent microarray analysis revealed down-regulation of many ribosomal protein  operons caused by lack of hfq  <cit> . moreover, earlier work also reported the co-immunoprecipitation of hfq with mrnas of r-protein operon in hfq+ cells, and their general loss in hfq mutants  <cit> . no plausible explanation for these effects was proposed. the implication of hfq-dependent ncrnas in positive regulation of house-keeping genes is very unlikely. the finding that a similar negative impact on abundance of the rpso and rpsb transcripts , on one hand, and on the corresponding reporter constructs rpso-lacz and rpsb-lacz , on another hand, implies that the observed reduction of the steady-state rna level in hfq- strains may result from changes in promoter recognition or other early steps of transcription.

it is unlikely that hfq discriminates promoters directly. however, there remains a possibility that hfq may affect promoter recognition indirectly. the e. coli rna polymerase holoenzyme is composed of the core enzyme  tightly bound with one of seven σ subunits which determine sequence specific contacts with promoter dna. while the level of the housekeeping σ <dig> subunit is constant under all growth conditions, the intracellular concentrations of the six other σ subunits vary as a function of the growth phase, growth conditions and upon exposure to environmental stress  <cit> . there is considerable evidence for competition between sigma factors for core rna polymerase in vivo; therefore alterations in the level of one sigma factor may influence the competitor properties of others  <cit> . at least two sigma factors, σs and σe, are affected by hfq inactivation, indicating that the relative abundance of different holoenzymes varies between hfq+ and hfq- strains. hfq deficiency decreases rpos  expression at the translational level  <cit> . at the same time the rpoe mrna encoding σe is up-regulated in a hfq mutant  <cit> , thus enhancing the competitiveness of σe for the core rna polymerase. however, the transcription of pnp as that of the trna genes, all of which are insensitive to hfq deficiency , are σ70-dependent, arguing against the possibility that competition between sigma factors is responsible for the down-regulation of the r-protein mrnas. alternatively, it is possible that hfq-mediated modulation of transcription may occur at an early elongation step. indeed, during the past decade, transcription elongation has been appreciated as a regulated phase of transcription. regulation of transcript elongation occurs mainly due to transcriptional pausing that can be stabilized by several mechanisms: hairpin-dependent pausing , backtracked pauses, and σ-stabilized rna polymerase stalling downstream from promoters  <cit> . as concerns the potential role of hfq in regulation of transcript elongation via hairpin-dependent pausing, most pause signals have been found in the leader regions of certain amino acid biosynthetic operons. the reported co-immunoprecipitation of hfq with mrnas encoding leader peptides of these operons may be indicative of a role of hfq in modulating attenuation  <cit> . moreover, this role should be positive, as microarray analysis revealed that lack of hfq decreased the levels of mrnas implicated in threonine  or histidine  biosynthesis pathways regulated by attenuation  <cit> .

the positive role for hfq in transcription in vivo we propose here is consistent with a reported stimulatory effect of hfq on the overall yield of transcription in vitro  <cit> . hfq may play a chaperoning role in co-transcriptional folding of a nascent rna chain, counteracting transcription pausing or arrest and preventing premature release of the transcript. biologically important rnas often solve their folding problem using the assistance of chaperone and cofactor proteins  <cit> . in this respect, it should be mentioned that folding of long structured mrna leaders of the rpso and rpsb operons plays a crucial role in regulation of their expression  <cit> . in addition to the folding problems, transcriptional pauses within the mrna leaders of r-protein mrnas may also be stabilized by rebinding of σ <dig> to the elongating rna polymerase, when -10-like elements located downstream from promoters are exposed in transcriptional bubble  <cit> . indeed, -10-like elements followed by three gc base pairs  are easily recognized within the rpso  and rpsb  mrna leaders. taking this into account, it is tempting to suppose that hfq may play a positive role in the co-transcriptional folding and/or maintaining of the nascent rna chain during transcriptional pauses, preventing transcription arrest and formation of abortive elongation complex. if this is the case, the portion of abortive transcription on the pause-inducing sites should increase in the absence of hfq in the cell, leading to a reduced steady-state level of the mrnas produced. the mrna transcripts that escape abortive events will be less abundant but more stable either because they are translated more efficiently to produce sufficient amount of r-proteins for ribosome biosynthesis, or due to inefficiency of poly-dependent degradation pathway mediated by hfq. we believe that the proposed here potential role of hfq in maintaining nascent transcripts to prevent premature transcript release at the pausing sites is the most plausible explanation for the observed down-regulation of r-protein mrnas in hfq null-mutants.

CONCLUSIONS
we present here several lines of evidence indicating that rpso, rpsb, rpsb-tsf and rpst mrnas are down-regulated in hfq null mutants and that the reduction of the mrna levels upon hfq deficiency cannot be explained by destabilization of mrnas and relates rather to changes in transcription efficiency. our results provide an explanation for the recent microarray analysis which has revealed down-regulation of several ribosomal protein  operons caused by the lack of hfq. taken together, hfq appears to have a much greater role in rna metabolism than previously anticipated involving all the steps of an rna molecule's "life", from its synthesis to its degradation.

