BACKGROUND
the importance of protein interactions and protein complexes in understanding cellular functions has driven the generation of comprehensive protein-protein interaction  maps. the first large-scale ppi maps were generated for the model organism saccharomyces cerevisiae, initially using yeast two-hybrid screens   <cit>  and subsequently by affinity purification combined with mass spectrometry   <cit> . similarly, high throughput approaches have been applied to comprehensively map the drosophila melanogaster interactome, initially using y2h  <cit>  and more recently by ap-ms  <cit> . with advances in experimental protocols and decreasing costs, medium-scale ap-ms studies have become ubiquitous in proteomics for targeted investigation of specific pathways or interactions. the ppi networks these analyses generate have provided exciting insights into biological pathways and protein complexes, e.g., with relevance to human disease  <cit> . however, raw ap-ms data includes many false positive and false negative interactions, which are serious confounding factors in their interpretation  <cit> .

to address these issues, numerous methods have been developed to post-process ap-ms data sets. these generally fall in two classes: spoke and matrix models . spoke models  <cit>  produce confidence scores on bait-prey interactor pairs directly observed in the data , whereas matrix models  <cit>  additionally infer prey-prey interactions that are not directly observed and hence have broader coverage at the expense of increased false positives. development of spoke models has been an intense area of research from the outset; see nesvizhskii  <cit>  for a thorough review. matrix models rely on analyzing co-occurrences of pairs of proteins across many experiments and were thus less effective on the initial medium-scale ap-ms studies first performed. as larger ap-ms experiments have become more common, however, matrix models have become increasingly relevant because they can leverage the rich co-occurrence information in these data sets. for example, guruharsha et al. <cit>  reported significantly improved inference on the drosophila melanogaster interactome using a matrix model approach as compared to state-of-the-art spoke methods.

the existing literature on matrix approaches has almost exclusively considered only binary experimental data . an exception is the hgscore method  <cit> , which to our knowledge is the first to use quantitative information from ap-ms experiments in the form of bait-prey spectral counts. in contrast, spoke models have successfully used quantitative information  to filter contaminants and assign confidence scores to interactions.

in this study, we propose a novel approach for incorporating quantitative interaction information into ap-ms ppi inference. our approach aggregates scores over an ensemble of binary data sets that represents the quantitative data, capturing the uncertainty of interactions with low spectral counts. importantly, the sampling-based framework we propose allows us to directly harness previous binary methods without modification, thus extending previous methods to use quantitative information. we validate our results on a large-scale ppi network and two medium-scale networks. our approach improves all binary methods that we tested across a broad range of parameter values. in many cases, the improved performance is comparable to or better than state-of-the-art methods that have been developed to leverage spectral counts. additionally, in the discussion we characterize previous approaches and identify a common mathematical framework that several successful approaches have used, providing insights that may be valuable in continuing to refine ppi inference techniques.

RESULTS
sampling framework
the motivation behind our approach is that spectral count values in ap-ms data sets span a very large dynamic range , and collapsing this range into binary values—as is necessary to apply several previous methods  <cit> —loses a great deal of potentially useful information. in particular, our intuition is that bait-prey interactions observed with high spectral counts are much more likely to be true interactions than those with spectral counts of only  <dig> or  <dig>  which might arise through experimental noise. however, there are exceptions; lower abundance proteins can be true interactors if they are pulled-down reproducibly, and high abundance proteins can be sticky proteins that are not necessarily true interactors.

to model this uncertainty in the bait-prey interaction data in a way that allows us to harness existing methods that operate on binary data, we propose a sampling framework that represents the quantitative  data set using an ensemble of binary data sets . we do so by first converting each positive spectral count into a probability that represents the confidence that the observed interactions were not experimental artifacts. then, for each of a specified number of trials, we create a binary data set by sampling bait-prey interactions according to their probabilities, and we apply the existing method to the binary data set. finally, we aggregate the results over the ensemble to produce an overall ranking of possible ppis.

explicitly, our framework takes as input a matrix of spectral counts , where columns correspond to purification experiments and rows to prey proteins. we convert a spectral count of n to the probability 1 - n, where p is a user-defined parameter representing the probability that a single spectral count is the result of a true observation, and we view the n observed spectral counts as arising independently. using these probabilities, we generate binary data sets of the same size as the original spectral count input matrix by putting a  <dig> in each matrix cell independently with probability 1 - nij. the resulting distribution of alternative binary realizations of the spectral count matrix thus reflects the range of confidences in different bait-prey interactions, in contrast to the common approach of converting the spectral count matrix to a single binary matrix simply by replacing all positive spectral counts with 1s.

given an ensemble of alternative binary realizations and an existing ppi scoring algorithm that operates on binary data, we apply the ppi scoring algorithm to each realization, in each case producing a score for every possible ppi. we then produce an aggregate score for every ppi by taking the mean of the ensemble of scores for that ppi, possibly after applying an appropriate transformation. 

an additional consideration is the size of the ensemble required to produce stable results. in the tests we describe below, we ran  <dig> independent trials and found reasonable score separation between low, medium and high confidence interactions . then we further verified that increasing the ensemble size by a factor of four had a negligible impact on the results, indicating that  <dig> trials was sufficient to average out the stochasticity of the method. although the minimum number of trials required will vary with the specific data set, our experiments suggest that in general, such a number of trials should sufficiently explore the space of binary realizations without presenting a computational burden, especially because the ensemble computations can be easily parallelized.

validation on three ap-ms data sets
we benchmarked our method by producing predictions from three ap-ms data sets: the recently published drosophila protein interaction map   <cit>  which includes over  <dig> baits, a medium-scale human data set  with  <dig> baits  <cit> , and a drosophila study focusing on the mapk pathway with  <dig> baits  <cit> . on each evaluation data set, we applied our sampling framework to three previously published binary matrix methods for ppi inference: hart et al.  <cit> , pe  <cit> , and sai  <cit> . each method produced a ranked list of interactions.

a standard approach to evaluating inferred interactions is to compare predictions with a high-confidence gold standard set. however, such a reference is challenging to construct. few large-scale databases are available, and even the largest are understood to be incomplete and include false positive interactions. in light of these concerns, we follow the validation strategy used in guruharsha et al.  <cit>  of considering the overlaps between multiple curated data sets, obtaining subsets of ppis with increasingly stringent thresholds on the number of supporting sources. the idea is that we can have high confidence in interactions supported by multiple lines of medium-confidence evidence, reducing the false positive rate in the gold standard data set . we applied this procedure to create validation data sets from the drosophila interactions database   <cit>  for drosophila ppi predictions and biogrid  <cit>  for human ppi predictions. 

for each method, we compared the top  <dig>  predicted interactions for the dpim data set and the top  <dig>  predicted interactions for the tip <dig> and mapk data sets to gold standard interactions supported by increasing numbers of sources, as in guruharsha et al.  <cit> . our sampling framework produced robust improvement to the binary methods across all levels of support and all data sets . moreover, the improved methods perform better than or comparably to state-of-the-art methods that use spectral count data . the choice of cutoff at the top  <dig>  and  <dig>  interactions was arbitrary, and the results are similar at different cutoffs .

the sole parameter in our method is the probability p that represents the reliability of a single peptide observation. we suggest a default value of p =  <dig> , but the performance improvements obtained using our sampling framework are robust across a wide range of values of p  and for different confidence cutoffs .

discussion
the literature of published methods for ppi inference from ap-ms data is substantial, and in continuing to develop methodological improvements, it is valuable to understand the similarities and differences among existing approaches and identify key ideas.

characterization of methods
broadly speaking, methods can be broken down into two classes of models—spoke and matrix models—and by their scoring method. spoke models make predictions solely on bait-prey interactions, while matrix models infer prey-prey interactions as well. because prey-prey relationships are never directly observed, matrix models use the co-occurrence of pairs of proteins over multiple experiments to make inferences. methods can also be characterized by their scoring functions, which generally fall into two classes: evidence-based scoring and null model-based scoring. in evidence-based scoring, models are built that estimate the likelihoods of observations under interacting and non-interacting pairs. typically, a log likelihood ratio is then summed across experiments, implicitly assuming independence. evidence-based scoring approaches, such as the pe  <cit>  and c2s  <cit>  scores, can easily combine direct bait-prey observations and prey-prey observations in the same model. however, because likelihood models for interacting and for non-interacting pairs must be constructed, these scores tend to have more tuning parameters that must be estimated from scarce gold standard validation data. in null model based approaches, such as hart et al.  <cit> , hgscore  <cit> , and sai  <cit> , a model for non-interacting pairs is assumed and fit from the data. this forms an empirical null distribution under which observations can be scored. the advantage of such an approach is that only the null distribution has to be tuned, so in many cases tuning with gold standard validation sets is unnecessary.

an additional consideration for any method that combines spoke and matrix information is the balance between information from direct bait-prey observations and prey-prey co-occurrences. these sources of information are clearly distinct, so the weighting between the two must be carefully calibrated, potentially requiring gold standard validation data. proper calibration is critical to performance and may explain why hart et al. and hgscore, which seemingly sub-optimally ignore spoke information, perform significantly better on our tests than sai  <cit> , which uses both spoke and matrix information.

for experiments with a handful of baits, we expect that methods relying on spoke information will have the best performance because matrix methods rely on analyzing co-occurrences of pairs of proteins across many experiments. however, even for the medium-scale experiments that we analyzed, methods that rely solely on matrix information performed competitively with methods that used spoke information. we foresee that as experiment sizes grow, matrix relationships will be increasingly informative, so it will be crucial to consider both spoke and matrix information. although our approach is applicable to any binary method, in our experiments, we found that for nearly all experiments pe was the top performer amongst the binary methods. in addition, because pe uses spoke and matrix information, we recommend using it in our framework.

low rank plus sparse matrix framework
interestingly, several methods  can be understood under a common “low rank plus sparse matrix” framework. hart et al.  <cit>  considered a null model in which interaction partners are chosen independently at random in proportion to the number of interactions each partner protein was observed in. although hart et al.  <cit>  used a hypergeometric distribution, for large-scale studies, the score for interaction between proteins a and b is well approximated using a poisson cumulative distribution function , taking the form

 -log1-poissoncdfxab;λ=nan×nbn×n, 

where xab is the number of experiments that protein a and protein b co-purify in, na  is the number of co-purifying pairs that protein a  is observed in, and n is the total number of co-purifying pairs.

in the above form, λ factors as a rank- <dig> matrix, so that the method can be seen as modeling the co-occurrence matrix xabas the sum of a rank- <dig> “background” matrix  and a sparse matrix indicating true interactions. notably, xabignores quantitative information, simply counting experiments in which proteins were co-purified. hgscore  <cit>  is an extension of the hart et al. score that incorporates spectral count information through a transformation of the spectral counts  and then analyzes the pseudo co-occurrence matrix in a similar manner. for the same reasons as above, we can view hgscore as a rank- <dig> null model plus sparse true interactions, where the rank- <dig> component is estimated from a transformation of the spectral count data.

similarly, saint  <cit>  uses a probabilistic formulation to decompose a matrix of observed counts as a sum of: a rank- <dig> matrix, a sparse true interaction matrix, and generalized poisson noise. interestingly, saint decomposes the matrix of spectral counts—as opposed to co-occurrences—and has an entirely different justification for using a low rank model. hart et al. and hgscore assume that interaction partners are chosen at random in the null model, which gives rise to a low rank structure in the co-occurrence observations. alternatively, saint assumes that contaminant proteins produce similar spectral counts across all bait experiments, which gives rise to a low rank structure in the spectral count observations. saint uses solely spoke evidence while hart et al. and hgscore use only co-occurrence evidence, suggesting that some combination of these approaches under a common framework may be an interesting direction for future investigation.

moving toward complexes
as protein biology is ultimately driven by the interactions of protein complexes—not just pairwise protein interactions—recent work has begun inferring protein complexes directly from ap-ms data  <cit> . traditionally, methods have first inferred ppis and then clustered proteins into complexes ; however, information may be lost in this two-step procedure that first post-processes the data into high-confidence pairwise interactions. as with matrix models, some recent methods that bypass this first step have considered only binary experimental data  <cit> , whereas others have successfully used spectral count information  <cit> . a similar sampling approach could be used to extend methods that consider only binary data to leverage spectral counts.

CONCLUSIONS
as large-scale ap-ms experiments have become more common, an opportunity to leverage indirect co-occurrence information for ppi inference has arisen. our sampling framework harnesses existing matrix methods for ppi inference that could previously only be applied to binary interaction data, achieving robust improvements across a range of data sets and enabling comparable or better performance versus current state-of-the-art methods. this framework extends the existing body of work on binary interaction analysis to apply to richer spectral count data now commonly available. moreover, it is sufficiently general to have potential for future application in related protein interaction inference studies.

