BACKGROUND
next-generation sequencing approaches have proved to be highly valuable for the analysis of genomes  <cit> , transcriptomes  <cit>  and transcription factor binding sites  <cit> . in addition, they are useful for analysis of specific target regions, notably in ultra-deep sequencing of amplicons from tumor biopsies for studying the genetic changes or clonal expansion of cancer  <cit> . another widely used application of amplicons is in the development of generic targets for many bacterial species in 16s rrna metagenomics projects  <cit> . a commonly used approach in amplicon sequencing is to introduce sequencing handles by extending the amplicon with a protruding sequence, and thus facilitate next generation sequencing with the standardized sets of primer sequences recommended by the manufacturers of the sequencing equipment. a sample identification tag is also often introduced at the same time.

however, we have observed that the introduction of genome sequencer primer handle sequences  can result in the formation of short unspecific products; fragments that amplify more readily than target sequences and thus threaten to severely reduce the frequencies of target sequence reads in a sample. unspecific products can be removed, to some extent, by gel purification if there is sufficient size difference between them and the target sequences, or alternatively the handle sequences can be omitted in the pcr and the a, b handle sequences can be added through more laborious linker ligation.

we have previously demonstrated that fluorescence activated cell sorting  can be used for the enrichment of dna-covered beads in sample preparation for roche/ <dig> sequencing. this is a quick, inexpensive way of ensuring that all of the analyzed beads carry dna, without affecting the sequence quality  <cit> . here, we present a method for selection and enrichment of beads with correct products on the surface, thus removing beads carrying unspecific sequences, which were not removed by standard gel purification protocols. this method greatly increases the fraction of informative reads obtained, thus improving the amount of high quality data generated in each sequencing run nearly three-fold.

RESULTS
experimental overview
in efforts to perform ultra-deep amplicon sequencing of the hypervariable dog leukocyte antigen  target using the roche/ <dig> genome sequencer we have developed a strategy based on dual-labelling of emulsion pcr  beads and fluorescence activated cell sorting  to isolate beads carrying the target sequence on their surface as described below and illustrated in figure  <dig> 

the aim was to eliminate the large amounts of unspecific products present in many amplicon libraries, which are difficult to fully remove by gel or spri-based  purification and take up precious sequencing capacity. we have achieved this by using sybr green to label all types of dna-carrying beads and a target-specific probe facilitating alexa <dig> detection and collection of beads carrying the target sequence.

facs sample preparation
the analyzed sample consisted of an amplicon library prepared from  <dig> individuals. amplification of the library resulted in significant formation of unspecific products, as shown in figure 2a, so the library was purified by size separation with gel electrophoresis which, according to the manufacturer, offers best control of fragment size selection hence giving rise to the best sequencing result. the purified material, which appeared to be free from short unspecific products according to gel analysis  was used for emulsion pcr and split into two batches for the comparative analysis. the control sample was processed according to the standardized genome sequencer flx procedure, involving enrichment of the dna-covered beads using streptavidin-covered magnetic beads to capture the biotinylated protruding strands. the parallel empcr sample was labelled as outlined above.

flow cytometric analysis of the labelled sample showed a major peak representing naked beads that had failed to capture and amplify a dna sequence while the dna-covered, sybr green positive beads formed two minor populations with strong and weak positive sybr green fluorescence, respectively, as indicated by green arrows in figure 1b. beads with strong alexa <dig> fluorescence, which thus carried an amplified target gene fragment on their surface, are indicated by purple brackets in figure 1c. these beads are also depicted as purple dots in figure 1d, which illustrates the sybr green fluorescence and ssc-a  of the beads. clearly, beads that yield positive alexa <dig> signals also give rise to strong sybr green signals. in contrast, beads displaying weak positive sybr green signals show no alexa <dig> fluorescence. thus, the level of sybr green fluorescence is correlated to the amount of dna on the bead surface and was used for guidance when setting the facs sort gate on the alexa <dig> parameter. the beads that yielded alexa <dig> fluorescence signals , and thus carried an amplified target gene fragment on their surface were sorted out for subsequent sequencing . an additional experiment using facs probe labelling was conducted confirming the previous results .

sequence analysis
the average sequence length was greatly improved by facs enrichment . interestingly, despite thorough purification by gel electrophoresis, short unspecific fragments still accounted for a large proportion of the standard-enriched control sample library . just 41% of the reads in the control sample were longer than  <dig> bp, and of these 63%  contained the target gene sequence. in contrast, in the facs-enriched sample many of the short fragments had been removed ; 69% of the reads were longer than  <dig> bp and 97% of these  contained the target gene sequence. the additional facs sorted sample demonstrated that 75% out of all reads exceeded  <dig> bp and 72% out of all reads contained the target sequence. thus, overall our facs sorting protocol gave a nearly three-fold increase in the fraction of target sequence reads obtained.

to assess if any sequence bias was introduced by the facs enrichment approach we calculated the change in frequencies of sequence counts for each individual  in the two facs-enriched samples as compared to the standard-enriched control sample . only minor differences were observed; the largest variations in frequency was for individual  <dig> and  <dig> where the frequencies were  <dig> and  <dig> percentage points higher in the facs-sorted sample than in the control sample, respectively. however, for the corresponding individual in the other facs sorted sample this change was merely  <dig>  and  <dig>  percentage points. for all other individuals the corresponding changes were approximately  <dig> percentage point or lower. hence, the slight differences in frequency observed appear to be of stochastic nature.

we further analyzed the genotypes and found that all genotypes were represented in both facs-enriched and control samples. up to five mismatches between facs probe and target sequences was observed. an example is shown in figure 4b, where the two consensus sequences from the facs-sorted and control samples for individual  <dig> are depicted. the same genotypes, with three or five mismatches against the target-specific probe, were detected in both the facs-enriched and control sample.

to investigate whether similarity to facs probe sequence had an effect on the enrichment efficiency of particular genotypes, the frequency of each probe region sequence present for every individual in the facs sorted sample and the control sample, was calculated . the average differences in genotype frequencies between the facs-enriched sample and the control sample was 10%. many samples had changes below 5% and investigation of individuals with changes above 5% showed that there was no trend of genotypes with a higher sequence identity to the probe having a higher frequency in the facs-enriched sample, than in the control sample. thus, the facs enrichment protocol does not affect what amplicon sequences are present in the amplicon library after facs sorting.

discussion
we have previously demonstrated that a generic fluorescently labelled facs probe common to all  <dig> sequences  can be effectively used to identify dna-carrying beads to simplify the titration step in roche/ <dig> sequencing and  facilitate enrichment of pure samples with dna-carrying beads produced by a shotgun sample preparation procedure  <cit> . in our current work we have taken this method further by showing that beads carrying a specific target dna sequence can be collected for sequencing using flow cytometry and hence beads carrying an unspecific product that includes a or b linkers can be removed. this could be used with unparalleled efficiency to enhance sequence output of problematic amplicon libraries.

in the technique presented here we exploit an additional feature of facs  to increase the resolution of the procedure and remove the high numbers of non-target amplicons. this approach could be used for most cases of amplicon deep sequencing, such as analysis of 16s rrna, mtdna, cancer genes etc. the probe-mediated facs enrichment protocol, using a probe tolerating at least five mismatches, provides sufficient flexibility to enrich beads carrying dla target sequence . the results also show that the relative frequencies of sequences from different individuals in the amplicon library were not affected by facs enrichment. further we show that genotypes with a probe region sequence very similar to the facs probe were not favoured by the facs enrichment protocol over genotypes with up to five mismatches against the facs probe.

the beads carrying the target sequence could be detected using solely the target-specific probe. however, the dual labelling system confirms the efficiency of the target-specific labelling. further, some stickiness of the probe to naked and unspecific product- carrying beads was observed , probably due to the length of the target-specific probe, and use of two labels greatly increases the resolution and scope for optimising the facs sort gate positions.

further, this report illustrates the possibility of fishing out specific sequences carried on beads using facs, a feature that could be used for colour-coded mid -specific facs enrichment, in order to load and sequence optimal numbers of beads carrying each mid-tag. the value of this would be the ability to compensate for differences in amplification efficiency between members of a mid library.

moreover, the results show that facs-based quantification of dna contents, and thus active selection of beads carrying long dna fragments, could be used to increase average sequence read lengths in roche/ <dig> sequencing runs.

another future possibility would be to enhance sort speeds to further increase throughput. in order to maximise yield we used a modest sorting speed, of  <dig> beads/s, but with a maximal sorting speed of  <dig>  beads/s facs enrichment of beads for large-scale sequencing would not be a rate-limiting step in the sample preparation procedure for roche/ <dig> sequencing.

CONCLUSIONS
our results demonstrate that the number of informative sequence reads can be substantially increased by using gene-specific facs sorting to remove most beads carrying amplified unspecific fragments on their surface, prior to sequencing using a roche/ <dig> genome sequencer.

using a biotinylated  <dig> mer facs probe and streptavidin-conjugated alexa <dig> florophore, beads with an amplified target gene product on their surface could be collected by facs sorting for subsequent sequencing using the roche/ <dig> genome sequencer. this procedure gives a nearly three-fold increase in the fraction of reads with the target amplicon sequence. the method also allows for several mismatches between the sequence and the facs probe and does not significantly affect the distribution of sequence reads over different individuals or genotypes obtained.

