BACKGROUND
natural products are small molecules synthesized by bacteria, algae, fungi and plants, as part of their biotic and abiotic interactions with the environment. they provide a valuable source of pharmaceuticals, with 45% of the most popular drugs derived from natural products  <cit> . however, the identification of molecular targets for natural compounds with pharmacological activity remains a significant bottleneck in the process of drug validation. plants provide a formidable source of natural products  with pharmacological activity  <cit> . over  <dig>  phytochemicals have already been identified from the small fraction of the plant kingdom that has so far been surveyed  <cit> . these phytochemicals can be classified into large groups that include the alkaloids, the terpenoids, and the phenylpropanoids.

flavonoids, derived from phenylpropanoids, are widely distributed throughout the plant kingdom and are abundantly present in many fruits and leaves  <cit> . they are characterized by the presence of two benzene rings linked by a pyrane or pyrone ring . based on the position and modifications of the a, b and c rings, the  <dig> + flavonoids so far known can be classified into several sub-classes including the flavonols, the flavones, the isoflavones and the red/purple anthocyanin pigments. flavonoids are potent antioxidants  <cit>  and have important activities as dietary anti-carcinogens and anti-inflammatory compounds  <cit> . flavonoids are also significant to plants, serving as signal molecules in various developmental processes  <cit> . several studies have investigated the effect of flavonoids on the activity of various enzymes. for example, flavonoids possess protein kinase  <cit>  and p-glycoprotein  <cit>  inhibitory activities. however, with a few exceptions, in vivo animal and plant cellular targets for flavonoids are largely unknown.

few methods are currently available for identifying proteins that bind to small molecules of plant origin, for example flavonoids. the development of high-throughput methods for the identification of flavonoid-binding proteins could significantly advance our understanding of the mechanisms by which flavonoids modulate plant hormone transport  <cit> , contribute to plant male fertility  <cit> , serve as allelochemicals  <cit>  and facilitate the identification of missing metabolic enzymes in the flavonoid biosynthetic pathway. one promising approach is the generation of flavonoid derivatives that contain a benzophenone chromophore for use as a photoaffinity reagent  <cit> . while benzophenone-modified flavonoids can potentially permit the identification of flavonoid-binding proteins, they are inadequate for the isolation of significant quantities of proteins, necessary for their mass spectrometry identification. the isolation of flavonoid-binding proteins would be simplified by the availability of flavonoids covalently-linked to solid supports that would permit the affinity-purification of flavonoid-binding proteins from complex protein mixtures or protein libraries. few methods are currently available that explore the possibility of linking select flavonoids to solid supports.

here, we describe the efficient coupling of the flavanone naringenin, a central intermediate in the flavonoid biosynthetic pathway  <cit> , to small ceramic and glass beads. the method developed can be easily adapted for the coupling of other related flavonoids to beads. the naringenin-coupled beads provide a powerful chemical genetic tool to probe biological systems.

RESULTS
ceramic and glass beads provide high-capacity solid supports
many beaded solid supports are available, primarily developed towards combinatorial chemistry efforts  <cit> . the possibility to use small ceramic and hollow glass beads for the conjugation of small molecules was investigated here, because of their low cost, reduced size and compatibility with most organic and inorganic solvents. scanning electron microscopy  experiments  showed that the ceramic beads have an average particle volume of  <dig> μm <dig> and a diameter of approximately  <dig> μm, about  <dig> times smaller than the glass beads . these dimensions make them much smaller than the usual solid supports utilized in solid phase synthesis. the sem analyses  also confirmed that both the ceramic and glass beads are not porous. this is an important property to consider given the ultimate goal to use the beads to identify proteins that bind to the small molecule, which requires a minimal hindrance of the small molecule by the bead matrix.

the presence of si-oh groups on the surface of the beads allows the rapid conjugation of bifunctional organosilanes  <cit> . to investigate the capacity of the loading of functional groups onto the surface of the ceramic and glass beads, silanisation of the beads was performed using 3-aminopropyltriethoxysilane . after washing and drying completely, the amino-modified beads were stored at 4°c until use.

in order to determine the effective loading of amino groups on the beads, both naïve  and amino-modified glass and ceramic beads were incubated with nhs-fluorescein in the dark at 4°c for  <dig> hrs. after completion of the reaction, the beads were washed with water and dried. naïve glass or ceramic beads displayed no fluorescence, nor did they fluoresce after incubation with nhs-fluorescein, while amino-modified glass and ceramic beads fluoresced after reaction with fluorescein . to quantitatively analyze the loading of amino groups on the surface of the beads, fluorescein was cleaved off by treatment with 1n hydrochloric acid. after the solution was neutralized to ph  <dig>  the released fluorescence was quantified by fluorometry. for the ceramic beads, the loading of fluorescein, which represents the number of amino groups on the beads available for reaction, was established to be  <dig>  μmol/g, which is the minimum possible loading of amino groups on the beads. since the density of ceramic beads is  <dig>  g/cc and the average diameter of bead is  <dig> μm, it was estimated that there is one amino group every approximately  <dig> Å <dig> of surface area, with a loading capacity of around  <dig> ×  <dig> amino groups per ceramic bead . similar calculations estimated the capacity of the glass beads at  <dig> ×  <dig> amino-groups per bead. to further investigate the distribution of the amino loading on the ceramic and glass beads, facs flow cytometry was utilized. after the reaction with nhs-fluorescein, over 90% of the ceramic and glass beads displayed fluorescence . thus, not only were the beads efficiently loaded with amino groups, but this loading was also uniformly distributed among the beads. together, these results indicate that both the ceramic and the glass beads met the desired requirements for serving as solid supports for the coupling of flavonoids, and the amino-modified beads have further potential for solid phase synthesis.

modification and coupling of naringenin to the solid support
initially, it was envisioned that the amino-loaded ceramic beads could be used for the direct coupling of naringenin, in the presence of a convenient linker such as dimethyl suberimidate . this approach, however, resulted to be impractical because technical limitations prevented the quantification of the amount of naringenin coupled to the beads, and it was feared that non-reacted amino groups on the beads or imidoester groups on the dms linker would react with components of the biological system  that were intended to be probed.

therefore, a different strategy was utilized, where the linker was first linked to the organosilane group on one end and naringenin on the other , followed by the coupling of the entire moiety to the beads. one equivalent of  <dig> -dibromobutane was first reacted with naringenin , resulting in the formation of 7-naringenin  with little amount of  <dig> '-di naringenin as a by-product  <cit> . after separation by chromatography on a silica column and structural elucidation by nmr , the 7-naringenin was reacted with aminopropyltriethoxysilane, to give compound . the compound was purified by chromatography on silica gel and confirmed to be 7-propylamino)butoxy) naringenin by nmr. once the identity of compound was confirmed, its coupling to sodium hydroxide-treated ceramic beads in 95% methanol was performed overnight. separation of the beads from non-conjugated compound was accomplished by filtration and washing.

to ensure that compound  was coupled to the beads, advantage was taken from the reactivity of nhs-fluorescein with the -nh- group present in 7-propylamino)butoxy) naringenin . the fluorescence detected is indicative of the coupling of the 7-propylamino)butoxy) naringenin to the ceramic and glass beads .

to further quantify the amount of 7-propylamino)butoxy) naringenin coupled to the beads, the molar extinction coefficient  of compound was first calculated at  <dig> nm, corresponding to one of the absorption peaks of this compound . the ε value of  <dig>  cm-1m- <dig> was used to calculate the amount of compound that remained in solution after a coupling reaction was carried with a slight molar excess of 7-propylamino)butoxy) naringenin . the loading of compound was established to be  <dig>  μmol per gram of beads, corresponding to approximately  <dig>  ×  <dig> molecules of 7-propylamino)butoxy) naringenin per ceramic bead. using a similar approach, the coupling of 7-propylamino)butoxy) naringenin to the glass beads was established to be  <dig>  μmol/g, corresponding to  <dig>  ×  <dig> molecules per glass bead.

CONCLUSIONS
the development of a simple and reliable method to link flavonoids to solid supports, in this particular case, small glass and ceramic beads, is described here. interestingly, ceramic beads provided a much more robust solid support for coupling naringenin than the glass beads. these naringenin-coupled ceramic beads provide a convenient tool for the identification and isolation of naringenin-binding proteins. although these studies describe only the coupling of naringenin to the beads through the 7-oh group in ring a, the possibility to selectively protect the various -oh groups offers opportunities for presenting the different groups in naringenin for recognition by proteins.

