BACKGROUND
immunohistochemistry  is one of the pillars of modern diagnostic pathology and a fundamental research tool in both pathology and translational research laboratories. currently, labelling of ffpe specimens most commonly involves a biotinylated secondary antibody followed by an avidin-biotin-peroxidase complex and development with a soluble chromogenic substrate. this approach is robust and reliable, and increasingly can be automated for labelling, image acquisition and scoring. however, as a research tool there are three major limitations. first, it is primarily used to reveal one protein at a time; multiple colour approaches by combining peroxidase with other development systems are less than satisfactory and cannot be used to examine the co-localization of two antigens in the same subcellular compartment. second, the resolution of antigen localization is limited due to the chromogenic substrate precipitate and the thickness  of the sections imaged in the light microscope. third, chromogenic systems saturate easily, which restricts semi-quantitative analysis. immunofluorescence labelling, on the other hand, has the capability for multiple labelling and is of higher resolution due to the fluorophores being directly conjugated to the antibody. nevertheless, immunofluorescence labelling is not often used for ffpe specimens, the perceived mantra being that the inherent autofluorescence of such specimens makes high quality immunofluorescence imaging capricious. this has placed two severe restrictions on investigators. first, it has limited fluorescence imaging to tissue cryosections and hence restricts analysis of clinical material. second, as cell and tissue preservation is lower in cryosections than in ffpe sections, the quality of morphological findings is frequently compromised. this is particularly the case in tissues that are difficult to cryosection, for example cartilage, bone and those that contain a high fat content such as the breast. in recent years, there have been a number of reports describing the immunofluorescence labelling of ffpe sections  <cit>  but, for a variety of reasons, these methods have not been taken up widely by the scientific community . similarly, quantitative immunofluorescence labelling of ffpe material, particularly that in tissue microarrays, has been achieved by the development of computer assisted fluorescence imaging systems  <cit> . although these systems have an important role in translational research, there is still an urgent need for a high resolution method which can be employed by the wider research community. to this end, we have taken a systematic approach to develop a robust protocol for coupling antigen retrieval, indirect immunofluorescence and confocal laser scanning microscopy to image ffpe sections. using this method, we demonstrate that multicolour immunofluorescence imaging of ffpe material is readily achievable and that this method provides excellent images. of note, the data shown here were not subjected to any image manipulation.

RESULTS
to demonstrate the utility of this method, three examples are provided. first, the expression of e-cadherin , ksp-cadherin  and collagen iv was examined in human kidney . ihc analysis clearly shows a differential labelling of the cadherins in different tubules, each of which is surrounded by a collagen iv containing basal lamina. however, with double-label immunofluorescence the existence of  <dig> distinct types of tubule  becomes apparent. in particular, such analysis shows tubules which express neither e- nor ksp-cadherin. further, the thin optical sections collected by confocal microscopy demonstrate clearly that this method provides a higher level of detail as to the subcellular distribution of antigens. control experiments demonstrated the specificity of the secondary antibodies and the absence of background staining .

in the second example, it is demonstrated that high quality  <dig> colour fluorescence images can be readily obtained from archival ffpe material; in this case normal breast tissue, breast tissue with columnar cell change and both ductal carcinoma in situ  and invasive components of an oestrogen receptor  positive breast cancer ). as expected in the normal breast tissue, er expression is limited to a subset of cytokeratin 8/ <dig>  positive luminal epithelial cells and vimentin expression is restricted to the intra- and interlobular stromal fibroblasts and the vasculature with low level staining in the myoepithelial cells. however, multicolour confocal imaging also reveals that expression of er in the normal breast is associated with cells expressing high levels of ck 8/18; that there is an upregulation of vimentin expression in the ck 8/ <dig> negative myoepithelial cells in the columnar cell change ; and that scattered vimentin-positive, ck 8/ <dig> negative cells admixed with neoplastic cells can be found in high grade dcis.

in the third example, a tissue microarray containing cores from  <dig> archival invasive breast cancers  <cit>  was stained with the same antibody combination as described above. as illustrated in figure  <dig>  high quality images can be collected from these samples.

to date we have successfully employed this method with a range of different primary and secondary antibodies on a large number of freshly fixed and archival samples from different normal tissues and tumour types. one perceived limitation of immunofluorescence labelling is that stained sections can only be stored for a short period of time prior to collecting images. we demonstrate here that stained slides can be stored for at least  <dig> weeks at 4°c or  <dig> months at -20°c and examined by confocal microscopy on multiple occasions with only a negligible reduction in the quality of images collected .

discussion
we describe here an optimised method for the collection of high quality immunofluorescence images from ffpe sections. the first element that is key to the success of the method is the use of a confocal microscopy has the following advantages over the epifluorescence microscope:  the collection of a thin  optical section, whose thickness is smaller than that of the section , means that the volume of the section contributing to the autofluorescence is less,  a conventional mercury vapour lamp in an epifluorescence microscope produces light from 250– <dig> nm wavelength, all of which has the potential to create autofluorescence. laser light illumination from the confocal microscope is of a much narrower bandwidth  and thus a significant amount of the visible spectrum light is removed from the excitation process. furthermore, on the confocal microscope the amount of light from each laser can be adjusted, thus creating the opportunity to minimise the excitation process which in turn reduces autofluorescence,  the confocal microscope allows the setting of numerically defined collection windows, which are more precise and efficient than the epifluorescence microscopy dichroic and trichroic glass filters,  in the confocal microscope, images can be collected in a sequential mode, which means that at any given time during the collection process only one laser is exciting the tissue and only one collection window is open. this effectively eliminates bleedthrough which can be a significant difficulty in epifluorescence microscopy. the second key issue is that the new generation alexafluor dyes are more stable and brighter than the previous generation of fluorescence conjugates such as fluorescein isothiocyanate , rhodamine, texas red, cy <dig> and cy <dig>  and their use can be tailored to the lasers available on different confocal microscopes. the final element of our optimised method is the implementation of careful microscopy practises in which the individual antibodies, the antibody combinations to be used, and the labelling conditions are optimised prior to labelling of important specimens. it is the combination of all these factors that leads to the improvement in image quality described here.

in the past decade, there have been reports of immunofluorescence labelling of ffpe sections from other laboratories  <cit>  all of which have made valuable contributions to the field but have not been widely adopted by the scientific community. at least in part, this reflects their use of older generation fluorescence conjugates, epifluorescence microscopes and/or complex image analysis systems. of particular interest have been reports that autofluorescence can be reduced by the use of reagents such as sudan black b  <cit> . as discussed here, the use of the confocal microscope largely reduces the problem of autofluorescence, but it will be important in future studies to test such reagents in the context of this method. similarly, although we demonstrate here that immunofluorescent labelling of ffpe sections is at least as sensitive as ihc labelling using the vectastain avidin-biotin complex  system from vector laboratories  or the envision+ system-hrp from dako , future studies will be required to assess the sensitivity compared to the new generation of amplification systems such as hrp polymers.

CONCLUSIONS
in conclusion, this method helps to bridge a gap between classical ihc of ffpe material, immunofluorescence labelling of fresh frozen material and high throughput systems for ffpe immunofluorescence detection. the ability to collect routinely high quality multicolour images from ffpe sections using a confocal microscopy combines the advantages of labelling material which is morphologically well preserved with the ability to study co-expression of multiple markers and to detect subcellular antigen localization within tissue samples. it is often difficult to know the orientation of the tissue within a frozen sample and to locate the desired area for analysis. this can only be determined by cutting a cryosection and counterstaining with haematoxylin and eosin. following trimming and reorientation of the block, this process has to be repeated until the material is correctly positioned, and as a consequence is a time consuming and tedious process. as ffpe blocks routinely have a haematoxylin and eosin stained reference section, these can be used to select the block best suited for the investigation prior to employing the immunofluorescence labelling method described here. therefore this method can be employed as an efficient research tool to utilise the vast and invaluable archive of ffpe tissues for more detailed cell biology analysis.

