BACKGROUND
coral reefs are global resources of great ecological, economic, and aesthetic value. the success of corals in their typically nutrient-poor environments is due largely to their symbiosis with dinoflagellates of the genus symbiodinium. these algae inhabit the symbiosome  in gastrodermal cells of the host  <cit>  and transfer up to 95% of their photosynthetically fixed carbon to the host  <cit> . reef-building corals have recently declined worldwide, with pollution, disease, destructive fishing practices, increased sea-surface temperatures, and ocean acidification all implicated as contributory factors. some of these environmental changes affect the symbiotic relationship between algae and host and can lead to dramatic and potentially lethal “bleaching” events, during which the algae are lost and the host may die. bleaching events have become more frequent over the past 20 years.

much recent research in coral biology has focused on the effects of stresses – particularly high temperature and lowered ph – on the coral holobiont , as well as on which genetic and molecular factors of the host and alga lead to differential stress responses and resilience  <cit> . however, these efforts have been impeded by the lack of an experimentally tractable system for studies of the establishment, maintenance, and breakdown of the symbiosis. corals themselves present major logistical difficulties for laboratory investigation. they grow slowly and are difficult and costly to maintain, their calcareous skeletons make many biochemical and cell biological techniques difficult, and it can be difficult to obtain sufficient biomass to do high-throughput experiments. in addition, samples collected from the wild can have heterogeneous genetic backgrounds, causing difficulties in the application and interpretation of gene-expression studies.

to circumvent these difficulties, we and others are developing the small sea anemone aiptasia as a model system for studies of dinoflagellate-cnidarian symbiosis  <cit> . like corals, aiptasia is an anthozoan  and maintains intracellular symbiotic dinoflagellates closely related to those in corals. however, unlike corals, aiptasia is extremely hardy, grows and reproduces rapidly via asexual reproduction in the laboratory , and lacks a calcareous skeleton. the lack of skeletal deposition makes aiptasia an unsuitable model for this aspect of coral biology but greatly facilitates other studies of cell biology and biochemistry. additionally, aiptasia can exist in an aposymbiotic  state or host a variety of symbiodinium types , allowing facile studies of symbiosis specificity  <cit> . we have recently developed a protocol for the year-round induction of spawning and larvae production in laboratory-raised aiptasia <cit> , which should free a variety of studies from dependence on the seasonal coral reproductive cycle and potentially open the door to genetic analysis.

studies of the dinoflagellate-cnidarian symbiosis can take advantage of genomics approaches. for example, gene-expression studies should help to elucidate how symbiotic cnidarians respond to various stressors, whereas comparative genomics approaches using sequence data from cnidarians that are not symbiotic with dinoflagellates should help us understand how these symbioses evolved. genomic and transcriptomic resources for cnidarians are beginning to accumulate rapidly, thanks to the advent of new sequencing technologies. recently, the genome of acropora digitifera, a common indo-pacific coral, was sequenced and assembled  <cit> . in addition, the genomes of two non-symbiotic cnidarians, the anemone nematostella vectensis  and the more distantly related hydra magnipapillata , have been sequenced  <cit> . small, sanger-sequenced est datasets are available for several species of corals and anemones  <cit> , as are larger 454-sequenced datasets for several corals  <cit> .

as a step in the development of aiptasia as a model system, we have performed a detailed analysis of the transcriptome of the aposymbiotic animals. unlike previous transcriptomes in the field of symbiotic cnidarian biology, these data are derived from a clonal and easily distributed strain of anemone, greatly facilitating a straightforward comparison of experimental results between different laboratories.

methods
aiptasia strain and culture
all animals used were from clonal population cc <dig>  <cit> , which in spawning experiments typically behaves as a male   <cit> . the stock cultures were grown in a circulating artificial seawater  system at ~25°c with 20–40 μmol photons m-2 s- <dig> of photosynthetically active radiation  on an ~12 h light : 12 h dark cycle and fed freshly hatched brine-shrimp nauplii approximately twice per week. aposymbiotic animals were generated by several repetitions of the following process: cold-shocking by addition of 4°c asw and incubation at 4°c for 4 h, followed by 1–2 days of treatment at ~25°c in asw containing the photosynthesis inhibitor diuron  at 50 μm. after recovery for several weeks in asw in the light  at ~25°c, putatively aposymbiotic anemones were inspected by fluorescence microscopy to confirm the complete absence of dinoflagellates  and were then cultured in separate tanks as described for the stock culture above.

rna extraction and sequencing
separate populations of animals were exposed to various conditions prior to rna isolation in an attempt to maximize the diversity of genes expressed. whole, medium-sized  anemones were collected in three pools:  ~ <dig> animals grown in control conditions;  animals  exposed to bacterial lipopolysaccharide  at  <dig>   <dig>  or  <dig> μg/μl for  <dig> or 24 h;  animals  that had been exposed to a single treatment . treated animals were stored in rnalater  at −20°c for later processing.

we extracted total rna from the anemones in each pool by homogenization in trizol reagent  following the manufacturer’s protocol and using the alternative high-salt method of rna precipitation recommended by invitrogen to reduce proteoglycan and polysaccharide contamination. we enriched for polyadenylated rna using the micropoly purist kit  and then fragmented the rna using divalent cations . cdna was synthesized using random-hexamer primers , ligated to illumina pe adaptors, size-selected, amplified, and size-selected a second time. libraries with different insert sizes  were synthesized for each pool. clustering and sequencing were performed by the stanford center for genomics and personalized medicine using an illumina genome analyzer iix  sequencer.

read filtering and transcriptome assembly
to minimize redundancy in the dataset, we used the fulcrum program to collapse duplicate reads and return a single representative read with improved quality scores for each “read family”  <cit> . reads were then filtered for quality and length. briefly, reads were trimmed such that no nucleotide had a quality score less than  <dig> and no ambiguous nucleotides  remained. any read shorter than 45 bp was then discarded. the remaining reads were combined into files based on the insert size of the library  and assembled using an additive multiple-k-mer  approach  <cit>  with the velvet/oases assembler   <cit> .

oases assembled many contigs that formed “hairpins”, suggesting mis-assembly caused by the presence of palindromic or near-palindromic sequences in the reads.  we identified these hairpin-containing sequences and split each of them into two separate contigs. the contigs resulting from the individual assemblies were then assembled together with the original illumina reads using a k-mer length of  <dig> with the conservelong option turned on. both the output from this final assembly and the combined contigs from each individual assembly were merged into a single file, new hairpins were identified and processed as described above, and identical contigs were collapsed into single representatives using cd-hit-est  <cit> . the resulting contigs were assembled using cap <dig>  to join overlapping contigs and reduce redundancy in the transcriptome dataset  <cit> . contigs shorter than 200 bp were discarded as likely to be uninformative.

transcriptome annotation
in order to assign putative functional roles to the transcripts, we aligned them to the ncbi non-redundant protein database  using the blastx program from the standalone blast  <dig> .25+ software suite with an e-value cutoff of 1e- <dig>  <cit> . predicted protein sequences were searched for specific domains using interproscan  <cit> . the blastx and interproscan outputs were imported using the blast2go software package  <cit>  and used to assign gene ontology  terms to the predicted proteins  <cit> .

validation of contigs by alignment with paired-end sanger reads
as one approach to contig validation, we aligned a set of paired-end sanger-sequenced ests  <cit>  to our transcriptome assembly using blat   <cit> . we counted the number of times the best alignments of a pair of forward and reverse sanger reads were to the same contig but with the expected opposite orientation.

genomic dna extraction and sequencing
genomic dna was isolated from medium-sized aposymbiotic anemones by incubating the whole animals at 55 °c for 4 h in lysis buffer  to which proteinase k had been added to a final concentration of  <dig>  μg/μl. the resulting solution was extracted twice with equal volumes of buffer-saturated phenol  and once with an equal volume of phenol/chloroform/isoamyl alcohol . the genomic dna was then precipitated by ethanol, resuspended in  <dig> μl of te buffer, and sheared using a covaris adaptive focused acoustics machine, following the manufacturer’s instructions, to a target size of 400 bp . end-repair and adapter ligation were performed following illumina’s instructions, and two lanes were sequenced using an illumina hiseq system by the stanford center for genomics and personalized medicine.

heterozygous snv detection
putative single-nucleotide variants  were detected using clc genomics workbench version  <dig>  . fulcrum-collapsed  and quality-filtered hiseq genomic reads were mapped against the transcriptome. after an optimal alignment was generated, it was considered valid if 40% of the read aligned with ≥96% agreement . we used 40% rather than something higher because the 100-bp reads could overlap exon-intron boundaries, and we do not yet have a good estimate of average exon size in aiptasia. the 40% criterion should prevent intron sequence in the read from disallowing a valid match while still providing sufficient specificity. if a given site had a minimum of 10x coverage and ≥35% of the reads at that site contained the alternative base, we classified that base as an snv.

to estimate the percentage of false positives among our snv calls, we amplified genomic dna for some of them using primers to the flanking sequences and sequenced the products using the sanger method. we identified snvs as positions in otherwise high-quality chromatograms where there were peaks for two different bases.

estimation of genome size
genome size was estimated by using a slightly modified version of the protocol outlined by hu et al. <cit> . we aligned two lanes of hiseq genomic data  against the assembled transcriptome using blat. we determined the number of bases in each read that aligned with the corresponding contig from the top hit that had no alignment gaps; where multiple hits with equal scores existed, the first hit listed was used. the numbers of aligned bases were summed for all genomic reads mapping to a given contig and divided by the contig length, giving each contig in the transcriptome an average coverage. the modal coverage of the entire contig dataset was then used to estimate the depth to which the genome had been sequenced. the total amount of sequence in the genomic reads was then divided by the estimated sequencing depth to obtain the genome size.

RESULTS
sequencing and assembly of the transcriptome
from a laboratory-raised, clonal population of aiptasia pallida, we generated aposymbiotic anemones and confirmed that they were dinoflagellate-free as described in methods. we then used these animals to produce three pools of mrna for cdna synthesis: mrna from animals grown in control conditions, mrna from lps-treated animals, and mrna from animals subjected to a variety of other treatments. from each pool of mrna, we then synthesized three paired-end illumina libraries with different insert sizes. those libraries deemed the best quality by bioanalyzer trace were then sequenced in separate lanes using the illumina gaiix system . the resulting  <dig> lanes of sequence yielded a total of ~ <dig> million raw pairs of reads and ~ <dig> gb of sequence. we used the fulcrum program  <cit>  on the sequence data from each lane to collapse duplicate sequences due to either pcr amplification or high coverage of abundant transcripts; this operation reduced the number of reads to ~ <dig> million pairs.  after trimming to remove low-quality and adaptor sequences and removing short reads, the number of reads was further reduced to ~ <dig> million pairs comprising ~ <dig>  gb of sequence.

the collapsed, quality-filtered reads were assembled using velvet/oases following a multiple-k-mer approach . the resulting assemblies were merged, resulting in an initial set of  <dig>  contigs. of these,  <dig>  appeared to be due to bacterial contamination as judged by their strong similarity to known bacterial sequences. most of these contigs were derived from the lps-treatment libraries and probably resulted from the presence of bacterial dna in the lps stock. the remaining  <dig>  contigs ranged from 200 bp to  <dig>  bp, with a mean of 770 bp and an n <dig> of  <dig>  bp . although the size distribution was weighted towards smaller contigs , there were  <dig>  contigs with lengths > <dig>  bp.

acontigs of < <dig> bp were discarded .

validation and functional annotation
we used several approaches to validate the transcriptome assembly. first, we compared it to a set of  <dig>  pairs of sanger-sequence reads from a cdna library derived from mrna isolated from symbiotic anemones  <cit> . in the preparation of this library, an effort was made to obtain full-length cdnas, which were also size-selected to enrich for longer species ; thus, it should be enriched for full-length or near-full-length transcripts. when we aligned these ests to our transcriptome assembly using blat, 73%  of the sanger reads mapped to the transcriptome with identity ≥90%. the remaining 27% are likely to be sequences from symbiodinium, from genes that are expressed only at low levels in aposymbiotic aiptasia, or from other organisms that were present in the culture used to prepare the library for sanger sequencing. of the  <dig> sanger read-pairs in which each read mapped to one and only one contig, 73%  mapped to the same contig in opposite directions. of the additional  <dig>  read-pairs with valid alignments in which one or both reads aligned to more than one contig, for 82%  there was at least one contig to which both reads aligned with opposite orientations. these data suggest that even among long transcripts, which are more likely to be fragmented in our assembly, many are represented by full-length or near-full-length contigs.

to further validate and begin assigning gene functions to the assembled transcripts, we used blastx to align them to the ncbi non-redundant protein database . using an e-value cut-off of 1e- <dig>  we found that  <dig> %  of the contigs encoded predicted proteins with significant similarity to proteins in nr. in  <dig> %  of these cases, the top hit was to a predicted protein from nematostella. the large number of contigs without nr hits appears to be due mainly to the presence of many short contigs , which presumably cover only non-conserved regions in the encoded proteins. the  <dig>  contigs with nr hits identified only  <dig>  unique protein accessions. this may be due both to the presence of multiple alternative contigs produced by velvet/oases for many transcripts and to the alignment of shorter contigs to different parts of the same protein. the presence of contigs that represent only a portion of a transcript, particularly from those transcripts that are expressed at low levels, makes it difficult at this time to achieve full clustering of contigs derived from alternative transcripts of the same gene , as well as to determine the number of alternative transcripts produced by each genetic locus. using blast2go, we assigned go terms based on the transcripts’ associated nr annotations – using the default e-value cutoff of the blast2go software, 1e- <dig> - and the results of interproscan  <cit> . we were able to assign go terms to  <dig>  contigs in our transcriptome.

we also looked for complete or partial coding sequences of conserved genes in several cellular pathways. in one analysis, we examined the proteins predicted from the nematostella genome sequence to be involved in eight metabolic pathways. sequences assigned to these pathways were downloaded from the kyoto encyclopedia of genes and genomes   <cit> , and their putative orthologs in the aiptasia transcriptome were identified by a best-reciprocal-blast approach . these results suggest that our transcriptome provides complete or nearly complete coverage of many pathways and that most nematostella proteins have orthologs that are represented by full-length or nearly full-length transcripts in our aiptasia transcriptome.

aaiptasia orthologs to nematostella proteins in each pathway  were predicted by best-reciprocal-blast analysis .

b using blosum <dig> similarity matrix  <cit> .

in a second analysis, we looked individually at the aiptasia homologues of an arbitrarily chosen functional group of proteins, namely a subset of those involved in cellular spatial organization and cytoskeletal function. the results  show clearly  that many aiptasia genes are represented in our transcriptome assembly by contigs that cover the entire coding region plus sequences of the 5′- and 3′-utrs;  that even some very long transcripts are represented by contigs that cover most of their lengths;  that, for whatever reason, even some genes of moderate length are not represented by complete transcripts in our current assembly ; and  that, as expected, proteins in this functional group are closely conserved in aiptasia as they are in other animals.

a our unpublished studies have shown that as expected, the a. pallida genome encodes multiple septins and that, like other septins  <cit> , these contain the three conserved motifs of a gtp-binding site in their n-terminal regions. we do not yet know why none of these transcripts appears in full-length form in the current transcriptome.

b the predicted a. pallida protein has a single insertion of  <dig> amino acids near the c-terminus of the “septin-unique element”  <cit> .

in summary, although we are undoubtedly lacking the sequences  for some transcripts that are expressed only at low levels, in particular cell types, during particular stages of development, or under conditions to which we did not expose the anemones, it appears that the transcriptome described here contains at least partial sequences  for the large majority of transcripts expressed in adult, aposymbiotic anemones. it will be particularly interesting to see how many additional transcripts are identified when the transcriptome of symbiotic anemones is examined.

estimation of snv frequency
we identified snvs  by mapping genomic data to the transcriptome . to minimize the misclassification of sequencing errors as snvs, we demanded that any snv called be represented in ≥35% of the reads mapping to a region. we identified  <dig>  putative snvs  by mapping one lane of hiseq genomic data , and an additional  <dig>  by adding a second lane of genomic data , for a total of  <dig> , or  <dig> snv per 808 bp. because the additional lane roughly doubled the amount of sequence mapped but led to only an ~14% increase in the snvs discovered, further mapping would presumably find few additional snvs within our clonal strain of aiptasia. the majority of snvs we identified were transition rather than transversion mutations , consistent with findings in other organisms  <cit>  and with the previous observations for aiptasia <cit> . additional investigation using similar methods led to the identification of  <dig>  putative deletion or insertion variants .

a broken down within the brackets by the numbers of nucleotides involved.

to evaluate the reliability of our snv calls, we designed primers to nine contigs in our assembly based on the following criteria.  the top blast hit was to a cnidarian, so we could be confident that we were looking at an aiptasia-derived contig.  the predicted snv was not located so close to an end of the contig that it would be within 40 bp of the primer that we were using to amplify .  the variant was a simple base-pair change rather than an indel .  contigs with multiple snvs were preferred as this enabled to us perform more tests with fewer primers.

for the nine contigs, we created  <dig> primer pairs that would amplify regions containing a total of  <dig> putative snvs. of these  <dig> primer pairs, eight produced clear pcr products with single bands, encompassing a total of  <dig> putative snvs. six of these bands had the predicted sizes, and two were larger , presumably indicating the presence of introns. the remaining four primer pairs presumably either needed additional optimization of the pcr reactions to ensure specificity or represented regions in which the exons were separated by introns that were too long for amplification under standard pcr conditions. all eight of the pcr products were sequenced using the same primers as used for the pcr, and the snv was considered to be validated when there were dual peaks matching the reference and variant calls at the specified location surrounded by otherwise high-quality peaks. all  <dig> of the snvs tested were validated in this test, suggesting that there is only a low false-positive rate for our larger set of snv calls.

estimation of genome size
we aligned ~ <dig>  gb of genomic reads to the transcriptome assembly , and estimated a modal coverage of ~24x per contig. thus, we estimate a genome size of  <dig>  mb/24 = 421 mb. nematostella and acropora digitifera, the closest relatives of aiptasia whose genomes have been sequenced, have genome sizes of ~450 mb and ~420 mb, respectively  <cit> . given its apparently modest size, the aiptasia genome could be readily sequenced using the currently available technologies.

identification of possible neuropeptide precursors
investigation of neuropeptide precursors and their cleavage products in other cnidarians has improved understanding of their neurological organization and development  <cit> . it has also provided tools for manipulation of the animals, such as increasing the rate of polyp budding and inducing larval metamorphosis and settlement  <cit> . attempts to induce settlement of larvae using the hydra neuropeptide hym- <dig>  were successful in several species of the coral genus acropora <cit>  but not in other coral genera  <cit>  or in aiptasia . to ask if this failure were due to a lack of sequence similarity between hym- <dig> and the neuropeptides in aiptasia, we scanned the transcriptome for potential neuropeptide precursors of the glw-nh <dig> type. we found three distinct transcripts containing repeated glw motifs . interestingly, the three putative precursors differ in the amino acids found immediately downstream of the glw motif. in ap-npe <dig>  this is in all  <dig> cases a g, suggesting that the mature peptides would indeed terminate in glw-nh <dig> <cit> , but in ap-npe <dig>  each of the four glw motifs is followed by a cg, suggesting that the mature peptides might terminate in glwc-nh <dig> . in ap-npe <dig>  each of the nine glw motifs is again followed by a c, but without a g to suggest c-terminal amidation of the mature peptides . each of the putative peptides is also preceded and followed by basic residues that could serve as cutting sites for endoproteases  <cit> , and in some cases the possible endoprotease cut sites are followed by xa and/or xp sequences that could be subject to removal by typical dipeptidylaminopeptidases  <cit> . importantly, none of the peptides that might be derived from these putative precursors would be a match either for hym- <dig> or for metamorphosin-a , a morphogenesis-inducing peptide from the anemone anthopleura elegantissima <cit> , suggesting that the neuropeptide responsible for morphogenesis and induction of settlement differ among cnidarians.

CONCLUSIONS
we have assembled and characterized a reference transcriptome for adult, aposymbiotic aiptasia pallida using the illumina sequencing platform. we have used this resource to detect snvs in our clonal population of anemones, estimate the genome size, and identify possible neuropeptide-encoding genes. this transcriptome will enable future studies to explore the changes in gene expression that accompany the association with dinoflagellate endosymbionts, determine how the symbiotic partners respond to a variety of stressors, further test the applicability of this model system to corals, and complete the assembly and annotation of the aiptasia genome . the contigs and their associated annotations are available through ncbi  and at http://pringlelab.stanford.edu/projects.html. the limitations of the current assembly should diminish in updated versions that incorporate additional sequence data, particularly those from symbiotic animals and from different developmental stages. updated assemblies will be made available through both the ncbi site and our lab website.

abbreviations
snv, single-nucleotide variant; te, tris-edta; gaiix, genome analyzer iix; go, gene ontology; par, photosynthetically active radiation; asw, artificial seawater; lps, lipopolysaccharide; nr, non-redundant database; est, expressed sequence tag.

authors’ contributions
eml and jrp conceived of and designed the project. eml prepared libraries and performed most of the analyses. msb developed the fulcrum read collapser and participated in the evaluation and optimization of assembly methods. eml, jrp, and msb wrote the manuscript. all authors read and approved the final the manuscript.

