BACKGROUND
the assimilation and re-distribution of nitrogen within a cell is essentially controlled within the central metabolic conversions between alpha-ketoglutarate, glutamate and glutamine . the enzymes that catalyze these conversions are glutamine synthetase , glutaminase , glutamate dehydrogenase  and glutamine alpha-ketoglutarate aminotransferase . on a short timescale, the enzyme activity is controlled via activating and inhibitory molecular interactions. for instance, the activity of gs is suppressed via feedback inhibition  by the product glutamine and by amp  <cit> . under conditions of nitrogen limitation a high gs activity is maintained to ensure a sufficient level of glutamine  <cit> . on a longer timescale, the enzyme levels are controlled via the activity of a limited number of transcription regulators.

marked differences exist in the transcription control of the genes encoding the enzymes involved in central nitrogen metabolism across the bacterial kingdom. in the gram-positive model organism bacillus subtilis, the expression of these genes is mediated by four major transcription factors: cody, glnr, tnra  <cit>  and gltc  <cit> . of these, glnr, tnra and gltc are specific for nitrogen metabolism whereas the global regulator cody is linked to both carbon and nitrogen metabolism  <cit> . gltc is specifically associated with the control of the genes encoding glutamine alpha-ketoglutarate aminotransferase. the transcription factor glnr is active during growth with excess nitrogen, whereas tnra is active during nitrogen-limiting growth  <cit> . the change in activity of these transcription factors is affected directly by gs and feedback inhibition  of the enzyme . in b. subtilis glnr is activated in the presence of fbi-gs  <cit>  and tnra is inhibited through a physical interaction with fbi-gs  <cit> . it was also shown that tnra binds to the pii-like regulatory protein glnk, which is sensitive to atp, mg2+ and alpha-ketoglutarate  <cit> . the two proteins become tightly associated with the ammonium permease amtb at a low level of atp. in streptococcus mutans cross-linking and pull-down assays demonstrated that glnr also interacts with glnk and that the interaction enhances the binding of glnr to its cognate site upstream of the glnra operon  <cit> .

in b. subtilis and many other low-gc gram-positives the genes encoding glnr  and gs  constitute the operon glnra <cit> . in b. subtilis glnr was reported to repress the transcription of the glnra operon , and of tnra <cit>  and the urease gene cluster   <cit> . on the other hand, tnra was reported to affect the transcription of a larger set of genes/operons  <cit> , for instance activating glnqhmp , amtb-glnk , nasa and nasbc/def , gabp  and pucr , while repressing alst , gltad  and ilvbhc-leuabcd . similarly, in the oral streptococci s. pneumonia and s. mutans glnr was reported to repress the transcription of the glnra operon and of the glnpq operon  in both organisms and of gdh  in the former, and the amtb-glnk and citbz-idh operons  in the latter organism  <cit> .

comparative genome analyses have shown that glnr, tnra and cody are characteristic for the low-gc gram-positive species although their distribution is not uniform. for instance, whereas glnr is found in almost all bacillus species, tnra has been identified only in a few. it is an intriguing question whether in the absence of one of these main regulators the others take over its role. we therefore decided to extend  a previous comparative analysis reported by  <cit>  to identify the presence of the regulators and the genes they regulate in the low gc gram-positive species of the class bacilli. this class includes the well-studied families bacillaceae, listeriaceae, staphylococcaceae, lactobacillaceae, leuconostocaceae and streptococcaceae.

we have redefined the binding motifs of glnr and tnra on basis of the available experimental and sequence data and used them to identify their respective regulons anew. for that purpose we have applied a footprinting approach formulated earlier by us  <cit>  and a similar motif search procedure  <cit> . the difference in composition of the glnr regulon was compared for the various taxonomic families within the class bacilli and for species having only glnr or also additional regulators. for most families we found a rather stable composition of the glnr regulon and some species-specific connections, independent of the presence or absence of the other two regulators. the data imply that glnr-mediated regulation serves predominantly to limit the import of ammonia/amino-containing compounds and, at the same time, to limit the production of intracellular ammonia.

RESULTS
presence/absence analysis of the genes encoding the central enzymes and regulators
we identified the orthologs of the genes encoding the enzymes of central nitrogen metabolism , the related transport systems and the regulators cody, glnr and tnra, in the sequenced genomes of species related to the class bacilli on basis of blast searches with the sequences of experimentally verified proteins . in tables  <dig> and  <dig> the analysis results for representative species of the orders bacillales and lactobacillales, respectively, are presented; the results for the complete set of analyzed species are given in additional file  <dig>  we observed a clear distinction in gene content between the two orders and between the different taxonomic families within the orders.

the table summarizes the data retrieved for all species and strains which can be found in additional file  <dig>  the number of orthologs/homologs in every genome is indicated. for instance anoxybacillus flavithermus wk <dig> contains  <dig> genes encoding glutamine synthetase. every species is represented by one strain only. species abbreviations: ab., alicyclobacillus; b., bacillus; g., geobacillus; l., listeria; mc., macrococcus; pb., paenibacillus; s., staphylococcus.

gene content. the included genes encode the established regulators cody, tnra and glnr  <cit> ; the central enzymes gln synthetase , glu dehydrogenase , 3-hydroxybutyrate dehydrogenase , high affinity  and low affinity  glutaminase, glutamate synthase , aspartate-ammonia ligase/asparagine synthetase , asparaginase ; and the transport systems for ammonium , gln/glu using atp  and glutamine-like proton symport  and glutamate-like proton symport . in the latter two cases a variation in numbers was observed for different strains. in the other cases the numbers were far less variable .

glnr-mediated regulation. genes/operons that have a clear upstream glnr binding site are marked by dark grey boxes , whereas genes/operons that are preceded by a less clear site are marked light grey . in case more genes are present encoding the same function then the number of genes with a clear binding site is indicated between brackets and if in addition the other gene are preceded by a less clear site then the cell is marked light grey.

a) a glnr-binding site is present but downstream of tnra because the gene has opposite direction when compared to all other species.

b) for one sequence no orf was called. however the gene could be identified using tblastn.

c) one of the sequences in two fragments.

d) seems part of an operon that includes a gene with duf <dig> domain and the gene dnaq.

e) the glnr and glna duplicates in b. pseudofirmus of <dig> are not part of a single operon and located at different positions on the genome.

the table summarizes the data retrieved for all species and strains which can be found in additional file  <dig>  the number of orthologs/homologs in every genome is indicated. for gene content and how glnr-mediated regulation is indicated see the legend of table  <dig>  every species is represented by one strain only. species abbreviations: l., lactobacillus; ln., leuconostoc; pc., pediococcus; s., streptococcus.

a) l. lactis has a cody paralog named codz <cit> .

b) there is a second glnph gene located next to the glnph,q operon.

c) the glnph gene encodes two h domains.

d) in o. oeni the gene glnph is in one operon with a gene encoding an asparaginase, whereas a glnq homolog is missing.

e) in l. salivarius a second glnph gene is not part of an operon and is located elsewhere on the genome with respect to the glnphq operon.

remarkably, within the family lactobacillaceae, lactobacillus acidophilus and its close relatives lack all three regulators. there are only three other species, bacillus halodurans, bacillus clausii and bacillus selenitrireducens that lack a gene encoding glnr. the global regulator cody is present in most species except for those of the families lactobacillaceae and leuconostocaceae. tnra is only present in species of the order bacillales within the families bacillaceae, paenibacillaceae and the genus exiguobacterium with the exception of the species and strains of the bacillus cereus group, alicyclobacillus acidocaldarius, brevibacillus brevis and lysinibacillus sphaericus.

similarly, we observed a large variation in the presence of the enzymes of central nitrogen metabolism, but much less so in the related transport systems. the set of enzymes is complete within the family of the bacillaceae and mostly reduced in the other families; in many of the lactobacillaceae, leuconostocaceae and streptococcaceae only glutamine synthetase and one of the other enzymes is present. in the case of transport, at least one ammonium transporter amtb , also referred to as nrga  <cit> , is present in most species, although the transporter is absent in more than half of the analyzed streptococcaceae, in three bacillus anthracis strains, in the gut-related lactobacilli  and in some meat-related species . it was recently put forward that transport of ammonia  should be active and tightly regulated to limit futile cycling  <cit> . this control was suggested to be exerted by the small pii-like regulator glnk, earlier referred to as nrgb ; the corresponding genes are indeed found genetically associated to amtb in many of the analyzed species. however, at the same time, it is absent in many others, including all analyzed lactobacillaceae. moreover, glnk was shown to interact with tnra in b. subtilis <cit>  and glnr in s. mutans <cit> .

most of the analyzed species carry one operon encoding a glutamine abc transporter . two variants of this system were identified: i) a glnqhmp operon found in escherichia coli and b. subtilis and ii) a glnphq variant found in the lactobacilli and streptococci. this latter operon consists of  <dig> genes, in which glnph represents a fusion-gene of the permease glnp and the substrate-binding protein encoding glnh. in fact, in the case of the streptococci the substrate-binding domain was duplicated to generate a glnphhq variant, whereas in some lactobacilli the glnph gene has been duplicated. the e. coli system has been related to high-affinity glutamine transport  <cit> , whereas the l. lactis system was shown to transport both glutamine and glutamate  <cit> . recently, the e. coli-type system present in streptococcus mutans was proven also to be involved in the transport of glutamate  <cit> . remarkably, most of the species of the order lactobacillales carry a copy of both types . these lactobacilli lack the genes encoding a glutamate dehydrogenase  or glutamate synthetase . therefore these species are unable to synthesize glutamate, which makes it essential to have a glutamate transport system.

most of the analyzed species encode one or more transporters of the daacs-family  and agcs-family , with the exception of the species within the families listeriaceae and leuconostocaceae, some lactobacillaceae and l. lactis. these transporter-protein families have been related to the cation symport of dicarboxylates and amino acids. the former family is represented by gltp , gltt , dcta , yhcl  and nqt , whereas the latter family is represented by glnt , alst , yrbd  and yfla .

identification of a glnr and tnra specific binding motif
the protein sequences of glnr and tnra are highly similar and their reported dna binding sites show little difference  <cit> . the palindromic consensus sequence has been defined as tgtna-n7-tnaca  <cit> . gel mobility shift assays indicated that tnra and glnr indeed bind to the same sites upstream of the tnra gene and the glnra operon, albeit with different specificity  <cit> . to achieve a separation of the predicted sites we have employed a genomic footprinting strategy that we formulated previously  <cit>  to identify the glnr-specific binding motif anew. the strategy involved the definition of groups of orthologous functional equivalents  on basis of conserved genomic context. within these goofes we assumed conservation of binding motif. in all analyzed species that contain glnr, the genetic association with glna has been conserved. moreover, for several species glnr was shown experimentally to be autoregulatory and therefore the upstream region of the glnra operon within all genomes was scanned for a conserved glnr binding site. in line with earlier published observations we found a clear and strongly conserved binding site 3– <dig> nucleotides upstream of a putative- <dig> region  of the promoter in all analyzed species and a second binding site overlapping the promoter in many of the bacillus species .

it was shown in a cross-regulation study that the binding site upstream of the promoter of the glnra operon in b. subtilis is only involved in glnr-mediated regulation  <cit> . therefore, to tract potential differences between the glnr and tnra binding motifs, we used the conserved glnr-binding sites upstream of the promoter to generate a family specific position frequency matrix . it appeared that the frequency representations of the motif varied slightly between the streptococci and the other bacilli . both motifs that were generated for glnr adhered to the consensus motif  <cit>  and were similar to the motif that was previously defined by  <cit> . then, a tnra-specific motif was created on basis of the tnra sites upstream of amtbanszgappglnqnasanasbnasdoppapucjpucrykzb and ywrd. these binding sites were reported to relate to transcription activation in b. subtilis  and are supposed to be tnra-specific as glnr has not been reported to activate transcription. the frequency representation of the tnra-specific motif is given in figure 3c. a comparison of the glnr and tnra specific motifs shows that there is limited difference. yet the tnra motif clearly lacks the conserved a and t at the 3′ and 5′ end, as was noted before. in fact, mutation of the conserved t at the 5′ end to a c or a g  was reported to abolish glnr-mediated repression of the glnra operon in b. subtilis <cit> , although  <cit>  did not observe such an effect. our new motifs also suggest that there is a slight preference for a g at position  <dig> and a c at position  <dig> which is less pronounced in the glnr motif in streptococci.

the predicted glnr and tnra regulon of b. subtilis
the specific glnr and tnra motif were used to search the b. subtilis genome for similar sites using the similar motif search  procedure described in the methods. the results of this search can be found in additional file  <dig>  although the differences in glnr and tnra motif did not appear strong in first instance, the results of the motif search in b. subtilis suggest they are large enough to bring about some separation between glnr and tnra binding sites, in line with the observed variable affinities of these transcription factors for the same sites  <cit> .

in principle the highest scoring sites are likely to be genuine binding sites and by using a relatively high cut-off score of  <dig>  the majority  of experimentally validated sites was indeed captured for glnr as well as for tnra. moreover, most other true binding sites scored just below the cut-off. only  <dig> out of  <dig> reported tnra binding sites were not recovered in this way. some of the sites were actually found at a relatively large distance from the translation start  and many sites were found located in the shared regulatory region of neighboring genes located on opposite strands . although many sites were found in both searches, the similarity score was mostly clearly better for one than for the other. genes/operons predicted to be controlled by both regulators included the known genes/operons glnra  and tnra. additional shared sites were found upstream of alstpuchpucjklm and the amtb-glnk operon. although these sites have not been attributed to glnr earlier and were described to be activated by tnra  <cit> , the relatively high simililarity score and the evolutionary conservation, also among organisms that lack tnra, suggest they are true binding sites. in the case of the amtb-glnk operon  it was formerly concluded that it is not repressed by glnr on the basis of a singular observation. it was found that the amtb-glnk operon remained repressed in a glnr deletion mutant  in the presence of glutamine, similar to the wild-type  <cit> . however this observation does not exclude repression by glnr in case additional regulators are at play. in fact, in l. lactis it was shown that expression of the amtb-glnk operon is controlled by glnr but also by cody  <cit> . in s. mutans it was shown by electrophoretic mobility shift assay that glnr binds to the promoter region of both the glnra and amtb-glnk operon  <cit> . the same study identified glnk as an activator of glnr dna-binding. besides, the data in tables  <dig> and  <dig> indicate that a putative glnr-binding site upstream of amtb is present across almost all species of the class bacilli. the conservation of these putative binding sites, including the conservation of the flanking a and t nucleotides , suggests glnr represses the amtb-glnk operon in all analyzed species, and thus also in b. subtilis.

it was proposed that glnr lacks the capability to recruit rna polymerase and therefore acts solely as a repressor  <cit> . given this lack of activating/recruiting capacity, it is to be expected that glnr will only act on the expression of one gene in various divergons, like for instance on tnra but not ykzb <cit>  and on puch but not pucr <cit> . moreover, in various cases where tnra was shown to activate transcription our analysis suggests the binding site is tnra-specific, like for gabpoppabcdf and glnqhmp. other genes/operons that seem to be tnra-specific in b. subtilis include: yclg, encoding an uronase; ydab, encoding an acyl-coa ligase; pel, encoding a pectate lyase; brab, encoding a branced-chain amino acid-na + symporter; and pucabcde, encoding a xanthine dehydrogenase operon.

the predicted glnr regulon in oral streptococci
glnr binding-site predictions were performed for the oral streptococci s. pneumoniae and s. mutans on basis of the streptococci-specific motif . for s. pneumoniae d <dig> and s. mutans ua <dig>  the genes/operons predicted to be controlled by glnr were compared to the genes/operons whose transcription was most affected in a glnr mutant  <cit> . we found good agreement between prediction and experiment for both organisms . in the case of s. pneumoniae d <dig>  the most significantly up-regulated genes/operons, glnphhq and gdh were represented by the best hits in our analysis. the analysis also revealed the presence of a clear binding site in front of  <dig> other genes/operons, in line with the predictions of  <cit> . these included the second glutamine abc transporter  and an operon containing enzymes of the urea cycle . the clear regulatory connection between glnr and the arcab operon  was found in all sequenced s. pneumoniae strains, but was absent in the other species. the absence of a change in arcab and glnqhmp expression upon inactivation of glnr may be explained by the presence of additional regulatory interactions.

the glnr-binding site identifications were made as described in the methods for all strains with a published genome . the composition of the regulon appeared identical between strains although the similarity scores of particular binding sites varied slightly. the table lists the numbers obtained with strains tigr <dig> and ua <dig>  respectively. column 4: the ranking is based on the scores obtained with the similar motif search procedure, which provides various sites with identical scores and thus identical ranking. the absence of certain high scoring sites  was caused by the conservative criteria we applied for a site to qualify as a putative binding site. column  <dig> gives the observed ranking on basis of the transcriptional response towards a glnr knock out mutation  as derived from  <cit>  and the ranking of operons that are downregulated in a s. mutans glnr knock out after exposure to acid stress for  <dig> minutes  <cit> . the ranking score was calculated by dividing the fold change in the glnr mutant by the fold change in the wild-type. column  <dig> : in some strains the arca and glnq orfs have not been called. the published sequence of strain r <dig> suggests arca and glnq are truncated in this strain. column  <dig> : the composition of the binding site upstream of arcab and glnqhmp varies between strains.

* although  <cit>  studied the effects in strain d <dig>  the used microarrays were based on strains tigr <dig> and r <dig>  for reasons of comparison we have therefore listed the locus tags in strain tigr <dig> 

in the case of s. mutans ua <dig> the genes and operons found to be mostly affected in the knockout mutant  <cit>  were the nrga-smu_1657c operon, coding for the ammonium transporter amtb and its nitrogen regulatory protein glnk; the citb-citz-idh operon coding for aconitate hydratase, citrate synthase and isocitrate dehydrogenase; the glnqhmp and glnphhq operons encoding glutamine abc transporters; and smu. <dig>  coding for a putative membrane protein, which is in a divergon with glnphhq. the best hits resulting from our analysis are also located upstream of the same operons. moreover, we found a clear binding site preceding the genes gdh and thrc. the citb-citz-idh operon has been shown to be essential for glutamate biosynthesis in s. mutans <cit> .

conserved genetic associations of glnr and the effect of the other regulators
glnr binding-site predictions were performed for selected genomes that represented all sequenced species of the class bacilli. we then collected the function annotation of all proteins encoded by genes/operons downstream of a putative glnr-binding site that fitted the selection criteria  to generate an overview of the regulatory connections that are conserved between more than three species . the results are summarized in tables  <dig>   <dig> and  <dig>  as expected, we found a conserved regulatory connection between glnr and the glnra operon in all analyzed species and with tnra in all bacilli. only in a few species of the order bacillales the related glnr-binding sites deviated from the consensus . another connection that was conserved in almost all of the analyzed species was that with amtb .

the related data can be found in additional file  <dig> 

various additional conserved connections were found, although these appeared far more family-specific. for instance, in the order lactobacillales a genomic association with the genes of the two glutamine abc transporter encoding variants glnphq or glnqhmp were identified, whereas this association appeared to be replaced by one with the sodium/proton amino acid symporters encoded by gltt  and alst <cit>  in various species within the family of the bacillaceae. the alst protein is very similar to glnt, a cation-glutamine symporter, i.e. showing a high degree of sequence conservation and having about the same length and the same number of predicted transmembrane helices. although the protein is sometimes referred to as an alanine transporter, alst could well be a cation-glutamine or asparagine symporter.

other associations that were conserved included that with the gdh gene  and the citbz-icd operon  in many streptococci, the ureabc operon  and the nasdef operon  in several bacillus species and with several genes involved in purine and asparagine/aspartate transport and metabolism , ywocd , ansa and ansz  and asna .

we also found a clear glnr-binding site upstream of several genes involved in regulation, for instance of mcp  and of the ycsfgi-kipiar-ycsk operon . in the initial description of the ycsfgi-kipiar-ycsk operon  <cit> , ycsf was related to the lactam  utilization gene lamb of aspergillus nidulans <cit> , and kipa  was related to a urea amidolyase of yeast. later, kipi was identified as a protein inhibitor of auto-phosphorylation of kinase a, the sensor histidine kinase responsible for processing post-exponential phase information and for providing phosphate input to the phosphorelay that activates developmental transcription via phosphorylated spo0a, and kipa as a protein that counteracts the inhibition  <cit> . ycsg showed similarity to brab  of pseudomonas aeruginosa <cit> . the operon was found repressed upon growth on good nitrogen sources like ammonia and glutamine and derepressed on poor nitrogen sources  <cit> , in line with repression mediated by glnr. the association with the ycsfgi-kipiar-ycsk operon connects glnr-mediated regulation to the regulation of sporulation in some bacilli.

another important finding was that in b. subtilis many operons related to the purine degradation pathway are controlled by glnr and/or tnra, like pucabcdepuchpucipucjklm and ureabc. the relation between purine catabolism and control by tnra was established before experimentally. it was observed that a tnra mutant strain could not use purines or its metabolic intermediates as a nitrogen source during nitrogen limited conditions  <cit> . nevertheless, the extent to which both glnr and tnra are connected to the related operons is surprising.

we observed no clear dependency between the composition of the predicted glnr regulon and the presence or absence of the other nitrogen-related regulators cody and tnra. for instance, there are only a few differences between the predicted glnr regulon of b. subtilis and b.cereus suggesting that glnr does not take over regulatory roles of tnra. similarly, the presence or absence of cody does not seem to affect the size of the glnr regulon in the lactobacillaceae. in l. lactis, a species that has cody, it was shown experimentally that at least three genes/operons  are repressed by glnr  <cit> . we indeed identified clear glnr-binding sites in the upstream region of these three genes/operons in l. lactis. in l. plantarum and l. monocytogenes, two species that lack cody, the same genes/operons appear to be preceded by a glnr-binding site and only a few additional genes were found connected to glnr indicating that glnr does not take over the role of cody in these species. the predicted glnr regulon was smallest, consisting of only glnra, in the meat isolates macrococcus caseolyticus  and l. sakei .

CONCLUSIONS
we have analyzed all sequenced bacilli for the presence of genes encoding central nitrogen metabolism and transport of the related metabolites, and identified their connection to the nitrogen metabolism regulator glnr. although there is a considerable variety in the presence of the central enzymes gs, g, gdh and gogat, and in the number of available transport systems for the central nitrogen-related metabolites, the composition of the glnr regulon is relatively invariable between species. moreover, we hardly found an effect of the absence or presence of the other regulators cody, tnra and gltc on the size of the predicted glnr regulon.

we made an initial conservative regulon prediction by restricting the regulatory association to those connections that are conserved between at least three species. in general, our findings are also in line with previous comparative in silico analysis performed on a limited number of species  <cit> . careful redefinition of a specific glnr-binding and a specific tnra-binding motif caused a slight but clear separation in the predicted regulons. it is likely that the conserved a/ts at the 3′ and 5′ end of the glnr motif, which are absent in the tnra motif, contribute significantly to the separation. for b. subtiliss. pneumoniaes. mutans and l. lactis our predictions complied with the available experimental data. moreover, within the bacilli we identified several new potential members of the glnr regulon, including the ywocd operon and the ycsfgi-kipiar-ycsk operon.

our analysis confirmed that for most species the size of the glnr regulon is relatively small. the main regulatory associations in the species of the class bacilli are with the incorporation of ammonium into central metabolism  via glutamine synthetase , and with ammonium  and glutamine/glutamate transport . at the same time, the lesser conserved associations point to a somewhat broader role. many of the conserved associations include genes that are either directly  or more indirectly  relate to the intracellular production of ammonia or are related to the import of aminated compounds . thus, it appears that the main conserved role of glnr is to prevent the influx and intracellular production of glutamine and ammonium under conditions of high nitrogen availability. the connection of glnr-mediated repression with the control of intracellular ammonia concentration is interesting. such a role fits with the intrinsic need for tight control of ammonia levels as put forward by  <cit> , who argue that transport of ammonia  should be tightly regulated to limit futile cycling by diffusion of ammonia out of the cell.

