BACKGROUND
directed evolution of proteins has become a widely adopted and accepted method for protein engineering. there are two basic iterative steps involved in the process: the creation of diversity at the gene level and the screening or selection for improved variants . the quality of the diversity method is crucial and the performance of the chosen protocol has a direct impact on the success rate of obtaining improved variants as well as on the time and cost effectiveness of the ensuing screening or selection process  <cit> . two main categories can be classified into methods for creating molecular diversity: random mutagenesis and recombination  <cit> . a recent, in-depth comparison of random mutagenesis methods showed that the existing methods are limited and highly biased. on average they can only achieve between  <dig> – <dig>  amino acid substitutions per residue  <cit> . on the other hand, to date recombination methods have not been compared in detail. since its introduction in  <dig>  dna shuffling of stemmer has become a widely adopted method for creating chimeric genes. as of the end of february  <dig>  the two original papers outlining the methodology  have been cited  <dig> and  <dig> times, respectively  <cit> . dna shuffling is the most common method with which to recombine genes, and it has become a powerful tool for protein evolution  <cit> .

despite the pervasiveness of dna shuffling in protein engineering, there are several drawbacks to its implementation. the protocol is somewhat skill-intensive, involving the fragmentation of the genes to be shuffled with dnasei and a long, primerless reassembly pcr step . because dna shuffling utilizes annealing and extension steps during reassembly, crossover points are biased towards regions of high sequence identity  <cit> . in addition, the yield of chimeras can be quite low, particularly when short genes are being shuffled. parental background ranging from around 20%  <cit>  to almost 100%  <cit>  has been reported. finally, there is a lower limit to the dna identity level of the genes being recombined, with 56% being the lowest reported identity level that lead to successful chimera generation  <cit> .

one alternate group of methods to recombine genes are fragmentation-free pcr-based protocols, which utilize a series of short annealing/extension steps to promote template switching, which in turn, leads to recombination. the first such protocol was the staggered extension process . further modifications that introduced skew primers to amplify chimeras over parental background have been introduced recently . these recombination-dependent pcr  protocols are much less skill-intensive than dna shuffling, and the use of skew primers should, in principle, eliminate parental background.

the efficiency of diversity generation has a direct impact on the time and cost effectiveness of the screening or selection process, and ultimately, on the probability of identifying an improved variant. the optimal library generation method would be unbiased and would avoid duplication of chimeras. reducing or completely eliminating parental background would minimize the effort required to screen these redundant variants. additionally, the ability to control the crossover number via tunable parameters is desirable as it enables access to different areas of sequence space. it is important to note that to minimize severe disruption of chimeras the crossover region should be located in regions of similar three-dimensional structure  <cit> .

the purpose of this work is to systematically compare the libraries produced by dna shuffling and rd-pcr using the same representative templates, in order to determine the suitability of rd-pcr as a less labor-intensive alternative to dna shuffling for the recombination of genes. we were interested in the number and type of chimeras generated by each protocol: the location of crossover points, the number of crossovers obtained, and the percentage of unique sequences generated with each protocol in our three test systems. we focused on rd-pcr as opposed to step since the use of skew primers will eliminate most parental background. our three test cases encompass the most common scenarios encountered in protein engineering: the recombination of point mutations, recombination of closely related genes, and the recombination of low homology but structurally similar proteins . to our knowledge, this is the first detailed, head-to-head comparison of dna shuffling and rd-pcr on the same systems.

RESULTS
recombination of point mutations using β-lactamase system
one common strategy in the directed evolution of proteins is several cycles of error-prone pcr followed by recombination of the point mutations in selected improved clones to enrich positive mutations and delete negative ones  <cit> . the optimal recombination protocol in this case would result in a high number of crossovers, no additional point mutations, and no parental background.

to estimate the crossover rate, we created a phenotype-based screening system to estimate crossover frequency on a large scale by introducing mutations into β-lactamase that disrupt activity and are not recoverable by a pcr mutation to the wild-type or a tolerated amino acid  <cit> . in contrast to previous systems  <cit> , this system allows easy selection for reactivation and does not show any genetic instability that could alter the distribution between observed and actual recombination frequencies  <cit> . crossovers in certain areas are required for reactivation, so an estimated crossover number can be obtained directly from the observed reactivation rate , reducing the need to sequence large numbers of library members. template pairs were created requiring 1– <dig> crossovers for reactivation. the template pairs for dna shuffling and rd-pcr were slightly different to allow for some extension of the genes before the first crossover in the rd-pcr pairs , but the nature of the point mutations and the number of crossovers required per  <dig> bp was kept constant.

rd-pcr was optimized by varying dna concentration, annealing/extension temperature, and time. a template concentration of  <dig>  ng dna/μl of pcr reaction gave sufficient yields of pcr product, while higher template concentrations reduced the crossover yield . the results of the reactivation experiments are summarized in table  <dig>  using the cycling conditions from milano & tang  <cit> , the crossover rate decreases upon increasing annealing/extension time, yielding a lower survival rate on ampicillin. this is logical, as longer extension times reduce template switching, providing less opportunity for crossovers to occur. using the cycling conditions from ikeuchi et al.  <cit> , increasing the annealing temperature increases the reactivation rate but decreases the yield of pcr product. higher temperatures favor the annealing and extension of longer fragments, making it harder to begin synthesizing a recombinant gene but promoting annealing of partially extended products to different templates after the melting step.

cr = crossovers required to gain activity

a/e = annealing/extension

*94°c for  <dig> min;  <dig> cycles of ;  <dig> cycles of ; + 94°c  <dig> min,  <dig> cycles of , 72°c  <dig> min, hold at 4°c

using pfu polymerase, which has higher fidelity than taq polymerase, slightly decreased the reactivation rate. however, reactivation rates were still fairly comparable to those in other conditions. in cases where avoiding the introduction of further point mutations is desirable, pfu polymerase can be successfully used in rd-pcr.

dna shuffling can be optimized either by varying the size of fragments or by adjusting the annealing temperature. larger fragments tend to yield fewer crossovers  <cit> . because of the high level of homology in our case, a fragment size of 50– <dig> bp produced sufficient product yield, though in many cases larger fragments are required to promote assembly.

in general, the reactivation rates for most rd-pcr conditions and dna shuffling are very similar. the optimized rd-pcr conditions  showed almost 2-fold higher crossover rates than dna shuffling. a further advantage of rd-pcr is the ease of implementation for the rd-pcr protocol, since very low template concentrations are required  and no fragmentation is required.

recombination of closely related genes
most family shuffling experiments are performed using genes from closely related organisms with dna identity levels greater than 75%, due in part to the homology limits of the dna shuffling protocol. to represent this scenario we chose the sequences of the red fluorescent protein from discosoma sp.  and the monomeric red fluorescent variant . our version of mrfp had been codon optimized for expression in e. coli, giving the pair a dna identity level of 75%. the chosen template pair is still a challenging test case, since the average length of identical regions in the alignment is only  <dig>  bp. the optimal result when recombining closely related genes would be a diverse library that samples all possible crossover positions. to determine crossover number, crossover position, percentage of parental background, percentage of duplicate sequences, and to estimate point mutation rate, we sequenced  <dig> randomly chosen functional and non-functional variants from our libraries. we also estimated the number of useful sequences for screening purposes, which is the total number of chimeras minus the number of duplicates of any sequences that appear more than once.

we used a series of templates to generate rd-pcr library. figure  <dig> shows the different type of templates we used for the libraries rd-pcr  <dig> to rd-pcr  <dig>  for rd-pcr  <dig> one-sided skew templates were used. rd-pcr  <dig> is a combination of one sided-skew template with another parental template having a truncation near the beginning of the gene. rd-pcr  <dig> templates is similar to the templates used in rd-pcr  <dig> but with an increased truncation length. rd-pcr  <dig> templates are one sided-skew templates with truncations on both templates. lastly, rd-pcr  <dig> uses templates that are both two sided-skewed. the effects of using different templates on the library are discussed in the next few paragraphs.

following the procedure to recombine β-lactamase, our first rd-pcr library  was created using a single skew primer for each parent as shown in figure  <dig>  we sequenced  <dig> variants from this library, all of which contained at least one crossover. however,  <dig> out of  <dig> contained a single crossover at position  <dig> , meaning that 38/ <dig>  or 76% were duplicate sequences, which we term chimera background. consequently, in a screening scenario only  <dig> out of  <dig>  or 24%, would be useful sequences to screen. the bias could not be removed by truncating the first  <dig> bases  from the front of the dsred gene before recombination . truncating the first  <dig> base pairs of the dsred parental gene created a bias towards crossovers at the 3' end of the genes, although it was not localized to a single position . when truncating both templates simultaneously, we could only obtain clonable products when dsred was truncated at the 3' end  and mrfp was truncated at the 5' end .  fifty variants from this library  were sequenced, and the result was a localization of crossovers to position  <dig> . statistics for the libraries are shown in figure  <dig> 

also striking, in the case of the truncated libraries rd-pcr  <dig> and rd-pcr  <dig>  we obtained parental background of approximately 10% of sequences, despite the fact that this should not be possible when using skew primers. the parental background could arise either from contamination of the pcr reaction with full-length templates, or by the accidental elongation of the unpaired extension on a strand containing no crossovers . one way to minimize such accidental elongation would be to use two different skew primers for each parental template. even though the recombination pcr is performed with only one primer for each parent, the amplification pcr is performed with both, thereby creating unique extensions on both ends of the gene and blocking unproductive skew extension without recombination.

when we created the library using templates extended in both directions , parental background was eliminated, and only chimeras were obtained. of  <dig> colonies randomly sequenced, 72% contained unique sequences, predominantly with one crossover per gene. one sequence with three crossovers and one with five crossovers were obtained. crossover points were also more evenly distributed than in the case of the libraries made with one skew primer, which showed significant bias towards the ends of the genes . further details on all of the sequences obtained can be found in the supplementary information .

the bias toward crossovers at the ends of pcr products amplified with single skew primers has been noted previously in recombinations during normal  pcr cycling conditions  <cit> . by using the templates amplified with two skew primers we have demonstrated that this bias can be reduced significantly. therefore, when performing rd-pcr the use of two skew primers for each parental template is important to avoid skew extension without recombination, which leads to parental background and a bias toward crossovers at the ends of the genes. when such precautions are taken, rd-pcr libraries result in a higher ratio of unique chimeras with lower parental background than those produced by dna shuffling . however, it is important to note that the majority of chimeras produced by rd-pcr had a single crossover , while dna shuffling produced sequences with  <dig> or more crossovers , nearly 25% of the time and that the dna shuffling parental background could also be reduced by using a skewed primer strategy similar to rd-pcr. rd-pcr is also constrained to have an odd number of crossovers  because the skew primers require that different parents contribute the 5' and 3' sequences. the shading on figure  <dig> indicates regions of identity between mrfp and dsred. the lines on supplementary figures s. <dig>  to s. <dig>  represent rolling point averages of dna identity between mrfp and dsred. in many cases, crossovers are clustered in regions high in shading  to s. <dig> ) for all protocols tested. in fact, the large level of identity at the 3' end of the gene may be partially responsible for the clustering of crossover points in this region for rd-pcr using one skew primer per parent.

the optimized dna shuffling procedure applied to mrfp and dsred produced approximately half parental genes . the percentage of parental background is consistent with published results for the shuffling of green fluorescent protein and yellow fluorescent protein, which have a similar dna identity level  <cit> . of the  <dig> chimeras we obtained a mean of  <dig>  crossovers.  <dig> had a single crossover,  <dig> had two crossovers, four had three crossovers, and one had four crossovers. characteristics of the library are summarized in figure  <dig> .

it is interesting to note that we obtained more than 50% functional chimeras of dsred and mrfp. table s <dig> shows the functional relationships of some of the chimeras we obtained through recombination. a high percentage of functional chimeras should be expected as mrfp protein was evolved from dsred protein. as a result of their high homologies, most of the crossovers preserved the activity of the parents.

recombination of distant homologs
in some cases it is desirable to recombine distant homologs with a low level of dna sequence identity but a high level of structural similarity  <cit> . in this case, the potential for diversity increase is very large, but the probability of obtaining non-functional variants is very high. currently, very low homology recombination is accomplished by the iterative-truncation family of methods  <cit>  or by oligonucleotide-directed shuffling  <cit> , because dna shuffling cannot successfully recombine genes with very low levels of nucleotide identity below about 50%. we were interested in determining the lower limit of homology that can be successfully recombined using rd-pcr. dna shuffling experiments were carried out simultaneously as a control measure.

we were able to successfully recombine dsred with hcred   with both dna shuffling and rd-pcr. library quality was similar to that of dsred/mrfp – figures  <dig> and  <dig> show that no parental background was obtained in the case of rd-pcr  and approximately 20% parental background was obtained for dna shuffling . 56% of the crossovers for rd-pcr were localized near a  <dig> base pair stretch of dna identity, whereas crossovers for dna shuffling were more diffuse. in general, the dna shuffling reaction appeared to yield about the same number of crossover positions, but yielded 40% more unique chimeras  and many more times the clones with multiple crossovers than rd-pcr .

we then moved to a lower dna identity level, recombining gfp and mrfp . sequencing of  <dig> variants from the rd-pcr showed all variants had one crossover  and 18% useful chimeric sequences . most of the sequences  contained a crossover point at the 5' end of the gene, with the remaining six unique crossover points distributed across the gene . two variants had a crossover in regions with a single base pair of identity between the two sequences, highlighting the ability of pcr-based methods to produce diverse chimeras. we were unable to obtain any chimeras using dna shuffling with this template set . we also found most of the chimeras were non functional . in this case, the homology between gfp and mrfp could be too low for useful shuffling.

CONCLUSIONS
to streamline the process of screening large combinatorial libraries, it is highly important to have an efficient diversity generation method, one which produces unique, nonparental sequences and is easy to implement. the current gold-standard for recombination of genes is dna shuffling, although this protocol suffers from a high rate of parental background and can be technically difficult to perform. one recently developed alternative to dna shuffling is rd-pcr, which is based on simple techniques and should, in theory, produce libraries with no parental background. we explored the use of rd-pcr as an alternative to dna shuffling for three common laboratory scenarios: recombination of point mutations, closely related sequences, and distantly related homologs.

we found that rd-pcr produces libraries of equal or greater quality to dna shuffling in the first two scenarios, as determined by the percentage of unique sequences from each protocol in the case of the fluorescent proteins and by the reactivation rate in the case of β-lactamase. depending on the number of inactivating mutations , n crossovers were observed for either protocol. in the moderate homology scenario, recombination experiments for dsred/hcred indicate that dna shuffling performed better than rd-pcr in producing a higher quality library with multiple crossovers in the low homology situation of gfp/mrfp , only rd-pcr yielded chimeras.

generally, the rate of introduction of inadvertent point mutations with rd-pcr is similar to the rate for dna shuffling  performed with pfu polymerase as well as for normal pcr amplifications , even though rd-pcr employs taq polymerase. even though taq polymerase lacks the 5' to 3' excision-repair mechanism, rd-pcr uses a short cycling protocol. one caveat of the rd-pcr for the shuffling of fluorescence genes is the dominant finding of only one crossover per gene, while dna shuffling resulted often in multiple crossovers. the above results imply that dna shuffling should be the method of choice in cases where multiple crossovers are highly desired.

dna shuffling and rd-pcr seemed to have distinct crossover positions, hence, in some situations dna shuffling and rd-pcr could be complementary methods used for generating diverse libraries. one can perform rd-pcr followed by dna shuffling to improve sequence diversity of the library.

both recombination protocols share the bias that they preferentially produce crossover in region of high sequence identity in the alignment. this phenomenon can be overcome by using homology-independent recombination protocols  <cit> . a combined approach was used by griswold et al.  <cit> . they divided the genes in five sections and perform rd-pcr on four of them to obtain multiple crossovers/gene. one section showed low dna identity  and they used a homology-independent recombination approach called enhanced crossover scratchy  <cit> .

to create high quality libraries with rd-pcr, two skew primers for each parental sequence must be used to minimize skew extension without recombination, such as parental background and a bias toward crossovers at the termini of the genes. if care in library design is taken, rd-pcr represents a viable alternative to classical dna shuffling that is easier to implement. similarly, to create high quality libraries with reduced parental background, skew primers can also be used. such an application has been successfully tested on estrogen receptor in yeast to generate chimeras  <cit> .

finally, to improve success of recombination of genes with low level of identity, one can also increase sequence identity between two genes. with decreasing costs of synthesis of whole genes, designer synthetic recombination libraries can be created. it is now straightforward to resynthesize genes with new codon choices to increase dna sequence identity between two genes prior to recombination because it is more economical to order oligonucleotides than ten years ago as the price per base-pair dropped from us $ <dig> to approximately us $ <dig>   <cit> . theoretically, one can re-optimize dna identity between two genes to prior to applying recombination to improve the chances of success and reduce bias in the library.

