BACKGROUND
the sunscreen scytonemin  is exclusively produced by some strains of cyanobacteria in response to uva irradiation . it is deposited as a yellow-brown pigment in the exopolysaccharide sheaths or capsules of the cyanobacteria which produce it  <cit> . scytonemin can protect the organism by effectively minimizing damage associated with uva exposure  <cit> , usually associated with the photoproduction of singlet oxygen  <cit> , as well as the sensitization of endogenous photosensitizers such as flavins and heme groups  <cit> . in the natural environment, organisms capable of producing scytonemin are often under restricted growth and metabolism due to harsh environmental conditions, and are usually found on soil surfaces, rocks, and marine inter-tidal mats  <cit> . scytonemin offers these organisms an alternative to traditional uva repair methods by providing them with a passive, preventative mechanism to resist uva irradiation before it ever reaches cellular targets.

the uv-absorbing ability of scytonemin is based on its chemical structure, a symmetrical indole-alkaloid consisting of fused heterocyclic units  <cit> . the biosynthesis of scytonemin likely involves tryptophan and tyrosine derivatives  <cit> , both of which are known to absorb ambient uvb irradiation  <cit> . although much is known about the biochemistry and ecology of scytonemin, very little was known until recently concerning its biosynthesis and molecular genetics.

in our previous study, using the model organism nostoc punctiforme atcc  <dig> , we were able to characterize an 18-gene region associated with the biosynthesis of scytonemin  <cit> , and compare that genomic region to a similar gene cluster in anabaena pcc  <dig> . since then, two additional cyanobacterial genomes were sequenced, lyngbya pcc  <dig>  and nodularia spumigena ccy  <dig> , which also contain orthologues to the scytonemin-associated genes from n. punctiforme  <cit> , and the putative roles of the initial genes in scytonemin biosynthesis have been corroborated in a recent study  <cit> . additionally, we were able to sequence several putative biosynthetic genes from this region in another scytonemin-producing cyanobacterium, chlorogloeopsis sp. strain cgs- <dig>  <cit> . chlorogloeopsis can also be identified by the strain number ccmee  <dig>  maintained by the culture collection of microorganisms from extreme environments at the university of oregon . genomic comparisons of the scytonemin-associated genes from all five cyanobacteria above suggest many similarities and have resulted in the discovery of additional genes in n. punctiforme that may be associated with scytonemin biosynthesis and regulation. here we describe and characterize genes that appear to be essential for scytonemin biosynthesis, and develop the first hypothetical model for the cellular compartmentalization of scytonemin biosynthesis.

RESULTS
analysis of the scytonemin biosynthesis genomic region in n. punctiforme
in our previous study we proposed that the open reading frames  npr <dig> to npr <dig> in the n. punctiforme genome comprise a functional unit dedicated to scytonemin biosynthesis  <cit> . within this 18-gene cluster, there appears to be a functional separation between the upstream genes and those in the downstream region . although some of the genes in the upstream region had not been associated with any protein function, others had been preliminarily annotated. for example, npr <dig> is annotated in genbank as an acetolactate synthase, which is a thiamine pyrophosphate -requiring enzyme. functionally, acetolactate synthase is able to condense two pyruvate molecules  <cit>  and is almost always found as part of the valine and isoleucine biosynthesis ilvbn operon  <cit> . npr <dig>  on the other hand, is not found anywhere near ilv- genes in the n. punctiforme genome. it does, however, contain domains specific for a tpp-requiring enzyme  <cit> , and it has been shown to have a similarly condensing activity on phenol- and indole-pyruvate moieties  <cit> . this constitutes sufficient divergence to revisit the annotation and rename the gene scya. the next gene in the cluster, npr <dig>  was annotated as leucine dehydrogenase . even though the protein sequence has the necessary domain for glutamate and leucine dehydrogenase, both of which are structurally related nad+-dependent oxidoreductases  <cit> , it only shares a 48% similarity to the leucine dehydrogenase characterized from thermoactinomyces intermedius. the gdha from t. intermedius is involved in catalyzing the oxidative deamination of branched amino acids  <cit> . the product of npr <dig> has a similar activity, but involves the oxidative deamination of aromatic amino acids  <cit> . as in the case of scya, there are sufficient differentiating traits to rename the gene as scyb. even though a protein function cannot be readily predicted for the next four genes , npr <dig> has experimentally been shown to prevent scytonemin production when inactivated through transposon insertion  <cit> . for consistency, given the lack of alternatives, and in keeping with the continuity of scya and scyb, we propose that these four genes encode for truly unique proteins likely essential to scytonemin biosynthesis, and will be referred to as scyc-f, respectively.

the predicted structural features found in some of these genes are also interesting and support a cellular compartmentalization of scytonemin biosynthesis. for example, scyd, scye, and scyf, none of which had been assigned a protein function by annotation, each contain a signal peptide export domain in their derived protein sequence. these n-terminal signature sequences are often associated with periplasmic proteins, suggesting that some stages of scytonemin biosynthesis may occur in the periplasm. furthermore, the protein sequences of scya, tyrp, and npr <dig> all contain at least one transmembrane domain. the software program pslpred  <cit> , which predicts the subcellular localization of bacterial proteins based on their protein sequences, suggests that tyrp may also function on the periplasmic side, while scya and npr <dig> likely function on the cytoplasmic side. while the protein sequence of npr <dig> does not have an n-terminal export domain, the fact that it resembles dsba, a dithiol-disulfide isomerase  that facilitates the formation of disulfide bridges in the folding of periplasmic proteins  <cit> , suggests that it may also localize to the periplasm. this leads us to speculate that a dithiol-disulfide isomerase of this kind could be important as an accessory to the other proteins predicted to be active in the periplasm. thus, the upstream region of the cluster is comprised of novel genes likely involved directly in the assembly of scytonemin biosynthesis, where early condensing reactions occur in the cytoplasm and presumably later steps appear to be localized to the periplasm.

most of the genes located towards the downstream portion of the cluster are clearly associated by similarity with the biosynthesis of aromatic amino acids  <cit> . furthermore, they do not contain structural motives that predict their association with cellular membranes or their transport to the periplasmic space. in this region of the cluster are genes predicted to code for the first two enzymes of the shikimic acid pathway , leading to the formation of 5-dehydroquinate. all of the genes necessary for the biosynthesis of tryptophan from chorismate  are also present, while only prephenate dehydrogenase  is present from the tyrosine biosynthesis pathway, thus ending that pathway at p-hydroxyphenylpyruvate, one amination short of tyrosine  <cit> . in fact, on the basis of chemical structures  <cit> , p-hydroxyphenylpyruvate is a theoretically more direct precursor for scytonemin than tyrosine.

one of the most significant observations regarding these aromatic amino acid genes is that there is at least one other copy of each of them elsewhere in the genome of n. punctiforme at dispersed loci. genes in this dispersed set find homologues in all other cyanobacteria sequenced so far and thus likely have a housekeeping function  <cit> . the cluster of redundant copies of aromatic amino acid biosynthetic genes, by contrast, appears to be unique and always spatially associated with the scytonemin cluster in the few cyanobacterial genomes that have it. therefore, it is reasonable to hypothesize that the downstream region of the scytonemin cluster is likely dedicated to supplying the building blocks for the biosynthesis of scytonemin, while the standard housekeeping copies remain important for central metabolism. this is supported by the differential up-regulation of these redundant genes along with the induction of scytonemin synthesis in n. punctiforme, while the expression levels of the housekeeping genes remain unaltered  <cit> .

two genes in the downstream region of the cluster have previously been assigned putative protein functions not related to aromatic amino acid biosynthesis. npr <dig> shows similarity to a putative glycosyltransferase, with 77% identity to a glycosyltransferase in nodularia. interestingly, some glycosyltransferases in bacteria have been linked to exopolysaccharide biosynthesis  <cit> . specifically, in nostoc commune, the synthesis of scytonemin is coupled to the synthesis of the exopolysaccharide  <cit> . the protein sequence of npr <dig> has a transmembrane domain and is annotated as a putative tyrosinase, tyrp, a copper monooxygenase that can hydroxylate monophenols and oxidize o-diphenols to o-quinols  <cit> . indeed, npr <dig> has the essential conserved residues for cu2+ binding and is a putative tyrosinase-like protein. it is unique, in that it does not have any cyanobacterial protein sequence homologs in genbank, and it can be predicted to play an important role in scytonemin biosynthesis, as explained below. the other downstream gene is npr <dig>  the last gene in this cluster. it has two putative transmembrane domains and was annotated as a hypothetical membrane protein, since it lacks real homologies with known genes.

upstream from the gene cluster are two genes that might be involved in the regulation of scytonemin biosynthesis, given their high degree of conservation in sequence and location among distantly related strains . these protein sequences reveal strong similarities to two-component signal transduction systems. these systems typically involve the autophosphorylation of a histidine kinase  and the subsequent transfer of the phosphate group to an aspartate on the protein. this phosphorylated aspartate then acts as a phospho-donor to a response regulator protein , which ultimately turns on the transcription of the genes the system regulates  <cit> . npf <dig> likely belongs to class ii histidine kinases, which are characterized by the presence of pas/pac sensory domains that are generally sensitive to oxygen, redox, or light  <cit> . npf <dig> is a class ii response regulator   <cit>  predicted to be a positive transcriptional regulator  <cit> . a working hypothesis is that npf <dig> and npf <dig> might regulate the adjacent genomic region  associated with scytonemin biosynthesis.

comparative genomics of the scytonemin gene cluster
the scytonemin-associated gene region was identified in three additional strains, belonging to the genera anabaena, lyngbya, and nodularia, among all bacteria whose genomes have been completely sequenced. genomic arrangements of homologous genes were similar to those of n. punctiforme . the scytonemin core genes  are conserved in all four genomes, their orthologs are at least 42%, and most greater than 65%, similar to one another , and they are positioned near sets of redundant copies of aromatic amino acid biosynthesis genes. these redundant copies are orthologous to the exact same set found in the n. punctiforme genomic region. the only other gene in the cluster conserved across all four genomes was the response regulator, npf <dig> in n. punctiforme.

a data are based on amino acid sequences

b similar sequences are not in the corresponding genome

in the scytonemin gene cluster of anabaena, lyngbya, and nodularia, there are five conserved genes downstream of scyf that are absent from the n. punctiforme cluster . in hindsight inspection, orthologs of these genes could readily be identified elsewhere on n. punctiforme's chromosome. there, they comprised a five-gene satellite cluster with all five genes oriented in the same transcriptional direction . in n. punctiforme, npf <dig> and npf <dig> are annotated as unknown hypothetical proteins, while npf <dig>  npf <dig>  and npf <dig> are annotated as a putative metal-dependent hydrolase, prenyltransferase , and type i phosphodiesterase, respectively. however, these annotations are based on weak similarity, and the orthologs of each of these genes are annotated as unknown hypothetical proteins in the anabaena, lyngbya, and nodularia genomes. at this point, it seems that ambiguity calls for a cautious approach by postponing a specific annotation for these genes.

in a previous study we determined that anabaena was unable to produce scytonemin  <cit> , even though it contained many of the genes in the scytonemin cluster, and interpreted this as a case of relic genetic information. it was thus important to test if scytonemin was produced in the other strains used in the comparisons. we could elicit the production of scytonemin neither in lyngbya nor in nodularia, upon exposing cultures of each strain to uva radiation, which is the standard procedure to achieve biosynthetic induction . it is possible that these strains may have had the ability to produce scytonemin at some point in their evolutionary history, but have now lost it, since laboratory strains are rarely, if ever, exposed to the doses of uva required for scytonemin biosynthesis. furthermore, since scytonemin is a passive sunscreen it is most effective in environments with pulsed resource availability as explained above. since anabaena and nodularia are planktonic  <cit> , their need for a passive sunscreen is not as crucial as it is for the nostoc and chlorogloeopsis strains of terrestrial habitats  <cit> . although some strains of lyngbya produce scytonemin, lyngbya pcc  <dig> does not produce it. this may be because the marine inter-tidal zone that it was isolated from had varying degrees of resource availability and uv exposure, thus this lyngbya strain may have not needed a passive sunscreen.

given these results, it seemed important to obtain sequences for the scytonemin-associated region from another scytonemin-producing strain besides n. punctiforme. chlorogloeopsis sp. strain cgs-o- <dig>  <cit> , a cyanobacterium known to produce scytonemin  <cit> , was selected for this purpose. using targeted pcr based on primers designed from the n. punctiforme genome, we were able to amplify and sequence several genes from the genomic region associated with scytonemin biosynthesis of chlorogloeopsis, and found that their genomic arrangement was very similar to that of n. punctiforme . additionally, the five-gene satellite cluster from n. punctiforme was found and sequenced in chlorogloeopsis as a continuous segment. as in n. punctiforme, the chlorogloeopsis satellite gene cluster was not continuous with the scytonemin-associated gene cluster. although we were unable to link all of the scytonemin-associated gene orthologs of chlorogloeopsis into a single contig, we could establish clear similarities between the chlorogloeopsis and n. punctiforme gene clusters .

insights into the biosynthetic pathway and working model for scytonemin biosynthesis
scytonemin is a symmetrical dimeric molecule, and it is expected that each monomer is synthesized separately before condensing to form the dimer. in theory, if tryptophan and tyrosine were used as building blocks, the biosynthesis of scytonemin could involve as little as four to six biosynthetic steps. in fact, structural, genetic, and preliminary radiotracer evidence indicates that the biosynthesis of scytonemin starts from aromatic amino acid  precursors  <cit> . previously isolated natural products, with structural similarities to putative scytonemin subunits, also provide useful biosynthetic clues. nostodione a  has not only been isolated by ozonolysis of scytonemin  <cit> , but has also been isolated from nostoc commune and scytonema hofmanni  <cit> , two typical scytonemin-producing strains. it is thus logical to assume that nostodione a is the most likely monomeric intermediate of scytonemin. prenostodione , the methylated carboxylic acid precursor of nostodione a, has been reported from nostoc sp. tau strain il- <dig>  further suggesting that the origin of the biosynthetic pathway of scytonemin is from a condensation of tryptophan and phenylpropanoid derived subunits  <cit> . indeed, a recent study found that deaminated tryptophan and tyrosine  condense, through the action of scya and scyb, to form an intermediate that is structurally similar to diolmycin a <dig>   <cit> . diolmycin a <dig> has been isolated from streptomyces sp.  <cit>  and is a plausible intermediate in the scytonemin biosynthetic pathway. furthermore, oxidation of the tyrosine moiety appears to be essential for the biosynthesis of nostodione a, an essential precursor to scytonemin as mentioned above. we propose that this oxidation could be carried by the tyrosinase-like tyrp encoded for in the scytonemin gene cluster, since tyrosinases are known to promote monooxygenation in similar moieties  <cit> . it is interesting to note that the only scytonemin-associated gene in common between n. punctiforme and chlorogloeopsis , that is absent from the other three strains , is tyrp . in fact, the gene appears to be absent from the genomes of these lyngbya, anabaena,and nodularia strains altogether, as is the case for all other fully sequenced cyanobacterial genomes. we do note, however, that while the genome of anabaena is complete, the lyngbya and nodularia genome projects are almost complete, and because of this we cannot determine with absolute certainty at the time of this publication if tyrp is absent from these genomes.

a working model of the subcellular compartmentalization of scytonemin biosynthesis in the cell, based on the above genomic analyses, is provided in figure  <dig>  following a uva radiation cue, the redundant genomic copies of the trp and tyr genes are expressed to lead the production of the tryptophan and p-hydroxyphenylpyruvate monomers from chorismate. the production of chorismate from central metabolites is boosted by additional expression of the genes arog and arob, which code for the regulatory and rate-limiting enzymes in the shikimic acid pathway, respectively. these precursors are first processed by scya, scyb, scyc, and npr <dig> in the cytoplasm. the resulting intermediaries are then excreted to the periplasm via some unknown membrane transport mechanism, as no known mechanism is coded for within the scytonemin cluster. there, they are subject to reactions orchestrated by the periplasmic enzymes scyd, scye, scyf, dsba, and tyrp to produce the reduced form of scytonemin. once secreted to the extracellular matrix, it auto-oxidizes and takes on its final yellow-brown appearance. parallel studies suggest that a type iv secretion system, similar in mechanism to a bacterial conjugation system  <cit> , is used to secrete scytonemin to the extracellular matrix . once scytonemin is in the extracellular slime layer in sufficient quantities, it blocks the incoming uva cue, thus returning the gene expression to background levels and halting the further synthesis of the sunscreen.

CONCLUSIONS
the conservation of genes and genomic arrangements between the n. punctiforme scytonemin biosynthesis gene cluster and the chlorogloeopsis gene cluster allows us to predict which genes are important in the biosynthesis of scytonemin. since scya to scyf are conserved across all of the strains described above, and are either unknown in function or putatively assigned a function, we expect that these six genes will provide the most useful information for determining the scytonemin biosynthetic pathway. additionally, we have reason to associate the n. punctiforme genes npf <dig> to npf <dig> with the biosynthesis of scytonemin, and it is likely that the response regulator  and sensor kinase  upstream from the cluster are involved in regulating this system.

furthermore, protein sequence data from several of the genes in the cluster provide us with clues regarding scytonemin biosynthesis and localization. while the roles of scya and scyb in the preliminary stages of scytonemin biosynthesis are predicted to occur in the cytoplasm, a working model of scytonemin biosynthesis suggests periplasmic compartmentalization of the later biosynthetic stages. overall, our analyses have increased our understanding of scytonemin biosynthesis and will facilitate the construction of more direct and efficient hypotheses for future experiments. furthermore, as scytonemin has been documented as having anti-inflammatory  <cit>  and antiproliferative properties  <cit> , our work also helps those working on the biomedical potential of scytonemin and related compounds. this study constitutes a step forward in understanding the biosynthesis of secondary metabolites in bacteria and contributes a novel example of a biosynthetic pathway for a microbial indole-alkaloid. we hope that our contributions to understanding secondary metabolite biosynthesis in cyanobacteria will ultimately lead to the discovery of additional natural products and the pathways by which they are synthesized.

