BACKGROUND
breast cancer is the most common form of cancer and the second leading cause of cancer death among women in the united states, with an estimated ~ <dig>  new cases and ~ <dig>  deaths in  <dig>  <cit> . the main cause of breast cancer death comes from its metastases to distant sites. early diagnosis and adjuvant systemic therapy  substantially reduce the risk of distant metastases. however, adjuvant therapy has serious short- and long-term side effects and involves high medical costs  <cit> . therefore, highly accurate prognostic tests are essential to aid clinicians in deciding which patients are at high risk of developing metastases and should receive adjuvant therapy. currently, the most widely used treatment guidelines, st. gallen  <cit>  and the us national institutes of health   <cit>  consensus criteria, assess a patient's risk of distant metastases based on clinical prognostic factors such as tumor size, lymph node status, and histologic grade. these guidelines cannot accurately identify at-risk patients and about 70–80% of patients defined as being at risk by these criteria and receiving adjuvant therapy would have survived without it  <cit> . in addition, many patients who would be cured by local or regional treatment alone are "over-treated" and suffer toxic side effects of adjuvant therapy unnecessarily. therefore, there is an urgent need for new prognostic tests to precisely define a patient's risk of developing metastases to ensure that the patient receives appropriate therapy.

the advent of dna microarray technology provides a powerful tool in various aspects of cancer research. simultaneous assessment of the expression of thousands of genes in a single experiment could allow better understanding of the complex and heterogeneous molecular properties of breast cancer. such information may lead to more accurate prognostic signatures for prediction of metastasis risk in breast cancer patients. over the past few years, a number of studies have identified prognostic gene expression signatures and proposed corresponding prognostic tests based on these genes. in many cases, the prediction of breast cancer outcome is superior to conventional prognostic tests  <cit> . among these studies, the two largest have attempted to identify gene expression signatures and prognostic tests strongly predictive of distant metastases. van't veer et al. applied a supervised method to identify a 70-gene signature, and a correlation-based test capable of predicting a short interval to distant metastases, in a cohort of  <dig> young breast cancer patients  with lymph-node-negative tumors  <cit> . the test was applied to a cohort of  <dig> patients with either lymph-node-negative or lymph-node-positive breast tumors  <cit> . using a different microarray platform, wang et al. derived a 76-gene prognostic signature from  <dig> lymph-node-negative patients who had not received adjuvant systemic treatment. the signature could be used to predict distant metastasis within five years in breast cancer patients of all age groups with lymph-node-negative tumors and was subsequently applied to a set of  <dig> lymph-node-negative patients  <cit> . these studies have shown that tests based on gene expression signatures would result in a substantial reduction of the number of patients receiving unnecessary adjuvant systemic treatment, thereby preventing over-treatment in a considerable number of breast cancer patients.

the most striking observation when comparing the signatures from different studies is the lack of overlap of signature genes. for instance, in the studies of van't veer et al. and wang et al., despite the similar clinical and statistical designs, there is an overlap of only three genes in the two gene signature lists. these diverse results make it difficult to identify the most predictive genes for breast cancer prognosis. the disagreements in gene signatures may be partly due to the use of different microarray platforms and differences in patient selection, normalization procedures and other experimental choices. moreover, in a recent study  <cit> , reanalysis of the van't veer data has shown that the prognostic signature is even strongly influenced by the subset of the patients used for signature selection within a particular study. this observation indicates that given the small number of samples in the training sets, many genes might show what appear to be significant correlations with clinical outcome and the differences among these correlations might be small. therefore, it is possible to combine genes in many ways to generate different signatures with similar predictive power when validated on internal test sets  <cit> . moreover, in general, these prognostic tests are not robust, meaning that they cannot be validated on independent, external data sets  <cit> . independent reanalysis on other microarray data sets has shown very similar findings  <cit> . given the large numbers of features  in microarray data and the relatively small numbers of samples  used in the training set of each study, it is highly possible to accidentally find a set of genes with good predictive power on internal test sets. this is the type of "over-fitting" that is typical when the number of observed variables far exceeds the number of samples. in light of this general "small-sample dilemma" in statistical learning and the particular observations from the two reanalysis studies mentioned above, the disagreements in gene signatures obtained from different data sets are not surprising. we believe that much larger numbers of samples , perhaps thousands, are needed to develop more robust prognostic tests and signatures.

the rapid accumulation of microarray gene expression data suggests that combining microarray data from different studies may be a useful way to increase sample size and diversity. in particular, "meta-analyses" have recently been used to merge different studies in order to develop prognostic gene expression signatures for breast cancer  <cit> . however, effectively integrating microarray data from different studies is not straightforward due to several issues of compatibility, such as differing microarray platforms, experimental protocols and data preprocessing methods. instead of directly integrating microarray gene expression values, meta-analyses combine results  of individual studies to increase statistical power. the major limitation of meta-analyses is that the small sample sizes typical of individual studies, coupled with variation due to differences in study protocols, inevitably degrades the results. also, deriving separate statistics and then averaging is often less powerful than directly computing statistics from aggregated data.

in contrast to the meta-analysis approach, in which the results of individual studies are combined at an interpretative level, other methods, such as z-score, distance weighted discrimination , integrate microarray data from different studies at the expression value level after transforming the expressions to numerically comparable measures  <cit> . in general, the procedure involves the following steps. first, a list of genes common to multiple distinct microarray platforms is extracted based on cross-referencing the annotation of each probe set represented on the microarrays. cross-referencing of expression data is usually achieved using the unigene database  <cit> . next, for each individual data set, numerically comparable quantities are derived from the expression values of genes in the common list by applying specific data transformation and normalization methods. finally, the newly derived quantities from individual data sets are combined to increase sample size and statistical methods are applied to the combined data to build diagnostic and prognostic signatures. one major limitation of these direct integration methods is that there is still no consensus on how best to perform data transformation and normalization.

in our previous work  <cit> , we proposed a novel method for molecular classification which builds predictors from relative expression values, which can be directly applied to integrated microarray data and which generates very simple decision rules. because this method is based only on the ranks of the expression values within a profile , there is no need to prepare the data for integration, in particular there is no need for data normalization, since ranks are invariant to all types of within-array monotonic preprocessing. this approach to data integration was validated on prostate cancer data  <cit> , resulting in a powerful two-gene diagnostic classifier. it has also been applied recently to differentiating between gastrointestinal stromal tumors and leiomyosarcomas  <cit> . here, we extend this method to predict distant metastases in breast cancer, and attempt to overcome the limitations of previous study-specific methods and meta-analyses.

RESULTS
summary
we integrate three independent microarray gene expression data sets to obtain an integrated training set of  <dig> samples and identify a set of features for predicting distant metastases. all the samples included in this study are from lymph-node-negative patients who have not received adjuvant systemic treatment. each feature is based on an ordered pair of genes and assumes the value one if the first gene is expressed less than the second gene, and assumes the value zero otherwise. these genes may not all be highly differentially expressed, and one gene in the pair may serve as a "reference" for the other one. since the features are rank-based, no data normalization is needed before data integration. a classical likelihood ratio test is used to classify patients as either poor-outcome, meaning they are likely to metastasize, or good-outcome, meaning that they are unlikely to develop distant metastases. the choice of features is motivated by achieving the highest possible specificity at an acceptable level of sensitivity, taken here to be 90% in accordance with the st. gallen and nih treatment guidelines. the number of features chosen in the prognostic signature, as well as the threshold in the likelihood ratio test , is optimized with k-fold cross-validation on the integrated training set. the optimal feature number is estimated to be  <dig>  corresponding to  <dig> genes . the prognostic test based on this signature is validated using an independent microarray data set. upon further validation on large-scale independent data, the prognostic gene expression signature could support other breast cancer prognostic tests with high enough specificity to help avoid over-treatment of newly diagnosed patients.

study data
four breast cancer microarray data sets are included in this study. each data set has been downloaded from publicly available gene expression repositories  or supporting web sites  <cit> . all four data sets are generated from the same affymetrix hg-u133a microarray platform. here, the names of the first authors of individual studies are used as the names of the data sets. three data sets, miller , sotiriou  and wang , are used as training data and the other one, pawitan , is used as independent test data. the reason for this division into training and test data is that detailed clinical information has been provided for the miller, sotiriou and wang data sets and this information has been used to select specific patients for training, whereas little clinical information is provided for the pawitan study. for the miller, sotiriou and pawitan studies, because the gene expression data sets provided by them have undergone cross-sample normalization, we have downloaded the raw cel files and calculated expression values using the affymetrix genechip operating software version  <dig> . there is an 85-patient overlap between miller and sotiriou data sets, so we have excluded the replicate samples from our study. detailed patient information in each study has been described in the corresponding literature.

motivated by a recent study  <cit> , we employ the idea of restricting training data to extreme patient samples, which are more informative in identifying a prognostic signature. extreme patients are either short-term survivors with poor-outcome within a short period or long-term survivors who maintain a good-outcome after a long follow-up time. specifically, we select patients who developed distant metastases  within five years as poor-outcome samples and patients who were free of distant metastases  during the follow-up for a period of at least eight years as good-outcome samples. the sharp contrast between short-term and long-term survivors should identify more informative and reliable genes for a prognostic signature. only early stage lymph-node-negative patients who had not received adjuvant systemic treatment are included in the training data because adjuvant treatment is likely to modify patient outcome. the selection is irrespective of age, tumor size and other clinical parameters. after applying the above selection criteria, a total of  <dig> patients are identified from the three training data sets and used to learn a prognostic signature and prognostic test. the numbers of selected patients from each training data set are listed in table  <dig> 

a prognostic signature from integrated data
we directly merge the three microarray data sets in table  <dig>  using the  <dig> probe sets on affymetrix hg-u133a microarray, to form an integrated training data set. the integrated data set consists of  <dig> extreme poor-outcome samples  and  <dig> extreme good-outcome samples . recall that each feature is based on a pair of genes. the integrated training set is used to estimate the relationship between the number m of features in a prognostic classifier and the specificity at 90% sensitivity level, evaluated by the 40-fold cross-validation, as described in 'methods'. the result is plotted in figure  <dig>  as can be seen, the specificity is nearly constant after about  <dig> features are included. our final prognostic signature then consists of the  <dig> top-ranked features  from the feature list generated from the original integrated training data, using the feature selection and transformation procedures described in 'methods'. because some genes appear in more than one feature, the  <dig> top-ranked gene pairs in our prognostic signature include  <dig> distinct genes . to illustrate the behavior of the  <dig> features in the signature on the wang data set , we show the difference in expression between the two genes in each of the  <dig> gene pairs in the form of a heat map in figure  <dig>  distinct patterns of expression differences can be observed for good- and poor-outcome samples.

in order to evaluate the reproducibility of the 112-gene signature, we repeat the same feature selection process with several re-samplings of  <dig> patients out of the  <dig> patients in the integrated data set. the average overlap is  <dig> %. this is not surprising in view of the still modest sample size and the fact that most of the changes occur in the second half of the ranked list of gene pairs.

validation of the prognostic test on independent data
to validate the prognostic test, we compute its sensitivity and specificity on an independent set of samples, the pawitan data set  <cit> , which consists of  <dig> primary breast cancer patients. this test set includes both patients with lymph-node-negative tumors and patients with lymph-node-positive tumors, and who had or had not received adjuvant systemic therapy. following the practice in most of the literature, our objective is to predict the development of distant metastases within five years. of the  <dig> patients,  <dig> patients developed distant metastases  within five years , and  <dig> patients were free of distant metastases  during the follow-up for a period of at least five years . note that the definition of good-outcome for patients in the validating data is different from the definition in the training data because we have used extreme samples to identify the prognostic signature.

our prognostic test is the classical likelihood ratio test, determined by assuming that the features are conditionally independent under both classes, namely "poor outcome"  and "good outcome" ; see 'methods'. the lrt reduces to comparing a weighted average of the  <dig> features to a threshold. the weights depend on the statistics of the individual features under both classes and are estimated from the training data; the threshold is also estimated from the training set, using cross-validation. the lrt built from the prognostic signature achieves a sensitivity of  <dig> %  and a specificity of  <dig> %  on the  <dig> samples included in the validating data set. the remaining five patients, who either developed distant metastases after five years or were free of distant metastases with a follow-up period less than five years, are not included in the validating data set. we compute the odds ratio of the prognostic test for developing metastases within five years between the patients in the poor-outcome group and in the good-outcome group as determined by the prognostic test. the prognostic test has a high odds ratio of  <dig>   with a fisher's exact test p-value <  <dig> . to make the results easier to understand, we have included in the additional files the heat maps of the two-group  supervised clusters of the integrated training data and test data for the 112-signature genes .

it is noteworthy that performance of the lrt on the validation data is actually somewhat better than the performance on the training set . specifically, from figure  <dig> , the specificity of the lrt prognostic test is around 43% at approximately 90% sensitivity when estimated from the training data, whereas a specificity of approximately 55% at about the same sensitivity is achieved on the independent validation set.

to obtain another useful estimate of the clinical outcome, we apply the lrt built from the prognostic signature to all of the  <dig> samples in the pawitan data set and calculate the probability of remaining free of distant metastases according to the prognostic signature by using kaplan-meier analysis. the kaplan-meier curve of the prognostic signature shows a significant difference  in the probability of remaining free of distant metastases between the patients in the poor-outcome group and those in the good-outcome groups . the p-value is computed by the use of log-rank test. the mantel-cox estimation of hazard ratio for distant metastases within five years in the poor-outcome group as compared to the good-outcome group is  <dig>  .

comparison of the prognostic signature to study-specific signatures
to evaluate the potential statistical power gained by integrating multiple data sets to increase diversity and sample size, we compare the predictive power of our integrated prognostic signature with each of the three separate study-specific prognostic signatures identified from the three data sets in table  <dig>  we use exactly the same method we used for the integrated data and each of the resulting three prognostic tests is applied to the same independent test data, the pawitan data. the results are reported in table  <dig>  in the case of the sotiriou data, we do not achieve the targeted sensitivity of at least ninety percent due to the very small sample size; the estimate of the threshold in the lrt does not generalize to the pawitan test set. for the miller and wang data sets, the desired sensitivity is achieved but the specificity is far lower than for the classifier learned from the integrated data set.

the wang data set is the largest. using 40-fold cross-validation, the optimal feature number of gene pairs for the prognostic signature is mopt =  <dig>  the  <dig> % sensitivity on the test set  is close to the target of 90%. the specificity of the classifier is  <dig> % , substantially lower than the classifier based on the integrated training set, albeit at somewhat higher sensitivity.  the odds ratio of this test is  <dig>  , and the kaplan-meier curve  shows a less significant difference between the patients in the poor-outcome and good-outcome groups than that of the signature from the integrated data. finally, the estimated hazard ratio of  <dig>   is much lower than that of the prognostic test from the integrated data.

these comparisons demonstrate that the prognostic test derived from the integrated data is superior to the prognostic test derived from any of the individual studies and highlight the value of data integration. by integrating several microarray data sets with our rank-based methods, study-specific effects are reduced and more features of breast cancer prognosis are captured.

discussion
using a rank-based method for feature selection, we integrate three independent microarray gene expression data sets of extreme samples and identify a 112-gene breast cancer prognostic signature. the signature is invariant to standard within-array preprocessing and data normalization. all of the patients in the integrated training set had lymph-node-negative tumors and had not received adjuvant systemic treatment, so the identification of the prognostic signature is not subject to potential confounding factors related to lymph node status or systemic treatment. a lrt constructed from the prognostic signature is used to predict whether a breast cancer patient will develop distant metastases within five years after initial treatment. this prognostic test achieves a sensitivity of  <dig> % and a specificity of  <dig> % on an independent test data set of  <dig> samples. the test set includes patients who had and who had not received adjuvant systemic treatment, and those with both lymph-node-negative and lymph-node-positive tumors, indicating that our prognostic signature could possibly be applied to all breast cancer patients independently of age, tumor size, tumor grade, lymph mode status, and systemic treatment. it should be pointed out that, somewhat paradoxically, one reason for this ability to generalize is that, as with all machine learning methods, the feature seleciton process is not guided by specific biological knowledge about the underlying processes and pathways.

one motivation for using the lrt is simplicity: under the assumption of independent features, the test statistic is a weighted average of the feature values and the test itself reduces to comparing this average to a fixed threshold. another motivation stems from the neyman-pearson lemma of statistical hypothesis testing  <cit> , which states that the lrt achieves optimal specificity at any given level of sensitivity. however, we cannot claim optimal specificity  for our prognostic test since our lrt is constructed by assuming the  <dig> binary comparison features are statistically independent in each class, which is likely to be violated in practice due to correlations among the genes and genes appearing in multiple pairs. but this approach does offer a rigorous statistical framework for constructing prognostic tests at a given sensitivity. it also provides a direction towards more powerful procedures. evidently, increasingly better approximations to the "true" lrt, and hence to optimal specificity, would be obtained by accounting for more and more of the dependency structure among the features. indeed, accounting for pair-wise correlations alone would be a significant step in this direction.

comparison with the conventional treatment guidelines  is instructive. while maintaining almost the same level of sensitivity , our prognostic test achieves a specificity which is well above the 10–30% range of the st. gallen and nih targets. this means that our test can spare a significant number of good-outcome patients from unnecessary adjuvant therapy, while ensuring roughly the same percentage of poor-outcome patients receive adjuvant therapy as recommended by the treatment guidelines. therefore, our prognostic test and signature, if further validated on large-scale independent data, could potentially provide a useful means of guiding adjuvant systemic treatment, reducing cost and improving the quality of patients' lives.

other strengths of our study, compared with previous ones, are the larger number of homogeneous patients  in the training set, and an external independent test set. in each of the two major breast cancer prognostic studies  <cit> , the training and validation data are extracted from the same study group from the same population. more specifically, the entire data set is randomly divided into two pieces, one serving as a training set and the other as a validation or test set. in this case, the training data and the validation data are likely to have similar properties. therefore, the study-specific prognostic test identified from the training data usually gives over-promising results when assessed using the "internal" validation data.  this argument may explain why the two major prognostic signatures, although validated internally with about 90% sensitivity and about 50% specificity, cannot be validated externally with an independent data set  <cit> . in addition, splitting the original data set into two pieces only aggravates the small-sample problem, as well as producing other sources of bias  <cit> . in our study, we increase diversity and sample size by integrating several microaray data sets involving patients from different populations. by selecting a homogeneous subgroup of patients and combining data from multiple studies, the derived prognostic test and signature is less sensitive to study-specific factors. an intriguing advantage of inter-study data integration is that it increases the statistical power to capture essential prognostic features which might be masked by study-specific features and the small sample sizes of individual data sets. in this sense, our prognostic test is more robust to inter-study variability and may facilitate external validation.

comparison of our prognostic signature with the two major signatures of van't veer et al. and wang et al. is not straightforward because of differences in patients, microarray platforms, and algorithms. the study of van't veer et al. uses an agilent array platform and our study uses an affymetrix array platform. only  <dig> out of the  <dig> genes in our prognostic signature are present on the agilent hu25k array and only  <dig> of the  <dig> genes in the van't veer signature are present on the affymetrix hg-u133a array. therefore, we can neither validate the van't veer prognostic test on our validation data nor validate our test on their data set. there is a three-gene overlap between the van't veer signature and our signature . since the data set in wang et al. is included in our training set, we cannot validate our test on that data set. on the other hand, in order to validate the test proposed by wang et al., we need to know the estrogen receptor  status of our test samples because the classification rule based on their signature is depend on er status, which is absent from our validation data. again, there is a four-gene overlap between the wang signature and our signature . it is noteworthy that the gene ccne <dig> is included in all of the three signatures and is reported to be related to breast cancer  <cit> . ccne <dig> could be a potential target for the rational development of new cancer drugs.

using the program david  <cit> , according to the gene ontology biological process categories, the 112-gene signature is highly enriched in cell cycle  and cell division . to pinpoint the role of some of the genes in our signature, the cell cycle pathway is displayed in the additional files with our signature genes shown in red . these findings demonstrate that deregulation of these pathways has a direct impact on tumor progression and indicate that the 112-gene signature is biologically relevant.

to assess the benefit of data integration, we compared the predictive power of our signature with that of three study-specific signatures identified from the sotiriou, miller and wang data sets using the same lrt procedure. when applied to the same independent test data, our prognostic test consistently outperforms the study-specific tests and the largest study  in particular, in terms of specificity  at roughly the same 90% sensitivity level, odds ratio , hazard ratio , and kaplan-meier analysis. these findings again suggest a prognostic test derived from a single data set may be over-dedicated and might perform weakly on external data. in contrast, a prognostic test derived from integrated data is more likely to be more robust to study-specific factors and to be validated satisfactorily on external data.

recently, some studies have shown that combining gene expression data and conventional clinical data  could lead to improved breast cancer prognosis  <cit> . an approach based on solid statistical principles can accommodate aggregating data of multiple types, e.g., combining gene expression signatures with traditional clinical factors. in this study, due to the lack of clinical information for some of the training samples, we could not incorporate such information into the development of our prognostic test. as clinical information becomes publicly available, it might be combined with the integrated gene expression data to further improve prognosis.

CONCLUSIONS
the opinion expressed in recent studies that gene expression information can be useful in breast cancer prognosis seems to be well-founded. however, due to the small sample sizes relative to the complexity of the entire expression profile, existing methods suffer certain limitations, namely the prevalence of study-specific signatures and difficulties in validating the prognostic tests constructed from these signatures on independent data. integrating data from multiple studies to obtain more samples appears to be a promising way to overcome these limitations.

we have integrated several gene expression data sets and developed a likelihood ratio test for predicting distant metastases that correctly signals a poor outcome in approximately ninety percent of test cases while maintaining about fifty-five percent specificity for good outcome patients. this well exceeds the st. gallen and nih guidelines and compares favorably with the best results previously reported . as more and more gene  expression data is generated and made publicly available, modeling the interactions among genes  will become increasingly feasible, and is likely to be crucial in designing prognostic tests which achieve high sensitivity without sacrificing specificity.

