BACKGROUND
network biology provides a holistic framework for understanding pathological processes at a system-wide level. by enabling human disorders to be cast within the context of large-scale interactomes, network-based approaches shed light on the roles of genes both within the context of specific diseases as well as across multiple disorders  <cit> . further, the network properties of disease genes hold promise for improving candidate gene prioritization in a time and cost effective way, and for helping to identify novel candidates for target-based therapies . the rapid growth of data associating genes to diseases , along with the availability of large-scale human interaction data  <cit> , provides further impetus for developing and applying network-based approaches for analyzing disease genes.

computational analysis of genes, both disease and non-disease, within interactomes has demonstrated that the topological network features of their corresponding proteins reveal important aspects of their underlying functioning . groups of interacting proteins work together in modules to achieve specific biological functions  <cit> . simple topological measures can reflect important cellular properties; for example, proteins with high degree centrality, or a large number of interactions, are more likely to be evolutionarily conserved and essential to the survival of the cell than other proteins  <cit> . in the context of human diseases, genes associated with specific disorders tend to cluster in physical interaction networks  <cit> , suggesting that these diseases result from the malfunctioning of specific functional modules. cancer mutated genes have been found to be enriched in their number of physical interactions  <cit> , whereas genes with mutations responsible for inherited disorders have a less clearly defined position in the network. more specifically, an early study showed that inherited disease genes are characterized by larger than expected degree  <cit> , but it has been since argued that this observation is due to the correlation between essentiality and degree, and that once the small fraction of disease genes that are also essential are removed from consideration, inherited disease genes do not tend to have a higher number of interactions  <cit> . in a more recent study, genes involved in inherited and complex diseases have been found to have higher global centrality, as measured by betweenness centrality, and to occur in less dense portions of the network, as measured by clustering coefficient, than non-disease genes; it has been proposed that these disease genes play an important role in bridging otherwise disconnected parts of the interactome  <cit> .

while these numerous studies have found that various disease gene sets have distinct topological network features, and have argued that these features reflect important aspects of pathology, here we aim to uncover whether network features reflect functional composition, and if so, to develop and apply a computational approach that controls for this. as a first step, we perform a comprehensive analysis of the topological network properties of five different disease sets, including genes implicated in monogenic or polygenic mendelian disorders, or mutated, over-expressed or under-expressed in cancer. we begin with the observation that these five disease sets are enriched in specific functional categories. further, we demonstrate that genes associated with specific functional categories themselves tend to have distinct topological properties a priori. together, these two findings raise the possibility that a significant portion of the observed topological differences between disease genes and other genes may in fact be due to differences in their functional compositions. if this is the case, then the topological properties of disease genes may contribute only a limited amount of new information beyond what is already implied by their functional make-up, thereby lessening their impact in furthering our understanding of disease pathology or in uncovering new disease genes.

we propose that in order to assess whether a set of disease genes is topologically distinct from other genes, it is critically important to explicitly consider biological function. towards this end, we develop a sampling strategy to generate control sets of genes functionally similar to a reference set. we apply our sampling approach to compare each of the disease sets to control sets of genes with similar functional compositions. in contrast to previous studies that consider and compare just the medians or means of topological properties, we compare the distributions of these properties between disease and non-disease gene sets over their interquartile ranges. we find that in most cases considered, the topological properties of disease genes appear less distinct when compared to functionally similar groups of genes than when considering randomly selected genes; that is, at least some of the observed differences in the topological properties of disease genes, as compared to all genes, is in fact explained by their specific functional compositions. for example, inherited disease genes have previously been found to have a significantly lower clustering coefficient than randomly selected genes  <cit> , but we find more typical or even higher values when considering groups of functionally similar genes. statistically significant differences do emerge, however, in some of the topological properties of disease sets, even when considering function, and different disease sets can exhibit opposing trends. for example, genes over-expressed in cancer tend to have, on average, higher interaction degree, higher clustering coefficient, and higher betweenness centrality than functionally similar sets of genes, but these trends are reversed for cancer under-expressed genes. overall, using our sampling approach, we show that the functional composition of a disease set is an important factor in its observed topological properties, but that the broad disease group  and the type of involvement  play significant roles as well.

RESULTS
preliminaries
we analyze the functional enrichment and network features of five sets of disease genes:  genes implicated in mendelian disorders, as reported in the omim catalogue  <cit>  ;  the subset of omim genes involved in monogenic disorders, derived from cai et al.  <cit>  ;  genes with mutations reported in more than one cancer type, derived from the intogen database  <cit>  ;  genes significantly over-expressed in cancers   and  genes significantly under-expressed in cancers  .

in the main body of the paper, we focus on a single network and set of functional terms, but also consider other networks and functional terms in the supplement. specifically, our primary analysis uses a subset of gene ontology  biological process terms that correspond to broad functional classes . further, we perform our primary network analysis on a comprehensive human protein-protein interaction network  <cit> , and limit our analysis to proteins annotated by at least one informative term. we consider three widely studied network properties: degree centrality, betweenness centrality and clustering coefficient. a protein’s degree centrality is the number of binding partners it has, whereas its betweenness centrality is defined as the sum over each pair of proteins of the fraction of the shortest paths between them that pass through it  <cit> ; these are, respectively, local and global measures of the topological prominence of a protein. the clustering coefficient of a protein measures the tendency of its binding partners to also bind to each other  <cit> ; it is a local measure of the network density of a protein’s neighborhood.

disease gene sets are topologically distinct from each other and from the set of all genes
we begin by observing that the five different disease sets exhibit starkly different topological properties . their median degrees range from  <dig> for cancer under-expressed genes to  <dig> for cancer mutated genes. cancer mutated genes have a median degree  <dig>  times larger than that of omim genes and the monogenic subset , and more than twice that of the cancer under-expressed genes . the median clustering coefficient ranges from  <dig>  for genes involved in monogenic disorders to  <dig>  for cancer over-expressed genes and  <dig>  for cancer mutated genes. both cancer over-expressed and cancer mutated genes are significantly more clustered than the genes in all the other disease sets . cancer mutated genes have a median betweenness centrality value that is over three times the medians of all the other disease sets , and is ten times that of cancer under-expressed genes. overall, the observed variation in topological properties between various disease sets is consistent with the apparent lack of agreement in previous studies that each focused only on specific groups of disorders  <cit> .

disease gene sets show characteristic functional compositions
having highlighted the significant topological differences in the five disease sets, we next investigate their functional compositions. for each of the disease sets, we calculate the go functional enrichment as compared to the full human interactome, using the hypergeometric test . as expected, all disease sets contain significantly over- or under-enriched functional terms , and therefore none of them represents a functionally unbiased sample of the human interactome. this simple go enrichment analysis broadly recapitulates crucial aspects of the various types of diseases. for example, mendelian disorder genes  are found to be enriched in developmental and metabolic terms , as one would expect for diseases that are largely congenital or early-onset. in contrast, genes involved in cancer show different patterns of enrichment, depending upon whether they are somatically mutated, over-expressed or under-expressed: cancer mutated genes show a significant involvement in signaling and apoptosis , while genes significantly over-expressed in cancers are enriched in cell cycle terms. finally, the set of genes significantly under-expressed in cancer are depleted of the biological processes that are most critical to rapidly dividing cells . a comprehensive enrichment analysis subdivided by anatomical region for cancer over-expressed and under-expressed genes is provided in additional file  <dig> figures s <dig> and s <dig>  and shows that distinct functional enrichments are also apparent in more fine-grained definitions of disease sets.

the functions enriched in the disease sets are associated with distinct topological properties a priori
given the characteristic functional compositions exhibited by the disease sets, we next address the following question: are genes annotated with these functions topologically distinct from the rest of the interactome a priori? to address this, for each informative term we calculate the average degree, clustering coefficient and betweenness centrality of the genes annotated with the term over the average of all annotated genes . several terms annotate genes whose topological properties deviate significantly from the background . a subset of these terms are also significantly enriched  in disease sets .

a novel sampling approach allows a functionally constrained comparison of disease and control sets
the results presented above show that disease genes tend to be enriched in or depleted of specific functions, in a disease set dependent manner, and that many of these functions are also associated with topological properties that deviate significantly from their values in the full interactome. this suggests that the functional make-up of disease genes represents a confounding factor when studying their topological properties. do the previously observed topological differences in disease genes simply reflect their functional composition? if this is the case, then disease genes are topologically indistinguishable from the rest of the genes in their functional modules.

in order to address this question, we develop a procedure to minimize the influence of functional composition in gene sets. the idea behind the approach  is to randomly sample a set of “control” genes from a background set of genes lacking the property that defines “disease genes,” such as mutation or altered expression in cancer. the set of sampled genes has the same size as the disease set and our goal is that it should also have a similar functional composition. we note that this is a challenging computational task because genes can have multiple annotations. we call the samples generated by our procedure “function-constrained” and we refer to the samples simply drawn from the control pool without regard for their functional composition as “unconstrained” samples.

to test our sampling procedure, for each target disease set we generate  <dig> function-constrained samples and  <dig> unconstrained samples. we compare the distribution of informative terms in the samples against the distribution observed in the disease sets. we find that our sampling procedure effectively reduces the differences between the functional composition of the disease set and that of the function-constrained samples ; in contrast, we observe a substantial deviation of the per-term distribution in the unconstrained samples as compared to the target distribution arising from the disease set.

we also consider the average number of terms per gene in the function-constrained and unconstrained samples, and compare it with the average number of terms per gene in the disease sets. we find that function-constrained samples closely match the average number of terms per gene observed in disease sets , whereas unconstrained samples show very different values. comparing the results across the five disease sets, cancer mutated and mendelian disorders genes have on average a higher number of terms per gene than randomly selected sets of genes, whereas cancer under-expressed genes have on average a lower number of terms. this issue of “multifunctionality” is important because of its direct relationship with degree. in agreement with the observation of gillis and pavlidis  <cit> , we find that multiply annotated  genes tend to be more central. for example, in our network, the median number of informative terms per gene is  <dig>  and whereas the median degree of genes annotated with more than  <dig> terms is  <dig>  it is only  <dig> for genes with less than  <dig> terms .

to ensure that our sampling approach yields sufficiently variable samples, we also quantify the overlap between samples by computing the fraction of genes shared by an increasing number of samples, using the “monogenic” set as an example. while the unconstrained samples exhibit higher variability than the function-constrained samples , for both approaches, the fraction of genes shared between all samples approaches  <dig> as the number of samples is increased . thus, our approach successfully reduces the functional biases present in samples as compared to the disease set while at the same time yielding diverse samples.

the functional composition of disease sets partially accounts for their topological properties
having determined that the functional composition of the disease sets can potentially play a role in the differences that set them apart from non-disease genes, we next test whether this is indeed the case by comparing disease sets with function-constrained samples generated as described above. we also consider functionally unconstrained samples as a baseline. the distributions of degree, clustering coefficient and betweenness centrality in the samples are compared against those of the disease sets in the 25th - 75th percentile range, using q-q plots ; that is, for this range, we plot the quantile of the disease set against the quantile of the samples. the comparison reveals the noticeable effect of functionally constraining the samples, as for most disease set and topological feature pairings, the function-constrained samples are more similar to the disease sets than the unconstrained samples are. this is visually evident in figure  <dig> with the q-q plots for the function-constrained samples closer to the diagonal , and their average difference from the disease sets closer to zero . to quantify this, for each topological property and disease set, we measure the “area under the difference curve” as the sum across the interquartile range of the absolute value of the difference between the average value of the topological property in the samples and that in the disease set . we find that in  <dig> of the  <dig> cases, this area is smaller for function-constrained samples than for unconstrained samples. that is, with the exception of betweenness centrality for the omim and monogenic disease sets and degree for the omim disease set, all the other cases show smaller differences between samples and disease sets when function is taken into account.

the effect of comparing disease sets to functionally similar control sets can be striking. a particularly interesting example is provided by the clustering coefficient of mendelian disorders genes. the distribution of clustering coefficient for the “monogenic” and “full omim” datasets would appear to be substantially lower than expected when looking at the unconstrained samples , as observed by cai et al.  <cit> . in contrast, by accounting for functional composition, the clustering coefficient does not significantly deviate from the values observed in the function-constrained samples at the 75th percentile  or has a median value larger than expected . this suggests that a large part of the differences for clustering coefficient in these two disease sets derive from their functional make-up.

in several cases, differences observed between disease sets and unconstrained samples are maintained once function is also considered. for example, a significant difference in degree exists between cancer over-expressed and under-expressed genes, even when accounting for their functional composition. cancer over-expressed genes have larger than expected values at the 50th and 75th percentiles , whereas cancer under-expressed genes have lower than expected values . a similar trend was observed earlier, with the smaller set of genes differentially expressed in lung cancer  <cit> .

in the case of betweenness centrality, mendelian disorders genes, cancer mutated and cancer over-expressed genes show higher values than expected  across the whole interquartile range , with cancer mutated genes exhibiting substantially larger values . in contrast, consistent with the results for degree, cancer under-expressed genes appear to be less central at the global level as well , although the differences are smaller when functional composition is taken into account.

we note that the results are robust with respect to the set of terms chosen, as sampling with a much larger set of  <dig> terms does not greatly affect the results . we also repeat our analysis on three other networks, including a high-throughput network, derived from two sources  <cit> . though there are some differences, the results obtained with these three networks are largely consistent with the results we report above .

discussion
the function of a protein is to a large extent embedded in its interactions with other biomolecules. this suggests that the topological properties of a protein and its functional roles may be deeply intertwined. our analysis of the human interactome shows that proteins belonging to different functional classes do indeed occupy topologically distinct regions of the network. this observation, which directly connects function to topology, has important repercussions for analyzing the topological properties of disease sets. in particular, disease genes are not an unbiased sample of the interactome, but are characterized by specific functional signatures that recapitulate the biology of the disorders.

we develop and apply a function-constrained sampling approach in order to compare disease sets with sample sets with a similar functional composition. a previous study of genes mutated in cancer  <cit>  showed that they have a higher number of interactions, independent of their molecular functions; in that case, each gene was mapped to a single curated function and stratified sampling was applied to generate samples with the same functional properties. in contrast, our approach is fully automated and handles multiple functional annotations per gene. further, an added benefit of our approach is that it automatically corrects for multifunctionality, an important confounding factor in network analysis  <cit> .

by applying our function-constrained sampling approach, we find that the functional composition of the disease sets significantly affects the observed differences in the topological features of disease genes. the majority of cases show a smaller difference between disease and function-constrained samples, compared to unconstrained samples. in a few cases , the differences even lose statistical significance. at least two factors can be invoked to explain the observed effect of function constraining on the topological properties of disease genes. first, disease gene sets may be enriched or under-enriched in functional modules that have been studied more extensively than others, and therefore tend to have a larger number of known interactions. controlling for function can therefore mitigate the effect of this particular type of study bias. a second factor directly involves the biology of protein interactions. for example, interactions tend to be more dense and clustered in protein complexes and more sparse in areas of the network implicated in primary metabolism. as observed by goh et al.  <cit> , mendelian genes are under-enriched in essential genes, which tend to be clustered in protein complexes  <cit> . this could explain why mendelian disorders genes do not appear less clustered than expected when factoring in their functional composition. obviously, a combination of both factors can be at play. on the other hand, some disease sets still show differences that remain even when accounting for function. the high betweenness centrality in the case of cancer mutated genes, across the entire interquartile range, provides a particularly striking example .

a caveat of most network analyses is that a larger fraction of interactions involving well-studied proteins and biological processes are likely to be known. using only high-throughput interactions is one possible way to address the issue of study bias; however, it introduces other problems, such as a potentially higher amount of spurious interactions and an under-enrichment of interactions involving membrane proteins  <cit> . while obtaining complete and unbiased interactomes may very well lie beyond what can be achieved by purely computational means, our sampling strategy effectively deals with some of these bias-related problems at the level of functional modules.

the fact that certain topological properties are still distinct when factoring out function highlights the added value of topological information, especially in the potential context of identifying or prioritizing disease gene candidates. while approaches for identifying disease genes based on topological properties have been shown to be effective  <cit> , incorporating the effects of function may lead to further performance improvements, as this better highlights the purely topological features that make disease genes distinct from other genes. further, this type of combined functional-topological information may be especially useful in the context of integrative approaches for uncovering disease genes .

CONCLUSIONS
as the number and types of disease gene sets continue to grow, network-based analysis of disease genes will continue to play a prominent role in attempts to characterize the complex interplay between network structure and pathological processes. in this paper, we study one of the most basic types of network analyses of disease genes—that of characterizing their topological properties. we show that in order to determine whether a set of disease genes is topologically distinct from other genes, it is necessary to explicitly consider biological function. we develop a computational framework for analyzing disease genes based upon a sampling strategy to generate control sets of genes functionally similar to a reference set. we apply this approach to study five disease gene sets, and demonstrate that in many cases topological features are distinct, in a disease set dependent manner, even when functional composition is considered.

