BACKGROUND
toxins and toxin-like molecules are present and used widely throughout the animal kingdom. among the arthropods, which constitute over 90% of the animal kingdom and include bees, wasps, ants, spiders, scorpions and many other various taxa, many are well known for their predacity and toxic venoms. these have evolved to yield complex and highly specialised toxins which are now successfully used by these predaceous animals to either protect themselves or attack their prey. despite being considered the most successful animals on earth  and the massive research effort so far, only a tiny proportion of arthropods has been studied in detail. spiders evolved from an arachnid ancestor around  <dig> million years ago and currently comprise over  <dig>  different species. spiders are the most successful predatory animals, in evolutionary terms, and they maintain by far the largest pool of toxic peptides. there are over  <dig>  catalogued species  <cit> , with an even larger number still awaiting characterisation  <cit> . it has been calculated, based upon a conservative estimate of some  <dig>  species and approximately  <dig> peptides per species  <cit> , that there are in the region of  <dig> million distinct spider-venom polypeptides in existence  <cit>  although of these only a few venoms have been characterised. only a few hundred of known toxins or toxin-like genes have so far been reported  from arthropods or other venomous creatures such as snails or snakes. the precise composition of spider venoms varies significantly between different species. spider toxins are thought to have derived from a small number of gene super-families with many peptide toxins sharing structural features, conserved amino acids and consensus sequences. this allows them to interact with specific targets such as related classes of cellular receptors. the wide array of peptides may be associated with spiders being general predators, i.e. they do not focus on one specific prey species. it has been suggested that the generation of peptide toxin diversity in spiders has probably been achieved via a similar process to that of cone snails , i.e. via extensive gene duplication followed by key hyper-mutations of the pro-peptide and mature-toxin segments. the resultant pool of genes has subsequently been subjected to the pressures of adaptive evolution and this has culminated in the vast arrays of species-specific combinatorial peptide libraries which now exist  <cit> . it is by the very nature of these processes that an opportunity to discover new peptides of pharmacological importance has become possible using techniques such as pcr-based cloning incorporating degenerate primers, and est-based cloning.

one of the few successful "molecular" approaches to molecular cloning of polypeptide toxins was reported recently by kozlov et al.  <cit> . there an est  high throughput cloning strategy was employed which yielded nearly  <dig> novel toxin and toxin-like sequences from agelena orientalis following the sequencing of  <dig> individual est clones  <cit> . there are two main advantages to using the est based approach: the discovery of novel genes and their mrnas/cdnas does not require any prior knowledge of the nucleic acid or amino acid sequence information  and if applied to non-normalised cdna libraries  it often yields quantitative information on the individual transcripts abundance. this allows, at least in principle, the discovery and expression profiling of all genes expressed in the cell/tissue/etc. without any pre-selection. this useful property is widely relied upon in pharmacogenomics, drug discovery, biomedical and plant sciences . for the same reasons, and unless an est cloning approach is used to explore fully normalised cdna libraries, the outcome will be biased towards the highly abundant transcripts whilst lower abundance molecular species will likely escape detection. not surprisingly, est sequencing of agelena orientalis revealed that over 70% of all of the est clones sequences  encoded the same transcript agelenin , whilst most of the other newly identified genes  were represented by just a few or in most cases by a single est  <cit> . est based cloning is a generic and universal approach to the discovery and expression profiling of genes, but despite its wide applicability it has a few drawbacks, such as the above discussed bias towards highly abundant transcripts and the requirements for lab automation, which are not universally available. this chapter aims to illustrate an alternative approach to the discovery of novel families of toxin or toxin-like polypeptides.

pcr amplification  <cit>  has revolutionised life sciences  <cit>  and with all its numerous variations has become one of the most widely used techniques in molecular biology. pcr has been described elsewhere; see e.g.  <cit>  and references therein. the main pcr variations, related to cdna amplification and cloning include pcr/rt-pcr, race-pcr  <cit>  and the related rlm-race-pcr  <cit> ; ls-ssp-pcr  <cit> , ap-pcr/dd-pcr  <cit>  and aflp  <cit> , see figure  <dig>  the former three pcr processes have one important feature in common – they all require the knowledge of the exact sequence on which the oligonucleotide primer are based. the use of the pcr/rt-pcr, race-pcr and to a lesser degree ls-ssp-pcr, results in the amplification of one or a few target-specific sequences situated between the two primer annealing sites , between the primer annealing site and 5'- or 3'- ends , or between the specific primer annealing site and a few non specific annealing sites on the same dna as in ls-ssp-pcr. unlike these, ap-pcr/dd-pcr and aflp do not require any knowledge of the target sequence . however, these methods typically result in the amplification of a much larger number of dna fragments and are generally most useful for various dna fingerprinting applications. block arrows  summarise the above pcr strategies by indicating the overall trends in primer sequence specificity vs. sequence degeneracy and vs. a typical number of amplified products.

the use of specific but partially degenerate or hybrid primers for nucleic acid hybridisations and pcrs amplification of known or unknown gene families was first reported well over a decade ago  and further mastered by rose et al. . the technique has been used widely since then. introducing degeneracy into the primer sequence aims to compensate for codon degeneracy  or amino acid degeneracy . the most common problems of degenerate primer design include:

i. too high a degeneracy leading to elevated non-specific amplification  and absence of specific amplification 

ii. too high a degeneracy leading to the formation of secondary structures and self-annealing, detrimental to a pcr amplification

iii. high variability in the tm within the pool of degenerate primers, making it impossible to choose optimal annealing temperatures

iv. a further potential problem of the approach is the inability to define suitable regions of high sequence conservation and thus an inability to design any primers at all, e.g when the sequences analysed are too dissimilar and/or when a large number of sequences are being aligned .

both primer design  <cit>  and the choice of conserved sequence fragments are key issues for the success of any such amplification. although easy in principle, practical applications of degenerate primers are often limited to the amplification of gene/protein families having a high degree of sequence similarity and containing low degeneracy codons in the positions corresponding to the pcr primers. successful application of degenerate or hybrid primers also depend on the particular application, target abundance and target sequence variation. a pcr/rt-pcr employing partially degenerate primers occupies a place somewhat in-between the other pcr approaches mentioned above, see  and its applications range from the use of low degeneracy "best guess" primers  to hybrid or even fully degenerate primers which have a tendency to amplify more fragments, which are often more non-specific fragments, and to a lower degree. the range of pcrs with degenerate primers is schematically indicated on figure  <dig> with grey arrows.

RESULTS
multiple alignment of a large number of existing toxin and toxin-like sequences yields no universal consensus sequence
the starting point of this investigation was the realisation that the number of known toxin and toxin-like peptides  was in excess of a hundred . it was also not unreasonable to assume that the target species agelena orientalis could have contained more than just a few novel related toxin-like sequences. our approach to the problem of cloning a potentially large peptide family of toxin-like peptides consisted of a number of logical steps, key enabling assumptions and technical solutions which eventually led to the identification of over  <dig> distinct cdnas, and which can be applied to any similar problem of identifying large families of expressed peptides or proteins. the first step was to align the existing toxin and toxin-like sequences . this was in order to find regions with high sequence homology or conservation. unfortunately this resulted in that no single universal consensus sequence was identified. this was not unexpected and was also in agreement with the reports on cone snails by duda & palumbi  and, more recently, on arthropods by kozlov et al. . however a number of short consensus regions were indeed identified between small subsets . identical or highly similar sequence fragments found in at least  <dig> different protein toxins were considered for further analysis.

the design of hybrid partially degenerate primers
short subsets of toxin and toxin-like sequences, regardless of their origin , sequence/structure  or function , were considered but only if they resulted in any alignment suitable for primer design. although sequence similarities between the small number of highly related sequences are not likely to identify real consensus sequences the use of these was often the only possibility. however, trying hundreds of such fragments would be impractical. therefore only those were chosen which satisfy the criteria listed below.

the original communication by rose et al.  <cit>  reported one of the first successful uses of hybrid partially degenerate primers for pcr detection of diverse reverse transcriptase-like genes from a human genome, and of detection of c <dig> dna methyltransferase homologs from plant dnas. contrary to the report of rose et al., in which the regions of sequence homology and lowest degeneracy were at the 3' end and the highest degeneracy was at the 5' end, we have chosen to minimise or avoid completely any degeneracy at the 5' end of the oligonucleotide primers. figure  <dig> depicts the fundamentally different design principles between the codehop approach  <cit>   and our approach , which was named pabalis  for brevity and in order to maintain a commonly followed tradition of meaningful naming. in the design by rose et al.  <cit> , the annealing of the sequence-specific non-degenerate consensus clamp at the 5' end to the template dna strand does not guarantee that the correct 3' sequence is present in this primer. therefore such 3' ends would compete with the correct 3' sequences and the efficiency of amplification will be reduced proportionally to the primer degeneracy. if highly degenerate primers are used , amplification will seize. therefore 3' ends of pcr primers should ideally be non-degenerate to increase the specificity of amplification and efficiency of amplification, minimise non-specific priming, avoid forming primer dimers and provide a means to utilise even mismatched primers for amplification. as the pcr amplification progresses and the 100% matching primers are used-up, partially mismatching ones would become capable of priming pcr amplification at the later amplification steps, even having a few mismatches at the 5' end, but not at 3' end . we have therefore limited our search to such homologous regions  which could be used in the design of 3' low degeneracy primers .

the next criterion was to allow the highest degeneracy in the middle of pcr primers . furthermore, the 5' end of the oligonucleotide primers was often designed to have a "best guess" sequence . this often significantly reduced the overall sequence degeneracy, at a small price of possibly introducing mismatches at the very 5' end . figure 3c shows the very different distribution of degenerate bases for the  <dig> oligonucleotides of identical length  out of the  <dig> oligonucleotides designed in this study. the maximum degeneracy is reached in the middle of the primer unlike the codehop primers .

the overall primer length was kept to an average of  <dig> bases  and the overall degeneracy – to below approx ~ <dig>  the latter is because higher degeneracy means a lower concentration of any single primer and their quick depletion from the pool of available primers as pcr amplification proceeds. although the unique primer design allows us to utilise some partially matching primers to boost the effective concentration of the working primer, a degeneracy over ~ <dig> was found to be detrimental in our previous experience. therefore, in the regions where designed primers did not satisfy the degeneracy criteria, inosine was substituted at the most highly degenerate positions between 5' end and approximately the middle of the oligonucleotide sequence. figure 3d shows the actual distribution of inosine residues for the  <dig> oligonucleotides of identical length  out of the  <dig> oligonucleotides designed in this study. figure  <dig> gives an easy to follow example of the primer design. table  <dig> lists all the sequence specific primers designed, to allow the reader to appreciate the range of primer design outcomes.

we can summarise the key advantages of pabalis over codehop as follows:

i. highest specificity of annealing and amplification due to low  of degeneracy at 3' end,

ii. less stringent requirements for the length and composition of the protein consensus sequence, which in pabalis is at the 3' end and is generally shorter than the equivalent "non-degenerate consensus clamp" 5' region in codehop.

iii. pabalis design allows avoidance of dimer formation  since 3' ends are unique non-degenerate sequences and can be easily designed not to dimerise: in contrast to codehop, where all primers will find their complementary 3' pair and will tend to dimerise .

iv. pabalis primers have lower degeneracy overall, and even primers with a few mismatching positions will be able to anneal specifically and continue amplification at later stages of the amplification, when the 100% matching primers are exhausted

v. pabalis primer design yields a larger fraction of primers with no mismatches at the 3' end .

vi. pabalis primers have fewer mismatches in the middle of the primer  and therefore higher overall hybrid forming stability .

the limitations of the codehop approach were highlighted in a recent report by gray and coates  <cit>  where the authors had to use two completely nested sets of codehop rt-pcr primers to amplify a highly-conserved  <dig> amino acid long region , whilst pabalis primers apparently work directly for race-pcr and can be designed to amplify sequences with just a few amino acids homology, and which do not need to be between consecutive amino acids .

annealing temperature matching
the constraints described above reduced the number of suitable regions significantly in our case and would undoubtedly do so in any other similar cloning approach. one other important criterion of the primer design is in a reduction of the range of annealing temperatures for highly degenerate primers and matching these for the pairs of pcr primers. we soon realised that no suitable 5' and 3' pcr primer pairs  could be obtained. therefore the decision was to opt for race-pcr. this is likely to be the only available option in any similar cloning project, when not enough sequence information is available for the design of more than one sequence-specific primer . the nature of the race-pcr technique is in the use of one universal primer instead of one sequence specific primer. this eliminates the need for the second sequence-specific primer, but leads to a faster accumulation of the products of non-specific amplification and the faster depletion of the universal primer . the major advantage of using race-pcr in addition to the requirement of the single sequence specific primer) is that the annealing temperatures can be more easily matched by redesigning the universal race primers . table  <dig> lists such subsets of universal primers suitable for the race-pcr . the designed oligo-dt primers had predicted tm's of  <dig> °c,  <dig> °c and  <dig> °c . the nearest tm matched primer was used as the race primer for each different degenerate primer to ensure the best performance of race-pcr . finally, as a last step of primer design all primer pairs  were checked for any possible dimer formation. two nucleotides long overlap at the primers' 3' end was not considered as leading to dimer formation, but three and higher overlaps were disallowed. the primer design is therefore a careful balance between the need to allow for all known  degenerate positions and the requirement of limited degeneracy, matched annealing temperatures, absence of secondary structures, no self annealing, no primer dimers and the ease of subsequent cloning. table  <dig> lists all the primers designed in our investigation and might serve an example of successful primer design for a similar experiment.

optimisation of the amplification conditions
the guide on choosing the pcr conditions and various key optimisation procedures can be found elsewhere  <cit> . below we describe key amplification conditions used in our investigation and depict additional optimisation steps, easily applicable to any similar cloning problem. because of the degeneracy, the primer mixtures have a wide range of tm values. since the correct matching sequence is unknown  it is impossible to predict the annealing temperature theoretically. it can only be determined experimentally. therefore each individual partially degenerate primer was probed at a range of temperatures  pcr machine from eppendorf) and, where necessary, with different race-pcr universal  primers having matching temperatures . only those primers which showed any amplification and the corresponding optimal temperature cycling conditions were used in later investigations. the optimisation of the annealing temperature  has shown that temperature differences as low as 2°c could have dramatic effects on the race-pcr outcome for some of the degenerate primers . we have also routinely changed the annealing temperature through the pcr amplification. the annealing step temperature was always gradually decreased at a rate of  <dig> – <dig> °c per cycle as the amplification progressed, in order to reduce the stringency of annealing and allow primers with mismatches to anneal and to continue the amplification. this has allowed us to maintain the high exponential rate of amplification of the correct fragments. despite the decrease in the concentration of the matching primers towards the end of the amplification, the proportion of the correct amplified sequences increases and thus the probability and the kinetics rate of annealing the mismatched primers also increases, resulting in a stronger amplification albeit with a few mismatched bases very near the fragment ends . our temperature ramp  is different from what is commonly known as "touch down" or "step down" approaches, which aim to minimise the need to optimise annealing temperature or buffer conditions and circumvent spurious priming during gene amplification  <cit> . in the "touch down" or "step down" applications pcr priming is normally initiated above the optimum annealing temperature for the specific primer to promote a greater discrimination between the annealing/amplification for the most stringently annealed primer/template pair . such an approach would be detrimental if highly degenerate primers are used  due to the artificially strong advantage that would be given to the primers with higher annealing temperatures, which are not necessarily the primers having correct sequences. in our approach we already start with the temperature finely optimised  to achieve higher  yield for the pcr product of expected size . the very small decrease in the annealing temperature in our protocol is to allow the mismatched oligonucleotides to continue to prime pcr amplification at later amplification stages.

high throughout amplification and cloning
of the  <dig> primers that passed our selection criteria described above,  <dig> have been shown to produce products . altogether over  <dig> distinct cdnas  were identified from agelena orientalis total rna by low stringency 3'-race-pcr . figure 4b gives just a few examples of the first round of race amplifications. large numbers of amplified fragments meant that we had to streamline the cloning and positive clone selection procedures. identification of positive clones was carried out by pcr directly from colonies. the primers  were designed based on the vector sequence . the clones were picked using sterile tips and transferred onto a fresh new antibiotic plate first, then using the same tip directly dissolved in the mixtures of pcr reactions. the positive clones and sizes were identified by agarose gel electrophoresis. this was a much quicker and more informative method for screening positive clones than applying an iptg  selection procedure  <cit> . this had the additional advantage of allowing positive clones to be identified within approximately one day and the sizes of cloned inserts to be simultaneously determined. this allowed us to improve the 'hit' rate with over 50% of clones chosen for further analysis being independent sequences. traditional approaches relying on plasmid purification and restriction mapping were not suitable for our high-throughput cloning approach, since it was possible that the chosen restriction enzymes might cut within the unknown insert sequences. figure 4c illustrates some of the positive clones with different insert sizes that were identified by pcr reactions directly form bacterial colonies.

sequences identification and analysis
a total of  <dig> positive clones with different size inserts were obtained using the race-pcr approach described above and confirmed by pcr as positive .  <dig> of these were chosen from different groups of amplified cdna fragments  and were sequenced. insert sequences generated in this study, plus agelena clones from kozlov's investigation identified using est based cloning approach  <cit> , were compared directly against the genbank database . it was discovered that there were no significant sequence similarities between agelena orientalis sequences  and published genbank entries. this was not unexpected since agelena orientalis venom has not previously been studied at the mrna level. but this has also proved the power of our cloning approach. out of the  <dig> non-identical sequences generated by race-pcr,  <dig> sequences matched the sequences form the est collection reported independently by kozlov et al.  <cit>  with 100% sequence identity. the remaining  <dig> clones did not fully match reported sequences  and are likely to represent additional toxins or toxin-like sequences. we believe that this validated our approach to cloning and demonstrated an advantage of using a race-pcr approach in that it has proven extremely effective for discovering novel sequences and compares very favourably with the est based approach   <cit> . the phylogenetic tree obtained following multiple alignment of all of the novel sequences . these possess only short regions of high sequence homology, with the rest of the sequences having no clearly identifiable similarities. some clones  might represent novel splice variants of previously reported sequences. additional material available on-line  contains all the sequences reported in figure  <dig> and summarises the relationships of our sequences with the previously reported agelena sequences.

CONCLUSIONS
the race rt-pcr strategy is a useful technique for amplifying specific regions of mrna between a defined and known internal site sequence and an unknown sequence located at either the 3' or 5' end. when race-rt pcr is combined with the application of degenerate primers the method becomes a very effective way to clone and identify novel cdna fragments. previously, such an approach has been used successfully to clone and sequence cdnas encoding insecticidal peptides from primitive hunting spiders  <cit> . the application of pcr-based cloning directly complements an est-based approach  <cit> . however, pcr-based cloning proffers a distinct advantage whereby even rare transcripts can be identified, i.e. low-abundance transcripts are similarly well represented following amplification and are not lost in preference to higher abundance molecules. this contrasts with est cloning which can often result in multiple copies of the same abundant mrna/cdnas being cloned, unless normalised libraries are exploited  <cit> . another important issue is the proportional representation of individual sequences at the outcome of the experiment. est based strategies  preserve the information on relative abundance of respective cdnas, whilst a pcr based approach might not, unless it is a truly quantitative qrt-pcr, see e.g.  <cit> . the latter is especially valid if no truly universal oligonucleotide primers  are used. the case presented here is a good example of such an approach. we have not preserved any quantitative information on toxin mrna/cdna expression, but compared to the est approach reported in  <cit>  we were able to identify more than twofold the number of different sequences from the same material. our oligonucleotide selection algorithm is therefore superior if the discovery of new genes is sought, but should not be used if quantitative analysis of mrna/cdna expression is required.

as interest in the field of neuro-modulatory molecules continues to expand, our approach contributes significantly through the provision of an effective high-throughput methodology to identify novel neurotoxin-like peptide sequences from the venom of agelena orientalis species of spiders. the collective use of published neuro-toxin sequence information, sets of specifically designed partially degenerate hybrid primers and streamlined cloning and positive clone selection procedures have enabled us to identify a large set  of toxin-like sequences from agelena orientalis. this is an invaluable resource although in all probably it represents only a very small fraction of the overall number of functional spider toxin peptides that are still awaiting discovery. the sequences identified with race-pcr include  <dig> putative novel toxin-like sequences, in addition to the ones matching the sequences obtained independently by an est-based approach  <cit> . these sequences are indicative of the vast repertoire and/or diversity of toxins, or toxin-like proteins, present in agelena orientalis venom. these spider venom toxins are a rich biological resource of active components and this presents an opportunity to develop further biological tools for neuroscience, in drug target discovery and possibly as effective bio-pesticides. with upwards of  <dig>  species of spider thought to exist, and each showing a propensity for producing diverse peptide pools, many more neurotoxin peptides await discovery. it is likely that a high percentage of these could be exploited in a wide range of novel applications, and profit both research and commercial industries.

