BACKGROUND
venoms have proven to be key evolutionary innovations for many divergent animal lineages  <cit> . although the most extensively studied venoms are from the medically important scorpions, snakes, and spiders, venom systems are present in many other lineages including cnidarians, echinoderms, molluscs, fish, lizards, and mammals  <cit> . these venoms have evolved to serve a variety of purposes, including prey capture, competitor deterrence, and defense against predators. there has been considerable innovation both in the chemical composition of these venoms as well as the method of venom delivery, which includes barbs, beaks, fangs, harpoons, nematocysts, pinchers, proboscises, spines, spurs, and stingers  <cit> .

from a molecular evolutionary perspective, the venoms of snakes are the best understood. there is now abundant evidence that snake venoms evolved by recruitment of genes encoding normal body proteins followed by extensive duplication, neofunctionalization, and in some instances relegation to the status of pseudogene  <cit> . in many cases, these genes have been explosively replicated to produce large multigene families. this process is analogous to the birth-and-death model of evolution proposed for multigene families involved in adaptive immunity, such as the major histocompatibility complex and immunoglobulin vh genes  <cit> . however, the evolutionary trajectory is less clear for the venoms of spiders, scorpions, and molluscs, which are dominated by disulfide-rich peptides of mass 2–9 kda  <cit> . these peptides typically possess high affinity and often-exquisite specificity for particular classes of ion channels and other nervous system targets  <cit> . these neurotoxic functions are perhaps not surprising given that the primary role of these venoms is to paralyse or kill envenomated prey  <cit> .

in this study, we analysed toxin-encoding transcripts from five species of australian funnel-web spider  from the genera atrax and hadronyche, representing a geographic spread of more than 2000 km , in order to provide insight into the evolutionary trajectory of the ω-hexatoxin- <dig>  family. ω-hexatoxins  are peptides comprising ~ <dig> residues that were first isolated from the venom of the lethal blue mountains funnel-web spider hadronyche versuta <cit> . the ω-hexatoxins are major components in the venom of australian funnel-web spiders  <cit>  and they contribute significantly to prey immobilization by virtue of their ability to specifically block insect, but not vertebrate, voltage-gated calcium  channels  <cit> . their potent insecticidal activity has engendered interest in these peptides as bioinsecticides  <cit> . proteomic analysis of h. versuta venom revealed a number of ω-hxtx-hv1a paralogs  <cit> , suggesting that this peptide toxin might belong to a multigene family. however, because the venom used in this previous study was pooled from several spiders, it was unclear whether these apparent paralogs are simply polymorphisms resulting from allelic variation. by using cdna libraries obtained from a single spider, we demonstrate here that ω-hxtx-hv1a is indeed part of a large multigene family that appears to have arisen from explosive gene duplication followed by extensive sequence divergence and neofunctionalization. within this superfamily of toxins, we show that pharmacologically distinct toxin classes are evolving under starkly different selection pressures, with some toxin classes accumulating variation under episodic bursts of adaptation, while others remain constrained by negative selection. this work reinforces the idea that the chemical and pharmacological diversity present in spider venoms may have evolved from a relatively small number of ancestral genes.

RESULTS
the ω-hexatoxins are expressed as prepropeptide precursors
race analysis was used to amplify transcripts encoding orthologs of ω-hxtx-hv1a from four species of australian funnel-web spider: atrax robustus, h. infensa, h. venenata, and h. versuta . multiple ω-hxtx-hv1a orthologs were identified in each species  . a further eight paralogs encoding four distinct mature toxins were identified in the venom-gland transcriptome of h. modesta . thus, the amino acid sequence diversity previously reported for ω-hxtx- <dig> based on analysis of pooled venom samples  <cit>  is due to expression of multiple related transcripts in a single spider rather than allelic variation. the almost complete conservation of the signal sequence, as well as the pattern of conserved cysteines in the mature toxin , indicates that these ω-hxtx-hv1a homologs arose by duplication and sequence divergence of the original toxin-encoding gene.

all of the ω-hxtxs are expressed as prepropeptide precursors that are posttranslationally processed to yield the mature toxin sequence . the highly hydrophobic 22-residue signal sequence is of similar length to that reported for peptide-toxin precursors from spiders, scorpions, and cone snails  <cit> . the 20-residue propeptide sequence is highly acidic, with a net charge of - <dig>  a feature that has been noted for numerous spider-toxin propeptide sequences  <cit>  but which is not characteristic of toxin precursors from other venomous animals. moreover, the presence of a propeptide region contrasts with most scorpion-toxin precursors in which the signal sequence is fused directly to the mature toxin without an intervening propeptide  <cit> . the reason for the highly acidic propeptide region in spider toxin precursors remains to be determined, but it may be related to specific interactions between the toxin precursor and components of the secretory and/or protein folding pathway in spider venom glands.

the propeptide sequence terminates with a dibasic arg-arg signature; dibasic sequences are common recognition sites for proteolytic removal of propeptide segments in neuropeptide precursors from both vertebrates  <cit>  and invertebrates  <cit> . while arg is the terminal residue in virtually all known spider-toxin propeptide sequences, the penultimate residue is variable, though it is commonly asp, glu, or lys  <cit> .

ω-hexatoxins belong to a large toxin-gene superfamily
orthologs of ω-hxtx-hv1a were identified in all five species of australian funnel-web spider examined in this study. these species are distributed along the eastern seaboard of australia with a geographic spread of more than 2000 km . the hexathelids are a group of approximately  <dig> species divided into three genera: atrax, hadronyche and illawarra <cit> . they are adapted to forest environments but can also be found in habitats that range from montane herblands and open woodland to closed forest  <cit> . conservation of the ω-hexatoxin family of toxins over this wide range of environments and differing prey distributions implies that there has been strong evolutionary pressure to maintain these peptides as part of the venom arsenal, which is perhaps not surprising given that they are broadly active against many different arthropods  <cit> .

in addition to obvious homologs of ω-hxtx-hv1a, the race and transcriptomic analyses revealed additional families of toxins that had almost identical signal sequences to the ω-hxtx- <dig> transcripts, but divergent propeptide and mature toxin sequences. we named one of these families the ω/κ-hxtx family . the ω/κ-hxtx peptides appear to be distributed in two of the species examined ; this reinforces the idea that these toxins most likely arose ancestrally by duplication of a ω-hxtx- <dig> gene followed by hypermutation of the propeptide and mature-toxin regions in order to create a new function . the conservation and radiation of these toxins across this family of spiders implies that they are not nonfunctional relics of an explosive radiation of this toxin-gene superfamily, and we confirmed this by showing that recombinant ω/κ-hxtx-hv1a is highly insecticidal  <cit> . the high insecticidal potency of this family of peptides is believed to result from a synergistic effect on insect voltage-gated calcium  channels and calcium-activated potassium  channels  <cit> .

race analysis of the venom-gland cdna library from h. versuta also led to amplification of transcripts encoding the insecticidal toxin κ-hxtx-hv1c  <cit> , and sequencing of the venom-gland transcriptome from h. modesta also uncovered an ortholog of this toxin . this was entirely unexpected since this toxin has a vastly different primary structure to ω-hxtx-hv1a  <cit> . moreover, in addition to the six conserved cysteine residues in ω-hxtx-hv1a that form an inhibitor cystine knot  motif  <cit> , κ-hxtx-hv1c contains two additional cysteine residues that form an extremely rare vicinal disulfide bond  <cit> . furthermore, in contrast to ω-hxtx-hv1a, which blocks insect cav channels, κ-hxtx-hv1c is a potent and specific blocker of kca channels  <cit> . nevertheless, the near identity of the signal sequence in these two toxin families and the conservation of cysteine residues in the mature toxin indicate that they evolved from the same ancestral toxin gene and are members of the same gene superfamily.

we did not find orthologs of κ-hxtx-hv1c in any of the other three species of australian funnel-web spider . however, κ-hxtx-hv1a, κ-hxtx-hv1b, and κ-hxtx-hv1c are expressed at very low levels in h. versuta venom  <cit> , and consequently we cannot rule out the possibility that these toxins are present in the venom of the other three spiders but the transcript levels are too low to be detected using the methods employed here.

the shiva superfamily of peptide toxins
it has previously been suggested that superfamilies of spider-venom peptides evolved from a single ancestral gene via explosive gene duplication  <cit> ; the work described here further supports this idea as it is clear that the ω-hxtxs, ω/κ-hxtxs, and κ-hxtxs belong to a large superfamily of toxins that arose via gene duplication . we have chosen to name spider-toxin gene superfamilies after deities of death and destruction since the major biological role of these toxins is to paralyze and/or kill envenomated prey. accordingly, we have named the ω/κ-hxtx/ω-hxtx/κ-hxtx gene superfamily after the hindu deity shiva, commonly known as the “destroyer”.

sequence logos were previously used to analyse differences in the level of sequence conservation between the three parts of the ω-hxtx toxin precursor, namely the signal peptide, propeptide, and mature toxin  <cit> . a revised logo analysis of the shiva superfamily  that incorporated all of the new sequences and species reported here reinforced the dichotomy in evolutionary forces affecting various elements of the toxin precursor. the signal peptide has clearly been highly conserved throughout the evolution of this toxin superfamily and it is presumably under negative selection in order to ensure that these toxins are directed to the appropriate secretory pathway. in contrast, there is significant sequence variation in both the propeptide and mature toxin sequences, with two notable exceptions. first, in contrast to the highly variable upstream region of the propeptide sequence, the c-terminal proteolytic recognition signal  is completely preserved . presumably there has been strong selection pressure to ensure processing of the propeptide by a specific protease. second, in contrast to the overall low level of conservation of the mature toxin sequence, the cysteine residues, which direct the three-dimensional  fold of the toxins, are completely conserved . the marked variation in levels of sequence conservation between the spider-toxin signal sequence and the propeptide and mature toxin regions is reminiscent of that observed for superfamilies of cone snail toxins  <cit> .

there are two striking differences between the shiva superfamily precursors and transcripts encoding human neuropeptides and other secreted proteins. first, whereas precursors of human neuropeptides often encode multiple mature neuropeptide sequences  <cit> , we and others have not found any examples of spider-toxin transcripts that encode more than a single mature toxin sequence. secondly, in direct contrast to the toxin precursors, the sequence of the mature human neuropeptide is usually strongly conserved whereas there is significantly more variability in the signal sequence. this is perhaps not surprising given that human neuropeptides usually act on a single well-defined molecular target whereas spider toxins typically target a specific subtype of receptor or ion channel that nevertheless might vary significantly in primary structure between prey taxa . thus, expressing a family of related toxins in the venom  might ensure that the desired receptor/ion channel is targeted, regardless of prey taxa.

position-specific cysteine codon bias
mature ω-hxtxs contain three disulfide bonds with 1– <dig>  2– <dig>  3– <dig> connectivity. these disulfides form an ick motif that provides these toxins with a high degree of chemical, thermal and biological stability  <cit> . although it is clear from a protein structure viewpoint why these six cysteine residues need to be strictly maintained in order to preserve the toxin’s 3d scaffold, one would not expect to find a preference for either one of the two possible cysteine codons . intriguingly, however, previous analysis of ω-hxtx precursors revealed a strong bias for tgc at four of the six cysteine positions in the mature toxin region  <cit> . an extended logo analysis  <cit>  incorporating all of the newly discovered sequences reported in this study corroborated the previously observed codon bias . we found an extreme tgc codon bias for the four cysteine residues that form the 1– <dig> and 3– <dig> disulfide bridges in the ω-hxtx family but not for the two cysteines that form the 2– <dig> disulfide bond . the observed position-specific codon bias is not simply a manifestation of global codon bias in these spiders as we have observed a preference for tgt as opposed to tgc for cysteine residues in other hexatoxin superfamilies . moreover, we did not observe extreme codon bias for any other conserved residue in the mature hexatoxins.

position-specific cysteine-codon bias has also been observed in superfamilies of cone snail toxins and it has been proposed that these codons might serve as attractants for a mutator complex that includes a poorly processive and highly mutagenic polymerase  that promotes radiation of the toxin superfamily by facilitating hypermutation of the mature toxin region  <cit> . however, there is currently no direct evidence that cysteine-codon bias plays a part in directing the evolution of spider or cone snail toxins.

molecular evolution analyses
we utilized various state-of-art molecular evolutionary assessment methods to determine the influence of natural selection on the evolution of genes encoding shiva superfamily toxins . the one-ratio model, the simplest of the codon-specific models, estimated the non-synonymous-to-synonymous nucleotide-substitution rate ratio  to be  <dig> ,  <dig>  and  <dig>  for the ω-hxtxs, κ-hxtxs, and combined shiva superfamily dataset, respectively . this highly conservative model can only detect positive selection when ω, averaged over all sites along the lineages in a phylogenetic tree, is significantly greater than one. as lineage-specific models of paml, such as the one-ratio model, often fail to detect positive-darwinian selection that only affects certain sites in proteins, we also employed site-specific models . model  <dig> estimated ω of  <dig> ,  <dig>  and  <dig>  for the ω-hxtxs, κ-hxtxs, and the combined shiva superfamily dataset, respectively . although the computed ω for the κ-hxtxs was > <dig>  the assessment was not statistically significant  in comparison with the null model . the bayes empirical bayes  approach implemented in m <dig> was only able to identify one positively selected site in the combined toxin dataset . thus, the site-specific models failed to detect the influence of adaptive selection pressures in shaping evolution of the shiva superfamily. in contrast, the more advanced fast, unconstrained bayesian approximation   <cit>  implemented in hyphy detected a handful of positively selected sites in both the ω-hxtxs and the combined dataset .

site
a
f
b
c
d
e
w
, m
v
, v
0
w
, m
v
, v
0
asites detected as positively selected using the integrative approach.

bm2a bayes empirical bayes  posterior probability and post-mean ω indicated in parentheses.

cm <dig> bayes empirical bayes  posterior probability and post-mean ω indicated in parentheses.

damino acid property under selection .

emagnitude if selection on the amino acid property.

faccessible surface area of 10–20% corresponds to buried residues, 40–50% indicates partially exposed amino acid residues, and ≥50% indicates solvent exposed residues.

a
b
c
afast, unconstrained bayesianapproximation .

bsites detected as experiencing episodic diversifying selection  by mixed effects model evolution .

cpositively selected sites detected using the bayes empirical approach implemented in the site models m <dig> and m2a. number of positively selected sites detected at the posterior probability ≥ <dig>  and  <dig>  are indicated in parenthesis. ω computed using m <dig> and m2a are also presented.

dnumber of sites evolving under the influence of pervasive diversifying selection, detected by fubar at  <dig>  posterior probability.

e number of sites evolving under the influence of pervasive purifying selection, detected by fubar at  <dig>  posterior probability.

ω = mean dn/ds.

ns = not significant at  <dig>  compared to the null model .

site-specific models for detecting positive selection work best when detecting pervasive selection pressures. however, the majority of positively selected sites are often subjected to transient or episodic adaptations. when the majority of lineages evolve under the influence of negative selection, they mask the signal of positive selection that influences only a small number of lineages. in such scenarios, the aforementioned analyses may fail to detect the influence of positive selection. to address the shortcomings of the aforementioned approaches, we employed the advanced mixed effects model evolution   <cit> , which uses fixed effects likelihood  along the sites and random effects likelihood  across the branches to detect episodic diversifying selection. meme is capable of identifying both pervasive and episodic adaptations. meme identified  <dig> and  <dig> episodically diversifying sites in the ω-hxtxs and combined toxin dataset, respectively , highlighting the vital role of episodic diversifying selection in shaping the evolution of these spider toxins. six out of eight episodically diversifying sites  were located on the molecular surface of the toxins  with their side chains completely or partially exposed to solvent, suggesting that they could act as pharmacological sites and participate in prey envenomation; these findings are also in agreement with the selection forces found on the surface of the sgtx toxin family from the venom of the african baboon spider scodra grisiepies <cit> . rapid accumulation of variations in exposed residues , where the toxin molecular chemistry undergoes hypervariations under the influence of positive darwinian selection and focal mutagenesis  <cit> , has been documented in a plethora of venom-components from a wide diversity of venomous animal lineages  <cit> . since the synthesis and secretion of venom proteins is energetically expensive  <cit> , mutations that disrupt the structure/function of proteins are filtered out of the population by negative selection over time, favoring the conservation of catalytic and structurally important residues. raver not only aids in generation of a rapidly variable toxin molecular surface biochemistry, but it also ensures the conservation of structurally and functionally important residues. accumulation of variations on the molecular surface of the toxin is advantageous as the altered surface chemistry might lead to new toxin functions .

to derive further support for the positively selected sites detected by nucleotide analyses, we employed a complementary protein-level approach implemented in treesaap . treesaap identified two positively selected sites in the ω-hxtxs that were in common with the sites identified by site-model  <dig> of paml . evolutionary fingerprint analyses  clearly revealed several residues in the ω-hxtxs and the combined toxin dataset that evolve under the influence of positive selection, while a majority of residues in the κ-hxtxs remained under evolutionary constraint . thus, evolution of the ω-hxtxs has been significantly influenced by short bursts of episodic adaptations, while the κ-hxtxs appear to be under negative selection.

phylogenetic analysis revealed that the κ-hxtxs form a separate clade to the ω-hxtxs, rendering the shiva superfamily non-monophyletic . there are also significant variations within the ω-hxtxs suggestive of functional diversification . the “hybrid” ω/κ-hxtxs exhibit functional characteristics of both the ω-hxtxs and κ-hxtxs as they block cav channels  as well as kca channels . the functional activity of the ω/κ-hxtxs combined with their relative phylogenetic placement and cysteine pattern indicates that they are structurally and functionally intermediate between the ω- and κ-hxtxs. the evolution of new cysteine residues to create the vicinal disulfide bond in the κ-hxtxs potentiated toxin activity on kca channels, since mutagenesis and analogue studies indicate that this vicinal disulfide bond is the most critical part of the kca pharmacophore  <cit> .

constraints on mutation of the mature toxin sequence
it is generally considered that conservation of the cysteine scaffold in toxin-gene superfamilies is critical for conserving the toxin’s 3d fold  <cit> . however, the incredible disparity in the amino acid sequence between ω-hxtx-hv1a and κ-hxtx-hv1c  begs the question of whether this is reflected in a significant difference in their 3d structures, despite their common cystine-knot scaffold. the 3d structure of both toxins has been determined previously using homonuclear nmr spectroscopy  <cit>  and their pharmacophores elucidated using alanine scanning mutagenesis  <cit> .

figure 7b and c show schematic representations of the 3d structure of κ-hxtx-hv1c and ω-hxtx-hv1a, respectively. the two toxins can be considered to comprise four inter-cystine loops, which are labelled 1– <dig> from n- to c-terminus. although there is an obvious similarity in the disposition of the three centrally located disulfide bridges that form the cystine-knot motif in each toxin, the overall topology of the toxins, as well as the size and relative orientation of the four inter-cystine loops, appears quite different. however, the structural overlay in figure 7d, which was generated automatically by the dalilite structural alignment program  <cit> , reveals that the two structures are in fact remarkably similar.

the dalilite alignment yields a root mean square deviation of  <dig>  Å over the backbone atoms of the  <dig> aligned residues, indicating that the two toxins are indeed structural homologs. the three central disulfide bridges and loop  <dig> align remarkably well. loop  <dig>  which encompasses the β-hairpin present in both toxins, also aligns well except for the four-residue insertion in ω-hxtx-hv1a , which increases the size of the hairpin loop at the tip of loop  <dig>  the major structural differences between the two toxins are the very different orientations of loops  <dig> and  <dig>  however, these structural variations cannot disguise the fact that the two toxins essentially conform to the same 3d scaffold despite their extraordinary sequence divergence . this ability to maintain a consistent molecular architecture despite massive variation in the inter-cystine loop sequences has important implications for the mechanism by which this superfamily of peptide toxins has evolved.

CONCLUSIONS
spiders and other venomous animals rely on the production of pharmacologically complex venoms for defense, prey capture, and competitor deterrence. the major components of most spider venoms are disulfide-rich peptides that have evolved to target a wide range of receptors and ion channels in the insect nervous system. the ω-hxtx and κ-hxtx families were the first peptides isolated from australian funnel-web spiders that were shown to be insecticidal  <cit> . analysis of all transcripts encoding these peptides showed that they are initially expressed as prepropeptides that are proteolytically processed to yield a 36– <dig> residue mature peptide that contains three disulfide bridges that form an ick motif plus a non-canonical vicinal disulfide bond in the κ-hxtxs.

the extreme diversity of primary structure within the shiva toxin superfamily suggests that there have been few evolutionary restraints on sequence diversification outside of the disulfide bridges that direct the 3d fold of these peptides. the ω-hxtxs, in particular, seem to have evolved under the influence of positive darwinian selection in an episodic fashion, whereas the κ-hxtxs appear to be constrained by negative selection pressures. functional assessments of these toxins should shed further light on why they have adopted quite contrasting molecular evolutionary regimes. ω-hxtxs were also found to have adopted raver, where a large number of the episodically diversifying sites are concentrated on the molecular surface, facilitating the generation of novel pharmacological sites. these toxins may therefore be good candidates for in vitro evolution studies designed to produce modified peptides with desired therapeutic  <cit>  or agrochemical  <cit>  properties. most importantly, this study reinforces the idea that the remarkable chemical and pharmacological complexity of spider venoms may be derived from a relatively small number of ancestral genes.

