BACKGROUND
feed cost is the major component  of the total cost of pig meat production  <cit> , so that animal’s efficiency in converting feed into a rapid increase of lean body weight  is a critical issue for the profitability of meat industries. to date, the main measures of feed efficiency in production farms are the feed conversion ratio  defined as the ratio of feed intake to the average daily gain  during a reference period, and its opposite trait, the gain-to-feed ratio . both fcr and g:f are ratio traits and as such, can lead to unexpected responses on the component traits when improved through direct selection. in addition, koch et al.  <cit>  have defined the concept of residual feed intake  as the difference between animal’s actual feed intake and its predicted feed intake based on production needs. rfi is often regarded as a biological estimate of the efficiency of feed utilization, and the lower the rfi value is, the more efficient the animal is. selection to improve feed efficiency through rfi has been proposed in different species. in pigs, lines divergently selected for rfi provided a good biological resource to unravel molecular mechanisms and functions associated with feed efficiency differences independent from the performance  <cit> .

to date, some dna variants playing a role in feed efficiency traits have been proposed from analyses of snp locations by whole-genome association in pigs  <cit>  and beef cattle  <cit> . based on their genomic location in the vicinity of these snps, putative gene candidates for feed efficiency traits including rfi have been suggested. the highlighted genes pertain to numerous biological processes  <cit> , suggesting that biological strategies recruited for improving feed efficiency are diverse. to examine the variety of functional pathways underlying inter-individual difference in feed efficiency, an increasing number of studies have also addressed the transcriptomes and mirna profiles of tissues and organs involved in energy homeostasis and energy demand in pigs  <cit>  and cattle  with contrasted rfi values. with the exception of weber and colleagues  <cit>  who very recently performed a multi-tissue transcriptome analysis in bulls, all other authors have addressed the different tissues separately. this did not allow understanding how shared pathways in different tissues and tissue specific concerted pathways may participate to rfi and feed efficiency differences. progress in this field is needed to predict side-effects of selection programs for rfi on unexpected animal phenotype and suggest other strategies to improve feed efficiency.

this study aimed to analyze the transcriptomic profiles of longissimus muscle, liver and two adipose tissues obtained in pigs from two lines divergently selected for rfi. pigs from the low rfi line had an improved g:f ratio and they consistently demonstrated greater loin muscle size when compared with pigs from the high rfi line  <cit> . this study focused on common vs. specific molecular pathways in different tissues which might be important in an efficiency phenotype.

RESULTS
growth and body composition of pigs from two lines divergently selected for rfi
forty-eight pigs from two genetic lines  that were divergently selected over eight generations for rfi were compared at the same age . pigs from the low rfi line grew faster during the test period , ate somewhat less feed  and were heavier at the same age than pigs from the high rfi line . gain-to-feed  ratio during the test period was clearly improved  in pigs from the low rfi line. the longissimus muscle, the major fast-twitch muscle in the loin part of the body, had a greater mass  in pigs from the low rfi line, but liver was lighter in those pigs as compared with pigs from the high rfi line. the relative proportions of dorsal  subcutaneous  and perirenal  adipose tissues, which are used as surrogates of carcass adiposity, were almost similar in both lines.table  <dig> growth and body composition traits in pigs from the low or high rfi lines

linea
sem
 

atwo pig lines were divergently selected over eight generations for residual feed intake . a subset of  <dig> pigs was tested for performance from 74 days to 132 days of age and used tissue sampling. the resulting phenotype in this subset was an improved gain-to-feed ratio and greater muscularity in pigs from the low rfi line when compared with pigs from the high rfi line. at adipose tissue, bw body weight




tissue transcriptomes
microarray analyses were performed in longissimus muscle, liver, scat and prat of pigs from the low vs high rfi lines . by using the same cut-offs for the four tissues examined, the global effects of the line on the numbers of differentially expressed probes  and their corresponding genes  were found much more pronounced in muscle than in the other examined tissues, with a total of  <dig>  <dig> genes being differentially-expressed in muscle . this number was more than two-fold lower in liver and prat and was about four-fold lower in scat. most of deg showed a fold-change less than | <dig> | in pigs from the low vs high rfi lines.fig  <dig> molecular changes in tissues due to rfi line. microarray data obtained in longissimus muscle, liver, perirenal  and subcutaneous  adipose tissues were separately analyzed for the main effects of line . genes were declared as differentially expressed  between pigs from the low or high rfi lines according to the same cutoffs in the four tissues . fc: fold-change between mean values calculated in pigs from the low or high rfi lines. values are inversed and preceeded by a minus sign for fc <  <dig> 




altogether, more than one-half of the deg  were over-expressed in pigs from the low rfi line when compared with pigs from the high rfi line . the lists of deg are provided tissue by tissue in additional file  <dig>  the quality and reliability of the microarray results was checked by measuring the expression of target genes by qpcr from  <dig>  to  <dig> genes  in each tissue . a good correlation  was generally found between microarrays and qpcr data .fig  <dig> reliability of microarray data. a subset of genes was analyzed by qpcr in longissimus muscle, liver, perirenal adipose tissue and subcutaneous adipose tissue . the fold-changes  calculated between expression levels of target genes in pigs from the low to high rfi lines in microarrays on one hand and qpcr on the other hand, were plot together. correlation coefficient was calculated between the two measures. forward and reverse primers used for qpcr are listed in additional file 3





shared biological processes and gene networks across tissues targeted by rfi selection
among the deg,  <dig> unique genes were identified by the venn diagram as common to the four tissues, and a much greater number were rather tissue-specific . fold-change  in values of the gene expressions  which were common to the four examined tissues as well in specific genes exclusively found in one tissue are provided in additional file  <dig> fig  <dig> venn diagram representing deg due to rfi line. the lists of differentially expressed genes  due to line effect in longissimus muscle, liver, perirenal  and subcutaneous  adipose tissues were considered to edit the venn diagram, using the venny tool . a total of  <dig> deg were commonly found in the four tissues . black arrows point to the deg exclusively found in one tissue. rfi: residual feed intake




the  <dig> deg were submitted to an enrichment test to explore the biological processes which were common to the four tissues. as indicated in table  <dig>  eight main biological pathways of clustered genes  were affected by the line across the four tissues. intracellular  transport and immune response, which includes antigen processing and presentation, were the top-enriched biological processes. in addition, membrane lipid metabolic process, macromolecule  catabolic process, translational elongation, phospholipid metabolic process, the response to oxidative stress, and an heterogeneous cluster related to cell death, cytokine production and protein kinase activity were also listed as important biological processes modulated due to line. these eight pathways can be thus considered as the main biological responses shared by different tissues and participating in difference in feed efficiency.table  <dig> main commonly affected biological processes across four tissues

go termsa
psen <dig>  ywhaz, tomm <dig>  mlx, dst, rab <dig>  pikfyve, myl <dig>  pex <dig>  stam <dig>  optn, cdk <dig>  cchcr <dig>  ywhag, jak <dig>  stam, nup43
hla-a, hla-b, hla-c, hla-h, ctsc, ywhaz, psen <dig>  traf <dig>  polr3b, bst <dig>  col4a3bp, adam <dig>  xcl1
cln <dig>  psap, sgms <dig>  col4a3bp
psen <dig>  yme1l <dig> cd <dig>  traf <dig>  usp <dig>  usp <dig>  ube2v <dig>  psma <dig>  psmd <dig>  mutyh, cln <dig>  tmem <dig>  cdk <dig>  rnaset <dig>  neurl <dig>  adam <dig>  adam17
rpl <dig>  rpl <dig>  rps <dig>  rpl35
psen <dig>  ntn <dig>  cd <dig>  traf <dig>  sod <dig>  ywhag, polr3d, hspe <dig>  cln <dig>  trio, sgms <dig>  optn, pdcd <dig>  cdk <dig>  jak <dig>  blcap, adam <dig>  adam17
pon <dig>  pigl, pla2g12a, sgms <dig>  pikfyve, cln3
psen <dig>  sod <dig>  gpx <dig>  jak <dig>  adam <dig>  mutyh

athe  <dig> differentially-expressed genes   which were commonly listed in muscle, liver, perirenal and subcutaneous adipose tissues, were clustered based on shared gene ontology  terms for biological processes. the enrichment score  and p-value for each cluster are provided




in parallel, highly-interconnected non-redundant small networks were released using ingenuity pathway analysis®  tool, with particular genes  represented as nodes and relationships between them or with neighboring genes represented as edges. this analysis allowed pointing key genes in different functional networks which were mainly related to response to oxidative stress, apoptosis, immunity and protein metabolism. through low density lipoproteins , the first network  describes relationships between sod <dig> and pon <dig> , il <dig> and ctsc  and ntn <dig> . two additional networks were also related to immunity : three members of the major histocompatibility complex family  were involved in a network of genes including the phosphoinositide protein kinase , an enzyme participating in lymphocyte homeostasis and function  <cit> ; two genes of the tnf family  were associated with nuclear factor kappa-light-chain-enhancer of activated b cells  and c-jun n-terminal kinase  signaling pathways in another small network. another significant network was clearly dedicated to protein metabolism  with different molecules acting in protein translation , protein catabolism , and protein transport .fig  <dig> examples of functional networks of regulated genes shared by different tissues. the  <dig> differentially expressed genes commonly listed in longissimus muscle, liver, perirenal and subcutaneous adipose tissues were submitted to ingenuity® pathway analysis to visualize small networks of co-expressed genes. highly-interconnected non-redundant networks were released from specified genes  and relationships  between them or with neighboring genes were established based on literature records in the ingenuity® pathway knowledge base. this allows identifying functional networks related to response to oxidative stress, apoptosis, immunity and protein metabolism. two small functional networks are shown. more networks can be viewed in additional files  <dig> and  <dig>  a relationships through low density lipoproteins , between sod <dig> and pon <dig> , il <dig> and ctsc  and ntn <dig> . b relationship between different molecules acting in protein translation , protein catabolism  and protein transport 




a last informative network  described the phosphoinositide 3-kinase  and erk signaling pathways with possible connections with creb <dig> , a gene known to induce transcription of genes involved in fatty acid metabolism. this network also included yme1l <dig> , a gene involved in mitochondrial protein metabolism, and psen <dig> , a gene encoding a protein that has been proposed to be the catalytic component of the gamma-secretase protein complex involved in development and cell regulatory processes.

multiple factor statistical analysis to highlight important genes in transcriptomic variability
in addition to bioinformatics analyses, a multiple factor analysis  was performed to aggregate the whole transcriptomic datasets. this data integration mathematical procedure ensures that each tissue influence was balanced in the joint analysis when latent synthetic variables were calculated as linear combinations of the most highly correlated dep. the first dimension  of the mfa summarized 24% of the whole molecular variability. as shown in fig. 5a, dim <dig> clearly opposed pigs of the low rfi line  and pigs of the high rfi line . the muscle weight  was moderately correlated with dim <dig> , which means that part of the molecular mechanisms summarized by dim <dig> contributed to inter-individual difference in muscularity. the second dimension  summarized only 6% of the variability of transcriptomic changes and this did not allow any distinction between pigs from the low or high rfi lines. therefore, only dim <dig> was further considered as a relevant summary of the tissue molecular changes due to line.fig  <dig> multi-way mathematical datasets analysis: consensus between distinct tissues transcriptomes underlying separation of molecular data due to rfi line. a pigs were represented on the scatter plot created with the first two dimensions  of the multiple factor analysis  which aggregated the whole transcriptomic variability across four tissues. only the first dimension of the mfa  discriminated pigs from the low rfi line and pigs from the high rfi line. b synthetic latent variables were calculated from correlated molecular probes in the longissimus muscle , liver , perirenal adipose tissue  and dorsal subcutaneous adipose tissue  and projected in the correlation circle of mfa. the first latent variables in muscle , liver , perirenal adipose tissue  and subcutaneous adipose tissue  had a contribution near |1| to dim <dig> in the diagnostic plot. this allows considering dim <dig> of the mfa as a relevant summary of the main common molecular responses across the four tissues




the first latent variables in muscle , liver , prat  and scat  had a contribution near |1| to dim <dig> in the mfa diagnostic plot : this means that dim <dig> of the mfa can be regarded as a relevant summary of similarities in the four tissues. the genes encoded by dep having the highest correlation with dim <dig>  and commonly found in the four tissues are provided in table  <dig>  more detailed information can be found in additional file  <dig> table  <dig> top-ranked genes contributing to the first dimension of mfa analysis

genea

psen1

pcif1

rpl6

ipp

rpl14

phyh

pla2g12a

heatr4

znf174

usp33

cd40

ntn1

polr3h

lztfl1

cyb561a3

h2-q4

ctsc

uqcrb

pikfyve

dst

phyh

atop-ranked contributors in transcriptomics variability were identified by a multiple factor analysis . unique genes were ranked according to the correlation coefficient  calculated between their corresponding molecular probe and the first dimension of the mfa that opposed pigs from the low rfi line to pigs from the high rfi line. when different probes corresponded to the same unique gene, only the highest r value for positive correlation or the lowest r value for negative correlation, respectively, is indicated. the main biological process associated to each gene in entrez database was also indicated. rfi residual feed intake




among the top-ranked common genes, psen <dig>  was again identified; it had the strongest positive correlation with dim <dig>  moreover, usp <dig>  and ipp  related to protein ubiquitination, rpl <dig> and rpl <dig> acting in translation, and pla2g12a and pigl involved in phospholipid metabolic process, also had positive contributions to dim <dig>  on the opposite, four genes involved in immune response  were identified as negative contributors to dim <dig>  netrin  and two other genes participating to oxido-reduction process  were also among the top negative contributors to dim <dig>  finally, phyh  was represented by different deps being either positively or negatively associated to dim <dig>  this was due to an opposite regulation of phyh expression in adipose tissues  and lean tissues .

tissue specificities in the molecular differences between the two rfi lines
in a second step of analysis, genes that were differentially expressed only in one tissue were submitted to an enrichment test to reveal tissue specificities. functional clusters were listed, tissue by tissue, in tables  <dig>   <dig> and  <dig>  details on genes included in each cluster are provided in additional files  <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> table  <dig> summary of the main muscle-specific biological processes

go termsa

agenes that were differentially expressed between pigs from the low or high rfi lines in muscle only were clustered according to gene ontology  terms for biological processes and genomes biological pathways . significantly-enriched clusters  were listed with the enrichment  score, the number  of differentially expressed genes  in each cluster and p-value. overlapping clusters with a similar biological significance were removed


go termsa

agenes that were differentially expressed between pigs from the low or high rfi lines in liver only were clustered according to considered to gene ontology  terms for biological processes and genomes biological pathways . significantly-enriched clusters  were listed with the enrichment  score, the number  of differentially expressed genes  in each cluster and p-value


go termsa

agenes that were differentially expressed between pigs from the low or high rfi lines in subcutaneous  or perirenal  adipose tissues only were clustered according to considered to gene ontology  terms for biological processes and genomes biological pathways . significantly-enriched clusters  were listed with the enrichment  score, the number  of differentially expressed genes  in each cluster and p-value




muscle
a total of  <dig>  <dig> deg were exclusively found in muscle . this means that about 72% of muscle deg was not listed in the other examined tissues. the highest number of up-regulated genes  in pigs from the low rfi line when compared with pigs from the high rfi line were participating to translation process , with  <dig> genes coding for ribosomal subunits,  <dig> genes coding for mitochondrial ribosomes,  <dig> genes involved in translational initiation and  <dig> genes coding for translation elongation factors . intracellular transport and protein catabolic process, which included ubiquitin specific peptidases, ubiquitin-conjugated enzymes and proteasome subunits, were also top-enriched biological pathways of overexpressed muscular genes in pigs from the low rfi line. another predominant pathway of over-expressed genes in muscle of pigs from the low rfi line was the contraction process with many up-regulated genes coding for filament proteins. finally, over-expressed genes in muscle were also clustered in functional modules related to the generation of precursor metabolites and energy: they participated to the regulation of glucose import , coded for various enzymes acting in glycogen metabolic process  and other glucose metabolic processes such as glycolysis, tricarboxylic acid cycle, and finally the respiratory chain  to achieve the oxidative process of energy production from glucose .

conversely,  <dig> genes that were down-regulated in pigs from the low rfi line were involved in immune response and cytokine production . they included genes associated with the toll-like receptor family, complement components and receptors, and proteins regulating antigen presentation . under-expressed genes in those pigs also shared gobp terms for fatty acid metabolic process, such as lipid biosynthetic process . a high number of under-expressed genes in muscle of pigs from the low rfi line also participated to the regulation of apoptosis. finally, skeletal muscle development, a process which was likely promoted by the transcription factor myc and also included genes of the transforming growth factor  and insulin-growth factor- <dig>  families , was identified as another down-regulated process in pigs from the low rfi line.

liver
in liver, the majority of the up-regulated genes in pigs of the low rfi line compared with pigs of the high rfi line participated to intracellular signaling cascade . three overexpressed genes were also involved in the reverse cholesterol transport: lipc , apoa <dig>  coding for a major component of high-density lipoproteins, and lcat  which is responsible for the formation of plasma cholesteryl esters from free cholesterol .

most of the down-regulated genes in liver of pigs from the low rfi line compared with pigs from the high rfi line participated to defense and immune responses . these pathways included tnf family members and interleukins, such as il <dig>  produced by lymphocytes and its receptor , which is required for il10-induced signal transduction . under-expressed hepatic genes in those pigs also participated to unsaturated fatty acid metabolism, with four members of the cytochrome p <dig> superfamily of enzymes known to catalyze reactions in the synthesis of cholesterol and steroids .

adipose tissues
the deg in the two adipose tissues of pigs from the low rfi line compared with pigs from the high rfi line were distributed in a large number of biological processes, so that there were few  or no  significantly enriched pathways. only 37% of the deg in prat was also reported in scat , which suggests different molecular responses according to fat anatomical locations.

in scat, the predominant biological pathway shared by over-expressed adipose genes in pigs from the low rfi line concerned the generation of precursor metabolites and energy. notably, glucose metabolic process  and lipid catabolic process  were up-regulated processes in those pigs when compared with pigs from the high rfi line ; this latter pathway included plin <dig> acting in lipolysis and three genes participating to fatty acid beta-oxidation . the response to oxidative stress with genes encoding anti-oxidant enzymes , was identified as another enriched biological process in scat of pigs from the low rfi line when compared with pigs from the high rfi line. conversely, defense response was the main enriched pathway of under-expressed genes in scat in pigs from the low rfi line: this concerned chemokines  and attractin , a secreted protein regulating the chemotactic activity.

specific to prat, under-expressed genes in pigs from the low rfi line were participating to steroid and cholesterol metabolic processes ; they included members of the cytochrome p <dig> superfamily catalyzing reactions involved in synthesis of cholesterol, and srebf <dig>  acting as a key transcription factor to control cholesterol homeostasis .

conclusions on tissue specificities
although represented by different genes in each tissue, immune and defense responses , regulation of apoptosis and cell death , and cholesterol and steroid metabolic processes  thus emerged again as modulated pathways due to line. importantly, fatty acid catabolic process was represented by genes that were under-expressed in muscle of pigs from the low rfi line and by genes that were up-regulated in adipose tissues of the same pigs when compared with pigs from the high rfi line.

discussion
this study considered pigs from two genetic lines divergently selected for rfi, a biological estimate of the efficiency of feed utilization. phenotypically, pigs from the low rfi line had an improved gain-to-feed ratio during the test period, the difference between lines being commensurate to our previous observations in a former generation of selection  <cit> . in this experiment, this was achieved by increased growth rate rather than by large reduction in daily feed intake for pigs of the low rfi line when compared with pigs of the pig rfi line. especially, the line-associated difference in feed intake in these subsets was smaller  than what was expected based on data acquired in sib mates raised in the selection farm  and reported in former generations raised in experimental farms under conventional diets . pigs of the low rfi line also had greater muscle mass when compared with pigs from the high rfi line, which agrees with previous data  <cit> . altogether, it is important to state that the two groups inherited the intrinsic rfi genetic differences of their line; they were also phenotypically different in feed efficiency. because it is now assumed that dedicated mathematical methods and joint modelling analyses are required to integrate multiple tissue transcript data  <cit> , multivariate statistical analysis and descriptive bioinformatics were associated to propose a reasonable number of shared and tissue-specific functional pathways from muscle, liver and adipose tissues transcriptomes and to enlighten key genes which can be related to a genetic difference for rfi and a general difference in feed efficiency phenotype.

immune molecular pathways shared by the four tissues
immune response appears to be the most important biological pathway of clustered under-expressed genes in the four tissues examined in pigs from the low rfi line  when compared with pigs from the high rfi line  at 132 days of age. in agreement with our results, levels of serum inflammatory markers such as the acute phase protein haptoglobin have been reported to be lower in yorkshire pigs selected for low rfi  <cit> . in cattle, contrasted results have rather been reported. consistent with our results, the expression levels of some genes related to inflammatory processes were lower in liver of low rfi heifers  <cit>  and an enrichment of transcriptomic networks for inflammatory response was conversely reported in the liver of low feed efficient, high rfi steers  <cit> . on the opposite, pathway analysis of deg across muscle, adipose tissue and duodenum predicted immune system and inflammatory response to be increased in low rfi bulls  <cit> . because having an activated immune system is energetically costly  <cit> , the down-regulation of many immune genes in pigs from the low rfi line  may contribute to lower basal metabolic rate in those pigs. in support, a lower heat production related to reduced basal metabolic rate has been previously reported in low rfi pigs compared with high rfi pigs  <cit> . in our study, the over-expression of cd <dig>  in the four examined tissues was notably proposed as one of the hallmarks of pigs from the high rfi line. this may be due to the regulatory role of this gene  in a wide spectrum of molecular processes during the initiation and progression of adaptive immunity  <cit> . this gene has been also identified in a significant genomic region associated with adg in pigs  <cit> . another important gene in the inflammatory response to discriminate pigs from the low vs high rfi lines was ctsc . this gene codes for a lysosomal cysteine proteinase playing a central role in bacterial killing and immune regulation in t lymphocytes  <cit> . identifying ntn <dig>  as another key gene for which a differential expression in the four tissues brought an important contribution to genetics difference for rfi, may be related to the role of this laminin-related secreted protein in directing the retention of macrophages in adipose tissue  <cit> . in accordance, different genes coding for chemokines, a family of chemoattractant cytokines, were also identified with a lower expression in scat of pigs from the low rfi line. instead, the transcriptional modulation of immunity in muscle was more specifically related to toll-like receptors , which are known to be expressed by both myoblasts and myotubes  <cit> ; genes in this pathway also included complement components and receptors that may initiate the inflammatory response in muscle  <cit> . from the current data, it is however not possible to predict the ability of pigs from the low or high rfi lines to cope with an immune challenge. in younger pigs, it has been shown that the two rfi lines coped similarly with a complete freund’s adjuvant challenge inducing a noninfectious pneumonia  <cit> . moreover, low rfi piglets recovered faster than high rfi piglets after the challenge  <cit> . in comparison with the high rfi line, growth rate was also less impaired in young growing pigs from the low rfi line facing degradation of hygiene conditions  <cit>  and after a prrsv infection  <cit> . these data suggest that having lower expression levels of various immune genes in tissues would not limit the ability of more efficient pigs to cope with inflammatory events in the young age; this remains to be checked for pigs around puberty.

anti-oxidant pathways in lean and fat tissues
the present study identifies response to oxidative stress as another biological process shared by the same genes which were differentially-regulated in the four tissues depending of the line. a small network of co-expressed genes also linked response to oxidative stress with immunity and apoptosis. in agreement with these findings, it is generally admitted that immune system activation releases highly reactive species to kill pathogens, which can cause oxidative damage to tissues. especially, paraoxonase- <dig>  had a higher expression level in the four tissues of pigs from the low rfi line when compared with pigs from the high rfi line. this glycoprotein is transferred from liver to prevent the accumulation of lipid peroxides and reduce macrophage inflammatory response in tissues  <cit> . conversely, an up-regulation in uqcrb, a gene coding for the ubiquinol-cytochrome c reductase binding protein which plays roles in oxygen sensing and ros-mediated signaling  <cit> , may negatively contribute to feed efficiency. altogether, this suggests diminished oxidative stress in more efficient pigs. in agreement with this assumption, research in broilers has consistently shown that muscle mitochondria from high efficient birds produce less hydrogen peroxide  <cit> . in addition, others have shown that ros production in muscle and rfi values were positively correlated, although no difference in electron leakage was seen in mitochondria prepared from livers of low and high rfi pig lines  <cit> . in our study, adipose-specific molecular responses to oxidative stress were further suggested, with the higher rather than lower expression levels in scat of different genes participating to the first enzymatic line of defense against oxidative stress  when pigs from the low rfi line were compared with pigs from the high rfi line. this suggests that feed efficiency might be associated with different ros production between adipose and lean tissues, and that these tissues dealt differently with ros detoxification.

up-regulation of genes involved in protein synthesis and catabolism in tissues
finally, the largest number of genes differentially regulated in the four tissues between pigs from the low or high rfi lines belonged to protein metabolic processes. similarly, candidate genes in pathways related to protein metabolism have been suggested in genomic regions accounting for feed conversion ratio in cattle  <cit> . ribosome biogenesis and translation processes were notably enriched in over-expressed genes in tissues of pigs from the low rfi line. this could explain the greater muscle mass in those pigs when compared with pigs from the high rfi line at 132 days of age. up-regulated genes acting in protein synthesis, proliferation and growth have been similarly revealed across muscle, liver and adipose tissue of low rfi beef cattle  <cit> . surprisingly, different genes known to participate to protein degradation were over-expressed in the four tissues examined in pigs from the low rfi line when compared with pigs of the high rfi line. this was not expected because others have reported depressed ubiquitin content in breast muscle of high feed efficient chicken  <cit>  and lower activities of protein degradation enzymes in muscle of pigs selected for low rfi  <cit> . among other genes involved in protein addressing and degradation, expression levels of psen <dig>  and usp <dig>  regulating ubiquitin-dependent protein catabolic process, were among the top molecular contributors in the differences between low and high rfi lines. many ubiquitin-conjugating enzymes were also specifically over-expressed in muscle of the most efficient pigs. both protein targeting and the ubiquitin system are known to regulate virtually all aspects of cellular functions  <cit> . therefore, the observed changes in genes regulating protein transport and degradation may be important in the control of various biological processes involved in an improved efficiency phenotype. however, because protein synthesis, transport and breakdown are regarded as energy-costly processes  <cit> , up-regulation of protein metabolism in tissues of pigs from the low rfi line represented an apparent paradox that deserves further studies.

tissue-specific modulations in energy use
tight regulation of glucose homeostasis is essential for fast-twitch muscle where glucose metabolites are the major energy sources. in longissimus muscle, the gene expression program related to glycogen utilization was up-regulated in pigs from the low rfi line. this is in agreement with our previous findings of higher level of glucose issued from glycogen hydrolysis and elevated glycolytic potential in pigs selected for low rfi  <cit> . moreover, increased glycogen content in hypertrophied white fast-twitch fibers have been previously observed in muscle biopsies from low rfi pigs in a former generation of selection  <cit> . in the present study, genes involved in the respiratory electron transport chain of mitochondria were also up-regulated in muscle of pigs from the low rfi line. this is in accordance with recent data showing higher mitochondrial protein expressions by shotgun proteomics in chicken with an improved feed efficiency phenotype  <cit> . altogether, these data may sign for an increased efficiency of mitochondria rather than a greater number of mitochondria in the most efficient pigs. conversely, different genes involved in triglyceride lipolysis, fatty acid oxidation but also fatty acid synthesis and elongation, were up-regulated in muscle of pigs from the high rfi line, which suggests that fatty acid use was promoted in muscle of the less efficient pigs. the greater activity of hydroxyacyl-coenzyme a dehydrogenase, an important enzyme in the beta-oxidation, which was measured in muscle from high rfi pigs in a former generation of selection  <cit> , further supports these molecular data. because energy cost of intramuscular fatty acid synthesis is elevated, more efficient pigs may favor the use of glycogen rather than of fat to support energy needs for protein deposition and muscle filament contraction. opposite to the muscle transcriptome, an increased expression of genes participating to lipolysis and fatty acid oxidation was observed in scat of pigs from the low rfi line. a striking example for this opposite regulation in fatty acid oxidation between lean  and fat  was provided by phyh. this gene codes for the phytanoyl-coa 2-hydroxylase, an enzyme involved in metabolizing phytanic acid, a metabolite of phytol regulating the alpha-oxidation process in the peroxisome. examples for such an opposite regulation of phyh gene expression between liver and adipose tissue have been provided in rodents fed high-fat diets  <cit> . to date, a higher fatty oxidation in adipose tissue is regarded as a key for the lean phenotype in rodents and human  <cit> . the present study further suggests that fatty acid oxidation in adipose tissue could be important for the efficiency of lean growth, independently of adiposity.

finally, members of the cytochrome p <dig>  superfamily of enzymes that catalyze reactions in the synthesis of cholesterol and steroids were down-regulated in liver and prat of pigs from the low rfi line . similarly to our results, other cyp genes were found as down-regulated genes in liver of low rfi cattle  <cit> . conversely, lcat  responsible for the formation of most plasma cholesteryl esters, and its cofactor apoa <dig>  which promotes cholesterol efflux, were up-regulated in liver of pigs from the low rfi line. taken together, these changes suggest that cholesterol level in liver may be reduced  in more efficient pigs. interestingly, positive relationships between cholesterol plasma level and rfi values have been previously reported in pigs  <cit>  and beef cattle  <cit> . altogether, this suggests that cholesterol content may be associated with differences in efficiency phenotypes.

tissue hierarchy participating to an efficiency phenotype
among the four examined tissues, the longissimus muscle was found as the primary site affected by a divergent selection for rfi. this was expected due to the main role of skeletal muscle in body energy homeostasis and energy use. among genes involved in the regulation of glucose import, energy metabolic process and cellular protein metabolism, different genes related to insulin and igf <dig> system were over-expressed in muscle of pigs from the low rfi line, which is in agreement with recent findings showing an up-regulation of igf <dig> in muscle of more efficient pigs  <cit> . on the opposite, other genes known to participate to skeletal muscle development such as c-myc antigen, tgf-β, igf <dig> and its receptor igf1r were down-regulated in muscle of pigs from the low rfi line. decreased circulating concentration of igf-i has been also associated with a leaner, more efficient phenotype when juvenile pigs  have been investigated  <cit> . considering that igf <dig> expression in pig muscle decreased with advancing age  <cit> , this suggests that difference in growth kinetics may exist between pigs from the low and high rfi lines. in the present study, dorsal subcutaneous adipose tissue  had the less affected transcriptome among the four examined tissues. the selection procedure has been conducted with the objective to keep adiposity constant  <cit> . if any, phenotypic differences in subcutaneous adiposity between lines were not manifested before 19 weeks of age  <cit> . altogether, time-course studies should be valuable to better understand the roles played by various biological mechanisms in muscle and adipose tissues in inter-individual differences in feed efficiency.

CONCLUSIONS
this study presents novel findings on the transcriptomic modulations related to feed efficiency considering four tissues involved in energy generation and use in pigs. immune response, protein metabolism and response to oxidative stress were identified as the main molecular pathways that were associated with a genetic difference for rfi and a general difference for efficiency phenotypes in pigs at 132 days of age. therefore, non-productive functions in metabolic tissues are likely important processes for feed efficiency. it may be further suggested that dietary compounds with both anti-inflammatory and anti-oxidant activities can improve feed efficiency in growing pigs.

