BACKGROUND
classification of biological organisms is of fundamental importance to evolutionary studies. it is commonly believed that there are three domains of life: archaea, bacteria and eukaryote. currently, the most popular classification method is the so called "molecular approach", in which polymorphism information in dna or protein sequence is exploited to assess the phylogenetic relationships among species  <cit> . to a large extent, this is a "local" approach since the choice of sequence for comparison greatly affects the final result, "lateral gene transfer"  and thus the resulting "genome chimerism" further complicates the situation  <cit> . a new "system" approach that takes "global" properties of each organism into consideration serves as a potential alternative to overcome this shortcoming. indeed, recent advances in system biology and increasingly available genomic databases have made it possible to rebuild biological networks from genomic data and have offered opportunity for such a "system" approach  <cit> .

podani and co-workers  <cit>  proposed classifying organisms based on two kinds of network indices: the jaccard index, which measures proportions of common sets of nodes in two networks, and goodman-kruskal γ function, which measures the similarity between rankings of nodes in two networks. they studied metabolic and information network structures of  <dig> organisms using these two measures under the hypothesis that network structure and the network design principle behind them contain phylogenetic information. ma and zeng  <cit>  conducted a more extensive phylogenetic classification study on  <dig> fully sequenced organisms based on different cellular function systems  at the genomic level. they constructed phylogenetic tree based on jaccard index and korbel's definition, and concluded that in general, the classification based on network indices are in good agreement with the one obtained by analyzing the 16s rrna using molecular approach. these studies seem to support the notion that significant differences in the network design principle exist among the three domains of life  <cit> . these differences may reflect on the different approaches that organisms take to organize their entire systems to serve their special needs in the environment they live during the evolutionary history. motivated by these encouraging results, in this manuscript, we went on to conduct a thorough comparison of network structural properties which provide further and more compelling evidences that significant differences exist among the network design principle in organisms from the three domains of life.

restricted by the theoretical network structural studies, there are not many deterministic and informative topological measurements available  <cit> . the established measurements can be roughly divided into two categories: higher-level  properties and low-level  properties. the difference between the two is that one needs to know the whole network in order to calculate the higher-level property measures  while the low-level properties can be worked out locally   <cit> . we use three groups of topological measurements  that address different aspects of the network structure. the first group contains network indices such as average clustering coefficient, average path length  <cit> . the second group is composed of degree distributions   <cit> . the third group is composed of network motif profiles that are recently shown to represent the network design principle and global statistical properties of the network when aggregating together  <cit> . these measurements have been well studied in the network literatures, and are able to capture most aspects of network degree information.

single cell model organisms such as e. coli and s. cerevisiae have been studied intensively in biochemistry, cell biology and genetics; hence the rebuilt networks in those organisms present the best chance to approximate the true underlying network. moreover, single cell organisms are less likely to have experienced the whole genome duplication , which might drastically change the network structure  <cit> . as a result, we selected eleven single cell organisms to study their network structural properties: one eukaryote: s. cerevisiae; six bacteria: e. coli, v. cholerae, r. solanacearum, b. subtilis, l. lactis, s. coelicolor; and four archaea: s. solfataricus, s. tokodaii, m. acetivorans, t. acidophilum.

there are three main types of intracellular networks: the protein-protein interaction network, the transcriptional regulation network and the metabolic network. the first two are rebuilt by using high throughput techniques such as yeast two-hybrid system, in vivo pull down assay or dna microarray, which are subject to high uncertainties, and the resulting networks may not be good approximation to biological complexity  <cit> . on the other hand, the metabolic network is derived from metabolic pathways, many of which are inferred from biochemical experiment-defined stoichiometries of many reactions  <cit> . it is well known that central pathways contain "hub nodes" of the whole metabolic network  <cit>  and are also main building blocks of the so-called giant strongly connected component  and giant weakly connected components   <cit> . the former is defined as the largest cluster of nodes within which any pair of nodes is mutually reachable from each other, and the latter is defined as the largest cluster of nodes within which each pair of nodes is connected in the underlying undirected graph  <cit> . therefore, our high confidence in the structure of gscc and gwcc, based on experimentally verified pathways, guarantees high confidence in whole network structure. the long history of biochemical studies of enzymes ensures relatively low false positive and low false negative rates of connections. therefore, we decided to use metabolic networks in single cell organisms to compare network topological properties in the three domains of life.

RESULTS
in constructing metabolic networks, ma and zeng  <cit>  argued that connections through "current metabolites", which is referred to as cofactors in biochemistry such as atp, adp, h2o, should be removed from metabolic networks. we followed their suggestions by removing such "current metabolites" before conducting the following analysis.

group i measures: network indices
before checking different types of network topological measurements, we visually compared different metabolic networks . metabolic networks in s. cerevisiae and the six bacterial species appear much more heterogeneous than archaeal metabolic networks. it is well known that the so-called exponential random network  appears homogeneous while scale-free network  appears more heterogeneous and modular  <cit> .

calculations of the two classic network indices, average clustering coefficient and average betweenness  also indicate that the metabolic networks in s. cerevisiae andthe six bacterial species are more clustered and modular than those in the four archaeal species . from table  <dig> and fig.  <dig>  it is evident that the clustering coefficient  and betweenness  did a better job in separating archaeal species from non-archaeal species than average path length  and diameter . note that since we removed connections through "current metabolites" when constructing metabolic networks, our average path lengths are much longer than those reported in jeong et al.  <cit>  but similar to those reported in ma and zeng  <cit> .

to avoid the confounding effects stemming from different network sizes, we calculated the so-called concentrations , see methods for details) of three-node subgraphs and four-node subgraphs. the concentration of subgraphs is an objective measure of the extent of clustering and modularity of the network  <cit> . it is observed that the concentrations of subgraphs in s. cerevisiae and the six bacterial metabolic networks are much higher than those in archaeal metabolic networks .

group ii measures: degree distributions
marginal degree distributions
recently, a variety of real-life networks are found to share the "scale-free" property, i.e. the marginal degree distribution follows a power-law distribution  <cit> . our analysis demonstrates that the outgoing and incoming marginal degree distributions in metabolic networks also follow the power-law distribution. a simple linear model fits the log-transformed data well  which indicates that in general, the power-law model is appropriate to capture the structure of degree data . parameters were estimated using the least square method. the results together with goodness of fit measure r <dig> and 95% individual confidence intervals are summarized in table  <dig> and table  <dig>  the estimated power-law index γ is around - <dig>  in all cases and the estimated log-transformed scaling parameter α ranges within  <dig>  to  <dig> . these indicate that marginal degree distribution, which is a low-level  topological property measure, although showed some distinction, is not enough to effectively differentiate networks from different domains. overall, metabolic networks in most of the species we studied seem to follow the power-law distributions and thus are "scale-free". the fact that the incoming degree distributions of most archaeal species we studied do not follow power-law well  suggests that networks in archaeal species tend to be less "scale-free" and more "random-like" compared to those of the non-archaeal species.

as we have shown, marginal degree distribution alone does not reveal the fundamental network structural differences between the archaeal species and the non-archaeal species. simulation studies have shown that randomized networks preserving marginal degree distribution can be quite different in terms of global  topological properties such as average clustering coefficient  <cit> . in metabolic networks, we are unable to determine the preferred types of reactions based on just marginal substrate or product degree distributions. since the metabolic network is rebuilt from chemical reactions, joint behavior of substrate and product in reactions should be more informative than disjoint behavior of metabolites. therefore, we calculate the joint degree distributions hoping to gain more insight into the network organization.

joint degree distributions
joint degree distribution measures and describes correlation between connectivities of neighboring nodes. n is defined as the number of edges connecting nodes of connectivity k <dig> to those of connectivity k <dig>  for metabolic networks, which are directed, n is used to measure the number of arches where substrate  with out-connectivity kout transforms to product with in-connectivity kin. this quantity reflects intrinsic properties of the network and can be used to distinguish different types of networks. for instance, we can test whether n of a particular network differs significantly from that of the random network. to be specific, we calculate , where  represents the mean of random variable n in a large number  of random networks simulated by an edge-rewiring algorithm proposed by maslov and sneppen  <cit> ,  denotes the estimated standard deviation of n. the p-value can then be obtained by compare z to a standard normal distribution. comparing with "properly" randomized network ensembles allows us to concentrate on those statistically significant patterns of the complex network that are likely to reflect the design principle  <cit> .

we calculated statistically significant correlation profiles  for the metabolic network in each organism . the z-score profiles of the four archaeal species are similar to each other but quite different from those in s. cerevisiae and the six bacterial species. although the dark red regions of the z-score profiles in archaeal species are quite different in scale, they all seem to differ significantly from the random network preserving the corresponding marginal degree distribution in a similar way . looking into the correlation profiles more carefully, we found that the number of statistically significant positive  increases in the order of s. cerevisiae, the six bacterial species and the four archaeal species. the significant z-score of certain observation n implies that the chemical reaction between substrates with out-degree kout and products with in-degree kin are statistically significant. we define substrates whose kout >=  <dig> or products whose kin >=  <dig> as versatile metabolites. thus, the above trend implies that the preference to employ reactions involving versatile metabolites increases in the order of s. cerevisiae, the six bacterial species and the four archaeal species. correspondingly, the variety of metabolites decreases in the above order and so does the number of distinct enzymes or variety of enzymes because of the high specific binding of metabolites and enzyme. this is consistent with the biological facts that s. cerevisiae  encodes a greater variety of enzymes than bacterial and archaeal species.

group iii measure: network motif
the network motif is defined to be recurring and non-random building blocks of the network  <cit> . just like sequence motif, which is an over-represented and biologically meaningful dna or protein sub-sequence, network motif is an over-represented and biologically meaningful subgraph.

network motif has been shown to be informative of network design principle and network structure. it was found that over 80% of the nodes in the e. coli transcription regulation network are covered by network motifs  <cit> . dobrin et al.  <cit>  recently discovered that in the e. coli transcriptional regulatory network, "individual motifs aggregate into homologous motif clusters and a supercluster forming the backbone of the network and play a central role in defining its global topological organization." more importantly, network motifs capture the information that is likely to be missed by the correlation profiles because motif actually describes the number of appearances of certain configurations of multiple nodes, and therefore nicely complement with the correlation profiles  <cit> . one might argue that there are certain amount of overlaps between the information they capture but the motif profile does not capture the degree information of the connecting nodes, which may be the most powerful feature of the correlation profiles.

we searched for all of the  <dig> three-node subgraphs and all of the  <dig> four-node subgraphs in the metabolic networks of eleven species. the results showed that the three-node motif profiles found in s. cerevisiae and the six bacterial species are identical while there is no three-node motif found in any of the four archaeal networks . also there is no common four-node motif shared by archaeal species and s. cerevisiae/bacterial species while two four-node motifs  are shared by the latter . among all the  <dig> possible three-node subgraphs, six of them have one pair of nodes not directly connected. abundance of such subgraphs will lower the extent of clustering and modularity of the network. as expected, we found that all three-node motifs identified in s. cerevisiae and the six bacterial species form triangles . it may explain our main finding that metabolic networks in non-archaeal species are more clustered and modular than those in archaeal species.

discussion
based on our comparison of network structural properties beyond network indices, we were able to gain more insight into the structural differences across the three domains of life. having shown that the metabolic network is "scale-free", we further showed that metabolic networks in the four archaeal species are closer to "exponential random network"  than those in s. cerevisiae and the six bacterial species. the reasons are the following:

first, the archaeal metabolic networks are visually more homogeneous among themselves compared to their counterparts in the non-archaeal species. in random networks, any pair of nodes is equally likely to be connected. the network topology should look homogeneous given that the size of network is large enough. the "scale-free" network, on the other hand, features a highly modular and heterogeneous topology since the marginal degree is power-law distributed  <cit> . moreover, the marginal degree distributions of the metabolic networks in non-archaeal species fit the power-law model better than archaeal species .

second, the average clustering coefficient and average betweenness of archaeal metabolic networks are much smaller than those in s. cerevisiae and the six bacterial species. the same is true for the concentrations of three-node and four-node subgraphs. as pointed out by watts and strogatz, real-life networks show strong clustering or network transitivity while exponential random network does not  <cit> .

third, there is no three-node motif and fewer four-node motifs found in archaeal metabolic networks compared to non-archaeal metabolic networks. in particular, the ubiquitous feed-forward loop  motif found in networks from biology  to neurology and engineering fields was not found in any of the four archaeal metabolic networks . since motifs are statistically significant subgraphs compared to "properly" randomized network ensembles, no motif or fewer than usual motifs found in a real-life network indicates that the network structure is closer to that of a random network. it has been shown by milo et al.  <cit>  that concentration of ffl motif is insensitive to the network size within e. coli transcription regulation network, but diminishes to zero in increasingly larger random networks. this also supports that archaeal metabolic networks are closer to randomized network ensembles than other real-life networks.

the metabolic networks in archaea are both "random-like" and "scale-free", which might exert profound influences on their adaptability to the hostile environment. archaeal species are typically restricted to marginal habitats such as hot springs or areas of low oxygen concentration and can assimilate different kinds of inorganic carbon and nitrogen sources. indeed, the chemical structure and component of the macromolecules such as protein and lipid make significant contributions to the organism's adaptability to the environment. the seemingly ad hoc network organization  in archaeal species might also enabled them to survive in those extreme physiological conditions. archaeal species might employ some biologically significant subgraphs  which can not be detected by current motif searching algorithm  <cit> . this makes the archaeal metabolic networks appear random in statistical sense  but not in biological sense.

our comparison results showed that many network structural properties measured in archaeal species are different from those of non-archaeal species. however, the hidden anthropomorphic factors might account for some of the differences observed. specifically, the drastic differences of topological profiles between the metabolic networks of archaeal species and non-archaeal species may be partially explained by the fact that significantly less extensive metabolic pathway studies have been conducted in archaeal species  <cit> . robustness of topological profiles against random perturbations can alleviate the impact to a certain extent but is unable to eradicate it  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
our network analysis results showed that in most of higher-level  topological properties measured, metabolic networks in the four archaeal species are similar to each other but significantly different from those in s. cerevisiae and the six bacterial species. this provides further evidence that the metabolic network structures and consequently the design principle in the four archaeal species are very different from those in s. cerevisiae  and the six bacterial species. our finding that the metabolic networks in archaeal species possess many properties of the exponential random network begs for better understanding of the design principle in biological networks, which may be revealed by further systematic analyses. for example, locate and align conservative pathways such as glycosis between e. coli or s. cerevisiae and archaeal species to understand the functional mechanisms of archaeal metabolic networks.

