BACKGROUND
bacteria have shaped the evolution of multicellular organisms since its very beginnings  <cit> . they are often essential for the survival and evolutionary fitness of animals, plants, and fungi and may even determine fundamental evolutionary events like speciation  <cit> . this interaction between multicellular hosts and their microbiome  has only recently been recognized to be highly inter-dependent and the entire association, termed metaorganism  <cit>  or holobiont  <cit> , was thus proposed as a unit of natural selection  <cit> . in particular, the associated microbiome can directly affect host development by providing food and essential metabolic compounds  <cit>  or by acting as a stimulus for morphogenesis  <cit> . a healthy microbiome can also inhibit pathogen colonization by direct toxin-mediated interference  <cit> , by limiting resources available to the invading microbes  <cit> , or by directly modulating immune system maturation  <cit> . conversely, a distorted microbiome can be cause of many diseases, for example, antibiotic-associated diarrhea caused by clostridium difficile  <cit> , obesity  <cit> , or liver cirrhosis  <cit> .

in spite of their potential importance, the microbiome of one of the most intensively studied model species, the nematode caenorhabditis elegans, is currently unknown. almost all work on this nematode is based on the canonical c. elegans strain n <dig>  which has been adapted to laboratory conditions over decades  <cit> , including the regular and routine removal of any microbes through hypochlorite treatment  <cit> . as a consequence, the n <dig> strain does not carry any microbes in its gut, on its surface, or anywhere else in its body . in its laboratory environment, it is only confronted with its food bacterium, the escherichia coli strain op <dig>  microbiome associations are thus unknown to any of the numerous c. elegans researchers, who study the nematode under these conditions. in contrast, natural isolates of this taxon usually seem to contain a variety of microorganisms in their guts . in general, worms are exposed to complex microbial communities in their preferred substrate in nature, namely decomposing plant material . a more realistic and unbiased understanding of c. elegans biology urgently requires the explicit consideration of the worm’s natural microbiome . a possible fitness benefit was already indicated upon gut colonization with certain non-pathogenic bacteria, leading to increased resistance against pathogens . however, it is yet unclear whether any of the non-pathogenic bacteria used are associated with c. elegans isolates in nature.

the aim of the current study is to obtain first insights into the composition and function of the c. elegans microbiome. we characterized the microbial community of natural c. elegans isolates from north german locations collected in  <dig> and  <dig>  <cit> , and french and portuguese samples collected between  <dig> and  <dig>  the results were compared to the microbial communities found in the substrate samples, from which c. elegans was isolated, and also to those obtained from two congeneric species with similar habitat preferences, c. briggsae and c. remanei  <cit> . to evaluate the influence of the microbiome on c. elegans life history, we isolated microbes from wild nematodes and used these to re-infect worms and thus to establish an experimental microbiome under laboratory conditions. based on this approach, we assessed an influence of host developmental stage and genotype on bacterial community composition. we also tested the bacteria’s ability to colonize the worm gut, their effect on worm population growth under standard and stressful conditions, and also on fungal growth.

RESULTS
c. elegans carries a distinct and species-rich microbiome
our characterization of the native microbiome of c. elegans  focused on samples from northern germany  <cit> , france, and portugal  <cit> . for the german locations, we studied the congeneric c. elegans and c. remanei and their corresponding substrates . for the remaining locations, we characterized isolates of c. elegans, c. briggsae, and c. remanei. two types of worm samples were analyzed:  single worms isolated without any exposure to the standard laboratory food e. coli  and  worm populations grown on e. coli several weeks after isolation . in total, we studied  <dig> nematode and substrate samples from germany,  <dig> worm samples from france, and one from portugal . several measures were taken to minimize risk of contamination with airborne microorganisms and those from the nematode body surface, as explained in more detail in the methods section. the bacterial microbiome was characterized for all samples using the v <dig> region of the 16s ribosomal dna  <cit> .

we found the c. elegans microbiome to be rich in bacterial taxa . the most common operational taxonomic units  included unclassified enterobacteriaceae as well as members of the genera pseudomonas, stenotrophomonas, ochrobactrum, and sphingomonas . individual samples from each nematode species differed substantially in their otu compositions. at higher bacterial taxonomic order, however, samples from the same host species  resembled each other and clearly differed to those from the corresponding substrates .fig.  <dig> the native microbiome of the nematode c. elegans. a–c frequency spectra of the bacterial classes based on miseq genotyping analysis for c. elegans , c. remanei , and c. briggsae , including results for natural worms , lab-enriched worms , and the corresponding substrates. d differential interference contrast micrograph of c. elegans inhabited by its native microbiome. the anterior end of the worm is to the left. e–g ordination by canonical correspondence analysis of bacterial operational taxonomic unit abundance in natural caenorhabditis isolates and their substrates from german and french locations , showing the three most significant axes. a three-dimensional visualization is given in additional file  <dig>  statistics are provided in additional file 1: tables s1- <dig>  s1- <dig>  and s1- <dig>  detailed information about the samples is provided in additional file 1: tables s1- <dig> and s1- <dig>  see also additional file 3




multivariate statistics  supported the presence of a nematode-specific microbiome. canonical correspondence analysis  identified a significant clustering of our samples by sample type  and species . a post-hoc test revealed that samples from c. elegans and c. briggsae do not differ , while both vary significantly from those of c. remanei . these differences are illustrated by the graphical ordination of the cca . the first axis separates all worms from the substrate samples, the second axis splits the c. remanei worms and substrate samples from all remaining material, while the third axis distinguishes the c. remanei worms from all remaining samples. all c. elegans samples and the few considered c. briggsae samples cluster closely together, irrespective of their location, substrate origin, or the worm isolation approach used . the cca results are generally confirmed by permutational multivariate analysis of variance  on jaccard, bray–curtis, as well as unweighted and weighted unifrac distances .

taken together, we demonstrate that c. elegans is associated with a species-rich microbiome dominated by proteobacteria such as unclassified enterobacteriaceae and the genera pseudomonas, stenotrophomonas, ochrobactrum, and sphingomonas. previous microbial analyses of the c. elegans laboratory strain n <dig>  after experimental exposure to rhizosphere  <cit>  or compost-amended soil  <cit> , hinted at the possible importance of proteobacteria. a recent study quantitatively assessed assembly of the microbial community in the n <dig> intestine, after worms were experimentally maintained in produce-enriched soil microcosms  <cit> . although not all of the dominant microbial taxa are identical to those identified here , berg et al.  <cit>  similarly identified a high abundance of enterobacteriaceae and pseudomonadaceae, and then also xanthomonadaceae and sphingobacteriaceae. members of these taxonomic groups may thus play a central role in the interaction with c. elegans and these bacteria can be easily retrieved from the environment; yet, their potential importance in the worm’s native microbiome is shown here for the first time by specific analysis of natural c. elegans isolates. the c. elegans microbiome is distinct from its substrate environment and from at least the congeneric c. remanei, while a possible difference to c. briggsae was difficult to assess due to small sample size. our analysis additionally revealed that, even though the exact range of bacterial taxa showed variation among c. elegans samples, at higher taxonomic level the identified microbiome is stable across geographic distances and in the face of perturbations. this conclusion is supported by the overlapping microbiomes from natural and lab-enriched worms . the latter were isolated from their substrate on a plate with e. coli and subsequently cultivated with e. coli without any washing or sterilization steps. these worms were able to maintain the associated microbial community, even though they were propagated on agar plates in the presence of e. coli, strongly suggesting that the identified microbiome forms a relatively close relationship with these worms that is robust towards general environmental changes . a stable species-specific microbiome is additionally supported by the concordance among c. elegans samples from different countries . these were independently collected by two different groups, using different isolation protocols and different substrate types. the nematode microbiome thus seems to show a similar species-specific signature, known from a wide variety of animals, ranging from the polyp hydra  <cit>  to primates  <cit> .

a c. elegans-specific experimental microbiome varies with developmental stage and genotype
as part of our 2011/ <dig> sampling in germany, we also obtained a total of  <dig> bacterial isolates, belonging to  <dig> bacterial genera from proteobacteria, bacteroidetes, actinobacteria, and firmicutes . from these bacteria, we chose a subset of  <dig> isolates to establish an experimental microbiome. nine of these were representative for the  <dig> most abundant identified genera of the c. elegans’ native microbiome, for which isolates were available . we added representatives of two other yet distinct abundant genera, namely comamonas and rhodococcus. we further included representatives of three additional genera, which belonged to abundant and taxonomically distinct bacterial orders of the worm’s native microbiome, such as achromobacter , bacillus , and microbacterium . the bacteria were provided on peptone-free agar, which minimizes bacterial proliferation, allowing experimental control of initial microbe frequencies. sterilized nematode eggs were added and hatching worms raised until adulthood for three c. elegans genotypes: the laboratory strain n <dig> and two natural isolates, my <dig> and my <dig>  from which most bacterial strains were isolated . dna for microbial analysis was extracted from fourth instar larvae , adult nematodes, and from the corresponding agar plates .

characterization of bacterial strain frequencies revealed a c. elegans-specific microbiome that is distinct from that on the agar plates . the most prominent example, the ochrobactrum isolate myb <dig>  was found only in traces in the bacterial lawns, but consistently comprised 10–20 % of nematode bacterial communities, regardless of stage or strain. other isolates specifically enriched in worms included achromobacter myb <dig>  stenotrophomonas myb <dig>  and to a lesser extent chryseobacterium myb <dig> and rhodococcus myb <dig> .fig.  <dig> 
c. elegans cultured in the laboratory with a mix of  <dig> wild-caught bacteria retains a specific microbiome. a–b average frequencies of bacterial taxa of the experimental microbiome for the lawns at different time points and two developmental stages  of three c. elegans strains . b shows the results for an independent experiment with n <dig> only. c fluorescence micrograph of c. elegans inhabited by its experimental microbiome, visualized through fluorescence in situ hybridization of the bacteria with the general eubacterial probe eub <dig> in red and dapi staining of nematode cell nuclei in blue. the anterior end of the worm is to the left. see additional file  <dig> for a three-dimensional illustration. d–f canonical correspondence analysis of the experimental microbiome of c. elegans, showing the first three axes and including nematode stage , sample type , and nematode strain  as factors . a three-dimensional visualization is given in additional file 8; see also additional file  <dig> and additional file  <dig>  for all treatments, we considered at least six replicates. the only exception referred to the treatment combination worm-l4-my <dig>  for which only three replicates remained after quality control and which was thus excluded from further statistical analysis. further details are given in tables s1- <dig> and s1-11



multivariate statistics such as cca  confirmed a significant influence of the sample type , the nematode stage , an interaction of stage and type , and also nematode strain  on microbial community composition. these differences were also captured by the adonis assessment, where nematode and substrate samples formed distinct clusters, regardless of the used metric . an independently performed experiment with the same  <dig> bacteria and the n <dig> nematode strain similarly demonstrated an effect of developmental stage on microbiome composition and increased quantities of ochrobactrum myb <dig> and stenotrophomonas myb <dig> in worms relative to agar plates .

we conclude that c. elegans developmental stage and genotype can influence the exact composition of the nematode-associated bacterial community. certain bacteria are enriched in the worm samples, especially ochrobactrum myb <dig> and stenotrophomonas myb <dig>  these taxa may be part of c. elegans’ core microbiome.

some proteobacteria can enter the nematode gut under experimental conditions
we assessed the ability of individual proteobacteria to enter the nematode gut by using microscopic analysis, taking advantage of the worms’ transparency . nematodes were raised on single bacterial isolates until adulthood and then transferred to new plates containing either the same or no bacterium, always using peptone-free nematode growth medium  agar plates. bacterial abundance was studied at  <dig> and 24 h post transfer, using fluorescence in situ hybridization . at 0 h , bacteria were present in all parts of the gut; 24 h after transfer, most bacterial isolates remained abundant, especially stenotrophomonas myb <dig>  achromobacter myb <dig>  and ochrobactrum myb <dig>  which reached higher frequencies than the standard laboratory food e. coli op <dig> . intriguingly, the ochrobactrum myb <dig> isolate also remained at high frequency inside the nematode gut when these were maintained without any bacterial lawn . this was not the case for any of the other tested bacteria.fig.  <dig> interaction of individual bacterial isolates with c. elegans. a persistence of bacterial isolates in the c. elegans gastrointestinal tract. we assessed the presence of selected bacteria at the beginning of the experiment  and after 24 h on either a lawn of the same bacterium  or an empty plate , using fluorescence in situ hybridization with eubacterial probe eub <dig>  bacterial load was quantified in four categories:  absent,  single cells, countable,  clumps of cells, too many to count, and  region is filled. results are shown for an e. coli control and seven bacterial isolates: pseudomonas my11b, comamonas my131b, pseudomonas my187b, pseudomonas my193b, stenotrophomonas my57b, ochrobactrum my71b, and achromobacter my9b. barplots show the mean bacterial load of  <dig> worms with standard error of the mean of a total of three independent replicates . b, c nematode population size on either the experimental microbiome community  or individual bacteria . population size was measured as total offspring of three n <dig> hermaphrodites after 5 days. in , population size was determined under standard and different stress conditions, including normal nematode growth medium , peptone-free medium  at three temperatures , and five salt concentrations . please note that the standard laboratory growth conditions for c. elegans in our lab consist of either pfm or ngm at 20 °c and 50 mm nacl. in , all experiments were performed on pfm at 20 °c and 50 mm nacl. the dashed lines indicate the median worm fitness on e. coli op <dig> under the respective control conditions of the respective experiments. asterisks denote significant differences from the e. coli control , additional file 1: tables s1- <dig> and s1- <dig>  n ≥ 10; the raw data is provided in additional file 1: tables s1- <dig> and s1-20). colors highlight the different bacterial groups



we conclude that several bacterial isolates are able to enter and most likely colonize the nematode gut, consistent with the above results from the experimental microbiome . as the nutrient-lacking peptone-free medium  does not support bacterial growth and as some isolates appeared to reach higher abundances than e. coli, these bacteria are unlikely to serve exclusively as food but may be able themselves to use the nematode gut as an environmental niche. moreover, at least one of the isolates, ochrobactrum myb <dig>  seems to be able to persist in the nematode gut under stressful conditions of an empty plate. under these conditions, the bacteria should have been used by the worms as food and/or eliminated by general stress responses, which can be induced under these conditions and can include upregulation of immune effector genes such as lysozymes  <cit> . this observation suggests that the ochrobactrum isolate is capable of long-term interactions with the nematode. bacteria of the genus ochrobactrum are common in soil  <cit>  and found in various animals ranging from humans  <cit>  to invertebrates, including nematodes  <cit> . in our case, the same ochrobactrum myb <dig> isolate was among the most prevalent bacteria in the experimental worm microbiome, while being almost undetectable on the corresponding agar plates . ochrobactrum is also one of the common taxa in the nematode’s native microbiome  and was indicated in a previous study to coexist with c. elegans in nature  <cit> . these findings may suggest that ochrobactrum uses c. elegans as a growth niche, apparently without causing major fitness reductions . this stands in strong contrast to previous reports of gut-persisting bacteria in c. elegans, such as salmonella typhimurium  <cit> , serratia marcescens  <cit> , and enterococcus spp.  <cit> , which are all pathogenic. it is currently unclear how exactly this bacterium may obtain energetic resources inside the host without producing major harm. this could be achieved by using host waste products available in the gut and/or by stimulating and retrieving specific compounds, which can be produced by the host without major energy requirements.

in case of the other tested bacteria, their failure to persist in the experimental monoinfections was surprising. many of the same taxa persisted in the lab-enriched worms  although these were cultured up to 3 weeks on peptone-free agar plates with the laboratory food e. coli . these discrepancies may be explained by the specific laboratory conditions used during the reinfection experiments, which were likely stressful for worms because of the absence of food, and/or by additional bacteria-bacteria interactions possible in the experimental microbiome but not the monoinfections.

the experimental microbiome and individual bacterial isolates enhance c. elegans population growth
we next asked whether our experimental microbiome influences nematode population growth, a proxy for evolutionary fitness. we initiated worm cultures with three l <dig> on the mixture of  <dig> bacterial isolates. population size was measured after 5 days under standard laboratory and various stress conditions, including the normal ngm, the pfm at three different temperatures , and also the pfm at five salt concentrations . our analysis revealed that the experimental microbiome significantly enhances nematode population growth relative to the e. coli control under all conditions  except of the experiment at 15 °c .

we subsequently tested  <dig> individual bacterial isolates under standard conditions . these  <dig> isolates included the same  <dig> isolates used for the experimental microbiome. we considered  <dig> additional isolates from the same genera  in order to obtain a first indication of within-genus variation of the bacteria’s interaction with c. elegans. in these experiments, almost all proteobacteria led to significantly higher population growth than e. coli. achromobacter myb <dig>  comamonas myb <dig>  and pseudomonas myb <dig> even caused a more than  <dig> -fold increase in offspring production . most remaining proteobacteria supported population sizes only slightly, albeit significantly, smaller than the e. coli reference. the tested members of the actinobacteridae, bacilli, flavobacteriia, and sphingobacteriia all significantly reduced population size.

in conclusion, the experimental microbiome enhances population growth relative to e. coli under the tested conditions, including stressful environments of high temperature and either low or high osmolarity. the comparison between results with the microbiome mixture and the single isolates under standard conditions suggests that a fitness increase can be caused by members of the proteobacteria, including taxa such as achromobacter. other proteobacteria specifically enriched in nematodes  support similar or slightly reduced population growth relative to the e. coli control, suggesting neither growth-promoting nor pathogenic effects under these conditions. in several cases, we observed contrasting effects among bacterial isolates of the same genus. these differences might arise from intra-taxon variation in the bacteria’s ability to produce nutritious substances and/or harmful compounds for the nematodes. some variation in the effect on nematode growth rate was previously shown for soil bacteria , although not including bacteria obtained from natural c. elegans, as in the present study.

members of the c. elegans microbiome exhibit anti-fungal activity
an intact bacterial microbiome can be an effective barrier against fungal infections  <cit> . pseudomonas spp. are well-known for their anti-fungal secondary metabolites  <cit> . therefore, we tested three pseudomonas isolates  for their activity against six fungi, similarly obtained from natural c. elegans . all three pseudomonas impaired fungal growth in comparison to e. coli, although with varying efficiencies . myb <dig> and myb <dig> produced broad anti-fungal activity, significantly reducing the growth of all six fungi , while myb <dig> caused significant growth inhibition of only one fungal isolate, dipodascus myf <dig> .fig.  <dig> 
pseudomonas isolates from the c. elegans microbiome inhibit fungal growth. a in vitro effect of three pseudomonas isolates  on growth of six selected fungi, isolated from natural caenorhabditis samples, after 3 days . each fungus is indicated by a different colour. b effect of the pseudomonas isolate my11b on c. elegans mortality induced by the fungal pathogen drechmeria coniospora . worms were either grown on pseudomonas my11b or e. coli  and then exposed to the fungal pathogen either in the presence of pseudomonas my11b or e. coli 



we next asked whether the antifungal effect of one of the pseudomonas isolates, myb <dig>  also benefitted c. elegans confronted with its fungal pathogen drechmeria coniospora  <cit> . worm populations were raised on either the pseudomonas isolate myb <dig> or e. coli and then as adults exposed to the fungus in the presence of either pseudomonas myb <dig> or e. coli in a full factorial design. the presence of pseudomonas myb <dig> during pathogen exposure completely prevented nematode death after 48 h, irrespective of the bacteria present during worm development . moreover, when worms were raised on pseudomonas myb <dig> and then exposed to the fungal pathogen in the presence of e. coli, they still suffered substantially less mortality than the corresponding worm populations raised on e. coli .

in summary, we identified members of c. elegans’ microbiome with an antifungal effect that can protect the nematode from fungal pathogens in vivo. protection seems to be provided by an antifungal compound produced by the bacteria  and, most likely, by a host factor induced while the nematode is exposed to the bacterium during development . similar protective, anti-pathogenic effects in c. elegans were previously demonstrated for other bacteria such as lactobacillus acidophilus  <cit>  and pseudomonas mendocina  <cit> . our study is the first to suggest this for members of the native c. elegans microbiome.

CONCLUSIONS
we present the first systematic analysis of the native microbiome of the model organism c. elegans, which is characterized by proteobacteria including ochrobactrum, pseudomonas, stenotrophomonas, and sphingomonas. we anticipate that future consideration of the microbiome will improve our functional understanding of c. elegans signaling processes and genetic mechanisms and enhance discovery of novel functions for the, at least, 40 % of nematode genes without current annotation  <cit> . our work lays the necessary groundwork for c. elegans to become an experimental model for native microbiome research allowing utilization of the genetic tractability of the worm to address pressing questions about microbiome-determined host biology.

