BACKGROUND
deinococcus spp. and thermus spp. are believed to belong to a distinct branch of bacteria called the deinococcus-thermus group  <cit> . the common origin of these bacteria is supported by the fact that they consistently form a strongly supported clade in phylogenetic trees of ribosomal rnas and several conserved proteins including ribosomal proteins, rna polymerase subunits, reca, and others  <cit> . the thermus genus currently consists of  <dig> thermophilic species, whereas the deinococcus genus includes at least eleven, mostly mesophilic species known for their extreme resistance to γ-irradiation and other agents causing dna damage, particularly, desiccation  <cit> . interestingly, two new species, d. frigens sp. nov., d. saxicola, have been isolated recently from antarctic rock and soil samples  <cit> . d. geothermalis and d. murrayi, are considered to be thermophilic   <cit> .

t. thermophilus  and d. radiodurans   have similar general physiology, both being catalase-positive, red-pigmented, non-sporulating, aerobic chemoorganoheterotrophs  <cit> . however, the two organisms are dramatically different in terms of stress resistance: dr is one of the most resistant to radiation and desiccation among the characterized organisms and, generally, can survive diverse types of oxidative stress, whereas tt is a thermophile that thrives under thermal stress conditions but is relatively sensitive to radiation and other forms of oxidative stress. recently, the genomes of t. thermophilus hb <dig> and hb <dig>  <cit>  became available for comparison with the previously sequenced genome of d. raduodurans r <dig>  <cit> .

despite extensive research, genetic systems underlying both thermophilic adaptations and radiation resistance remain poorly understood. attempts have been made to detect "thermophilic determinants" in the proteomes of thermophiles using a comparative-genomic approach. this resulted in the delineation of a set of proteins that might be associated with the thermophilic phenotype, although most of these are significantly enriched in thermophiles but not unique to these organisms  <cit> . other distinctions between thermophilic and mesophilic proteins might be due to differences in their structural properties, such as different amino acid compositions, loop lengths, number of salt bridges, strength of hydrophobic interaction, number of disulfide bonds, and other features  <cit> .

various hypotheses also have been proposed to explain radiation resistance, some postulating the existence of specialized genetic systems, particularly those for dna repair and stress response  <cit> . recently, however, alternative possibilities have been advanced. for example, the post-irradiation adjustment of metabolism of d. radiodurans might prevent production of reactive oxygen species  by decreasing the number of reactions involving oxygen  <cit> , and high intracellular manganese concentrations of deinococcus spp. might help scavenge ros generated during irradiation and post-irradiation recovery  <cit> . however, these explanations of radiation resistance have received little direct support from comparative-genomic analyses  <cit> .

several evolutionary processes could potentially contribute to the genome differentiation of tt and dr subsequent to the divergence from the common ancestor:  differential gene loss and gain,  acquisition of genes via horizontal gene transfer  which may be followed by loss of the ancestral orthologous gene ),  lineage-specific expansion of paralogous gene families by duplication and/or acquisition of paralogs via hgt;  modification of amino acid composition that could affect protein stability. here, we experimentally characterize radiation and desiccation resistance of tt in comparison to dr, and, assess the contribution of different evolutionary processes to distinct adaptations of tt and dr, using a variety of comparative-genomic approaches and phylogenetic analysis. we identify the unique feature of the gene repertoires of tt and dr that might contribute to these phenotypic differences, which could be the subject of further experimental work. in addition, we describe the results of a detailed analysis of the proteins predicted to be involved in dna repair and stress response functions, which are particularly relevant for adaptive evolution of resistance phenotypes.

RESULTS
experimental characterization of resistance to gamma-radiation and desiccation, and determination of intracellular mn/fe ratio for t. thermophilus
while the radiation- and desiccation-resistant phenotypes of dr and the thermal requirements of both tt and dr have been studied extensively , we are unaware of any detailed characterization of the response of tt to irradiation or desiccation. therefore, we sought to investigate these properties in order to obtain a more complete picture of the differences in the stress response phenotypes of tt and dr. not unexpectedly, we found that tt was much more sensitive to acute irradiation than dr. the survival curve of tt is similar to that of esherichia coli k <dig>  for dr, the radiation dose yielding 10% colony forming unit  survival  is ~ <dig> kgy, whereas for tt and e. coli, the d <dig> dose is ~ <dig>  kgy and ~ <dig>  kgy, respectively . tt is also highly sensitive to desiccation. the 10% cfu desiccation survival frequency of dr is sustained after  <dig> days, while tt reaches the 10% cfu desiccation survival at ~ <dig> hours  and, by the 5th day, suffers essentially 100% lethality. the low resistance of tt to desiccation is observed regardless of the temperature and drying rate . the desiccation resistance of e. coli was found to be intermediate between those of tt and dr .

we recently reported a trend of intracellular mn/fe concentration ratios in bacterial ir resistance, where very high and very low mn/fe ratios correlated with very high and very low resistances, respectively  <cit> . we have also shown that growing d. radiodurans in conditions which limited mn accumulation, significantly lowered the cells' ir resistance  <cit> . these observations led to the hypothesis that the ratio of mn to fe in a cell might determine the relative abundance of different ros induced during exposure to and recovery from ir  <cit> . at high concentrations, mn can act as true catalyst of the dismutation of superoxide , with mn cycling between the divalent and trivalent states; mn redox-cycling scavenges both o2•- and hydrogen peroxide  <cit> . in this context, we determined the intracellular mn/fe ratio of tt using an inductively coupled plasma-mass spectrometry method , as previously described  <cit> . tt cells contained  <dig>   nmol mn/mg protein and  <dig>   nmol fe/mg protein. the intracellular mn/fe ratio of tt  is  <dig>  compared to  <dig>  for e. coli ,  <dig>  for d. radiodurans , and < <dig>  for pseudomonas putida   <cit> . thus, tt appears to be somewhat more sensitive to acute ir and desiccation than predicted by its mn/fe ratio, suggesting the possibility of more complex relationships between these two variables. notably, scavenging of o2•- by mn is highly dependent on the availability of h2o <dig>  which in tt would be expected to become limiting during recovery at 65°c because of thermal decomposition  <cit> ; inefficient mn redox-cycling can lead to mn accumulation, which is cytotoxic. both dr and tt encode an abc- type mn transporter and a transcriptional regulator that probably regulates mn homeostasis. additionally, dr has a nramp family mn transporter, for which there is no ortholog in tt.

reconstruction of the gene-content tree and the gene repertoire of the common ancestor of deinococcus and thermus
information on the presence-absence of orthologous genes in a set of genomes can be used to produce a gene-content tree  <cit> . the topology of a gene-content tree may reflect not only the phylogenetic relationships between the compared species but lifestyle similarities and differences as well  <cit> . given the dramatic differences in the lifestyles and resistance phenotypes of tt and dr, we were interested to determine whether or not the gene content of tt was most similar to that of dr or those of other thermophilic bacteria or, perhaps, even archaea. to this end, we assigned the proteins encoded in the tt genome to the clusters of orthologous groups of proteins   <cit>  and, using the patterns of representation of species in cogs to calculate distances between species, reconstructed a gene-content tree as described previously  <cit> . in the resulting gene-content tree, which included  <dig> sequenced genomes of prokaryotes and unicellular eukaryotes, tt and dr were confidently recovered as sister species, and the dr-tt lineage was positioned within a subtree that also included actinobacteria and cyanobacteria, several of which are known for their extreme radiation and desiccation resistances  <cit>  . for this branch, the topology of the gene-content tree mimics the topologies of trees constructed with other approaches based on genome-wide data  <cit> , indicating that the gene repertoires of these bacteria, and tt and dr in particular, have been diverging, roughly, in a clock-like fashion. to determine which genes were likely to have been lost and gained in each lineage, we reconstructed a parsimonious scenario of evolution from the last bacterial common ancestor  to tt and dr, through their last common ancestor. the reconstruction was performed on the basis of the assignment of tt and dr proteins to cogs, together with cog-based phyletic patterns of  <dig> other sequenced bacterial and archaeal genomes  <cit> , using a previously developed weighted parsimony method  <cit>  . this approach assigns  <dig>  genes  to the dr-tt common ancestor . of these,  <dig>   were retained in both tt and dr and belong to their shared gene core. since tt  has far fewer predicted protein-coding genes than dr , it seems likely that the divergence of the two involved substantial genome reduction in tt and/or genome expansion in dr. however, the reconstruction results suggest that tt has not experienced massive genome reduction although the total gene flux  during the evolution of this lineage was considerable, involving ~25% of the gene complement. in contrast, dr gained  <dig> cogs, with only  <dig> lost, which indicates substantial genome growth after the dr-tt divergence .

we were further interested in determining whether similarities existed among the gene repertoires of tt and two deeply-branching bacterial hyperthermophiles, aquifex aeolicus  and thermotoga maritima . we found that genes that are present in tt but not dr are significantly more likely to be present in aa and tm than genes present in dr but not tt . in contrast, among the  <dig> tt genes inferred to have been lost, only  <dig> were present in both aa and tm. thus, the gene repertoire of tt has significantly greater similarity with hyperthermophilic bacteria than the gene repertoire of dr, perhaps resulting from direct or parallel hgt .

note: expected number of cogs under the assumption of independence is shown in parentheses. probability, associated with the χ <dig> test, is  <dig> × 10- <dig> for the complete  <dig> ×  <dig> table and  <dig> × 10- <dig> for the  <dig> ×  <dig> table .

the majority of the genes shared by tt and dr encode house-keeping proteins and are widespread in bacteria. among those,  <dig> cogs are unusual in that they are not found in any other bacteria but instead are shared by tt and dr with archaea or eukaryotes. this set includes  <dig> subunits of the archaeal/vacuolar-type h+-atpase and six other cogs that consist of characteristic archaeal genes .

as noticed previously, some dr genes that belong to families well-represented in both bacteria and archaea showed clear archaeal affinity  <cit> . to assess how many genes of apparent "thermophilic" descent  might already have been present already in the common dr-tt ancestor, we performed phylogenetic analysis of genes that were assigned to the dr-tt ancestor and had  <dig> of the  <dig> best hits to the genes from thermophiles . we found that at least  <dig> genes  of the originally selected  <dig> genes showed an affinity to thermophilic species, i.e., either a branch of two orthologous genes from dr and tt, or a dr or tt gene  clustered with thermophiles . due to the fact that many tree topologies are highly perturbed by multiple hgt events and may be inaccurate due to differences in evolutionary rates between lineages, this is only a rough estimate of the number of "thermophilic" genes in the dr-tt ancestor. in particular, it cannot be ruled out that some of the ancestral "thermophilic" genes, which are currently present in tt but not dr , have been acquired by tt via xgd . taken together, these observations suggest the possibility of ecological contacts between the dr-tt ancestor and hyperthermophilic archaea and/or bacteria, leading to substantial acquisition of "thermophilic" genes via hgt.

gene gain and loss in thermus
our reconstruction of the evolutionary events that occurred after the divergence of the tt and dr lineages from the common ancestor delineated the sets of genes that likely have been gained and lost by each lineage . we first consider in greater detail the pattern of gene loss and gain in tt. the absence of certain metabolic genes in tt creates gaps in its metabolic pathways, some of which are essential. however, tt is capable of synthesizing all amino acids, nucleotides and a majority of cofactors, suggesting that the gaps are filled by analogous or at least non-orthologous enzymes. several such cases have been described. for example, tt and dr encode unrelated thymidylate synthases, dr <dig>  and ttc <dig> . the classical, folate-dependent thymidylate synthase  present in dr is probably ancestral in bacteria and apparently was displaced via hgt in the thermus lineage by the flavin-dependent thymidylate synthase, typical of archaea and bacterial thermophiles. in other cases, the substituted analogous enzymes or pathways remain uncharacterized. for instance, the displacement of the folate-dependent thymidylate synthase with the flavin-dependent type in the tt lineage and in other bacteria and archaea correlates with the apparent loss of dihydrofolate reductase , which catalyzes the last step of the tetrahydrofolate biosynthesis pathway. since tetrahydrofolate is an essential cofactor, a displacement appears most likely. recently, it has been shown that the halobacterial folp-folc fusion protein complemented a haloferax volcanii fola mutant  <cit> . thus, it appears likely that folc and folp in tt and other organisms complement the activity of fola although the existence of an unrelated, as yet uncharacterized dihydrofolate reductase cannot be ruled out.

in addition, tt does not encode two enzymes for pyridoxal phosphate biosynthesis , while dr has a complete set of enzymes of this pathway. our reconstructions suggest that pdxk was likely lost in the tt lineage, whereas dr probably independently acquired pdxh. however, the pathway is likely to be functional in both organisms. since similar gaps in the pyridoxal phosphate biosynthesis are seen in a variety of prokaryotes  <cit> , it appears that, for at least some steps of this pathway, there exists a set of distinct enzymes which remain unidentified.

some systems apparently were completely lost in the tt lineage. these include the urease complex, the ramnose metabolism pathway, acyl coa:acetate/3-ketoacid coa transferase, fructose transport and utilization, and glycerol metabolism. notably, most of these systems are also absent in thermophilic bacteria and many thermophilic archaea.

in contrast to dr, the genes that appear to have been acquired by tt show a clear connection to the thermophilic lifestyle. in particular, tt seems to have acquired  <dig> gene families from the set of putative thermophilic determinants  <cit> , whereas the common dr-tt ancestor had  <dig> genes from the list, and dr seems to have acquired only one . the majority of these proteins  are encoded in the tt megaplasmid and  <dig> belong to the predicted mobile dna repair system characteristic of thermophiles  <cit>  . in addition, tt has acquired  <dig> "archaeal" genes that are not encoded in any of the genomes of mesophilic bacteria assigned to cogs .

the sox-like sulfur oxidation system is among the group of genes that were apparently acquired in the tt lineage. the tt sox operon is partly similar to the one identified in aa , and might have been horizontally transferred between the aa and tt lineages with subsequent local rearrangements. the presence of the sox operon in tt suggests that this bacterium can use reduced sulfur compounds as a source of energy and sulfur. another system likely acquired by tt is lactose utilization . this system is also present in tm, which indicates that sugars can be utilized as carbon sources by thermophilic bacteria.

gene gain and loss in deinococcus
the dr lineage has apparently acquired many more genes than it has lost . the majority of the genes lost by dr encode enzymes of energy metabolism and biosynthesis of cofactors. one example is the loss of the three subunits of pyruvate:ferredoxin oxidoreductase, which is one of the several known systems for pyruvate oxidation, a key reaction of central metabolism. another example of gene loss in dr involves the three subunits of nad/nadp transhydrogenase, which is responsible for energy-dependent reduction of nadp+  <cit> . in addition, the dr lineage lost four enzymes of nad biosynthesis and six enzymes of cobalamine biosynthesis, and consistently, dr is dependent on an exogenous source of nad for growth  <cit> .

a conspicuous number of genes apparently acquired by the dr lineage encode systems of protein degradation and amino acid catabolism . a similar trend is observed for the expansion of several protein families in dr, such as secreted subtilisin-like proteases . additionally, dr acquired two three-subunit complexes of aerobic-type carbon monoxide dehydrogenase ; oxidation of co by this enzyme might be used as an energy source as shown for some bacteria  <cit> . acquisition and expansion of these metabolic systems, together with the loss of certain biosynthetic capabilities, supports the possibility that metabolic restructuring could impact oxidative stress resistance in dr by decreasing the need for high-energy-dependent cellular activities. energy production through the respiratory chain is one major source of free radicals in the cell  <cit> .

dr has many more genes for proteins involved in inorganic ion transport and metabolism than tt. in particular, dr has acquired the multisubunit na+/h+ antiporter , k+-transporting atpase , and the feoa/feob fe transport system. this abundance of ion transport systems might be indirectly linked to oxidative stress resistance through regulation of membrane ion gradients and mn/fe homeostasis .

dr is more dependent than tt on peptide-derived growth substrates  <cit>  and has a more complex stress response circuitry. consistent with this, the signal transduction systems of dr, as predicted by genome analysis, are considerably more elaborate than those of tt. in particular, dr has at least  <dig> cogs  related to signal-transduction functions that are not represented in tt as compared to  <dig>  such cogs in tt. furthermore, although most of the signal-transduction domains are shared by dr and tt, the domain architectures of the respective multidomain proteins are completely different .

among the genes apparently acquired by dr, two encode multidomain proteins containing distinct periplasmic ligand-binding sensor domains . another protein, dra <dig>  contains the chase <dig> domain  <cit>  and is located in a predicted operon with superoxide dismutase , indicating a function in oxidative stress response. the protein dr <dig> contains the sarp domain which is involved in apoptosis-related signaling pathways in eukaryotes  <cit>  but its function in bacteria is unknown. the roles of the other signal transduction proteins of dr are even less clear, with the notable exception of a phytochrome-like protein  that apparently was acquired by dr from a bacterial source and has been implicated in uv resistance  <cit> .

additionally, dr has many genes  encoding systems for microbial defense; tt has only  <dig> cogs in this category,  <dig> of which are shared with dr. at least  <dig> genes for restriction-modification system subunits were specifically acquired by the dr lineage, along with several antibiotic-resistance enzymes. this difference might be linked to the reduced metabolic capabilities of dr, which is dependent on nutrient-rich conditions for growth and, perhaps, encounters more microbial species than tt.

the previous analysis of the dr genome revealed  <dig> genes that appear to have been horizontally transferred from unexpected sources, such as eukaryotes and viruses  <cit> ; only two of these  <dig> genes are present in tt, the desiccation-related protein of the ferritin family and the uma2-like family proteins . two desiccation-related proteins have been shown to be involved in desiccation but not radiation resistance  <cit> ; ro ribonucleoprotein is apparently involved in uv resistance  <cit> , and topoisomerase ib, while active, has no known role in dr  <cit> . so far, none of these genes has been linked experimentally with radioresistance in dr.

identification of xenologous gene displacement by phylogenetic analysis
it is well-established that hgt has made major contributions to the gene repertoires of most thermophilic bacteria as supported by the presence of numerous genes with unexpectedly high similarity to and/or phylogenetic affinity with genes typical of hyperthermophilic archaea  <cit> . these cases include even those proteins that have orthologs in mesophilic bacteria but, as shown by phylogenetic analysis, have clear affinity to archaea or thermophilic bacteria from distant bacterial lineages, which is indicative of xgd  <cit> . to investigate the impact of hgt from thermophiles leading to xgd on the evolution of the gene repertoire of tt, we determined the taxonomic affiliations of the proteins from the common gene core of tt and dr. we used the taxonomic distribution of best hits in blast searches for preliminary identification of hgt candidates, followed by a detailed phylogenetic analysis of selected genes.

as expected, compared to dr, tt has a notable excess in the fraction of best hits to thermophilic bacteria and archaea for both core and non-core proteins . however, it has been reported that the best blast hit does not always accurately reflect phylogeny  <cit> . in particular, artifacts of best hit analysis may be caused by similar biases in the amino acid composition of proteins in tt and other thermophiles, as demonstrated previously  <cit> . to assess these effects systematically, we performed phylogenetic analysis of  <dig> tt proteins and  <dig> dr proteins from the common core that had their respective best hits in thermophiles . despite the fact that all these trees were built for families in which tt and dr proteins were not mutual best hits in the non-redundant protein sequence database , more than half of the trees  recovered a dr-tt clade,  <dig> of these grouping this clade with mesophiles and  <dig> with thermophiles . nevertheless, the difference of evolutionary patterns of dr and tt came across clearly in this analysis: a reliable affinity with thermophiles was detected for  <dig> tt proteins and only one dr protein. the former cases are likely to represent hgt into the tt lineage from other thermophiles, whereas the only "thermophilic" gene of dr may involve the reverse direction of hgt, from the dr lineage to thermoanaerobacter tencongiensis .

amino acid composition bias is known to affect not only sequence similarity searches but phylogeny reconstruction as well  <cit> . we tested this effect on our data set by comparing the sequence-based maximum likelihood trees to the neighbor-joining trees reconstructed from the amino acid frequencies of corresponding proteins . we found that, in the majority of cases , the topology of the sequence-based tree was not congruent with that of the amino acid composition tree; thus, the effect of the amino acid composition on the breakdown shown in figure 5b is unlikely to be substantial. taken together, these results suggest that xgd involving genes from thermophiles made a measurable contribution to the evolution of the core gene set of tt after the divergence from the common dr-tt ancestor; no such contribution was detected in the case of dr. while this interpretation seems most plausible given the ecological proximity of tt and other thermophiles, it cannot be ruled out that the observed patterns  are partially explained by xgd with genes from mesophilic bacteria in the dr lineage. more generally, these results emphasize that the taxonomic distribution of best database hits can be taken only as a rough and preliminary indicator of hgt.

among the cases of potential xgd supported by phylogenetic analysis, there are two ribosomal proteins, l <dig> and l <dig>  which are encoded by adjacent genes within a conserved ribosomal operon. the proteins encoded by surrounding genes in these operons showed clear affinity to the corresponding dr orthologs . in phylogenetic trees of l <dig> and l <dig>  the tt proteins reliably clustered with orthologs from bacterial hyperthermophiles and not with the corresponding dr orthologs . the congruent evolutionary patterns seen with these two ribosomal proteins encoded by adjacent genes suggest that this gene pair has been replaced via xgd in situ, without disruption of the operon organization  <cit> . additional cases of apparent xgd, where dr confidently partitions into the mesophilic clade, whereas tt belongs to the thermophilic clade, are shown in figure 6c, d .

the apparent lineage-specific hgt in dr and tt was not limited to xgd or to acquisition of genes from thermophiles. additional examples of various types of hgt supported by phylogenetic analysis are given in table  <dig> 

expanded families of paralogs
most bacterial lineages contain unique sets of expanded paralogous gene families  <cit> . this notion was borne out by the present comparative-genomic analysis of dr and tt. none of the expanded families that have been detected during the previous detailed analysis of the dr genome  <cit>  was expanded in tt, and many were missing altogether. this strongly suggests that extensive gene duplication and acquisition of new pseudoparalogs via hgt, which led to the expansion of these families in dr, occurred after the divergence from the common ancestor with tt, and could contribute to the specific adaptations of dr . expansion of several other families in dr was revealed in the course of the present comparison with tt. one notable example is the family of predicted membrane-associated proteins , which are encoded adjacent to transcriptional regulators of the padr-like family  . padr-like regulators are involved in the regulation of the cellular response to chemical stress agents, derivatives of phenolic acid  <cit> . another previously unnoticed paralogous family that is expanded in dr includes proteins containing the mosc  domain . these proteins have been predicted to function as sulfur-carriers that deliver sulfur for the formation of sulfur-metal clusters associated with various enzymes  <cit> . one of these genes  forms a predicted operon with genes for a nudix hydrolase and a monooxygenase, suggesting that these proteins might comprise a distinct stress response/house-cleaning complex.

several paralogous families are specifically expanded in tt . the largest of these  is the uma <dig> family that is highly expanded in cyanobacteria but otherwise seen in only a few bacteria. the function of these proteins is unknown; the presence of conserved acidic residues suggests that they might be uncharacterized dna-binding proteins  <cit> . the expansion of predicted sugar transporters in tt and the paucity of extracellular proteases  is unexpected because it has been shown that tt is predominantly a proteolytic rather than a saccharolytic organism  <cit> . however, it should be noted that tt, unlike dr, has not been observed to secrete proteases .

 <dig> 
 <dig> 
notably, several protein families that are expanded in tt but are absent in dr belong to the set of potential thermophilic determinants   <cit>  or are expanded in thermophylic archaea   <cit> , table 4). in particular, tt has three paralogs of the archaea-specific tungsten-containing aldehyde ferredoxin oxidoreductase , which is the first occurrenceof this enzyme in thermophilic bacteria. however, these enzymes are present in several mesophilic bacteria, and have various substrate specificities and might be involved in sugar, amino acids or sulfur metabolism  <cit> .

comparison of dna repair and stress response systems
comparative analysis of the well-characterized genetic systems for replication, repair and recombination, and related functions in tt and dr shows that fractions of these genes in the respective genomes are very similar . the greatest differences were observed among the proteins associated with direct damage reversal , which is due to the extraordinary expansion of the nudix  family of hydrolases in dr  <cit> . it should be noted that the majority of these proteins have other substrates than  <dig> -dihydro-8-oxoguanine-triphosphate , which is cleaved by mutt. consistently, the majority of the nudix proteins appear to be "house cleaning" enzymes rather than bona fide components of repair systems  <cit> . other notable differences include the apparent loss of the sos-response transcriptional repressor lexa  <cit>  and another sos-response protein, endonuclease vii  in the tt lineage; these proteins seem to have been lost also by another thermophilic bacterium, aa. in contrast, dr has two lexa paralogs , but their functions remain unclear. a genetic disruption of dra <dig>  the paralog that shows greater similarity to the canonical bacterial lexa protein, does not result in sensitivity to dna damage or impairment of reca expression  <cit> . photolyase  and endonuclease iv  are among the few dna repair proteins that probably were acquired by tt after the divergence from the common ancestor with dr. in addition, the catalytic subunit of dna polymerase iii of tt  has two inserted inteins, whereas the orthologous dr <dig> has none. in general, it seems that the conventional dna-repair systems of tt and dr are closely related to each other and to the respective systems of other free-living bacteria. thus, the unique, shared features of these systems do not explain the very large difference observed in resistance between tt and dr species.

however, a conclusion that there are no important differences between the repair systems of tt and dr might be premature. recently, several additional proteins of dr have been implicated in dna or rna repair, either in direct experiments or on the basis of up-regulation following irradiation, complemented with protein sequence analysis. these putative repair enzymes include drb <dig>  an rna ligase  <cit>  that is strongly up-regulated in response to irradiation  <cit>  and might be involved in an uncharacterized rna repair process; a predicted double-strand break repair complex specific for recovery after irradiation, which consists of drb <dig>  a dna ligase, drb <dig>  a protein containing an hd family phosphatase and polynucleotide kinase domains  <cit> ; drb <dig>  a predicted phosphatase of the h2macro superfamily ; a double-stranded dna-binding protein ppra , which stimulates the dna end-joining reaction in vitro  <cit> ; a predicted dna single-strand annealing protein ddra   <cit> ; a regulator of radiation response irre ; a metal-dependent protease fused to a helix-turn-helix domain  <cit> ; and the uncharacterized protein dr <dig> that has been shown to be essential for full resistance to acute irradiation  <cit> . among these poorly characterized  repair proteins of dr, only ddra has an ortholog in the tt genome. in general, these putative repair genes are sparsely represented in bacteria, and it appears most unlikely that they were present in the common ancestor of tt and dr; most likely, these genes were acquired by the dr lineage via hgt after the divergence from the common ancestor with tt, and might have contributed to the evolution of the resistance phenotype. however, functional relevance of these genes to radiation resistance remains to be confirmed because most of the corresponding knockout mutants showed only relatively small to moderate decreases in radiation resistance  <cit> .

among the unique  repair enzymes of tt, the most conspicuous ones are the components of the putative thermophile-specific repair system, which are predominantly encoded on the tt megaplasmid . the functional features of the proteins encoded in this system  suggest that they are involved in an as yet uncharacterized dna repair pathway. it has been hypothesized that this novel gene complex might be functionally analogous to the bacterial-eukaryotic system of translesion, mutagenic repair whose central components are dna polymerases of the umuc-dinb-rad30-rev <dig> superfamily, which typically are missing in thermophiles  <cit> .

comparison of proteins comprising various  systems involved in stress response reveals a greater number and diversity of such proteins in dr, which has  <dig> cogs with relevant functions that are not represented in tt compared to  <dig> such cogs in tt . altogether, there are  <dig> proteins in dr in this category and  <dig> in tt, suggesting that some of them are additionally expanded in dr .

enzymatic systems of defense against oxidative stress predicted in tt and dr also show important differences. tt has one mn-dependent superoxide dismutase   <cit>  and one mn-dependent catalase , whereas dr encodes three superoxide dismutases  and three predicted catalases with no tt orthologs  <cit> . additionally, dr has a cytochrome c peroxidase  and a predicted iron-dependent peroxidase , enzymes that are likely to provide protection against toxic peroxides  <cit> . orthologs of these enzymes are rare among bacteria, suggesting that the deinococcus lineage acquired them via hgt after the divergence of tt and dr from the common ancestor. reduction of oxidized methionine residues in proteins is crucial for survival of cells under oxidative stress  <cit> . consistent with this idea, two peptide methionine sulfoxide reductases , msra  and msrb , are encoded in the dr genome  <cit> , whereas none are present in tt. interestingly, both pmsrs are also missing in aquifex, thermotoga and most thermophilic archaea, suggesting at least two possibilities: either this type of oxidative damage is rare at high temperatures or the known pmsrs are replaced by uncharacterized analogous enzymes due to the inefficiency of the former at high temperatures.

oxidative stress defense mechanisms also might include control of mn and fe partitioning in the cell  <cit> . proteins of the dps/ferritin family are required for the storage of iron in a non-reactive state, which prevents iron-catalyzed formation of hydroxyl radicals, thus protecting the cell from iron toxicity   <cit> . two dps-related proteins are encoded in the dr genome , and it has been shown that one of them  protects dna from both hydroxyl radical cleavage and from dnase i-mediated cleavage  <cit> . some proteins homologous to dps can non-specifically bind dna and therefore are viewed as dna-specific protectors  <cit> . like most thermophiles, tt has no proteins of this family but encodes a ferritin from another family .

since desiccation also causes oxidative stress, proteins involved in desiccation resistance belong to the general cellular defense category  <cit> . desiccation-related proteins from at least two distinct families have been detected in dr  <cit> . these desiccation resistance protein families  are not represented in tt. however, three tt proteins  are homologs of another desiccation resistance protein that was originally characterized in a plant, craterostigma plantagineum  <cit> ; dr also has two proteins of this family, drb <dig> and dra <dig>  these proteins are distantly related to cog <dig> and belong to the ferritin family of iron storage proteins . highly conserved homologs of these proteins are also present in thermophilic bacteria and archaea. two desiccation-related proteins  appear to be essential for desiccation resistance but not for radiation resistance in dr  <cit> .

comparison of the genome partitions of tt and dr
both tt and dr have multipartite genomes. to examine possible evolutionary relationships between the genome partitions of tt and dr, we analyzed the distribution of symmetrical best hits  in the single extra-chromosomal element of tt, the ptt <dig> megaplasmid, and the three smaller genome partitions of dr . the results of this analysis show that ptt <dig> has a highly significant excess of orthologs on dr <dig>  suggesting that these two megaplasmids are homologous, i.e., probably evolved from a distinct genome partition of the common dr-tt ancestor. apparently, however, the genomes of the megaplasmids have undergone extensive rearrangements since the divergence from the common ancestor because no conservation of gene order could be identified .

note: expected number of orthologs under the assumption of independent distribution is shown in parentheses.

notably, among the putative thermophilic determinants of tt, ~50% are encoded on the megaplasmid . of these,  <dig> belong to the putative mobile thermophile-specific dna repair system  <cit>  . additionally, the megaplasmid carries at least four other genes associated with this system, which have not yet been assigned to cogs . moreover, the tt megaplasmid also carries a pseudogene for reverse gyrase, the most conspicuous signature protein of hyperthermophiles  <cit> .

recently, the genome of another strain of tt  has been completely sequenced and became available in public databases  <cit> . a preliminary comparison of the two tt strains  revealed considerable differences in the gene orders and contents of the megaplasmids . interestingly, these differences in gene content are derived mostly from genes that appear to be associated with the thermophylic lifestyle. in particular, strain hb <dig> encodes an intact reverse gyrase. thus, it appears most likely that the gene for reverse gyrase was acquired from a hyperthermophilic source by the tt lineage and was present in the common ancestor of hb <dig> and hb <dig> but decayed in the former. conversely, hb <dig> encodes a unique, three-domain fusion protein , whereas hb <dig> lacks the ding and recq orthologs . furthermore, there are unexpected differences in the organization of predicted thermophile-specific repair systems between the two strains of tt. specifically, hb <dig> contains a "gram-positive version" , whereas hb <dig> has a "proteobacterial version" of these genes  .

furthermore, a nearly complete draft genome sequence of deinococcus geothermalis  has recently become publicly available  <cit> . since dg is closely related to dr but is moderately thermophilic, we searched for "thermophilic" genes in dg genome. using the "thermophilic" protein sequences  of tt and dr as queries, we identified orthologs of  <dig> of the  <dig> dr proteins from this set  and orthologs of  <dig> of the remaining  <dig> "thermophilic" proteins of tt . these  <dig> proteins had the respective tt proteins as the best hits, and their monophyly was supported by phylogenetic analysis , suggesting that these genes were already present in the genome of the dr-tt common ancestor.

these observations give rise to two hypotheses:  the tt megaplasmid is essential for the survival of the organism at high temperatures. consistent with this idea, we detected an expansion of a two-component toxin-antitoxin system, which consists of a pin-like nuclease  and a maze family transcriptional regulator   <cit> . such a system is known to be responsible for the segregational stability of antibiotic resistance plasmids and other plasmids via selective elimination of cells that have failed to acquire a plasmid copy  <cit> , and/or exclusion of competing plasmids  <cit> ; and  the tt megaplasmid is a dynamic genome compartment and a veritable sink for horizontally transferred genes, some of which might affect the thermophilic phenotype of this bacterium. this is compatible with the considerable differences in gene content observed between the two tt strains.

specific roles of plasmid-borne genes in recovery from dna damage have been proposed previously, including class ib ribonucleotide reductase, periplasmic alkaline phosphatase, and extracellular nuclease, and subsequent analyses revealed at least five other genes implicated in this process   <cit> . there is also a toxin-antitoxin system operon in the dr <dig> megaplasmid . additionally, there are five other toxin-antitoxin systems encoded on dr <dig>  the smaller chromosome of dr, which might be related to maintenance of dr <dig> megaplasmid in dr. the dr <dig> chromosome appears to have some special features as well. numerous genes that apparently have been acquired by dr via hgt after the divergence from the common ancestor with tt and are implicated in various processes of amino acid and nucleotide degradation, map to this genome partition. thus, the megaplasmids of tt and dr  appear to have participated in extensive hgt, which might have been important for the evolution of thermophily and radioresistance, although the repertoires of the respective acquired genes are completely different.

CONCLUSIONS
tt and dr share a large core of genes and form a clade in the gene-content tree, which supports the idea that these bacteria form a distinct clade, as indicated previously by phylogenetic analysis of rrna and various proteins, and that the evolution of their gene complements was, roughly, clock-like. however, major differences between the gene repertoires of tt and dr were observed, indicating that both genomes lost numerous ancestral genes and acquired distinct sets of new genes primarily via hgt. in addition, numerous lineage-specific expansions of paralogous gene families were identified, particularly, in dr.

some of the differences in the gene repertoires of tt and dr can be linked to the distinctive adaptive strategies of these bacteria. for example, tt appears to have acquired many genes from thermophilic bacteria and archaea, whereas dr apparently acquired various genes involved in oxidative stress response and other "house-cleaning" functions from diverse bacterial sources.

the gene content of the tt megaplasmid  and the dr megaplasmid  are sufficiently similar to conclude that they evolved from a common ancestor. to our knowledge, this is the first evidence of persistence of a megaplasmid beyond the genus level. however, the tt megaplasmid also carries many genes whose functions are implicated in the thermophylic phenotype; in particular, components of the predicted thermophile-specific repair system. these megaplasmids are likely to be essential for the survival of both tt and dr, with their maintenance controlled by toxin-antitoxin systems. furthermore, the substantial differences between the gene repertoires of the megaplasmids of tt strains hb <dig> and hb <dig> indicate that this genome partition has been highly dynamic, with high rates of gene loss and hgt events occurring during evolution.

the evolutionary reconstruction based on the parsimony principle is generally compatible with the idea that the common ancestor of tt and dr was a mesophilic bacterium, whereas the thermophylic phenotype of tt evolved gradually via hgt of genes from thermophiles. conversely, the radiation-desiccation resistance phenotype of dr might have gradually evolved via hgt of genes from other mesophiles, particularly, with highly developed oxidative stress response systems. however, it should be noted that the tt-dr common gene core includes dozens of genes of apparent archaeal origin or, at least, genes with thermophilic affiliation. moreover, the dg genome encodes a few additional "thermophilic determinants" that are missing in dr but are unlikely to have been transferred from a thermophilic source independently of tt, as shown by comparative-genomic and phylogenetic analyses described here. thus, acquisition of a considerable number of archaeal genes might have occurred along the evolutionary branch leading to the common ancestor of tt and dr. accordingly, at this stage, we cannot rule out the possibility that this ancestor was a moderate thermophile rather than a mesophile. further sequencing of bacterial genomes of the thermus-deinococcus clade should allow more definitive comparative-genomic analysis to elucidate the nature of the common ancestor of these bacteria.

