BACKGROUND
in aquaculture, there is a growing demand for alternative plant-based feed ingredients to replace traditionally used fish meal  <cit> . however, most plant-derived nutrient sources contain various antinutritional factors  such as saponins, which may exert harmful effects when ingested by animals  <cit> . saponins are triterpenoidal or steroidal glycosides naturally occurring in many feed ingredients of plant origin such as soy, pea, sunflower and lupin. various pharmacological and biological effects of saponins have been reported  <cit> , and many of these have been attributed to the amphiphilic structure of saponins. saponins can affect intestinal condition and functions in different ways. the ability of saponins to interact with sterols may account for many of the reported biological effects, particularly those that involve membrane properties. saponins bind to membrane cholesterol and seem to increase cellular permeability, which may in turn have significant effects on the uptake of macromolecules including allergens  <cit>  and antigens  <cit> . based on their detergent and surfactant properties, dietary saponins likely disturb fat emulsification and formation of micelles and absorption of their constituents, i.e. bile salts, fatty acids, fat-soluble vitamins and other lipid soluble compounds. in mammals, saponins may decrease lipid and protein digestibility  <cit>  as well as reduce absorption of iron  <cit>  and fat-soluble vitamins a and e  <cit> . most saponins can form complexes with intestinal bile salts and cholesterol  <cit> , thus decreasing intestinal cholesterol reabsorption  <cit> . another possible mode of saponin hypocholesterolemic action is through loss of cell membrane cholesterol from shed cells via increased intestinal cell turnover rate due to the membranolytic action of saponins  <cit> .

feeding salmonid fishes with diets containing high inclusion levels of soybean meal , a saponin rich ingredient, have in most experiments caused a dose dependent distal intestinal inflammation   <cit> . recently, we demonstrated that high dietary levels of another potential alternative protein source, pea protein concentrate , induced inflammation in the distal intestine of atlantic salmon similar to that described for sbm-induced enteritis  <cit> . peas also contain high levels of saponins. the causative factor for the sbm- and ppc-induced enteritis in salmonids has not been conclusively identified, but there are strong indications that saponins are involved in the stimulation of cytokine production  <cit>  and induction of inflammation  <cit> . however, pure saponins will not induce enteritis unless some other plant components are present  <cit> .

the effects of various plant protein sources on fish growth performance, nutrient digestibility and gut health have been extensively studied  <cit> . in contrast, only fragmentary information on the impacts of plant-derived anfs on fish health is currently available, and the molecular mechanisms remain unknown. in the present study, we addressed possible interactions between soyasaponins and five different plant protein sources. the five plant ingredients all have potential as alternative protein source in aquafeeds and were included at levels as high as practically possible in commercial diet formulations. given the limited knowledge of saponin effects on fish, it is expedient to apply high-throughput analytic techniques. consequently, multiple gene expression profiling with an oligonucleotide microarray was conducted to investigate the transcriptomic responses of atlantic salmon distal intestine to dietary saponin at inclusion levels naturally present in soy. this work was part of a larger feeding trial, and fish performance and physiological data have been reported in detail elsewhere  <cit> .

RESULTS
fish performance
fish performance data are presented in detail elsewhere  <cit> . in brief, saponin inclusion significantly decreased feed intake and body weight for the ppc-based diet. for the other diets, feed intake and body weight seemed to be constant or slightly increased. saponin supplementation showed no significant effects on the feed efficiency ratio.

histology
saponin supplementation markedly affected distal intestine histology when supplemented to the diet containing ppc . the changes observed in the ppc + s diet group included typical enteritic changes such as higher degrees of mucosal fold fusion , connective tissue hyperplasia and leukocyte infiltration in the lamina propria and submucosa, reduced supranuclear absorptive vacuolization and abnormal nucleus position in enterocytes, and increased numbers of goblet cells. distal intestine histology was either minimally, or not, affected in all other diet groups. slightly shorter mucosal folds and a wider lamina propria were observed in fish fed rapeseed meal , and higher numbers of goblet cells were observed in fish fed sunflower meal . however, no clear signs of inflammation were present. quantitative histology results are presented in detail elsewhere  <cit> .

transcriptomic responses: an overview
a sizeable effect of saponins  on the distal intestinal transcriptome was observed only in combination with pea protein concentrate . the number of differentially expressed genes  in the ppc + s diet group was  <dig>  much higher than the other groups which ranged between  <dig> and  <dig> deg. hierarchical clustering separated ppc while other samples were joined in one cluster . as saponin supplementation to diets with corn gluten , sfm, rsm and horsebean meal  did not produce any adverse effects on the intestine, further presentation focuses only on the effects of saponins in combination with ppc. a search for enriched terms in lists of deg was applied for rapid screening of the thematic associations of the transcriptomic responses . results suggested that the ppc + s diet induced inflammation mediated by chemokines and complement components. the metabolic changes involved a number of pathways of amino acid, steroid and lipid metabolism. effects on glutathione and xenobiotic metabolism could impair protection against reactive oxygen species  and toxicity, while protein folding was a hallmark of cellular stress. effects of ppc + s diet on higher levels of biological organization were observed by terms related to cellular and tissue structures  and integrative functions . for validation of microarray results with qpcr,  <dig> genes related to the key functional groups were selected  and the data produced with two independent methods were closely correlated . data are presented in figure  <dig> 

* numbers of genes among deg and on the microarray platform.

† yates’ corrected chi-square.

inflammatory responses
salmon fed ppc + s showed increased distal intestinal transcription of genes involved in inflammation at different levels . up-regulation was observed in several chemokines, cytokines, especially il- <dig> , as well as chemokine and cytokine receptors. two genes for proteins of eicosanoid metabolism were induced 2- to 3-fold . annexins contribute to the intestinal resistance to injury, as they possess anti-inflammatory properties as well as gastroprotective properties. microarray analyses did not show increase of il- <dig> and tnfalpha. however, up-regulation of nfkb, several functionally related pro-inflammatory transcription factors and tnf-induced proteins was revealed and this suggested an acute character of inflammation. interestingly, this was in parallel with the down-regulation of mhci  and several virus responsive genes that are dependent on ifn. diverse immune effector mechanisms were activated. up-regulation was shown for lectins and genes with reported induction in pathogen infected fish. stimulation of different complement pathways was likely since 2- to 4-fold up-regulated levels were shown for genes associated with classical  and alternative  pathways. this was in parallel with decreased expression of negative complement regulators: c <dig> inhibitor  and c4b-binding protein . activation was shown by several extracellular matrix  degrading proteases including matrix metalloproteinases  and their inhibitors that are commonly co-regulated. inflammatory tissue damages were also suggested by up-regulation of several components of the respiratory burst complex that generates ros, i.e. cytochromes b- <dig> and b <dig> , myeloperoxidase  and neutrophil cytosolic factor  <dig> . arginase  <dig>  and ornithine decarboxylase  can direct the arginine flux away from nitric oxide synthase and nitrogen nitric oxide  production, a free radical toxic to bacteria but also an important signalling molecule. the oxidative stress was probably reinforced by down-regulation of diverse ros scavengers and proteins that bind iron and heme; both are potent catalysts of free radicals production.

metabolism
unlike polyfunctional arginase  <dig>  a suite of genes involved in several pathways of amino acids metabolism were down-regulated . reduction of amino acid- /peptide absorption could be predicted from down-regulation of b <dig> + − type amino acid transporter , sodium-dependent neutral amino acid transporter b <dig> , taurine transporter and solute carrier family  <dig> member  <dig> . decreased expression was found in a number of transporters that are known to or can take part in intestinal absorption of diverse nutrients including phosphates, copper and sulphate, sugars , lactate and pyruvate , citrate , other organic cations  and vitamins . water channels  were down-regulated  while increased expression was shown by three chloride transporting proteins.

slight induction of putative bile salt transporter  was in parallel with down-regulation of genes for carriers of lipids including several apolipoproteins  and sterolin , steroids and retinoids , triglycerides and fatty acids. a  <dig> -fold down-regulation was observed for 2-acylglycerol o-acyltransferase 2-a, which takes part in absorption of dietary fat in the small intestine by catalyzing the resynthesis of triacylglycerol in enterocytes. a number of down-regulated genes is involved in different pathways including production of bile , steroid metabolism, glycerolipids , phospholipids  and retinol. several down-regulated genes were implicated in different aspects of fatty acids utilization. metabolism of lipids and conversion of toxic compounds include common steps since biotransformation of xenobiotics requires improvement of their solubility. this is achieved by processes grouped in phase i  and phase ii . the ppc + s diet suppressed genes with important roles in detoxification. cyp <dig> are enzymes with different substrate specificity that play an essential part in phase i as well as several other enzymes presented in table  <dig>  phase ii reactions are catalyzed by glutathione s-transferases , sulfotransferases and udp-glucuronosyltransferases. the precise role of alanine-glyoxylate aminotransferase  is not known, however this gene showed responses to various aquatic contaminants and was suggested as a marker of generalized toxicity  <cit> . down-regulation of lysosomal proteases  could be attributed to the inflammatory response as well as digestion. reduction of digestive proteolytic action could be predicted from down-regulation of several aminopeptidases and carboxypeptidases, as well as pancreatic secretory trypsin inhibitor, which protects against premature activity of trypsin.

tissue damage and repair
up-regulation of several genes involved in exocytosis including annexins  was in accordance with increased production of mucus as indicated by increased numbers of goblet cells. down-regulation was observed in several genes involved in epithelial cell-to-cell contacts including genes that encode tight junctions . the  <dig> -fold down-regulation of the gap junction cx <dig>  could affect passage of inorganic ions and small water-soluble molecules in between cells. suppression of the two cadherins  is also worth mentioning as cadherin-mediated cell-cell and cell-matrix junctions have crucial roles both within normal and injured intestinal epithelium  <cit> . surface glycans are essential for cell recognition and interactions. three glycan modifying esterases were up-regulated  and alpha- <dig> -fucosyltransferase), while several genes required for degradation and turnover of glycans were down-regulated, e.g. aspartylglucosaminidase . decreased expression was observed in growth factors and transcription regulators that control differentiation of various cell lineages including mesenchymal  and endothelial , fibroblasts and other elements of connective tissue. furthermore, lactase-phlorizin hydrolase  is exclusively expressed in the small intestine in mammals, and is often used as a marker for the differentiation of enterocytes, as lph mrna can first be detected in the transition zone between the crypt and the villus  <cit> . an interesting finding was the  <dig> -fold up-regulation of putative guanylin, an intestinal peptide with an important role in regulation of water balance.

discussion
in the present study, saponins negatively affected the intestine and caused lower growth performance, but only in combination with ppc. histology of the distal intestine revealed enteritis resembling the changes associated with soy enteropathy  <cit> , which was also confirmed with pronounced transcriptome changes. moreover, microarray results were consistent with our previous report on soya induced gene expression changes in the distal intestine of atlantic salmon  <cit> . similar effects of sbm on expression levels of genes related to lipid, iron and xenobiotic metabolism have also been observed in the distal intestine of atlantic halibut  <cit> . interestingly, inflammation was not induced in the latter case, suggesting that suppression of some metabolic processes observed in the present work could occur independent of the activation of immune responses.

in previous studies, feeding 18% field peas  <cit>  or 20% ppc  <cit>  did not produce histomorphological changes, while high dietary ppc levels  produced enteritis and adverse effects on growth performance and nutrient digestibility  <cit> . peas have been reported to contain between  <dig>  and  <dig>  g kg− <dig> saponin  <cit> . however, the ppc used in the current work, produced by air classification, may have contained higher levels compared to unprocessed peas due to changes during processing  <cit> . the difference in distal intestinal morphology in fish fed the ppc + s diet could therefore be due to a dosage effect of saponins as suggested previously  <cit> . none of the other protein sources were expected to contain appreciable amounts of saponins  <cit> . therefore, the basal saponin level in the different diets could explain the differences in the results. however, the level of saponin supplementation was equivalent to the amount found in a diet containing approximately 40% sbm, which consistently causes distal intestine inflammation. moreover, similar histology was reported in fish fed either a fishmeal based control diet or the same diet supplemented with  <dig>  g kg− <dig> of a 65% soyasaponin concentrate  <cit> , an amount equivalent to a diet containing approximately 30% defatted sbm, a level which also consistently produces distal intestine inflammation. this indicates that some other component or contributing factor is  necessary to induce an inflammatory response. the necessary factor may involve interactions with other anfs present in peas, such as protease inhibitors, phytic acid, oligosaccharides, lectins, tannins, and/or dietary antigens  <cit> , or changes in the intestinal microbiota  <cit> .

the inflammatory response was characterized by marked involvement of genes regulating t-cell functions, in line with the high t-cell reactivity seen during the development of soy enteropathy  <cit> . increase in the expression of the t-cell receptor , responsible for the primary costimulatory signal for t-cell activation, cd <dig>  that provides a secondary positive signal, as well as the binding partner of cd <dig>  t-cell inhibitory ctla <dig>   <cit> , suggested the need to tightly regulate t-cell-mediated processes. il-18-dependent polarisation of th responses towards the th <dig> and th <dig> lineages is consistent with the increased level of il- <dig> observed in the chronically inflamed intestine  <cit> . preferential expression of pro-inflammatory th responses can promote a wide range of pathological responses in the intestine, mediated either by t-cells or by excessive innate immune activation  <cit> .

activation of tnfalpha dependent responses including induction of nfkb and the respiratory burst are typical for myeloid cells . this was further supported by the substantial remodelling of ecm, as evidenced by a number of significantly affected genes encoding proteins involved in ecm deposition and degradation. the high destructive power of the effectors explains severe tissue damages. in the healthy intestine, basal immune activation maintains barrier function and commensal microflora composition; however, excessive and uncontrolled inflammation likely represents a central contributor to the pathophysiology of the feed-induced distal enteritis in salmon. microarray data revealed 11-fold induction of annexin-a <dig>  which together with the induction of phospholipase d <dig>  involved in processing of the annexin- <dig> receptor , suggested promotion of the pathway that can result in the inhibition of the transendothelial migration of neutrophils  <cit> . suppression of the recruitment of leukocytes into the mucosa by reducing leukocyte-endothelial adhesive interactions could be an attempt to abrogate exaggerated immune responses. however, annexins may also inhibit biosynthesis of eicosanoids and therefore potentially reduce production of prostaglandin e <dig>  that has a crucial role in multiple gastrointestinal defences  <cit> . the context of immune activation is crucial; although immune effector cells play essential roles in protective immunity against harmful luminal agents, similar effector functions seemed to be engaged during inappropriate inflammatory responses against dietary antigens. although previous work from our group did not find a protective effect of oxytetracycline against enteritis in salmon  <cit> , the need to engage in handling of commensal flora that breached damaged mucosal barrier should not be ruled out. further investigation of the involvement of other, oxytetracycline resistant bacteria in the soy induced inflammatory response is warranted.

activation of phagocytes such as neutrophils and macrophages was further indicated by the regulation of several components of the respiratory burst complex. these findings are important because neutralization of ros represents an important defence against self-inflicted damage. decreased mrna levels of several glutathione-s-transferases and the key antioxidant enzymes catalase and glutathione peroxidase indicated that animals could be vulnerable to oxidative stress. similar observations have been made in salmon and rainbow trout hepatic transcriptome after restricted feeding, sbm feeding and infection  <cit> . the coordinated decrease of genes encoding iron and heme proteins may have also influenced redox status. excessive amounts of toxic metals may be prevented from entering the body by retention in the gut tissue bound to specific proteins such as metallothionein  and ferritin  <cit> . decreased mt and ferritin levels may thus have resulted in increased susceptibility to metal toxicity. interaction between the regulation of inflammation and biotransformation of toxic compounds has been observed under various conditions  <cit> . up-regulation of the nfkb pathway may be necessary to activate protection against cellular stress, indicated by the expression pattern of several heat shock proteins and ubiquitin . however, nfkb suppresses ahr, which co-ordinates transcription of genes involved in xenobiotic metabolism  <cit> . the down-regulation of biodegradation in the intestine observed in this study may possibly increase vulnerability of the intestinal tissue and consequent hepatic loading.

the mucosal epithelial barrier of the alimentary tract is continuously exposed to noxious and immunogenic substances, including pathogens, dietary antigens and toxins. decreased numbers of goblet cells, reduced mucus secretion and abnormalities of its composition are well described in a number of intestinal disorders  <cit> . in the present work, increased mucus production, as indicated by increased number of goblet cells, likely increased barrier properties and provided a degree of protection. in accordance, microarray data suggested augmented production of mucin glycoproteins. notably aga, which targets mucin glycoproteins for degradation, was down-regulated while b3gn <dig>  which modifies glycoproteins, was 4-fold up-regulated. another crucial aspect of the mucosal barrier is cell-cell adherence. paracellular passage of luminal content is restricted by tjs that seal the most apical space between intestinal epithelial cells. knudsen and co-workers suggested that soyasaponins might increase transepithelial inflow of dietary antigens and microflora through increased tj permeability in salmon distal intestine  <cit> . although molecular components of the tj complex and their individual contributions to barrier function within the intestinal epithelium of atlantic salmon have not been studied extensively, up-regulation of the major protein of mammalian tjs occludin could be interpreted as a sign of extensive junctional reorganization during assembly of new junctions and/or an attempt to increase tj strength. multiple tj components interact with the actin cytoskeleton through binding to pdz domains found on cytoplasmic adapter proteins, a number of which was induced in the current work. furthermore, activation of actinomyosin contractility that leads to increased paracellular permeability was suggested by up-regulation of several myosins and rhogtpase signaling  and suppression of the inhibitory myosin phosphatase-rho interacting protein . the microarray data set was enriched for genes involved in arginine and proline metabolism . polyamines produced from arginine have previously been shown to be essential both in early mucosal restitution by cell migration and in regeneration by proliferation  <cit> . intracellular polyamine levels are tightly regulated by the activity of odc and arg, which were both induced by saponins. in addition to being responsible for the generation of polyamines, odc and arg have been shown to be protective in a mouse model of colitis by competitive inhibition of no production  <cit> .

collectively, gene expression data support the proposal that continuous cell renewal and an increased need to replace lost cells may come at the expense of proper differentiation of intestinal cells. this could partly explain the observed profile of genes involved in digestive processes and is in line with previously made observations that sbm-induced enteritis affects differentiation of epithelial cells in salmon  <cit> . the general down-regulation of digestive proteases was consistent with our study on sbm inclusion in salmon diets  <cit>  and the reduced brush border enzyme activities observed in salmon fed plant-based diets such as sbm and ppc  <cit> . dys-regulation of proteolytic actions has also been described for inflammatory bowel diseases , which shows similarities to fish enteropathy  <cit> . pancreatic secretory trypsin inhibitors were found to be markedly reduced in the colon of patients with ibd  <cit> , whereas mmp levels were elevated  <cit> . in the present study, decreased faecal dry matter in fish fed the ppc + s diet suggested that these fish had diarrhea  <cit> , similar to what has been reported in salmon with sbm-induced enteritis  <cit> . in accordance, microarray data indicated disruption of water and solute absorption. the observed down-regulation of aquaporins is in accordance with several mammalian ibd studies  <cit> , and the role of aqp <dig>  as a key water channel in the intestinal tract of salmonids  <cit> . another interesting finding was increased levels of guanylin, which may decrease intestinal fluid absorption, increase chloride secretion and cause diarrhea in mammalian models  <cit> . it is known that sbm causes increased permeability of the distal intestinal epithelium  <cit> , which likely disrupts water and ion balance. furthermore, the observed decreased expression of nutrient transporters in the current work is in line with decreased carrier-mediated transport after sbm feeding  <cit> .

as presented elsewhere  <cit> , apparent digestibility of cysteine decreased when saponins were added to the ppc containing diet, indicating reduction in sulfur containing amino acids. cysteine is a precursor for taurine, and decreased cysteine uptake together with a marked effect on cysteine deoxygenase  <dig>  as well as down-regulation of taurine transporter mrna levels may have consequences for taurine biosynthesis and subsequently conjugated bile salt levels. additionally, reduced cysteine uptake may negatively affect synthesis of the highly cysteine-rich mts  <cit> . the observed transcriptional effects on mt and taurine metabolism as well as the reduced bile salt levels may therefore have resulted from reduced cysteine uptake when saponins were added to the ppc diet. in general, sbm inclusion in fish feed has been associated with decreased lipid digestibility, reduced bile salt levels and hypocholesterolemia  <cit> . in the present study, similar negative effects of saponins on lipid and fatty acid digestibility were observed , and microarray analyses revealed dramatic suppression of lipid and steroid metabolism. this could result both from activation of immunity and limited absorption of nutrients as a consequence of dys-regulated cellular differentiation and loss of function, as previously mentioned. our previous studies with the  <dig>  k cdna microarray revealed similar changes in the liver of salmon infected with isa virus  <cit>  and the same tendency was caused with restricted feeding in salmon and rainbow trout  <cit>  and by sbm inclusion in feed for salmon  <cit>  and halibut  <cit> . it remains unknown whether suppression of lipid metabolism in the intestine could affect the condition of fish or biosynthesis of steroid hormones that require cholesterol. however, down-regulation of cholesterol and sulfate metabolism likely impaired production of bile. in accordance, saponins reduced bile salt concentration in fish fed ppc by 60% in the pyloric intestine and 56% in the mid intestine  <cit> . given the key role of bile in lipid digestion and absorption, this could partly explain the observed decrease in lipid digestibility. additionally, bile salts have several signaling properties regulating metabolic, detoxifying, antibacterial and immunomodulatory actions  <cit> , which may have been compromised and could account for some of the observed transcriptional responses.

CONCLUSIONS
this study promoted development of a model of feed induced intestinal inflammation in salmon. multiple gene expression profiling further characterized the inflammation and described the intestinal pathology at the molecular level. a number of potential diagnostic markers were found, including lectin-like proteins with unknown functions in fish, aquaporins and several enzymes involved in lipid, amino acid and xenobiotic metabolism. in addition, activation of multiple mucosal defence mechanisms was outlined.

