BACKGROUND
it is a well established fact that the water quality of rivers is strongly influenced by their sediments. sediments are frequently highly contaminated because hydrophobic chemicals, introduced to the water body, bind to particles and accumulate in the sediment. in contrast to surface waters, river sediments therefore reflect not only present, but also past contamination. ignoring their capacity to act as a sink and as a potential source of contamination can lead to wrong conclusions concerning the characterization of current pollution levels. therefore, sediment quality assessment has to be included as an essential integral part of any environmental risk assessment of freshwater bodies  <cit> .

detailed chemical analyses and sediment toxicity tests typically expose benthic organisms to bulk sediments to assess their quality  <cit> . the diversity of toxic substances in the environment, the complexity of possible adverse or even positive responses to exposure, and various biotic and abiotic factors that modulate a response call for a comprehensive approach that is able to analyze simultaneously several thousand measurable variables  <cit> . molecular approaches, such as 'ecogenomics'  <cit>  or 'ecotoxicogenomics'  <cit> , may prove to be a suitable tool for facilitating the interpretation of bulk sediment toxicity data, as the molecular response of an organism is arguably more sensitive and more specific than the response at higher levels of organization. pragmatically, the purpose of ecogenomics is to identify gene and/or protein classes which are switched on or off upon exposure, thus making it possible to detect molecular fingerprints specific to the bio-available fraction of the chemical contamination.

this study investigated the aptness of the bacterivorous nematode caenorhabditis elegans as a model organism for toxicogenomic sediment testing. various studies have previously demonstrated the general suitability of c. elegans in classical sediment toxicity testing  <cit>  and, more recently, also in dna microarray experiments with clear toxicological background  <cit> . however, to date, the use of microarrays has not been explored to assess sediment ecotoxicology in c. elegans. this paper aims to redress this shortfall by identifying changes in the gene expression of c. elegans exposed to three german river sediment samples of varying pollution status, namely danube, rhine and elbe. correlating the chemical composition of sediment with biological toxicity tests and global gene expression will clarify  whether expression patterns mirror the different levels of pollution by over-representing regulatory and metabolic pathways as well as gene classes; and  if these findings support, or indeed provide a deep understanding of the biological effects observed that go beyond the classical toxic parameters of dna toxicity and estrogenicity, as defined by the comet and yes assays.

RESULTS
test design
the sites at the danube , the rhine , and the elbe , were selected due to differing pollution levels and patterns, previously identified in long-term survey programs and/or research programs operated by the federal institute of hydrology . to study the reproductive capacity and the gene expression, c. elegans were exposed to the sediments of danube , rhine , or elbe . moreover, pore water was obtained from the sediments to perform the yeast estrogen screen  and the comet assay to evaluate estrogenicity and genotoxicity, respectively. in addition to the bioassays, the sediment samples were analyzed for priority chemical contaminants.

chemical analyses characterize the elbe sediment as most polluted
sediments were analyzed for a variety of priority substances. according to their grain-size distribution, the three sediments are silty or sandy mud with organic contents of  <dig>  to  <dig> %. fine grain-sized sediments are particularly suitable to accumulate organic compounds and heavy metals. in general, the sediments showed a clear pollution gradient , with the elbe sediment being characterized by elevated organic contamination and high concentrations of heavy metals . the rhine sediment shows a low to moderate contamination with only copper, nickel and zinc being slightly elevated. the most prominent contaminants in the sediment of the river elbe are organochlorine compounds. these persistent organic pollutants  are ddt and its metabolites, hch-isomers, hexachlorobenzene , octachlorostyrene  and polychlorinated biphenyls . the total amounts of  <dig> pahs were between  <dig>   and  <dig>  mg/kg , the concentrations of tbt ranged between below the detection limit <  <dig>  and  <dig>  μg sn/kg . moreover, the highest concentrations of heavy metals were detected in the elbe sediment. it can be expected that pahs, pcb, and other pop act as ah-receptor agonists, whereas organotin compounds display an endocrine disrupting potential.

all concentrations are units per kg dry sediment and derived from a single measurement with appropriate analytical controls. the sediment volumes differ depending on which analysis was performed and the degree of contamination . abbreviations of organic pollutants: tph – total petroleum hydrocarbon; Σ  <dig> epa pah . when exposed for  <dig> h to rhine and elbe sediments, inhibition of reproduction was found to approximate the toxicity threshold of 50%, clearly indicating the presence of sublethal toxicity. in contrast, only a low level inhibition of reproduction was observed in the danube sediment suggesting that this sample is less toxic. the fact that even in the polluted sediments c. elegans was affected but not killed was a prerequisite for the microarray study.

a the toxicity test is based on the mean of four replicate experiments

b % tail dna  was calculated of  <dig> randomly selected nuclei on two replicate slides;

c eeq values were calculated from three independent experiments , each consisting of three replicates;

* significantly different to the negative control ;

** significantly different to the negative control ;

*** significantly different to the danube sample .

comet assay
all samples had slight to significant dna damaging potential in rtg- <dig> cells indicating that genotoxic substances are present in the pore water of the sediments. consistent with the chemical contamination, the elbe sample was most genotoxic followed by the ones from rhine and danube . in each case, a clear concentration effect relationship was obvious with the highest genotoxicity in the most concentrated  sample. interference of cytotoxicity could be excluded due to the utilization of a double cytofluorescence assay, which involved simultaneous staining of cells with fda and pi. even in the most polluted sample , the viability of the cells was equal or above 88%, which is in line with the general consensus that a sample is regarded as being non-toxic if cell viability is above 80% of controls  <cit> .

yes test
estrogen receptor binding potential was found in all pore water samples. independent experiments on three consecutive days revealed mean values of  <dig>  ng/l ethinyl estradiol equivalents  for the elbe sample,  <dig>  and  <dig>  ng/l for rhine and danube samples, respectively . mean background toxicity, measured as growth reduction of yeast, was negligible in all samples. the estrogenic potential differed considerably between the three sites, with a significant difference  between elbe and danube samples.

due to the low chemical burden and the corresponding biotest data, danube sediment was confirmed to be a suitable reference sediment for further experiments. it should be noted that the use of artificial, unpolluted control sediments  <cit>  or laboratory growth media are not without their own challenges, and will be addressed later in more detail.

c. elegans exhibit reproducible transcriptional profiles when exposed to river sediments
the molecular genetic impact of the different river sediments on staged  young adult c. elegans, exposed to the sediments for  <dig> h, was determined using a whole genome dna microarray screening approach. the  <dig>  oligonucleotides on the dna microarray represent  <dig>  transcripts of the c. elegans genome. of these,  <dig>  yielded good quality spots, of which following normalization,  <dig>  genes passed stable and uniform log normal distribution settings . using danube sediment as reference identified  <dig>  and  <dig>  transcripts that were differentially regulated by > <dig> -fold. one-way anova revealed that  <dig> and  <dig> transcripts were significantly  altered in elbe and rhine, respectively . the complete dataset can be viewed in the national center for biotechnology information's  gene expression omnibus  database . the data was subjected to hierarchical clustering analyses . a principal component analysis  was imposed on the dataset to capture the cluster structure prior to further analysis, mainly to reduce the complexity of the data whilst simultaneously filtering out noise  <cit> . it shows that the five independent repetitions of each experimental trial are clustered closely together , underlining the presence of a sound technical reproducibility. graphic heatmaps present an entire overview of all significantly changing genes ; visualized by graduated green , yellow  and red  colors. this analysis clusters genes that display similar expression patterns. a corresponding venn diagram  illustrates the total number of genes which are significantly up- or down-regulated  and reveals an increase in the number of up-regulated genes in nematodes exposed to the elbe sediment. in contrast, exposure to the rhine sediment resulted in an increase in down-regulated genes. interestingly, there is only a moderate overlap of genes that are differentially expressed in both sediments, namely  <dig> up- and  <dig> down-regulated genes.

c. elegans exhibit specific functional gene classes overrepresented in response to river sediment exposure
the dataset was dissected further to identify categories that comprise different functionally related objects. this was achieved by gene ontology  and kyoto encyclopedia of genes and genomes  pathway screens. both go  <cit>  and kegg  <cit>  are now an integral part of microarray analysis  <cit>  as it is capable of extracting and summarizing information from expression data. simple venn diagrams  summarize the number of significant overrepresented go categories and show the level of correlation between the rhine and elbe samples, with a complete list of all significantly regulated go categories shown in additional file  <dig>  this substantiates that both sediments display a distinctive similarity in cellular component groups but are only moderately correlated in terms of overrepresented molecular functions . focusing on the  <dig> overlapping differentially regulated genes  these similarities become apparent by a down-regulation of catalytic activity, binding and metabolic process  as well as, the bi-directed regulation of cell and cell part components . further evaluation of differentially regulated biological processes also reveals clear-cut differences between the nematode's responses to rhine and elbe sediments. the elbe sediment modulates over twice as many categories as the rhine sediment. this notion is supported by the kegg pathway analysis where five kegg pathways are overrepresented in response to elbe sediment exposure, but only one pathway  in response to the rhine sediment . elbe and rhine, but not of danube sediments, induce several phase  <dig> or phase  <dig> metabolism genes  or heat shock proteins  and differentially regulate genes that overlap with other ecotoxicogenomic studies . moreover, go categories go: <dig> , go: <dig>   and the kegg pathway 'metabolism of xenobiotics by cytochrome p450' were identified to be differentially regulated in the elbe sediment derived sample. the elbe sediment consistently induces the expression of ribosomal genes which may reflect an increased synthesis of ribosomes. likewise, the process of oxidative phosphorylation is seemingly affected, as six members, including cytochrome c oxidase and f1f0-atp synthase, are up-regulated but only one  found to be down-regulated. furthermore, though with a lower level of significance, members of the "metabolism of xenobiotics by cytochrome p450" and "snare interactions in vesicular transport" pathways were found  to be up-regulated. it is noteworthy, that both exposures resulted in a down-regulation of several members of the starch and sucrose metabolism, including the trehalase encoding genes tre- <dig> and tre- <dig>  in contrast, the expression of an α-amylase, known to facilitate the breakdown of glycogen in humans, was highly elevated. both glycogen and trehalose are known to be essential for the maintenance and correct functioning of physiological processes in nematodes.

numerous differentially regulated parent go terms and related derived daughter terms were analyzed in detail with a sub-selection of overrepresented biological processes illustrated in figure  <dig> . the diagram depicts that the majority of derived go categories are only overrepresented in the elbe sediment. this indicates that in particular the biological processes of "reproduction", "determination of adult life span" and several developmental processes  are differentially modulated by the elbe sediment. a more detailed dissection focusing on six prominent categories substantiated this notion . this lists the identity and brief description of the  <dig> genes that responded to the elbe and rhine sediments. in almost all categories a similar number of genes were up- as well as down-regulated, making a further analysis more challenging. therefore it is currently only possible to speculate that several developmental processes affect c. elegans upon exposure to the elbe sediment – only the process of aging provides more detailed cues, where most of the significantly regulated genes were found to be up-regulated. finally, it is reassuring to observe that go terms associated with reproduction are overrepresented in rhine and elbe, a finding that correlates well with the observed reduction in brood size in nematodes exposed to the respective sediments.

similarities of gene expression patterns in nematodes exposed to elbe sediment and pcb <dig> treatment
the gene list of differentially regulated transcripts was compared to past toxicogenomic data where c. elegans were exposed to single xenobiotic compounds, pcb <dig>  <cit> , cd  <cit> , or two humic substances  <cit> . although the current data showed only limited overlap to the differential gene-lists obtained from humic substances and cd exposures , several genes matched those identified upon treatment to pcb <dig>  in detail,  <dig> up- and  <dig> down-regulated genes were common to the elbe and pcb <dig> gene list and  <dig> up- and  <dig> down-regulated genes to the rhine list. noteworthy is that both sediment samples induced the nadh-cytochrome b <dig> reductase encoding gene. moreover, wrn- <dig> and rpa- <dig>  both coding for proteins involved in dna damage checkpoint functions, were found to be significantly induced by the elbe sediment. furthermore, the pcb <dig> inducible cyp-35a <dig> was found to be up-regulated in the rhine sediment derived sample. c-type lectin  was down-regulated when exposed to either sediment sample, pcb <dig> or cd. a complete overview of matching genes is shown in additional file  <dig> 

discussion
rivers all over the world have a history of being heavily polluted by untreated waste waters from industrial and municipal discharges. chemical analyses of priority pollutants are typically used to monitor contamination levels and are complemented by bioassay-based approaches and their modifications to serve as simple, rapid and sensitive screening systems to predict bioavailability  <cit> . changes in expression levels of single biomarkers  have been reported to reflect the toxic response and the underlying mode of action of few specific substances or environmental contaminants  <cit> . the use of dna microarrays attempts to link ecotoxicological effects with the changes in global gene expression patterns  <cit> . this global approach is expected to cope more adequately with the complex matrices  and to display the variety of potential modes of actions and strategies of the exposed organisms. clearly, many species of invertebrates could be used to investigate transcriptional responsiveness in sediments, however two challenges need to be met, firstly few invertebrate species are omnipresent , and secondly none have, to date, been fully sequenced thus prohibiting the application of whole genome microarray technology. in contrast, the genome sequence of c. elegans has been deciphered in fine detail, clearly representing an added value to comprehensive ecotoxicogenomics. although c. elegans is primarily a soil nematode, it has also been isolated from freshwater habitats   <cit> . given that its natural habitat is the interstitial space between particles filled with water, the exposure to contaminants is similar in soils and sediments, thus making c. elegans a suitable test organism for toxicity tests for both habitats. in the laboratory, the use of c. elegans has been validated for single compounds, such as steroid hormones, pcb <dig>  cd, dehp, as well as natural mixtures, such as humic substances  <cit> . however, due to differences in experimental setups, e.g. the use of mixed populations vs. synchronized cultures or varying exposure times, the systematic and sound comparison between experiments is challenging and highlights, if anything, the need to streamline ecotoxicogenomic experiments. of course, the use of c. elegans in sediment toxicity is not a new concept introduced by us, but supported by numerous publications in classical sediment toxicity testing  <cit> , which have been instrumental for the implementation of the first standardized sediments toxicity test .

the chemical analyses and three bioassays  showed a clear pollution and toxicity gradient, with elbe sediment being the most polluted characterized by elevated organic and heavy metal contamination. the yes test and comet assay identified the estrogenic and genotoxic potential of the elbe sediment to be well above that of the rhine and danube sediment, respectively.

a laboratory media control  was initially included, but deemed too artificial as subsequent pca analysis identified the laboratory control exposures to cluster distinctly separate from the sediment exposures  which masked the differences between the three sediments and thus diminished the robustness of go and kegg analyses and biologically meaningful data interpretation . sediments from the three geographically separated rivers are of course heterogeneous with distinct physico-chemical properties which may modulate effects  of chemical contamination, a notion that may apply to any control sediment as well . it could therefore be argued that observed effects may be a combination of chemical contamination and physio-chemical properties of sediments from different rivers. nevertheless, for reasons of ecological relevance, and justified by the low chemical burden as well as the results from the bioassays, we selected the danube sediment as reference for the dna microarray study.

of course, true dna damaging or estrogen responsive effects of sediments are best assessed exploiting one of the many budding in vivo techniques, including pcr based approaches to detect dna damage in c. elegans  <cit>  or to assess changes of estrogen responsive genes in c. elegans, such as vit- <dig> or vit- <dig>  <cit> . however, the focus of this work was not to determine the definitive toxic status of the river sediments, but to observe, in a proof of principle experiment, if changes in global gene expression patterns can be used to study  the responses of exposure to complex sediments. nematodes, as any other organism, exposed to contaminated environments will modulate their metabolic resources and available energy to combat the environmental insult  <cit> . in line with this, we found that c. elegans exposed to elbe or rhine sediments down-regulated higher-ranking go categories which include catalytic activities, binding and metabolic processes. an analogous strategy of c. elegans was observed by dna microarray studies following single compound exposures to pcb <dig>  <cit>  and cd  <cit> . interestingly, exposure to both sediments resulted in a down-regulation of several members of the starch and sucrose metabolism pathway, including the trehalase encoding genes tre- <dig> and tre- <dig>  the disaccharide trehalose is an invertebrate sugar transport and storage material  <cit>  that is present in c. elegans at all life stages. the highest concentrations of trehalose  are found in eggs and dauer larvae, two diapausing stages that are highly resistant to environmental stressors  <cit> , it is proposed to function as energy reserve and stress protectant  <cit> . in contrast, the gene expression of α-amylase, whose yeast and human orthologs help to facilitate the breakdown of glycogen  <cit> , was found to have strongly increased. although the cd level of the elbe sediment was found to be 5-fold higher than the rhine sample, the sediment data presented here is remarkably divergent to the global gene expression pattern observed in laboratory exposures to cadmium  <cit> . this underlines how single compound exposures, though valuable in their own right, cannot model conditions of true environmental complexity. observed effects are a sum of effects of chemical contamination and their bioavailability as well as further biotic and abiotic properties of sediments which may mask typical single compound transcript profiles. indeed, the comparison of several gene lists resulted in only one obvious match, namely with pcb <dig> responsive genes, including two dna damage checkpoint protein encoding genes , which were found up-regulated in the elbe derived sample, where the sediment was characterized by the highest measured genotoxicity and a high level amount of various pops including different pcb compounds. in this context it is notable that the pathway involved in metabolism of xenobiotics by cytochrome p <dig> was induced in those nematodes exposed to the elbe sediment, whereas the rhine sediment failed to induce this pathway.

besides well defined and annotated kegg pathways, the elbe sediment exposure resulted in the differential regulation of several related biological processes , including development , aging  and a pool of  <dig> go terms associated with reproduction. detailed analysis of the latter go terms will provide a detailed mechanistic and physiological/toxicological understanding of sediment toxicity and allow the linking of gene expression to higher level effects such as the observed reduction in brood size. almost all members belonging to these categories are characterized by an abnormal developmental and/or aging phenotype , when silenced by rnai. given the significant estrogenicity of the elbe sediment sample, as defined by the yes test, it is conceivable that at least some of the observed responses are due to this specific class of pollutants. similarly, exposure to the elbe sediment was shown to increase the aging process. this process is the determination of adult life span and provides a well-defined data record. first, genes deemed to be essential for embryogenesis and normal growth   <cit>  or associated with an increased life-span   <cit>  were up-regulated. second, the loss of daf- <dig> and nhx- <dig>  found to be down-regulated, are known to promote a long life as well  <cit> . likewise, a gain of function of wrn- <dig>  <cit> , found to be up-regulated in this experiment, has been shown to shortened life span. this pattern of regulation, and the results concerning starch and sucrose metabolism pathway, discussed above, are expected to increase nematode's life span and induce the dauer stadium, well known as a survival pathway to overcome unfavorable environmental conditions.

CONCLUSIONS
in summary, our results give a first insight into how microarrays can be used to evaluate differences in gene expression levels in c. elegans exposed to differently polluted river sediments. the chemical burden and toxicity of elbe sediment sample were found to coincide with a substantially higher number of differentially regulated gene classes constituting the go category of biological processes as well as several kegg pathways. however, it has to be noted that river sediments are highly complex and vary in abiotic and biotic properties, thus significantly contributing to the modulation of baseline expression profiles. ecotoxicogenomics should not aim to replace conventional aquatic monitoring techniques, but acts as a supplementary biochemical assay to unravel unknown mode of action pathways. the caveat of the pilot experiment, as disseminated here, is the limited sample number. further replicates that go beyond the sampling strategy defined by din  <dig> are needed to be able to fully comprehend the toxicity and associated effects of samples used in this study. also, large databases comprising numerous expression profiles of individual, pure chemicals, simple mixtures, pore water extracts and in particular further polluted and unpolluted control samples with replicated sampling from the same site are called for, a notion that goes beyond the scope of this pilot study. nevertheless, this contribution provides tantalizing insights of the potential of microarrays in "real word" ecotoxicogenomics.

