BACKGROUND
autophagy is a self-degradative, highly regulated process that involves the non-specific degradation of cytoplasmic macromolecules and organelles via the lysosomal system. there are three different autophagic pathways based on the mechanisms for delivery of cargo to lysosomes: macroautophagy, microautophagy and chaperone-mediated autophagy   <cit> . macroautophagy  is the major lysosomal pathway for the turnover of cytoplasmic components. specifically, this process consists of the following steps: induction or initiation and cargo selection, vesicle nucleation and expansion, lysosome targeting, lysosome docking and autophagosome-lysosome fusion, vesicle breakdown and recycling. during nucleation, the activity of specific autophagy effectors including beclin- <dig>  and lc <dig>  generates an active phagophore   <cit> . the nascent membrane wraps around a portion of cytoplasm  to eventually form a double membrane-bounded structure called “autophagosome”. the nascent autophagosome subsequently fuse with lysosomes to form an autophagolysosome in which the cytoplasmic cargo is degraded by lysosome hydrolases; degradation products are recycled for the synthesis of new molecules  <cit> . emerging evidence indicates that autophagy protects cells by removing long-lived proteins, aggregated protein complexes, and excess or damaged organelles  <cit> . defects in autophagy, therefore, are associated to various pathological conditions within organisms, including tumorigenesis, defects in developmental programs and the build-up of toxic, protein aggregates involved in neurodegeneration  <cit>  such as amyloid precursor protein . it has been recently suggested that the progressive age-related decline of autophagic and lysosomal activity may also be responsible for the continuous intraneuronal accumulation of lipofuscin, or “age pigment”  <cit> . for this study, we aimed to investigate the expression of autophagic markers such as beclin  <dig> and lc <dig> and the accumulation of pathologic proteins such as app and lipofuscin in aged bovine brains.

RESULTS
histopathology
in aged bovine, microscopic evaluation revealed a moderate to severe gliosis and an increase of the number of glial cells around neurons  in the gray matter. moreover, we observed scattered, strongly eosinophilic and shrunken neurons with nuclear pyknosis of a centrally placed nucleus. this findings were not observed in young animals. the striking and constant finding in all aged brains  was the accumulation of small perinuclear and granular yellow-brown, periodic acid – schiff  stain positive  and autofluorescent deposits  consisting of lipofuscin. the amount of lipofuscin was moderate to severe, with a wide distribution in both cerebral cortex and hippocampus regions. lipofuscin accumulation was found within the perikarya and sometimes the proximal dendritic tree of neurons and within the cytoplasm of astrocytes. no evidence of lipofuscin accumulation was observed in the neurons of young animals .lipofuscin accumulation was significantly more noticeable among the older animals  . there was a statistically significant positive association between age and increase in severity of lipofuscin accumulation  and this relation was strong .fig.  <dig> 
a lipofuscin storage, hippocampus, dentate gyrus. pyramidal neurons showing an abundant granular, pas positive, intracytoplasmatic storage material. periodic acid-schiff  stain, 40x. b intraneuronal storage material exhibits green-yellow autofluorescence by fluorescence microscopy. fluorescence microscope; fitc filter , 40x. c neurons of young controls does not exhibit pas positive and intracytoplasmatic storage material. periodic acid-schiff  stain, 40x




immunofluorescence
in all samples, autophagy induction was evaluated by beclin- <dig> immunofluorescence and showed a progressive age-related decrease of intraneuronal beclin- <dig> expression. in young animals , the percentage of beclin- <dig> immuno-positive neurons and astrocytes as well as beclin- <dig> staining intensity was of mild degree and widespread. beclin- <dig> staining intensity as well as percentage of beclin- <dig> immuno-positive cells were significantly more noticeable among the young animals . on the contrary, in 76%  of samples from aged cows  no beclin- <dig> positivity was detected . in remaining 24% of cases percentage of beclin- <dig> immuno-positive cells as well as beclin- <dig> staining intensity was of mild degree. a beclin- <dig> positivity was mainly observed in neurons in the hippocampus. there was a statistically significant negative association between age and increase of percentage of beclin- <dig> immunoreactive cells  and this relation was strong . there was also a statistically significant negative association between age and increase of staining intensity of beclin- <dig> immunoreactivity  and this relation was strong .fig.  <dig> beclin  <dig> expression, hippocampus, dentate gyrus. a immunostaining inyoung and b aged brain. tritc filter . dapi counterstain, 40x. c protein expression in young and aged bovine brains. densitometric values shows that becn <dig> is expressed in higher amount in young controls when compared to aged brain samples . bars refers to mean values. actin protein levels confirm the amount of protein loading in each lane




moreover, strongly lc <dig> immuno-positive neurons and astrocytes were observed in aged animals , indicating possibly an excessive accumulation of autophagosomes. in younger animals, lc <dig> staining intensity was mostly absent , even though a low percentage of lc <dig> widespread immune-positive neurons was rarely observed. these parameters were significantly more noticeable among the aged animals . there was a statistically significant positive association between age and increase of these parameters  and this relation was moderate .fig.  <dig> lc <dig> expression, hippocampus, dentate gyrus. a immunostaining in young and b aged brain. immunoreaction for lc <dig> was detected also in astrocytes .tritc filter . dapi counterstain, 40x. c protein expression in young and aged bovine brains. densitometric values shows that lc3-ii/lc3-i ratio is significantly increased in the aged animals compared to the young controls . bars refers to mean values. actin protein levels confirm the amount of protein loading in each lane




amyloid precursor protein  positive immunoreaction was detected within the cytoplasm of neurons and astrocytes in the hippocampus and cerebral frontal cortex of all the aged animals  , but never in young animals . there was high degree of staining intensity of app in all the cases of aged animals. percentage of app immuno-positive cells as well as their staining intensity were significantly more noticeable among the older animals . there was a statistically significant positive association between age and increase in severity of app positive immunoreaction  and this relation was moderate .fig.  <dig> app expression, hippocampus, dentate gyrus. a immunostaining in young and b aged brain. tritc filter . dapi counterstain, 40x. c protein expression in young and aged bovine brains. densitometric values shows that app is expressed in higher amount in aged brains when compared to young controls . bars refers to mean values. actin protein levels confirm the amount of protein loading in each lane




western blot analysis
we evaluated the expression levels of app, beclin- <dig>  and lc <dig> in elder cows showing immunohistochemical positivity for app , beclin- <dig> and two isoforms of lc <dig>  mainly to confirm the dysregulation of autophagy in brain from elder cows compared to young animals. our results, normalized for actin, showed that beclin- <dig>  was significantly reduced in the aged animals compared with the young animals   and an increased lc3-ii/lc3-i ratio  . moreover, a significant increase in the oldest animals compared to young animals   for app was detected with a band approximatively to 100 kda as previously described  <cit> .

discussion
microscopic findings in the brains of our aged bovine are similar to those previously described in old animals of other species as well as in cattle . satellitosis is generally the result of an altered cellular homeostasis leading to neuronal damage and depletion  <cit> . specifically, satellitosis represents a response to primary neuronal degeneration that increases in aged animals and often portends to the imminent progression to neuronophagia, a process whereby the degenerated fragments of a necrotic neuron are removed piecemeal by macrophages  <cit> .

in this study, the age-dependent intraneuronal accumulation of lipofuscin is one of the most striking features of aged brains. this finding is not actually new, as it has been described for more than 150 years  <cit> . in the past, lipofuscin was generally thought to be an innocent end product of oxidation which has no significant influence on cellular activities  <cit> , but in the last decade several authors have investigated about the possible detrimental and pathogenic potential of this material.

turman and banks, in a series of elegant experiments  <cit> , hypothesized the so-called “mitochondrial–lysosomal axis theory of aging” that tries to explain the possible relationship between lipofuscin accumulation, decreased autophagy, increased reactive oxygen species  production, and mitochondrial damage in senescent long-lived postmitotic cells. according to this theory, in senescent cells lysosomal enzymes are directed towards the plentiful lipofuscin-rich lysosomes and, subsequently, they are lost for effective autophagic degradation because lipofuscin remains non-degradable. the consequences are a progressive impairment of autophagy and the gradual accumulation of damaged mitochondria, other organelles and misfolded proteins that lead to neurodegeneration.

unfortunately, our results cannot support a direct association between lipofuscin accumulation and autophagy impairment in aged bovine brains. according to recent scientific literature, we can only hypothesize that progressive and severe lipofuscin accumulation may irreversibly lead to functional decline and death of neurons by diminishing lysosomal degradative capacity and by preventing lysosomal enzymes from targeting to functional autophagosomes. cytotoxic activity of lipofuscin consists also in its ability to catalyze the fenton reaction: in presence of fe2+, h2o <dig> is decomposed forming hydroxyl radicals   <cit> . in vitro, this material is able to generate the formation of free radicals and initiates apoptotic cell death  <cit> . however, the contribution of lipofuscin in the initiation of apoptotic cell death in vivo is still poorly understood.

further studies are indeed necessary to better understand how lipofuscin accumulation can influence the neuronal autophagic and apoptotic pathways in bovine brains. it would be interesting to perform double-staining techniquesin order to show whether lipofuscin is directly related to autophagic and apoptosis markersand/or to pathologic proteins deposition. unfortunately, to our knowledge, a specific antibody for lipofuscin is not available since this complex substance is mainly composed of cross-linked protein and lipid residues. alternatively, combined histochemical and immunohistochemical staining protocols can be performed to simultaneously localize lipofuscin and the antigen of interest  <cit> . however, since lipofuscin progressively accumulates throughout the life of neurons, this combined immunohistochemical/histochemical protocol is not perfectly indicated to investigate the mechanism and relative timing of intraneuronal lipofuscin accumulation and the deposition of other proteins. primary cultured neuronal cells exhibit, in vitro, a variety of features that are frequently observed in physiologically aged neurons in vivo, including lipofuscin accumulation  <cit> . thus, long-term aging culture of primary cultured neurons would be a remarkable model to unravel, at least in part, the molecular mechanisms behind lipofuscin accumulation and its pathological effects on neuronal cells.

despite its important limitations, to our knowledge this is the first study that describe the expression of autophagy markers in aged bovine brains. our results suggest that in aged cow autophagy is significantly impaired if compared to young animals and they confirm that intraneuronal app deposition increases with age. beclin- <dig> and lc <dig> play a pivotal role in the autophagy process and their expression by immunoblotting, immunohistochemistry or immunofluorescence has become a reliable method for monitoring autophagy and autophagy-related processes  <cit> . beclin- <dig> is a positive regulator of the autophagy pathway and promotes its induction whereas lc <dig> facilitates autophagosome elongation and closure  <cit> . during autophagic activity, the cytosolic form of lc <dig>  is conjugated to phosphatidylethanolamine to form lc3-phosphatidylethanolamine conjugate , which localizes to both the outside and the inside membranes of autophagosomes  <cit> . autophagosomes fuse with lysosomes to form autolysosomes and intra-autophagosomal components as well as lc3-ii are degraded by lysosomal hydrolases. results from immunofluorescence and western blot analysis showed a progressive age-related decrease of intraneuronal beclin- <dig> expression that most likely indicate a decrease in autophagy initiation. the increase of lc <dig> antibody expression detected by immunofluorescence may indicate an excessive accumulation of autophagosomes. interestingly, western blot analysis showed an increased lc3-ii expression that most likely indicate an impaired autophagosomal degradation resulting in the persistence of autophagic vacuoles that could interfere with intracellular trafficking promoting the presence of cytotoxic products  <cit> .

recently, vallino costassa et al.  <cit>  characterized the nature of amyloid β  deposits in aged bovine brains pointing out that they are similar to those in humans in early stages of aging. consistent with these findings, we observed an age-dependent, intraneuronal accumulation of app immuno-positive material. furthermore, western blot analysis showed an increased level of app in aged animal compared to young animals. several authors suggested that autophagy dysregulation may alter app metabolism and fail to clear aggregated aβ via autophagy - lysosome system promoting the accumulation of misfolded proteins and subsequent neurodegeneration.  <cit> . moreover, we recently observed accumulation of app in the sarcoplasm of some of the aged cows used for this study  <cit> . the accumulation within abnormal muscle fibers of several pathologic and alzheimer-related proteins such as beta-amyloid precursor protein , phosphorylated tau, alpha-1-antichymotrypsin, apolipoprotein e and presenilin- <dig> is an unusual feature of sporadic inclusion-body myositis   <cit> . we can speculate that same pathophysiological mechanism leading to the accumulation of app can occur in the brain as well as in the muscle of old cows.

however, molecular mechanisms underlying the progressive accumulation of toxic proteins during aging remain still elusive and unclear. in healthy individuals, app is transcribed in the endoplasmic reticulum, modified by golgi network and then shuttled to the cell surface through the secretory pathway  <cit> . app can then either be degraded through the autophagy-lysosome system, or recycled by endosomes entering the cycle again  <cit> . an interesting study of pickford et al. contributed to clarify the association between autophagy impairment and neurodegeneration providing evidence that an essential component of the autophagy pathway, such as beclin- <dig>  is reduced in early alzheimer disease promoting amyloid β accumulation in mice  <cit> . induction of autophagy and autophagosomal degradation seem to be impaired in beclin- <dig> deficient cells. as a consequence, app containing vesicles  build up inside the cell. app is increasingly cleaved by secretases generating aβ that is possibly released from the cell  <cit> . furthermore, the progressive accumulation of autophagosomes due to an impairment of autophagosomal degradation can serve as sites of aβ generation, promoting the inhibition of app turnover and degradation  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
nowadays, it’s a firm belief that impairment and dysregulation of autophagy pathways is related to many neurological diseases both in humans and animals. to our knowledge, this is the first report concerning about the expression of autophagy markers beclin  <dig> and lc <dig> in aged bovine brains. our data show that autophagy is impaired in aged bovine brains and that intraneuronal accumulation of app increases with age. future studies, however, will allow to further understand the cellular and molecular events regulating the autophagy machinery.

