BACKGROUND
the ability to genetically differentiate among microbial strains facilitates tracing the origins and spread of bacterial pathogens, including mycobacterium tuberculosis , the causative agent of tuberculosis . various methods for genetically typing clinical strains of mtb have been developed  <cit> . this includes typing strains through copy number variation  in mycobacterial interspersed repetitive units , which are minisatellite loci in the mtb genome  <cit> . this approach, termed miru-vntr  typing, distinguishes genetically divergent strains rapidly and with relatively high accuracy  <cit> . as a result, miru analysis has been employed in a wide array of epidemiological studies  <cit> , where an identical miru profile between isolates is interpreted as a recent transmission event  <cit> . this is based on the assumption that over short periods of time, a change in miru copy number is unlikely. therefore, accurate estimation of the miru mutation rate is essential to infer the relationship between transmitted strains based on typing profile. the limits of this approach are highlighted by a recent study of a tb outbreak in british columbia, where miru typing identified a single clonal outbreak, yet higher resolution wgs established two separate, simultaneous outbreaks  <cit> .

approximating the rate of miru cnv based on the profiles of clinical strains has proven to be a challenge. the approaches taken by various groups to estimate a rate have relied primarily on modeling of epidemiological data and meta-analyses  <cit> . the discrepancies in methodology, loci analyzed, and underlying assumptions between different studies have resulted in estimates ranging over two orders of magnitude. for example, grant et al.  analyzed copy number changes between mtb lineages and used previous research estimating the time of the most recent common ancestor between lineages to estimate a miru mutation rate, yielding a per locus, per year rate of  <dig>  × 10- <dig>  reyes and tanaka  used an infinite alleles model to define a relative rate and then benchmarked this rate against estimates of the is <dig> mutation rate to infer a miru mutation rate . more recently, aandahl et al.  developed a stepwise mutation model for miru evolution and utilized bayesian statistics to estimate the miru mutation rate of previously gathered epidemiological data , supporting the estimates provided by reyes and tanaka .

here, we seek to experimentally determine a mutation rate by assessing cnv in mtb strains isolated from cynomolgus macaques  <cit> , an animal model of mtb infection that closely recapitulates the course of human disease  <cit> . the genomes from mtb isolated from infected macaques were previously sequenced using the illumina platform  <cit> . while protocols on detecting single nucleotide polymorphisms  and small insertion/deletions  using illumina sequencing data are well established, it is less clear how to best determine the copy number in minisatellite loci. as wgs becomes increasingly common in epidemiological studies, the ability to establish miru copy number from sequencing data becomes important for the analysis of new wgs data in the context of previously existing typing data.

the length of illumina reads fails to span the majority of miru repeats in a locus, which range from one to five or more repeats of 40– <dig> basepairs each in mtb. thus, short read sequencing cannot capture unique sequence and define copy number. recently, researchers have utilized read depth , a measure of the density of sequencing reads at each nucleotide in the genome, in order to identify cnv  <cit> . this approach relies on the observation that the absolute number of sequencing reads mapped to a reference genome is proportional to the copy number of a particular strain  <cit> . however, this approach has been primarily utilized to identify large  variants in human tandem repeats, and rd has not been successfully applied to assess smaller minisatellite variation in microbes. similarly, attempts to identify structural variation, including cnv, using mate pair distance have been previously employed in human genome studies  <cit> . this approach, termed paired-end mapping , utilizes the likely distance between paired reads from illumina sequencing to identify structural variants. when mapping back to a reference genome, if the distance between paired reads is discordant from the expected value, it is suggestive of cnv relative to the reference genome. pem has been successfully employed to identify large insertions or deletions. however, bacterial minisatellite cnv produces only small discordances relative to the reference genome which fall within the expected distribution of mate pair distance, making such events difficult to detect.

in this study, we sought to define a wgs methodology useful for identifying miru cnv by mapping sequencing reads to a single copy-number reference genome. we validated the wgs analyses by resequencing all miru loci via sanger sequencing, which allowed us to assess the accuracy of using rd and pem approaches to identify minisatellite variations. we then used our wgs and sanger resequencing data to estimate a miru mutation rate during the course of infection. this rate will help guide the analysis of epidemiological data and provide a preliminary understanding of site-specific mutability in mtb.

RESULTS
identifying miru cnv’s using wgs
we analyzed wgs data from  <dig> sequenced strains  <cit>  for cnv at  <dig> of the  <dig> miru loci currently standardized for strain typing  <cit> . the remaining two loci showed poor read density and were excluded from this portion of the analysis. we utilized rd and pem, both of which have been shown to correlate with copy number, to identify miru cnv. we hypothesized that any strain containing a miru insertion would exhibit an increase in rd and a decrease in mate pair distance relative to the input strain, while a deletion would exhibit decreased rd and increased mate pair distance  <cit> . however, either method is complicated by the inherent limitations of mapping short reads.

illumina reads corresponding to miru regions often cannot be mapped unambiguously. this poses a challenge to identifying miru cnv, as it may reduce or alter signal at these loci. different sequence alignment software packages have attempted to circumvent the challenge of assigning reads that map to multiple sites   <cit> . algorithms may discard multi-reads, place all of them at one potential mapping site, or randomly distribute them to multiple mapping sites . we reasoned that directing multi-reads to a single repeat unit in the reference genome would result in more discrete and predictable mapping. therefore, we sought to reduce ambiguity in mapping repetitive elements by constructing a reference mtb h37rv genome with only a single miru copy at each locus. this approach resulted in  <dig> loci with a single miru copy and  <dig> loci with two unique miru copies, which we subsequently treated as independent miru loci  for mapping purposes . as expected, comparing the average mate pair distance for reads mapped to the h37rv genome and the single copy-number genome reveals a significant difference in mapping at the miru site . mapping differences were restricted to reads at the miru, as the average mate pair distance of reads flanking the miru region  is not significantly different when comparing the two reference genomes.

loci containing asterisks  were only analyzed using sanger sequencing. bolded strains  were confirmed insertion and deletion events, respectively, via sanger resequencing. discrete copy numbers for each strain were determined by sanger sequencing. previous strain notation is used  <cit> .

mean mate pair distance values were calculated for each strain at miru locus  <dig>  values were gathered for the miru coordinates as well as the surrounding  region.

after mapping to a single copy-number genome, rd and mate pair distance for each strain were mean normalized at each miru locus  in our  <dig> strain panel. we classified strains which varied two standard deviations  from the mean value for over 60% of a miru site as putative variants. to ensure this effect was limited to the miru locus, we assessed whether these strains also varied over two sd for more than 20% of the  <dig> basepair window surrounding the miru. using these requirements, seven putative miru variants were identified, three by rd, three by pem, and one by both approaches .

in order to assess the validity of the rd and pem approaches we used sanger sequencing to quantify the number of miru repeats at each of the  <dig> standard miru loci described previously  <cit> . to improve our estimate of the miru mutation rate, we assessed copy number in  <dig> additional strains isolated from cynomolgus macaques that were experimentally infected with the mtb strain erdman. all  <dig> strains were assessed at the 24-miru loci previously described. from the  <dig> loci sequenced, two of the four putative indels identified by pem were confirmed, and no new variants were discovered . locus  <dig> in strain h- <dig> increased from three to four repeats and was identified by both rd and pem, and locus  <dig> in strain g- <dig> decreased from two to one copy and was identified solely by pem.

with the number of repeats at each locus defined by sanger sequencing, we determined the relationship between miru copy number and rd and pem . our results indicate a strong inverse correlation  between miru copy number and mean normalized mate pair distance. additionally, we find a positive correlation between mean normalized rd and miru copy number, though the correlation is weaker . this is likely a reflection of the variance in read depth across the genome and between strains. this data suggests that pem more closely correlates with miru copy number, consistent with more accurate detection of indels using pem.

estimation of the miru mutation rate during the course of disease
we have estimated the per locus, per year, mutation rate by assessing miru cnv during the course of infection. the mutation rate, μmiru, was calculated based on the number of miru indels identified by sanger sequencing and the length of infection for each macaque, allowing us to estimate a per locus, per unit time rate. the rate was estimated by dividing the total observed cnvs by the total length of infection for each macaque, t, the cumulative number of sequenced isolates per macaque, g, and the cumulate number of miru loci sequenced, l . the miru mutation rate of our in vivo isolates was found to be  <dig>  × 10- <dig> per locus, per year . our rate is most similar to the highest previous estimates derived from epidemiologic data, though the confidence interval overlaps with other estimates .

*grant, et al.  <dig> rate was converted from a per generation to a per year mutation rate.

discussion
here we have utilized both conventional and next-generation sequencing approaches to define the number of copy variants at miru loci that arose during the course of macaque infection. approaches to detect miru cnv by illumina sequencing are increasingly important given the expanding use of wgs in molecular epidemiology. however, mapping ambiguities due to the repetitive nature of miru loci complicate copy number assessment by wgs. in this work, we sought to reduce mapping ambiguity and identify cnv in mtb by mapping to a single copy-number genome. sequencing technologies have advanced since the sequencing of these strains, and longer reads with less coverage variability may improve specificity in future work  <cit> . additionally, it is thought that variability in both rd and pem arises from local disparities in gc content  <cit> . future work may exploit advances in correcting for gc bias  <cit> , in combination with the approaches described here, to more reliably detect miru cnv from wgs data.

with the miru cnv identified in strains isolated from cynomolgus macaques, we have estimated the mutation rate at miru loci. our in vivo miru mutation rate,  <dig>  × 10- <dig> per locus, per year, is most consistent with the highest published estimates. variability in these estimates may be partially driven by differences in miru loci analyzed, the epidemiology of the strains used, and differences in the assumptions of the models used to estimate a rate. the resulting differences in rate estimates have motivated extensive debate in the literature  <cit> . our estimate is derived from an alternative, experimental approach, relying on the cynomolgus macaque model of tb infection to assess the mutation rate of the  <dig> loci standard used in miru typing. though our analysis is somewhat limited by a relatively small signal, strikingly, our estimate closely aligns with previous rates.

what are the biologic consequences of a high mutation rate at miru loci? interestingly, most mirus are located in intergenic regions and are hypothesized to be transcribed as part of a polycistronic operon. several miru elements are located within the coding region of well-described two-component regulatory systems as well as genes essential for virulence and host adaptation  <cit> . it is interesting to hypothesize that rapid genetic variation at these miru loci may have effects on the transcription of the regulon, thus generating population diversity. some evidence exists that cnv variation at miru loci may result in transcriptional changes of the downstream gene within a miru locus  <cit> , though further characterization is required to establish the biologic relevance of these loci and the role of variation in miru elements.

repeat variation is a well-established means of generating locus specific mutation in other microbial genomes  <cit> . the rate established here is comparable to tandem repeat variation rates in other organisms. for example, in bacillus anthracis the estimated mutation rate of tandem repeat loci is reported to be roughly 10- <dig> to 10- <dig> per generation  <cit> , while in pathogenic e. coli o157:h <dig>  the rate is reported to be roughly  <dig>  × 10- <dig> per generation  <cit> . the miru per generation mutation rate is between  <dig>  × 10- <dig> and  <dig>  × 10- <dig>  using the lower  and upper  estimates of generation times previously described  <cit> . it is important to note the loci analyzed in this study were selected from the larger set of miru loci for their relative stability, making them ideal for typing. the rate of variation in the remaining loci may vary from the rate reported here, especially in loci previously identified as hypermutable  <cit> . while further work is needed to determine the biological consequences of miru variation, we have shown that there is potential for detecting miru variants by wgs and that the rate uncovered from macaque infection is consistent with the highest previous estimates.

CONCLUSIONS
cnv in typing markers is an essential tool to differentiate and classify clinical strains, and quantitation of marker variation allows for enhanced interpretation of epidemiological data. in this study, we have used the macaque model of mtb infection to estimate the miru mutation rate during the course of disease, and we have explored the use of wgs to assess miru copy number. subsequent sanger resequencing confirmed two of the four miru indels identified by pem to a reduced copy genome, and from this we have estimated a per locus, per year mutation rate of  <dig>  × 10- <dig>  this value agrees with the higher published estimations of miru mutation rates. further assessment of rd and pem as indicators for copy number may streamline minisatellite detection via wgs.

