BACKGROUND
rna interference  provides a powerful tool for silencing gene expression. large-scale phenotypic or pathway-driven screens of sirna libraries may help to identify novel genes that may be targets for therapy in cancer and other diseases. two different methods have been used to construct genome-wide sirna libraries. one is to chemically synthesize oligonucleotides based on sirna design algorithms . typically, the oligonucleotides are synthesized in the form of double-stranded dna molecules containing short hairpin rna  templates and are cloned into a pol iii-driven expression vector. libraries constructed with this method and targeting more than  <dig>  different human genes have been successfully used for screening  <cit> . the other method is to convert collections of cdnas into shrna templates. three groups have developed protocols to produce genome-wide shrna libraries  <cit> . these protocols share several common features, and all "measure" the appropriate length of the hairpin using the type iis restriction endonuclease mmei, which cuts 20/ <dig> nt from its recognition site. the common steps, with minor variations, include  generating random cdna fragments;  ligating the cdna fragments with a double-stranded oligonucleotide that contains an mmei site;  restriction digestion with mmei;  ligating a second oligonucleotide to the digested cdna fragments to form a double-stranded dna with a hairpin structure;  using a dna polymerase with strong strand-displacement activity to convert the hairpin dna into double-stranded dna; and  cloning the double-stranded dna into an expression vector.

the chemical synthesis method is a very expensive and time-consuming approach that requires synthesis of thousands of oligonucleotides, followed by cloning and sequence validation. construction of shrna libraries from cdnas provides an economical alternative. however, the multiple-step process in the current protocols makes the overall efficiency low and thus requires a large amount of starting mrna. to increase the efficiency of library construction, we have developed an improved method, which includes newly designed oligonucleotides and a key pcr step to amplify and convert the hairpin structures in the abovementioned step  <dig> into double-stranded dnas. the pcr amplification of the hairpin structures greatly increases the overall efficiency of the procedure and allows libraries to be constructed from small amounts mrna.

RESULTS
the "yiu" procedure
fig.  <dig> outlines our method for converting double-stranded cdna into a pool of double-stranded dna comprising a large and diverse population of 19-bp inverted repeats. the process contains three major steps:

 generation of cdna hairpins with noncomplementary ends. in previous reports  <cit> , the first oligonucleotide used either had a cg overhang or was blunt-ended, allowing self-ligation. to avoid this problem, the "y" oligonucleotide was designed with a single 3'-t overhang , and thus cannot self-ligate . additional features of the y oligonucleotide include  an embedded mmei site,  long noncomplementary arms designed for anchoring pcr primers with high melting temperatures , and  a single basepair mismatch within the 18-bp stem region, resulting in the aflii site and mlyi site each being present on only one arm of the double-stranded pcr products, allowing the products to be directionally cloned. the unusual shape of the y oligonucleotide causes abnormal mobility on page gels . double-stranded cdna fragments  were generated either by restriction enzyme digestion or by partial dnase i digestion and repair with t <dig> polymerase. they were then treated with taq dna polymerase to add a single a at the 3' end  <cit> ; this untemplated addition is reported to occur with an average efficiency of around 70%  <cit> . this treatment prevents self-ligation of cdna fragments but allows them to ligate to the y oligonucleotide. excess "y" oligonucleotide was added to increase ligation efficiency.

the ligated "yi" molecule was digested with the restriction endonuclease mmei, a type iis restriction endonuclease that cuts  <dig> and  <dig> nt away from its recognition site, yielding a 2-nt 3' overhang. a hairpin loop oligonucleotide  with a random 2-nt 3' extension was ligated to the ends generated by mmei . the final product  contains a 10-nt loop. in "yiu" molecules, the cdna insert is  <dig> bp in size. although the u molecules can ligate to themselves , the u dimers cannot be amplified by pcr.

because the expected product and several intermediates migrate anomalously on page gels, the "yiu" ligation product was identified by excising individual dna bands from a page gel and pcr-amplifying extracted dna. one band , presumably containing the yiu products, gave the maximum yield of the expected 160-bp pcr product . alternatively, the entire ligation mix can be used without purification as a template to amplify the 160-bp product . thus, it is not necessary to gel-purify the yiu ligation product before pcr.

 pcr amplification of "yiu". regular dna hairpins  cannot be efficiently pcr-amplified because after the denaturation step, hairpins rapidly re-form upon cooling, precluding primer annealing  <cit> . however, a dna hairpin with noncomplementary arms, such as yiu molecules, can be efficiently pcr-amplified  <cit> . primers corresponding to the two noncomplementary arms were designed with high melting temperatures, allowing the annealing and extension temperature during pcr cycling to be set at 75°c to destabilize intramolecular hairpins. vent dna polymerase was used because of its high fidelity and its strand-displacement activity when at high temperature. although hairpins presumably form before primer annealing, vent polymerase can open them by strand displacement .

in late cycles of pcr amplification, after the denaturation step, product reannealing competes with primer annealing. in the case of yiu amplification, after denaturation, the single-stranded products will form an intramolecular hairpin. annealing of two hairpin-containing molecules with complementary arms yields an "x"-shaped  product that contains a holliday junction. because in a complex library the two strands comprising the x almost always will contain different 19-bp inverted repeats, spontaneous branch migration within the "x" molecules cannot resolve the holliday junction to generate linear molecules . at late pcr cycles, the amplified products consist of a mixture of linear double-stranded dna duplexes that migrate at the expected 160-bp position and these aberrant structures, which migrate at the 200– <dig> bp position in agarose gels  and form a smear in page gels . to convert the x molecules to linear double-stranded dna, fresh pcr reaction mix  was added to the pcr product tube, and an additional pcr cycle was performed to synthesize the complementary strand for each strand of the x molecule . to minimize generation of the x molecules, the optimal pcr cycle number was determined by running four pcr reactions with different cycle numbers. the pcr products were analyzed on agarose gel. with the starting materials used in our experiments, the optimal number of pcr cycles is usually between 16– <dig>  this cycle number was used in scaling up the reactions.

 cloning. the pcr product of yiu was directly digested with mlyi and aflii in the pcr buffer and separated by page . the  <dig> bp product band was excised from gel, purified and directionally cloned into the pksu <dig> expression vector.

effect of modifications of the u <dig> promoter and hairpin loop on rnai
the shrna expression vector pksu <dig> contains a modified human u <dig> promoter region into which an aflii site was introduced for ease of cloning . to test whether our modifications alter the effectiveness of the resulting shrnas, a small shrna library was made from egfp using dnase i partial digestion and the yiu procedure. twenty random clones were tested for shrna efficiency on 3t <dig> cells when cotransfected individually with the pegfp plasmid and a control plasmid, pdsred <dig>  expressing red fluorescent protein . the fluorescence was examined  <dig> h after transfection. one construct showing strong suppression by fluorescence microscopy  was further analyzed by flow cytometry; in these experiments, gfp was driven by the ltr promoter of a retroviral vector, pmig . fig. 3b shows that this shrna construct could effectively suppress gfp expression at a 3: <dig> molar ratio; suppression was an average of 96% in four individual assays. therefore, the modifications appear to adversely affect neither transcription from the u <dig> promoter nor subsequent shrna processing.

to confirm that our modifications do not interfere with transcription or processing, we prepared three constructs targeting the same sequence in the luciferase gene , which is known to be an effective target  <cit> . the "classic" construct uses a u <dig> promoter, differing minimally from the u6+ <dig> construct of paul et al.  <cit> , and the loop ttcaagaga, corresponding to the earliest generation of shrna expression cassettes  <cit> . the "yiu" construct has the structure generated by the yiu procedure. in the "mir-30" construct, the targeting sequence is engrafted into part of the human microrna-30a primary transcript sequence, contained in the pshag-magic <dig>  vector  <cit> . fig. 4a shows the results of northern blot hybridization analyzing cells transiently transfected with equal amounts of the "classic" or "yiu" construct targeting luciferase. the two constructs generated similar quantities of the primary hairpin transcript and the processed sirna. functional comparison of the three constructs, as described below, demonstrates that the "yiu" construct is at least as effective as the other two constructs in targeting luciferase.

cloning efficiency and quality of the shrna library
the model system we chose was the human ccnd <dig> gene, encoding cyclin d <dig>  which is frequently upregulated in cancer. this upregulation can occur through gene amplification in breast cancer and through a chromosomal translocation in mantle cell lymphoma and other b-cell malignancies. we generated a ccnd <dig> shrna library and analyzed random clones for effective rnai. the full-length cdna  was digested by alui, dpni, and haeiii, all of which are restriction endonucleases that yield blunt ends. digestion with the three restriction endonucleases generates  <dig> fragments. because both ends of the dnas can be used for ligation, there are  <dig> possible ligation products in total. after cloning into pksu <dig>  random bacterial colonies were picked, and pcr was performed to examine the inserts. out of  <dig> colonies,  <dig>  had inserts. twenty clones were sequenced . eighteen of the twenty clones have hairpin inserts; one clone yielded only the lacz gene sequence, implying that recombination had occurred; and one clone contains a longer ccnd <dig> fragment. in the  <dig> clones with hairpins, the inserts are either  <dig> or  <dig> bp, reflecting the variability in the site of cleavage by the mmei endonuclease  <cit> . all the  <dig> clones derived from a restriction digestion:  <dig> clones from haeiii, which has the most sites  in ccnd <dig>   <dig> clones from alui ,  <dig> clones from dpni , and  <dig> clone from ecori . the positions of the inserted sequences were random within ccnd1:  <dig> clones were from nt 1–1000;  <dig> from nt 1001–2000;  <dig> from nt 2001–3000; and  <dig> from nt 3001– <dig>  importantly, the pcr step of the yiu process appears to amplify all hairpin structures with no apparent bias with respect to gc content. in the  <dig> sequenced clones, the percentage of gc varied between 30% and 84%, with  <dig> clones  having less than 50% gc,  <dig> clones  having 50–60% gc, and  <dig> clones  having gc content over 60%. therefore, our two-temperature pcr cycle protocol can amplify a wide range of potential hairpin structures.

analysis of the ccnd <dig> shrna library
to demonstrate the utility of this shrna library construction method, random clones from the ccnd <dig> shrna library were tested for effective rnai by cotransfection with one of two constructs expressing luciferase fused in its 3'utr to a portion of the ccnd <dig> gene . the shrna constructs were also compared to three constructs targeting the luciferase portion of the fusion transcript. the two ccnd <dig> fragments together comprise almost the entire ccnd <dig> cdna with the exception of a small portion of the 3' utr containing a cluster of auuua motifs, which are often associated with mrna instability  <cit> . the relatively low level of expression of the " <dig>  kb" construct suggests, however, that this fragment may confer instability of the fusion transcript; this may result in less apparent further destabilization by the shrna expression constructs. a destabilizing region has been mapped within the sequences contained in the " <dig>  kb" construct  <cit> . notably, the yiu construct targeting luciferase was at least as effective as either the "classic" construct or the construct in which the target is embedded in a microrna structure . several of the enzymatically generated constructs effectively targeted the fusion transcript. the most effective of the tested clones, # <dig>  is predicted to be a potentially effective shrna by dharmacon's program  <cit> .

construction of shrna libraries is the first step toward the goal of performing mammalian genome-wide screens with the rnai technology. the applications of shrna library technology also include determining the best sequences for inhibition of infection by viruses, such as hiv  <cit> , and identifying the most effective shrnas for a single gene.

given the great amount of work required for a functional screen, if the construction of an shrna library becomes much easier, tissue- or cell-specific shrna libraries are preferable to generic synthetic shrna libraries for the following reasons:  not all genes have been identified. this is particularly likely to be the case for genes with a very limited range of tissue expression. thus, with our current state of knowledge, any library prepared by individual chemical synthesis is necessarily incomplete.  alternative splice forms of some genes may not be affected if only one or a few shrnas are used.  screening only for genes that are actually expressed in a given tissue reduces the amount of work required. normalized, tissue-specific cdna libraries from image collections may be the most cost-effective source of genome-wide cdna libraries for generating shrna libraries. however, each laboratory can pursue its specific interests using appropriate tissue-specific shrna libraries.

a major step in constructing an shrna library from cdna is to normalize the cdna. a simple cdna normalization method has recently been reported  <cit> . the key component in this method is a duplex-specific nuclease  from the kamchakta crab. the dsn preferentially cleaves double-stranded dna and dna in rna-dna hybrid duplexes at 70°c. using this enzyme, cdna can be normalized after first-strand cdna synthesis or after amplifying the cdna. after heat-denaturation and kinetic reassociation  <cit> , abundant cdnas reanneal more rapidly than rare cdnas and are depleted from the mixture by dsn digestion.

CONCLUSIONS
the yiu method allows rapid conversion of cdnas into shrna templates. this method has several advantages over previous methods  <cit> . our y oligonucleotide was designed with a 3' t overhang to prevent self-ligation. to allow ligation with the y oligonucleotide, a single 3' a overhang is added to cdna fragments by incubating with taq dna polymerase. to create multiple fragments from each transcript, cdnas derived from cells or tissues can be subjected to either partial dnase i digestion, sonication, or restriction digestion. a pcr step after generating the yiu molecules was introduced to amplify the desired product but not irrelevant byproducts, thereby eliminating the necessity of multiple page purifications as described in previous methods  <cit>  and greatly simplifying the whole process. the pcr amplification also increases the overall yield of yiu products and allows the use of small amounts of starting mrna. this is expected to be particularly useful for small number of cells separated by facs or microdissection.

the two-temperature pcr program used a high temperature  for a combined annealing and extension step to destabilize hairpin structures and to promote the strand-displacement activity of vent polymerase. this approach has been used in amplifying dna with a hairpin structure  <cit> , and we showed that this method has additional applications in the sirna field, such as amplification of shrna expression cassettes. conventional 3-temperature pcr cycles promote strand slippage of dna polymerase when replicating self-annealing structures  <cit> , including the shrna hairpin  <cit> , leading to deletions. adoption of our pcr program to the application may alleviate the problem.

finally, the yiu method is versatile. if an initial larger loop is secondarily trimmed using a type iis restriction enzyme, constructs can be produced expressing an shrna with a loop of arbitrary sequence  <cit> . in particular, with minor changes in the y and u oligonucleotides, one potentially could prepare shrna expression libraries in which the targeting sirna sequences are engrafted into a microrna stem and loop structure. the use of a microrna stem and loop has been shown to dramatically increase the efficiency of suppression by an shrna  <cit>  and is compatible with pol ii promoters, which are more diverse and versatile than the pol iii promoters necessary for expression of "classic" shrnas.

