BACKGROUND
the advent of mass spectrometry-based proteomic biomarker discovery augurs an increased output of diagnostic disease markers due to its ability to interrogate a complex constellation of proteins simultaneously. a typical proteomic biomarker discovery process comprises two major steps: data acquisition and data analysis. data acquisition encompasses everything from sample collection, handling, and processing to the eventual production of mass spectra where proteins and peptides are represented as peaks with mass-to-charge  ratios and their corresponding signal intensities.

technical issues pertaining to this step of the process are well-documented  <cit> . the ultimate goal is reproducibility of the mass spectra across replicates and the alignment of peaks across samples. to this end, next-generation mass spectrometers with high mass accuracy have been employed, along with efforts to standardize sample collection and processing protocols  <cit> .

the data analysis phase of the process seeks to identify mass peaks that are differentially present between the groups of samples being compared. as with any expression data analysis, an array of pattern profiling systems exist that can reliably discover sets of classifying mass peaks. unfortunately, a common and frustrating occurrence in proteomic biomarker discovery is the production of non-overlapping sets of biomarker peaks when different laboratories studying the same disease employ different statistical methods on the same data set. all data analysis methods have their strengths and weaknesses. the caveat lies in the realization of their statistical power only when applied to data sets where the underlying data distribution assumptions are met. as is often the case with mass spectrometry data, the data distribution is unknown.

comparisons of different statistical methods on the same mass spectrometry data have been reported previously  <cit> . however, the ultimate goal of these reports was the selection of a method whose prediction model outperforms the rest of the methods under investigation when applied to a given set of experimental data and the subsequent recommendation of the method that prevailed for future analyses. this introduces bias in the selected marker peaks which are unique to a statistical method and are most often a result of overfitting. this is also true when peak reduction was performed using a predefined statistical method prior to submitting the remaining peaks for model building comparisons. in addition, a majority of these studies were performed using low-resolution mass spectrometer data with significant mass drifts across spectra within a single experimental run that further complicate analysis.

therefore, in the proposed workflow, four unique statistical modeling approaches  are employed concurrently for the analysis of the raw peaks from the same high-resolution data set to obtain a set of consensus biomarkers. consensus biomarkers are defined as mass peaks with discriminatory power between the groups being compared that end up on the list of differential peaks across at least two or more of the statistical strategies employed in the data mining analysis. the reasoning is that in lieu of the data distribution knowledge, mass peaks that survive stringent conditions across multiple statistical methods are more likely to be true "biomarkers" and not artefacts as a consequence of bias inherent to a particular algorithm. convergence upon this distinct set of biomarkers using multiple analytical platforms will confer higher confidence in these markers as robust entities and will increase the chance that these markers may be adopted as diagnostic entities where subsequent identification and validation efforts should be directed.

the novelty of our approach lies in both the experimental design and the statistical evaluations. first, we used a mass spectrometer with high mass accuracy and low mass drift to generate high-resolution data, which is essential for accurate peak-to-peak comparison across spectra. second, there was no biased peak selection prior to model building by the four statistical algorithms under investigation; all raw peaks within the  <dig>  to  <dig>  mass range were subject to each algorithm. furthermore, to assure a fair comparison between the methods, the best discriminatory peaks from each method underwent the same diagnostic accuracy testing via receiver operating characteristic  curve analysis, as did the model consisting of only the consensus peaks. roc confers a better sense of diagnostic performance of the biomarker peaks as it evaluates all possible cutoff values and produces the best trade-off between the rates of false-negative and false-positive results. in addition, the diagnostic accuracy measures will provide an indication of the clinical utility of the statistically significant differential peaks discovered.

this study has two objectives. the first is to perform biomarker data mining on the same data set using four different statistical platforms and compare the list of candidates from each platform to determine if the resulting peaks are specific to each method and whether it is at all possible to find peaks that are robust enough to exist across two or more platforms. the second objective is to group the consensus peaks and compare their diagnostic performance collectively against the best individual model from each statistical method. our results reveal that even in the case of comparable performance between different statistical platforms, the model incorporating the consensus biomarkers across multiple platforms confers a more dependable set of peaks for further investigation.

RESULTS
biomarker selection
logistic regression
we used our modified, aic-optimal logistic regression protocol to analyze the narcolepsy data set and compared the diagnostic power of the best model from this approach to the best model obtained using the default single-step calling of the proc logistic in sas. the diagnostic measures are shown in table  <dig>  the final model from the default stepwise procedure has a higher akaike information criterion  statistic of  <dig>  with two variables incorporated while the aic-optimal model from the modified procedure has an aic statistic of  <dig>  with five variables incorporated. this means that the default stepwise model incorporated three predictors less than necessary to form a better predictive model. this is indicated by its lower hosmer-lemeshow goodness of fit statistic . the resulting default model also has a poorer discriminatory power than the aic-optimal model as indicated by the lower area under the roc curve. as for diagnostic accuracy, both models have comparable sensitivity, positive predictive value  and negative predictive value , but the default model lacks in specificity and the percentage of cases accurately predicted . this demonstrates that the modified procedure performs better than the default in producing good predictive models, and was thus adopted in subsequent logistic regression analyses.

aic = akaike information criterion, roc = receiver operating characteristic, ppv = positive predictive value, npv = negative predictive value

in the comparison between narcoleptic and non-narcoleptic samples, four optimal models were obtained, as listed in table  <dig>  the mass peaks from these four models were pooled as potential biomarkers selected from logistic regression.

classification and regression tree 
the narcolepsy data set was analyzed using ciphergen's biomarker patterns software  <dig> . tree-building was first performed using the default gini splitting criterion to obtain the best tree with the minimal cost. this was repeated with the remaining split criteria – symgini, twoing, ordered twoing, class probability, and entropy. 10-fold cross-validation was used for testing. the best tree from cart is the tree with the lowest cost across all six splitting criteria. this optimal tree with a cost of  <dig>  was obtained from the twoing criterion and is shown in figure  <dig>  the diagnostic measures of this model are listed in table  <dig> 

roc = receiver operating characteristic, ppv = positive predictive value, npv = negative predictive value

t-test
in the t-test method, a peak is deemed differential if it is populated by statistically significant data points. the maximum p-value was set to  <dig>  and the minimum signal intensity ratio was set to the default value of  <dig> . peaks that best distinguish the two groups under comparison were selected by increasing the stringency of the criteria by decreasing the minimal p-value or increasing the minimal fold-change. in this study, the default conditions were found to be optimal as decreasing the p-value below  <dig>  and increasing the fold-change above  <dig>  did not result in differential peaks. only three possible candidate biomarkers were identified in the spectra –  <dig>  da,  <dig>  da, and  <dig>  da. they were all higher in the narcolepsy samples. the diagnostic performance of this three-peak model is shown in table  <dig> 

all differential peaks have a p-value less than  <dig> . ppv = positive predictive value, npv = negative predictive value

hierarchical clustering
differential peaks from unweighted pair group method with arithmetic mean  clustering were first selected with a p-value <  <dig> , followed by trimming of the remaining mass peaks based on fold-change between the two conditions under comparison. the three differential peaks obtained from this platform only had a fold-change of at least 10% . peaks that demonstrated a greater than 10% fold-change did not meet the p-value requirement. their diagnostic accuracy measures were determined and are shown in table  <dig> 

peaks are presented with their respective fold change and p-value.

roc = receiver operating characteristic, ppv = positive predictive value, npv = negative predictive value

consensus peaks
consensus peaks across at least two or more of the four platforms are defined as robust biomarkers. even though the ideal scenario is to have consensus peaks across all four platforms, the two peaks that were considered truly robust in this study were mass peaks at m/z  <dig>  and  <dig>  which were selected as statistically differential in three of the four approaches. no marker peaks appeared as differential across all four platforms. these two robust, consensus peaks were grouped collectively to form an independent diagnostic model. when used for diagnosis, these two peaks have a sensitivity of  <dig> %, a specificity of  <dig> %, a ppv of  <dig> %, a npv of  <dig> %, and a percentage of cases correctly classified of  <dig> %. the area under the roc curve was  <dig>  .

consensus peaks included in this model are peaks selected as statistically differential across three of the four algorithms. roc = receiver operating characteristic, ppv = positive predictive value, npv = negative predictive value

in this study, upgma and the t-test produced predictive models that did not perform as well as those from logistic regression and cart, even though the model from upgma included the two consensus peaks. in contrast, the consensus model has the diagnostic potency in some diagnostic measures that is comparable to, if not better than, the individual models from each statistical platform .

depending on the clinical applications , different diagnostic measures will take precedence. for example, high sensitivity is needed for screening but high specificity is needed for confirmation and subcategorization. ideally, both need to be greater than 70%  <cit> . sensitivity is a measure of how well the diagnostic test correctly identifies the disease cases whereas specificity is how well it correctly identifies the non-disease cases from the whole test population. although admittedly limited in sample size, our comparison between narcolepsy samples versus all non-narcolepsy samples in this pilot study served to emulate general population screening, where these biomarkers are intended for. in this case, sensitivity is of more importance than specificity. logistic regression suffers from low sensitivity . cart prevailed in these measures with  <dig> % sensitivity and  <dig> % specificity, followed by the consensus model with a reasonable sensitivity of  <dig> % and a specificity of  <dig> %. this is very encouraging as the current genetic marker for narcolepsy in general is based on the presence of hla dqb1* <dig> which itself only has a specificity of 40%  <cit> . genetic markers confer susceptibility but are not ideal disease biomarkers as most people who are positive for the hla dqb1* <dig> gene do not develop narcolepsy.

the more important diagnostic measures to consider are ppv and npv, which evaluate the applicability of the diagnostic test on the target population. the precision of the test is measured by the ppv where a positive test reflects the probability that a subject will have the diagnosed condition . on the other hand, npv reflects the probability that a negative test means the subject is disease free. the consensus model displays the highest ppv of  <dig> % and an npv of  <dig> %, comparable to the best logistic model. cart has the highest npv of  <dig> % but lacks in ppv with only 75%.

to surmise, cart seems to produce the best model in this pilot study when all five diagnostic accuracy measures are considered collectively , followed by logistic regression. upgma and the t-test did not fair as well. of interest is the performance of the consensus model which seems to be a good compromise between both cart and logistic regression. albeit models from logistic regression and cart in this study performed better in a few of the diagnostic measures, not all peaks in those models warrant subsequent identification and validation efforts. this is because spurious peaks that are only specific to those models might be a reflection of overfitting and biases to the respective algorithm. these biases could be the reason why the logistic and cart models appear to perform better than the consensus model. therefore, downstream validation efforts and resources will be better off directed at the consensus peaks.

an added advantage of the consensus model is the higher level of confidence in the true discriminatory traits of the peaks as they managed to survive various data distribution assumptions across statistical platforms to appear as statistically significant differential peaks. another advantage of forming a consensus model is the trimming of the long list of potential biomarkers to be sequenced to the selected few with true discriminatory power. the ideal clinical assay will only need to focus on assaying the minimal number of biomarkers to accurately diagnose a disease state.

the methodology described here can be applied to any maldi-tof derived data set to reconcile the disparate potential biomarker mass peaks reported by different studies on the same disease, provided the same standard operating procedure is employed during data acquisition and the studies are significantly powered. this requires the incorporation of a sizeable sample set that is representative of the target population to impart confidence in the differential peaks discovered. a limitation of this approach is when there are no overlapping peaks across the statistical platforms used. however, when there are overlapping marker peaks, these consensus peaks will no doubt expedite efforts to identify robust biomarkers for clinical applications as their true discriminatory trait is reflected in their selection as differential biomarkers across several statistical platforms. our laboratory is currently pursuing the identification of the consensus peaks via fourier transform mass spectrometry.

CONCLUSIONS
we have applied four distinct statistical approaches to the same high-resolution mass spectral data set from our narcolepsy study to discover mass peaks that are statistically differential. even though each approach has its own assumptions on the data distribution of the data set, several of the mass peaks that have inherent discriminatory power appeared as potential biomarkers across platforms. in particular, peaks  <dig>  da and  <dig>  da were selected as discriminatory peaks across three of the four platforms and thus, deemed robust biomarkers.

when these two peaks were combined into a diagnostic model, they performed as well if not better than the individual models. they confer a specificity of 82% which is far greater than the current genetic marker hla dqb1* <dig> for narcolepsy in general. while we are aware we have analyzed only a limited number of patient samples thus far, our results are encouraging; this reiterates the promise that mass spectrometry-based biomarker discovery is capable of delivering potential biomarkers between disease states that can add on to the current battery of diagnostic tools, once validated in a larger sample size that is more representative of the screening population of course. furthermore, with our methodology, consensus biomarkers with higher confidence in their ability to discriminate can be discovered and hence, should be the main candidates where downstream identification and validation efforts should be focused on to assess their suitability to be adopted in a diagnostic assay or as therapeutic targets.

