BACKGROUND
phylogenetic profiling is a powerful discovery method in bioinformatics. in this method, typically, the presence or absence of a member of a protein family in a genome is treated as a trait whose phylogenetic distribution can be compared to that of another trait, usually meaning another protein family. the joint presence or joint absence of two traits over a sufficiently large and varied set of species provides strong statistically-based evidence that those traits are functionally connected in some fashion  <cit> . profile methods are being used increasingly to relate protein families to varied types of second traits such as phenotype, biological niche, transcriptional regulatory sites, and so on  <cit> . one such type of trait, metabolic capability, can be calculated by the genome properties system  <cit>  using rules based largely on hidden markov models  from the tigrfams collection  <cit> , as well as by the application of other methodologies such as subsystems  <cit>  or metacyc  <cit> . for example, one can determine which species have and which lack the capability to synthesize menaquinone or metabolize urea, even when those capabilities are encoded in different ways by different organisms. we have found that these assertions of metabolic background  provide excellent opportunities for launching phylogenetic profiling studies.

phylogenetic profiling  methods often are limited by their reliance on pre-constructed protein families, or on fixed parameters that serve in lieu of pre-constructed families. recently, we addressed this limitation by introducing partial phylogenetic profiling   <cit> . ppp uses a given phylogenetic profile as a query, and determines which proteins in a target genome score best against that profile. each protein is scored by selecting the  sequence similarity cutoff that optimizes its match to the query profile. as the algorithm explores more and more permissive cutoffs, more genomes are added to the set of genomes compared to the query profile. at each depth, this set corresponds to only a part of the query profile , and the preponderance of matches over mismatches is scored according to the binomial distribution. for each protein, the depth at which the agreement with the query profile scores best, and the score itself, are recorded. once all genes in a genome have been run, sorting by score reveals those proteins that best match the profile. the on-the-fly optimization method eliminates dependence on pre-defined protein families. it enables profile-based discovery even where pre-built families are lacking, and obviates the need for pre-set score thresholds.

profiling methods may indicate strongly that some biological connection underlies the regular co-occurrence of two traits, but they do not always reveal the nature of the connection. ppp and other profiling methods provide inferences about the functional relationships between full-length proteins and the biological systems represented by query profiles. a biochemical basis for those relationships might be revealed by identifying which specific protein sequence domains and motifs are most responsible for the correlation of two traits. therefore, a computational method to dissect and explain the origin of ppp's signal may provide a wealth of additional clarity and insight, especially when different sites within a protein mediate interactions with substrates, cofactors, and/or auxiliary proteins.

the basic scoring mechanism from ppp - using binomial distribution statistics to optimize sequence similarity cutoffs during searches of partitioned training sets - can be reused to discover key subsequences in groups of proteins. here we demonstrate that simbal, sites inferred by metabolic background assertion labeling, generalizes that approach by providing the additional freedom to apply phylogenetic profiling methods locally within a protein sequence. we show that simbal can mine a protein sequence for short sequence regions, presumably containing critical sites, and that it outperforms other simple classifiers, such as blast matches to full-length proteins, for the task of classifying functionally diverged members of homology families.

RESULTS
training sets classified by metabolic context: urea abc transporters
several features of urea transporter permeases make them attractive for demonstrating the potential of simbal. functional prediction for transporter proteins, important as it is, is difficult because these proteins are highly hydrophobic and may be difficult to study by crystallographic techniques. similarly, these transporters show relatively weak sequence conservation, complicating inferences made solely from pairwise homology comparisons. however, urea utilization and urea uptake both are broadly and sporadically distributed , giving strong, clear signals for comparative genomics methods. the multi-component systems that are required for urea-utilization, especially the nickel cofactor-dependent urease system that numerically dominates over the urea carboxylase system, provide clear discrimination between utilizers and non-utilizers. independent characterizations of urea transport operons in cyanobacteria   <cit>  and actinobacteria   <cit>  reveal considerable sequence divergence across species for the corresponding permease subunits, including substantially different lengths, despite their shared function. in a large number of distinct lineages , the urease operon and urea abc transporter operon are adjacent, providing additional support through local gene context for extending the set of trusted urea transporter sequences. having five subunits in the urea abc transporter  provides a means to test the self-consistency of the transitive annotation of function from one genome to another. all belong to larger families that have considerable numbers of homologs of differing function  from which they must be discriminated. the remote but real homology between the two permease subunits urtb and urtc  provides an opportunity to examine similarities and differences in the locations of the apparent hot-spots of predicted functional specificity. therefore, the pair of permease subunits of the urea abc transporter was chosen as the first test system for simbal.

partial phylogenetic profiling 
the genome properties rule for urea utilization  was used to generate a profile for partial phylogenetic profile  analysis. urea utilization was taken as a union of species with urease and those with the urea carboxylase pathway. ppp of the genome of corynebacterium glutamicum vs. this profile revealed, as the top eleven hits, six  components of the urease system, followed by the known five-gene operon for a urea abc transporter. all scores exceeded that of the  twelfth hit by more than three orders of magnitude. the results, shown in table  <dig>  display the power of phylogenetic profiling methods for associating proteins with biological processes and molecular functions. ppp applied to other genomes with putative urea abc transporters similarly found complete five-gene operons in the top tier of results, confirming predictions made by tigrfams "equivalog"-level hmms: tigr <dig> , tigr <dig> and tigr <dig> , and tigr <dig> and tigr <dig> .

ppp
a) ppp scores are reported as the optimal negative log odds against observing the indicated number of hits to the true profile at the indicated search depth.

simbal: using metabolic background assertions to find key subsequences
a training set of sequences from pf <dig>  and from all other families in the same pfam  <cit>  clan, cl <dig> , were collected from the cmr  <cit> , partitioned based on apparent urea metabolism potential of the source genomes, made non-redundant at 80% sequence identity, and used for simbal analysis . this training set consists of  <dig> sequences in the true branch and  <dig> sequences in the false branch.

the genome of corynebacterium glutamicum atcc  <dig> encodes all structural and accessory components of the urease system  <cit> , so all  <dig> c. glutamicum members of the cl <dig> clan are assigned to the true branch of the simbal training set . this includes the urea abc transport permease subunits ncgl <dig>  and ncgl <dig> , members of pf <dig>  which have been characterized  <cit> , are clustered with the urease genes and are identified as top hits by ppp analysis. results of simbal analysis are plotted in figure  <dig>  each subsequence is designated by the location of its center on the parent sequence  and by its length , and then given a color to show its simbal score. results are presented as heat maps, where hot spots in red indicate the most significant simbal scores while blue shows the weakest. because larger sequence windows have less freedom to slide, the resulting graphic is triangular in shape. the apex represents the greatest possible subsequence length, equal to the full length of the protein, with its center at the midpoint along the protein sequence. these plots clearly indicate that, in this protein family in c. glutamicum, the two bona fide urea abc transporter permease subunits have significant regions of relatively high score. the results also show large regions where the sequence seems to contain hardly any evidence of the parent protein's specificity for urea transport. notably, the best performing subsequences  for these two permeases outscore their respective full-length parent sequences. in contrast, the three other c. glutamicum members of this family are nearly featureless indicating that no portion of these sequences, when used as a blast query succeeds in recovering the pattern of urea utilizing species. one of these, ncgl <dig>  simbal triangle heat map for the corynebacterium glutamicum urtb protein  constructed of stacked rows of output from windows of size  <dig> amino acids up to the full length of the protein, colored by the simbal score. peaks at window sizes  <dig> and  <dig> are indicated in blue boxes. b) a portion of the heat map for the c. glutamicum urtc protein . c) a heat map for the non-urea transporting c. glutamicum ncgl <dig> permease at exaggerated scale illustrating negligible response. d) simbal score plot of urtb  and ncgl <dig>  at a window size of  <dig> amino acids.

although no crystal structures have been determined for urtbc, two structures from homologous transporters in the cl <dig> clan have been published: the b <dig> transporter permease/atpase complex btucd from e. coli   <cit> , and the unknown specificity permease/atpase complex hi1471/hi <dig> from haemophilus influenzae   <cit> . both of these structures include single-gene, homodimeric permeases, in contrast to the heterodimeric urtbc. notably, these two structures capture two different conformational states of the permease, inward-open in the case of hi <dig> and outward-open in the case of btuc. these two permeases are more closely related to one another than either is to urtbc. it is difficult to calculate a reliable sequence alignment between urtbc and either of these reference sequences due to their overall divergence . secondary structure prediction algorithms can be utilized to derive the approximate location of the transmembrane helices of urtb and urtc and these in turn used to constrain a multiple sequence alignment. we utilized the program memsat <dig>  <cit>  and found it to yield consistent results when applied to urtbc, btuc and hi <dig> with little disagreement as to the position and number of membrane-spanning helices. the only major structural difference between urtbc and the crystallized permeases is the lack of the n-terminal helix in urtb . based on this alignment, the simbal hotspots from urtbc can be mapped onto the corresponding segments of the crystal structures. even allowing for some error in the alignment, it is clear that simbal only identifies residues on the cytoplasmic face of the permease, and that the first two peaks in both urtb and urtc identify every residue of the exit pore in the inward-open conformation .

this observation suggests that, for urtb and urtc-like abc transporter permease subunits, the most prominent evolutionary constraints tied to urea utilization are neither interactions with the substrate-binding protein nor with the substrate where it begins to transit the membrane. rather, the key sites that track with urea utilization appear to be those that control release of the substrate on the cytosolic face of the plasma membrane. exit from the channel corresponds to a change in transporter complex quaternary structure as part of the cycle that couples atp hydrolysis to substrate translocation  <cit> .

the evolutionary history of urtb and urtc-like transporter permeases clearly contains numerous examples of paralogy formation and neofunctionalization, such that the protein family now contains examples of both ancient divergences with conserved function, and more modern splits with divergent function. by marking several small regions, separated along the main chain but close in the folded structure and surrounding the pore, simbal shows that transporter permease subunits indeed contain sequences that tend to predict functional specificity rather than recent common ancestry.

the genome of bradyrhizobium japonicum usda  <dig> encodes  <dig> cl <dig> abc transporter permease domains,  <dig> of which are in the same pf <dig> family as urtbc. these are organized in  <dig> distinct clusters,  <dig> of which are of the 5-gene type  typical of the known urea transporter. a phylogenetic tree of the pf <dig> permeases  has  <dig> major branches that can be classified as urtb-like, urtc-like, sugar transporter-like  and unknown . all  <dig> of these were analyzed by simbal. only certain members of the urtbc-like clades showed any peaks by simbal above noise. two of these genes  reproduce the pattern of hotspot peaks observed for the c. glutamicum urtb and urtc genes and are in fact the b. japonicum homologs of urtb and urtc that are observed adjacent to the genes for the urease enzyme system. an additional pair of genes  have simbal peaks nearly indistinguishable from those of the urease-linked permeases in c. glutamicum and b. japonicum. interestingly, this second 5-gene abc transporter cluster is adjacent to a gene of the pf <dig> acetamidase/formamidase family  and a gene of the pf <dig> carbon-nitrogen lyase family annotated as "aliphatic amidase, aime" , strongly suggesting that the transported molecule is not urea, but some other amide-containing molecule or molecules, possibly acetamide or formamide.

the examination of simbal results for b. japonicum provides a cautionary clarification. the hot-spots identified as highly similar in both raw sequence and simbal score still should be interpreted to reflect functional specificity that reflects substrate chemical properties. this specificity, however, may include related amides, echoing the ability of urea carboxylase from oleomonas sagaranensis, for instance, to act on formamide and acetamide as well as urea  <cit> .

simbal applied to training sets classified by local genomic context
local genomic context can provide strong clues to protein function. the s-adenosylmethionine-dependent protein- methyltransferase prmc   <cit>  n-methylates a glutamine residue in a specific gly-gly-gln motif of peptide chain release factors  <dig> and  <dig>  <cit> . prmc and prfa are adjacent in escherichia coli and many other bacterial species. a complex of prmc with rf- <dig> has been solved crystallographically  <cit> , and can provide a context for interpreting results from simbal analysis.

candidate prmc proteins were identified by using the broad-specificity tigrfams model tigr <dig>  this model represents a family of methylases including genuine prmc proteins, a number of unidentified methylases and the e. coli yfcb protein, identified as the methylase  carrying out the glutamine methylation of ribosomal protein l <dig>  <cit> . hits to the tigr <dig> model were placed in the true partition for the prmc simbal training set  if they were encoded in the immediate neighborhood of prfa . in species with two paralogous prmc family proteins, the one not encoded near prfa was placed in the true-negative set. in species with a prmc homolog that was not near to prfa, the protein was not used in either partition of the training set since it is not possible to conclude whether the gene is active on one, both or neither of rf- <dig> and l <dig>  both rf- <dig> and l <dig> themselves are universal in all bacteria, but their post-translational modifications may not be. each partition was made non-redundant to no more than 80% sequence identity, and simbal analysis was performed. this training set contains  <dig> proteins in the positive branch and  <dig> proteins in the negative branch. note that this training set is 1/40th the size of that used in the previous example and has a 3: <dig> true-false ratio as opposed to the 1: <dig> ratio used previously. this training set, though smaller, should contain essentially no false positives  by virtue of the way it was constructed as opposed to the considerable amount included in the permease example. also of notable difference is the much less sporadic nature of the prmc profile.

in theory, simbal should detect short sequences that outperform full-length sequences for making functional predictions by blast versus members of the homology family under study. this will be observed primarily when neofunctionalization has occurred within the clade containing the target function. in such a case, better functional predictions are made by conservation at critical sites than by time since the most recent common ancestry. because neofunctionalization events happen sporadically, some sequences will show simbal hot spots in much starker contrast to the apex  signal than do others. comparing results based on several different starting sequences, however, adds a measure of confidence through consistent "voting" for functionally important sites.

simbal analysis was first performed against the sequence of the  prmc protein from e. coli w <dig> . this protein is a member of the tigr <dig> prmc family and has been characterized as the methyase acting on rf- <dig> and rf- <dig> in vitro  <cit> . this simbal plot is dominated by five major peaks with scores in excess of  <dig>  and several additional minor peaks with scores between  <dig> and  <dig>  sequences of members of the prmc true partition were aligned and confirmed to form a single clade by phylogenetic analysis . ten sequences were chosen to represent diverse subclades of this tree and each was analyzed by simbal. we observed some variation in the number, relative position and strengths of peaks. a typical result is illustrated in figure 6a. to obtain a consensus, all of the simbal results at window sizes of  <dig> and  <dig> amino acids were co-registered by locally aligning the subsequences for each peak and were then averaged . the average value for the full-length sequences  is also indicated.

the eight subsequences identified by simbal  include  <dig> of the  <dig> residues observed to make contacts with rf- <dig> in the complex crystal structure  <cit> . of the nine not identified by simbal, seven are the most distal from the active site and make contact with an rf- <dig> domain distinct from that containing the methylation target glutamine . subsequences c and e, displaying the strongest simbal scores, are positioned closest to the active site and make contacts with the residues flanking the conserved ggq target sequence and the target motif itself. subsequence c, in particular, dominates the simbal results and is observed as the strongest peak in every sequence analyzed. one may infer that this subsequence encodes the most distinctively prfc-like portion of the protein, mediating not the catalysis per se, since other prfc-homologs presumably use the same catalytic mechanism, but the discrimination of the substrate from other potential methylation targets. unlike all the other susbsequences identified, subsequence c appears to have a central position in the binding surface, its rpdte motif making contacts with rf- <dig> at the methylation site and the sequence loops immediately before and after, as well as positioning a negatively charged group  at the positive dipole end of the following alpha helix .

a) subsequences as indicated in figure 6b. b) contacts with rf- <dig> observed in the prmc:rf- <dig> crystal structure indicated in bold. c) lower-case residues are less than 50% conserved, residues in bold are greater than 80% conserved. d) scores are reported at a window of  <dig> amino acids except for subsequence e which has a window size of  <dig> 

simbal does not identify merely the most conserved motifs in a protein family; subsequences d and e are equally well conserved as the high-scoring subsequence c . rather, what are found are those regions conserved enough that blast identifies them efficiently within the true partition of the family, yet divergent enough that corresponding sequences outside the desired partition are excluded. in the case of subsequence c, the difference between the consensus from the positive and negative branches of the partition is clear:  

the sequences are variable precisely at the place where the most significant substrate contacts are made . in comparison, subsequence d, which contains the well-conserved sam-methylase motif i  <cit>  is not only conserved among the true prmc genes, but is only slightly different in the prmc-like proteins. this is consistent with its position adjacent to the sam cofactor where it makes no direct contacts with the substrate.

displaying the full heat map , rather than just a simbal trace for a fixed window size, shows an interesting attribute for motif c. not only is it the strongest of the peaks at the selected window size, but its signal remains conspicuous in longer and longer windows  as long as they include the motif. this behavior creates a feature in the simbal heat map in which a large red and yellow area appears to spread upward in a v-shaped "plume" from a highly localized single site, the center of motif c. features of this type likely represent both the strength of the signal at small window sizes and supporting signal from neighboring residues. however, the mapping of simbal peaks from short window sizes to crystal structure shows that even sites that lack such v-shaped plumes in the heat map remain important for finding and interpreting determinants of protein functional specificity.

discussion
in developing the ppp method  <cit>  we introduced the strategy of using blast results from every gene in a genome and scoring the results based on the likelihood that the top hits would predominantly hit genes from the genomes in a given phylogenetic profile. here, in the simbal method, we have transferred that methodology to an analysis of individual protein sequences. instead of scanning every gene in a given genome, we instead scan all subsequences of a given protein sequence. blast is again utilized, this time versus all proteins in the same homology family where that family has been partitioned by some method. this binary partition of the data is analogous to a phylogenetic profile and may, as in the urea permease example, be derived directly from such a profile. the simbal method is generic, however, in the sense that any method may be applied for the separation of the proteins into true and false groups, discriminating among homologs from the same genome as in the prmc example where this makes sense. the interpretation of simbal results will depend directly on the biological relevance of the partitioning rationale.

in this work, in order to focus on the methodology itself, we have chosen examples where the results could be verified versus solved crystal structures with published analyses and interpretations, where much is known about the relevant biochemistry, where the proper annotation of gene function is relatively secure and the understanding of subunit architecture and key functional sites is fairly advanced. nevertheless, we did not use any of this information a priori, bit relied instead on proxies for constructing the protein family partitions such as might be used in circumstances where far less is known about the proteins to be analyzed.

in the urea permease example, many urea abc transporters are present in clear-cut operons near genes for the catabolism of urea making their annotation straightforward.

the partition method we chose, however, is only based on the metabolic potential of the genomes, and results in the incorporation of large numbers of non-urea permeases into the true branch of the partition. despite this "noise" in the dataset, simbal was able to give unambiguous results for relevant permeases. this robust behavior is due in part to the high information content of the urea metabolism profile, but also can be traced to the algorithm itself which only scores top blast hits to the true branch relative to the number of hits encountered so far in the hits list, and is agnostic to the size of the true set and the proportion of that set which has been encountered. clearly, had there been no information about which permeases were involved in urea transport  simbal could have been iterated and used like ppp, scanning every member of the relevant protein family for strong signals .

in the prmc example, we chose to construct the partition based solely on local prmc-prfa operonic context and the inference that additional prmc homologs in those genomes were not prmc. this partition results in a training set far smaller than it could have been if other information had been used, and susceptible to bias based on the non-random distribution of operonically clustered family members. despite these self-imposed drawbacks, simbal derives a list of subsequences covering most of the prmc-rf- <dig> contact surface and clearly identifying the crucial substrate-binding motif.

some noise is inherent in these analyses, from the small sample size of sequence regions, anisotropy of molecular evolution, and quirks of scoring sequence similarity by blast. however, the graphical display of scores obtained by simbal shows relatively smooth curves with clear peaks, rather than scores differing noisily over the length of the sequence. the signals appear to be real, well-behaved, and consistent with ppp analysis and crystal structures.

we have observed a decided advantage of certain subsequences in these examples to outperform the full-length protein sequences in blast-based discrimination of the true and false branches of the partitions. one might imagine that the full-length sequence, incorporating all of the strongly discriminating subsequences should have superior discriminatory power. the issue is that a full-length sequence also incorporates those regions of the protein that are strongly conserved across all members of the family, regions that are conserved only in certain lineages as well as those which have little conservation. all of these regions will contribute to the overall homology scored by blast and tend to wash out the functional signal encoded by the partition. it is important to realize that simbal does not reward conservation per se, but rather discrimination. a subsequence site may have little obvious conservation among the sequences of the desired class, but so long as its range of amino acids at particular sites is distinctly different from that of the rest of the partition, it will tend to be found. additionally, full-length sequences may include structural differences  irrelevant to the functional differences underlying the partition. simbal, like other motif-based approaches is insensitive these gross changes in protein length.

methods such as intrepid  <cit>  have been developed to identify in multiple sequence alignments the critical sites that discriminate between branches of calculated phylogenetic trees. the approach presented here is independent of any multiple sequence alignment or tree calculation procedures, avoiding the possibility of errors they may introduce or the computational burden involved in their accurate generation. similarly, simbal does not involve any explicit training algorithms or parameters that must be tuned. most importantly, simbal requires neither painstaking compilation of experimentally verified training set data, nor assumptions about functional homogeneity in clades selected from larger protein families. simbal's execution for a full scan at every window size scales with the square of the length of the object protein. full scans will not usually be necessary  allowing execution in linear time with protein length.

the method of mapping simbal-identified hotspots onto crystal structures is used here to lend credence to our assertion that identified subsequences point to functional specificity. finding the precise boundaries of these subsequences, that is, determining that one residue is critical but another nearby is not, is likely beyond the resolution of this method . the algorithm is designed to mine information from noisy data sets, at the expense of single amino acid resolution. we note, however, that simbal heat maps often show unambiguous peaks with pronounced edge effects, scores falling off sharply with single-residue shifts in subsequence length or location , from which one may predict the importance of a particular residue. decisions as to what lengths of subsequences to map onto available crystal structures, will be determined by users in a case-by-case manner to illustrate emergent discoveries, rather than by the imposition of ad hoc rules. the development of ancillary tools to facilitate such graphical manipulation of these data sets will be beneficial.

phylogenetic profiling, a discovery method in comparative genomics, has certain limitations. it identifies protein families correlated to some particular trait, and therefore provides an enrichment of proteins most likely to have a meaningful biological connection. but in the absence of secondary clues such as conserved operon structure, such hypothesized connections may offer only limited hints for explaining a protein's biochemical function and metabolic role. the method introduced here, simbal, provides a means to continue investigations once profiling methods have generated first-round hypotheses. phylogenetic profiling depends on substantial functional homogeneity within a protein family; high rates of neofunctionalization in a protein family may complicate use of the method by causing equivocal scores and hard-to-interpret results. by contrast, neofunctionalization events  improve simbal results , allowing the method to distinguish sequence differences that imply altered function from those that do not.

we suggest that, where results of profiling methods such as ppp appear equivocal, the following protocol may perform better than ppp alone. first ppp identifies good candidates for protein families co-distributed phylogenetically with some assigned trait, as in the example of abc transporter permeases that score well based on a query profile of urea utilization. next, an expansive set of homologs to each candidate protein is generated from completed genomes and partitioned according the trait, to serve as a training set. finally, simbal scans candidate proteins, and discovers if there are molecular signatures that outperform analyses based on the full-length protein only. simbal extraction of suggested key motifs appears able to act as a "primitive", a basic operation that can identify multiple exemplars of protein subsequences important for functional prediction. we expect any number of downstream uses to become possible, such as building hmms from simbal-identified motifs at homologous positions, defining regular expressions to use in conjunction with other classifiers in functional annotation, or using simbal to guide the creation of classifiers constructed from discontinuous signatures. such simbal-derived classifiers would be expected to outperform individual simbal hot-spot sequences just as an hmm or psi-blast model is expected to outperform blast based on a single sequence.

CONCLUSIONS
in partial phylogenetic profiling, the implicit "training set" is all proteins from all genomes in the true partition of the profile. this training set is noisy of course - usually fewer than one protein in  <dig> actually match the reference profile in a meaningful way - yet the power of profiling methods is beyond dispute. simbal is likewise a discovery method based on efficient data mining after provision with a potentially noisy training set, where the training set now is the entirety of a protein family, partitioned according to some property calculated on each source genome. the method efficiently identifies prime candidate sites for conferring functional specificity to the proteins that contain them, and will be applicable in protein families where little or no direct characterization work has been done. the method will likely provide an excellent complement to protein crystallographic studies as a means to infer the importance of protein functional determinants, and provide mechanisms to develop improved protein functional classifiers for automated annotation systems.

