BACKGROUND
introduction of the microarray has brought about a revolutionary change in biological studies, leading to the development of omic world studies: genome, transcriptome, proteome, and others  <cit> . the microarray technology has a wide range of applications and is still developing. among the most common applications, there are cdna and oligonucleotide chips  <cit>  and expression array of proteins  <cit> . much advanced applications are appearing as the living protein chip  <cit> . in essence, the current microarray technology is based on the surface reaction allocated at each spot. therefore, in a microarray experiment, the elements of reactants  can be sorted and arrayed by a set of counter-reactants  at a single operation, saving laborious experiments and costly reagents. for the researcher's convenience, microarrays which deal with a high density of information need to be supplied commercially due to the requirement of elaborate apparatuses and software. obviously, most of the data obtained by the microarray technology could not have been addressed by any other method, featuring the exceptional power of this technology.

nevertheless, the current microarray technology still leaves room to be developed. one of the emerging desires to it is the ability of multistep operations and reactions: e.g., if an mrna binding to a particular oligonucleotide could be translated into a protein in situ and then could be monitored about the function of the product , functional analyses of proteins would be much boosted up. on the other hand, in an in vitro evolution study, a huge number of clones  need to be screened at once, meaning that each clone can be in a very small amount  and highly parallel  and multistep operations are required  <cit> . in other words, the conventional micro-plate  technology, though it allows us to operate in multisteps, requires not a tiny amount of reagents  if we consider the high degree of parallelism. therefore, technologies dealing with less than μl aliquots have been pursued. although there are not a few studies on dealing with sub-μl solutions  <cit> , they are basically microfluidics approaches and are currently limited in the degree of parallelism and the number of possible reaction steps  <cit> . this may be because they are adopting, in a sense, a closed system so as to prevent from evaporation-loss of a tiny volume of sample, leading to rather elaborate and complicated systems. another approach to earn the multiplicity and smallness of samples is the beads-based one  <cit>  and the essence of it has been successfully adopted in the machine of giga-base  sequencers  <cit> . however, in this approach, there is a difficult problem to cope with: multi-parallel and multistep reactions require the compartmentation of beads. this has already been challenged by some scientists  <cit> . we made a quite different, unique approach for this challenge: open well type compartmentation.

in this stream, we have devised a multi-well type microarray  made of plastics  and gel  and developed its operational method through pilot experiments such as an arrayed-colony formation, a parallel monitoring of various conditions , and an application to multistep reactions. to develop such technologies, fabricating microarrays in-house was actually prerequisite. as is well-known, the conventional microarray technology has been developed based on the highly sophisticated photo-lithographic technology developed for the ic industry  <cit> . therefore, the technological framework was well-established and rather easy to attain a high density of arrays . though the ic-derived technology is good at surface reactions, this technology developed for handling 'information ' but not 'materials ' has a limitation in being applied to a bulk reaction of molecules. one typical inconvenience is, as shown in fig.  <dig>  in the inability to succeed individual reaction products at each spot for the next reaction independently, thus making the parallel multistep reactions impossible. since almost all reactions in vitro need to be multistep ones, a number of separate tubes  have been traditionally used with an aid of robotics, resulting in a massive system  <cit> . currently, the number of wells per micro-plate has boosted up to almost the limit of  <dig> to  <dig> with increase of difficulties in operation time and throughput accuracy  <cit> . in this paper, a novel method depending on a wet and dry microarray system was developed, which enables parallel operations of sub-μl aliquots by overcoming difficult problems such as measuring and transferring sub-μl solutions in parallel without critical evaporation and adsorption-losses of samples. as a result, multi-different conditions were formed for crystallization of proteins and multistep reactions were successively performed in parallel beginning with pcr followed by transcription, translation, modifying enzyme reaction, and protease-activity assay. thus, this paper reports a great potentiality of a novel concept microarray mmv for the first time.

RESULTS
first, we need to describe how to make and handle the novel microarray mmv and then proceed to its applications.

introduction of microarray with manageable volumes : how to make and operate
following the methods described in methods, the mmv was prepared and operated . mmvs were fabricated using the apparatus built in-house which is composed of dmd  and others   <cit> . we could form any type of vessels, filters, templates, and others made of either plastics or gel through light-induced polymerization by controlling the light pattern generated by dmd . mmvs made of gel  were first introduced here and used in combination with plastics mmvs  to fulfill multistep reactions as described in methods. the basic operation of sample transfer from one to another mmv is an aperture-to-aperture way as shown in fig. 3a and fig. 3e. in order to demonstrate the feasibility of multistep reactions in the mmv, dna encoding green fluorescent protein  was pcr-amplified using an mmv . the amplified dna molecules were transferred to another mmv, partly filled with a solution for the transcription/translation reaction, and then subjected to the reaction. the resulting checker pattern of fluorescent gfp proteins  confirmed the success of the parallel aperture-to-aperture transfer and the series of reactions: pcr, transcription, and translation which finally generate fluorescent gfps .

without using pipettes, each well of an mmv can be set to be differently conditioned  by using various forms of sample-supplying mmvs . in other words, applying a sample to a particular well can be fulfilled by making the corresponding well chargeable as shown in fig. 3f. on the other hand, solutions in each well can be transferred to a facing well in the opposing mmv in parallel, if necessary, separating magnet-bead-trapped molecules from the remaining solvent and solutes as shown in fig.3d. therefore, combining these operations, samples in each well can be independently manipulated at will without using pipettes, which is one of the most remarkable features of the mmv technology. since handling of ~ <dig>  μl or less aliquots can not evade from the instant evaporation problem during the ejection of them from a microsyringe, this feature is valuable in addition to the rapid transfer. besides, 1000-fold parallelism is another great problem in handling such a minute volume of solution even if robotics could be employed. this has been a common challenge for mems  and μtas  approaches  <cit> , but yet not completely solved. therefore, a direct transfer, aperture-to-aperture , system is an effective solution for this problem.

to make this system working, both wet and dry mmvs were necessary to be used compensatively: wet one is required for pcr and cell-cultivation while dry one can be used repeatedly for the other purposes such as exchange of solutions. this complementary usage of wet and dry mmvs enabled us to perform multistep reactions which contain molecule-amplification  reactions as shown later.

application to a crystallization condition test
to generate multiple conditions , '2n method' was employed using dry mmvs. in case of generating  <dig> different conditions,  <dig> species of mmv plates  were used for this purpose . the transfer was carried out by spinning two face-to-face stacked mmv plates, a recipient mmv  and a donor mmv  . using the mmv thus made, we could obtain four distinctive types of crystals: typical, micro, needle-like and amorphous crystals  corresponding to the phase diagram in fig.  <dig>  this result informs us that the conditions of the lower nacl concentrations  and the ph of around 4~ <dig> were especially suitable for obtaining a large tetragonal crystalline and that the higher salt concentration  and the lower ph  conditions generated the needle-like crystalline whereas the other conditions led to poor generation of crystallines. such systematic information on crystallization conditions must be very useful for the physicochemical study of morphogenesis mechanism  <cit> . by applying this method, the cost-performance can be greatly improved due to the tiny scale  of this method and, otherwise unavailable experiments must be made possible .

introduction and effectiveness of the wet mmv
in addition to the plastic mmv made of pdms  or acrylate resin as a dry type, we originally introduced a wet type mmv made of polyacrylamide gel. to validate wet mmvs used for cultivation, bacteria e. coli harboring green fluorescent protein  were subjected to a single cell culture ). overnight culture of the cells in the mmv resulted in a poisson distribution as expected . this means that we could obtain neatly arrayed colonies without depending on robotics such as colony picker  <cit> , which can be easily manipulated in the following processes.

the power of wet mmvs was partly shown above in the success of the pcr-containing experiment  since the dry mmvs could not have provided a successful pcr due to the drying-up during the pcr thermal cycle. clearly, the wet gel must have protected the drying up effect of samples by serving as a reservoir against evaporation. importantly, whether wet or dry mmvs are used, coating the surface of mmvs with bsa  was indispensable for successful reactions.

application of mmvs to multistep screening experiments
two independent applications of mmvs were carried out:  selection of amyloid β -binding peptides and  selection of cathepsin e inhibitory peptides.

first, the selection of aβ-binding peptides was performed, consisting of  <dig> consecutive steps of reaction: pcr-amplification of dna, in vitro transcription, in vitro translation, binding of aβ and aβ-binding peptides, and monitoring the fluorescence of gfp  with three exchanges of mmv plates. the final result of these reactions is the aβ-binding peptides as shown in fig.  <dig> where those wells which contain gfp-fused peptides trapped by aβ on a magnetic bead are illuminating . those wells where gfps are expressed and halted  indicate the success of a series of reactions. the background brightness is caused by the reflection of the excitation beam on the surface of sample solutions. in this experiment, the peptide sequences could be obtained from the corresponding dnas contained in the same well by pcr .

as another example of multistep reactions, selection of cathepsin e-inhibitory peptides was performed using mmv plates. for the multistep experiment, wet mmv plates were used for dna amplification by pcr , in vitro transcription/translation, restriction protease  digestion, and cathepsin e-inhibition assay . after all, the wells containing cathepsin e-inhibitory peptides were marked as a dark spot . the contents in those wells were further analyzed by dna sequencing and the ce-inhibitory peptides were identified . through this experiment, mmvs were again confirmed to be usable for multistep reactions including pcr.

CONCLUSIONS
we have first introduced a novel concept microarray that can handle sub-μl scale bulk reactions, which enables 1000-fold parallel and multistep reactions. for this purpose we fabricated wet and dry microarrays with manageable volumes . mmvs could be used for setting multi-different conditions and for culturing cells in an array mode . especially, mmvs were powerful for in vitro selection experiments as shown regarding the selections of aβ-binding peptides and ce inhibitory ones . conclusively, the mmv has two prominent merits: an ability to generate multiple conditions  and another ability to succeed well-specific products well-to-well . both were proven effective experimentally in this paper. we sometimes experienced mis-transfers in the aperture-to-aperture  mode because of side diffusion in-between two mmvs . this problem must be solved controlling the quality of mmvs ). this technology is relatively free from the problems of evaporation  and adhesion losses owing to the direct transfer from well to well and the introduction of wet vessels made of gel. since the volume of a solution is measured by the capacity of a well, there are some errors in the volume precision by around 10% or so, which is still permissible for the current studies. moreover, this fault must be conquered by the improvement of the surface nature of dry mmvs . therefore, sub-μl volume, which is almost beyond the pipette operation, could be first manipulated quantitatively without depending on pipettes.

finally, drawing a possible application of the mmv technology must be helpful to visualize the utility of this novel one. namely, we will be able to fabricate a protein chip more conveniently and effectively than currently done. the procedures will be: i) make an oligonucleotide-array based on the conventional microarray technology, ii) trap cdnas by hybridization at each cognitive oligonucleotide spot, iii) transfer each dna parallelly to each corresponding well of an mmv by electrophoresis or diffusion , iv) do successive reactions in mmvs including pcr, in vitro transcription and in vitro translation on beads within a well, v) transfer the resultant peptides/proteins on beads on a chip surface and fix there by a tag sequence or else, completing a protein chip. this approach will drastically reduce the cost and labor to make arbitrarily designed protein chips. the protein chip thus constructed must be used for 'proteomic diagnosis' which aims to survey all biomarkers such as cancer, diabetes, neurodegenerative diseases, and others at once and quantitatively. to be encouraging enough, in vitro evolution utilizing the mmv itself  must be able to find such biomarkers.

