BACKGROUND
bronchial epithelium acts not only as physical barrier but also is a key factor of remodelling and secretion of inflammation mediators in airways  <cit> . in addition to sampling methods such as bronchoalveolar lavage  and induced sputum, endobronchial biopsies have been used as a key research tool over the last decade to study the importance of bronchial epithelium in inflammatory diseases and define disease progression in asthma and copd in humans  <cit> , and evaluate the effects of different drug treatments and environmental effects on bronchial epithelium  <cit> . besides identifying morphological changes, examination of bronchial tissue can provide information on mrna expression and subsequent levels of translated inflammatory mediators directly within the tissue, both by resident cells and infiltrating inflammatory cells using immunohistochemistry   <cit> .

horses are commonly affected by the disease "recurrent airway obstruction ", which has many similarities with asthma in people. inflammatory changes in the airways of horses with rao have been studied predominately on the basis of cell samples collected by bal, or less commonly, by analysis of other respiratory tract samples, such as bronchial brushing, tracheal lavage, exhaled breath condensate, and even lung tissue samples  <cit> . most of our current understanding about the mechanism of inflammation and involvement of various regulatory or effector cytokines in the airways of horses with rao has been derived from samples obtained by bal. apart from recent work of ainsworth et al  <cit> , similar assessment of bronchial tissues or direct identification of tissue cytokine levels by immunohistochemistry, which has been invaluable in human respiratory research, remains poorly investigated in horses.

the aim of this study was to evaluate the contribution of bronchial epithelium to airway inflammation in horses with rao during exacerbation and in remission, with initial focus on relative cytokine mrna and protein expression of cytokines il- <dig>  il- <dig> and tnf-α, that are involved in innate non-specific immunity. the differences in mrna levels measured by quantitative real-time pcr were compared with the corresponding protein levels in epithelial tissue measured by ihc. the epithelial cytokine levels in rao horses during remission were also compared against samples from healthy controls on pasture.

RESULTS
clinical examination and pulmonary function test
there was no statistical difference in age and body weight in principal and control animals. the clinical score of rao horses on pasture was statistically lower than during exacerbation , but did not differ from control horses on pasture . the rao horses showed a significant worsening of pulmonary function during exacerbation as a response to provocation with mouldy hay, characterised by significant increase in Δpplmax  and rl . during respiratory exacerbation in rao horses, there was also a significant decrease in cdyn after removing one outlier . during pasture the lung function improved in rao horses, but remained significantly different when compared to healthy controls which had Δpplmax of  <dig>  ±  <dig>  cmh <dig>  rl of  <dig>  ±  <dig>  cm h20/l/s and cdyn of  <dig>  ±  <dig>  l/cmh <dig> 

bal cytology
the total cell count, percentage of neutrophils and total number of neutrophils in bal was statistically higher  in rao horses post provocation compared to samples taken during remission on pasture . during the pasture remission there was no statistical difference in bal neutrophil percentage in rao horses compared to controls . neither the percentage of neutrophils nor absolute number of neutrophils correlated with levels of investigated cytokine mrna or protein expression. for the remaining cell types the percentage of macrophages showed a negative correlation with tnf-α mrna expression in rao horses during pasture  but the biological relevance of this was of questionable significance.

immunohistochemistry of endobronchial biopsies
while there was a tendency for bronchial epithelial levels of il- <dig> and tnf-α in rao horses to increase during crisis the differences did not reach statistical significance . expression of investigated cytokines in rao horses and controls on pasture did not differ, nor was any correlation found between ihc expression of different cytokines within individual horses.

immunohistochemical determination of percentage  of positively stained area of bronchial epithelium for selected cytokines. values are given as medians . ns = not significant.

real-time pcr
the differences in cytokine mrna levels from samples during crisis and on pasture are shown in figure  <dig>  in comparing rao horses in crisis versus remission the only significant alteration in endobronchial tissue cytokine regulation was a  <dig>   fold decrease in tnf-α mrna when in crisis . the mrna levels of investigated cytokines did not correlate with each other. differences in expression of investigated cytokine mrna in rao horses and controls on pasture were not detected.

immunohistochemistry versus real-time pcr
il- <dig> mrna levels in rao horses on pasture was significantly correlated with cytokine expression measured by ihc  whereas il- <dig> and tnf-α mrna showed no correlation to their corresponding cytokines on ihc. curiously, in controls examined on pasture, the tnf-α expression measured by ihc was positively correlated to il- <dig> mrna levels  and negatively correlated to il- <dig> mrna levels . in controls there was no correlation between investigated cytokines when comparing real-time pcr analysis to results of immunohistochemistry.

discussion
the horses in our study showed changes in pulmonary function and clinical scores that confirmed a period of respiratory crisis with neutrophilic inflammation and airway obstruction and also a period of remission. surprisingly, we were unable to detect significant differences in either mrna or protein expression in investigated cytokines in endobronchial tissue between provocation and remission. the only statistically significant finding was a small . however, given the extreme sensitivity of real time-pcr methodology this difference was unlikely of clinical relevance.

earlier studies report conflicting results regarding il- <dig> and il- <dig> bioactivity or mrna levels in bal cells from rao horses after challenge. however, these results may be due to differences in sampling time or the type of inhalation provocation  <cit> . regarding il- <dig>  others have shown that inhalation challenge with lipopolysaccharide  elevates il- <dig> mrna expression in both bal alveolar macrophages  <cit>  and peripheral blood cells in rao-susceptible horses  <cit> . however inhalation challenge with other agents failed to induce this up-regulation in bal macrophages  <cit> . thus it is possible that not only the sampling time, but also the mode and individual components of challenge agent may influence the dynamics of cytokine regulation. in our study, the negative correlation of bronchial tnf-α levels to il- <dig> mrna levels in controls examined on pasture may indicate the time-dependent changes in the expression of these two cytokines  <cit>  or simply be coincidental. the positive correlation of il- <dig> mrna expression with tnf-α measured by ihc  may have reflected the immunoregulatory properties of il- <dig> as a counterbalance to tnf-α  <cit> .

there are also several other possible reasons that this study did not detect alteration of these cytokines under exacerbation. firstly, the time point for sample collection in correlation to provocation might have failed to capture a temporally related enhancement in examined cytokine expression. others workers have shown time-dependent expression of inflammatory mediators in horse airways that occur within hours or days after provocation  <cit> . in contrast, our samples were collected only once rao-horses had developed clinical signs of impaired pulmonary function, , rather than at a predetermined time after provocation. alternatively, it can be questioned whether the bronchial epithelial tissues obtained were representative for the study. as shown in earlier studies in human copd and asthma patients, there is variability of distribution of inflammatory cells in bronchial tissue which can require examination of biopsies from more than one airway generation to increase the statistical power to detect differences between individuals  <cit> . of the six biopsies we obtained from each horse, the first two were from the first generation bronchus and examined by pcr. the remaining four biopsies were obtained progressively more distally in the lung and from these morphologically representative biopsies were then selected for further analysis by ihc. as well, the small biopsy size, the sampling of the epithelial layer without underlying deeper mucosa, and the fact that biopsies are generally sampled from more proximal airways and from subcarinae, are additional limitations to the sampling procedure. to secure antigen preservation and optimal morphology for ihc studies, we chose plastic resin embedding, gma, used in several human studies together with acetone fixation containing protease inhibitors. this embedding technique ensures both excellent antigen preservation for ihc and morphologic overview  <cit> . when planning the study, the choice of equine antibodies was limited. at  present there are several equine specific antibodies available for the  investigated cytokines.

the primers used in pcr have been evaluated and validated in other studies. moreover, companion studies in these rao subjects have shown increased expression during crisis of other inflammatory mediators in bal and epithelial cells collected by bronchial brushings and in biopsies  <cit> , indicating ongoing inflammatory process. thus, our findings suggest that, within the complex interrelation of regulatory cytokines, il- <dig>  il- <dig> and tnf-α may not play a key role in the inflammation in bronchial tissues in horses with rao.

apart from il- <dig> for the rao horses at pasture, the lack of correlation of the cytokine mrna to protein levels of il- <dig>  il- <dig> and tnf-α was not unexpected as regulation of actual protein level is likely more complex than a direct relationship to amount of mrna and the rate of translation and thus the amount of mrna does not necessarily directly correlate with the level of protein expressed  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
these results show that combining quantitative real-time pcr and ihc methods on bronchial biopsy tissues can provide a new complementary research tool to study the role of mediators and structural elements in bronchial tissue associated with the inflammatory process in rao-horses. future work should focus on examining temporal events in the early stages following challenge exposure, and expanding the range of cytokines examined to study the role of airway epithelial cells in the immunopathogenesis of rao.

