BACKGROUND
the error threshold is a limit on the permissible mutation rate for which "survival of the fittest" holds in darwinian evolution  <cit> . the error threshold can be seen as a limit on the amount of information maintainable in evolutionary systems  since an increase in sequence length results in an increase in error rate. the information threshold leads to a paradox in prebiotic evolution  <cit> . suppose that to increase the maintainable amount of information, an evolving system must acquire a more complex molecular mechanism to reduce the mutation rate. however, to have such a complex molecular mechanism the system must maintain a longer sequence in the first place. thus, the system will encounter a barrier in the evolution of complexity .

the error threshold was first formulated in terms of genotypes. however if some changes in genotype do not alter the phenotype or the fitness , there is no unique genotype which can be stably maintained. instead, the survival of a phenotype should be considered, and thus the error threshold should be formulated in terms of phenotypes  <cit> .

in this paper, first we formulate the phenotypic error threshold analytically by employing the additive assumption, in which base substitutions do not influence each other. under the additive assumption, we obtain the probability that a replication does not alter the phenotype  as a function of the number of base substitutions and the fraction of "neutral substitutions". our results show a qualitative difference from the previous formulation  <cit> . second, we analyze epistasis in rna folding of a particular rna sequence to examine the additive assumption.

RESULTS
phenotypic error threshold
analytical formulation
the quasispecies equation describes  replicator dynamics in well-mixed systems  <cit> . we transform the equation in two ways:  describing the abundance of phenotypes instead of that of genotypes by denoting the population of genotypes which share the same phenotype by one variable ;  distinguishing only two classes of phenotypes, the focal phenotype  and the others called mutants . the population size is assumed to be large enough to express the abundance of the phenotypes by normalized concentration. the population dynamics of the phenotypes is described as

dx/dt = σqx + σΛ x - dx - Φx,

dy/dt = y + σ x - dy - Φy     

where σ  is the replication rate of x ; q is the replication accuracy of x. Λ is the fraction of neutral mutants of x. d is the degradation rate  assumed to be uniform over the phenotypes. Φ = x + y is the excess production . the terms - Φx and - Φy induce a selection pressure. we neglect back mutation from y to x . from eq.  <dig>  we obtain the survival condition of x as q + Λ  >σ- <dig>  for which the stationary value of x is larger than zero. from this inequality, we will deduce the phenotypic error threshold, i.e., the maximum error rate of replication for which x can be stably maintained in the system.

we distinguish two classes of single base substitutions: neutral and deleterious substitutions. the class of a substitution is determined by the effect of the substitution on the phenotype when there are no other substitutions in the genotype: a substitution which retains the phenotype is a neutral substitution; otherwise it is a deleterious substitution. a beneficial substitution is not considered since the focus of the study is on the maintenance of x. 

to calculate the effective replication accuracy qe = q + Λ , we assume that a mutant is neutral iff there is no deleterious substitution: the effect of a substitution on the phenotype is independent of the other substitutions; i.e., no epistasis is assumed . let λ denote the fraction of neutral substitutions in all possible single substitutions, and let d denote the number of substitutions per replication. then, the probability that d substitutions are all neutral substitutions  is approximated by λd by assuming that the number of neutral substitutions in d substitutions follows the binomial distribution . this approximation is valid if the probability of correct replication per base  is sufficiently large so that d is small. denoting the sequence length of replicators by n, the effective replication accuracy  is obtained as



by assuming that q and λ are uniform among the genotypes in x, that q is invariable over sequence positions, and that n is the same among the populations. 

the minimum q for which x can survive is derived from q + Λ >σ- <dig> and eq.  <dig> as

qmin = /.     

the phenotypic error threshold is  <dig> - qmin. as seen in fig.  <dig> , the increase in the error threshold is limited for almost all values of λ. this is because if q decreases, the number of substitutions per replication  increases; hence the probability of neutral replication  decreases . at a large λ , there is a singularity such that qmin becomes zero. however, this singularity is not plausible in two ways:  such a large λ is not realistic ;  q at the singularity is so small that the binomial approximation is threatened. we studied the validity of the binomial approximation, and found that the inaccuracy in the binomial approximation is largest if in some positions of the sequence all possible single substitutions are neutral, but in the rest of the positions all possible single substitutions are deleterious; i.e., the distributions of neutral and deleterious substitutions over the sequence positions are completely separated. by taking this extreme example, qmin is calculated with the additive assumption but without the binomial approximation. as fig.  <dig>  shows, for a wide range of λ the binomial approximation is valid. qmin is underestimated by the binomial approximation only around the singularity , and thus the singularity is actually located at higher λ, which makes the singularity even less plausible. we conclude that the increase in the error threshold due to mutational neutrality is limited.

from eq.  <dig>  we obtain the information threshold, i.e., the maximum permissible sequence length as

nmax = ln/lnλ).     

as fig.  <dig>  shows, the increase in the information threshold is limited for plausible values of λ.  however, this result does not mean that a longer sequence in fact can have a larger λ, and thus it can be maintained. we studied the relationship between λ and the sequence length by utilizing rna folding, which is a well-studied prototype of genotype-phenotype map, where the genotype is the primary structure of an rna sequence and the phenotype is the minimum free energy secondary structure of the rna sequence. we utilized vienna rna package  <cit>  to fold rna . the average λ for different sequence length was obtained through comparing the secondary structure of randomly created rna sequences with that of all possible mutants with only one substitution. a substitution which retains the original secondary structure is considered as neutral; otherwise deleterious. as fig.  <dig>  shows, the average λ is a decreasing function of the sequence length. this relationship further limits an increase of information threshold due to mutational neutrality.

comparison between the analytical prediction and computer simulations
we compare our analytical prediction with computer simulations. our computer program simulates the evolution of rna replicators in a well-mixed flow reactor . in the simulations, each rna sequence replicates and/or is diluted  with a certain probability in every time step. rna folding is utilized again as a genotype-phenotype map : the fitness of an rna sequence depends on the secondary structure  of the rna sequence. the fittest phenotype is set to the secondary structure of a yeast trnaphe . rna sequences which have the fittest phenotype replicate with the probability  <dig>  per time step; all the other rna sequences  replicate with the probability  <dig>  per time step . the replication introduces mutations with a certain probability. back mutations are not allowed to occur – the effect of back mutations is negligible if the sequence length is large enough  <cit>  . the dilution probability  is calculated as the average probability of replication divided by the target population size. the target population size is set to  <dig>  all the simulations start with  <dig> yeast trnaphe sequences. the degradation of sequences is ignored .

the results of the computer simulations showed that the "representative λ"  of the fittest sequences increased from  <dig>  to ca.  <dig>  for the examined values of the error rate .  the value of the representative λ fluctuates over the time .

the equilibrium fraction of the fittest sequences of the computer simulations is compared to that of the analytical prediction over the different error rate in fig.  <dig>  the analytical prediction is calculated under the additive assumption from eq.  <dig> and eq.  <dig> by using the time averaged representative λ observed in the simulations after the evolution . as fig.  <dig> shows, the calculation  closely predicts the result obtained from the computer simulations . the predicted error threshold  is slightly higher than that observed  probably due to the assumption of infinite population in eq.  <dig> .

comparison with a previous formulation
reidys et al.  <cit>  derived the phenotypic error threshold as



from qe = q + λ . this equation shows an unlimited increase in the error threshold for λ ≥ σ- <dig> . however, qe = q + λ  is valid only if either  a neutral set is uniformly distributed over the genotype space , or  q is so large that most mutants have d =  <dig>  the uniform distribution of neutral sets in the genotype space is not applicable in rna folding as shown later. the latter possibility is discussed next.

studies of replicator dynamics on a neutral network often consider a very large value of q so that most mutants have d =  <dig> .  however, if the error rate  is close to the error threshold, mutants can have on average d >  <dig> even if λ =  <dig>  for which the error threshold is at the lowest error rate . the average d of the neutral sequences  per replication  is lower than the average d per replication. however at the error threshold, even the average d per neutral replication is larger than one for λ >  <dig>  . above consideration asserts that the error threshold will be substantially overestimated if one considers only a single mutation.

reidys et al.  <cit>  obtained an extension of eq.  <dig>  the so called "four λ approximation". this extension divides a sequence in four sub-sequences in order to take into account the fact that the fraction of neutral substitutions varies over the sequence position. this extension still overestimates qe though less so than eq.  <dig> because the approximation now permits four substitutions per replication as a side effect of the subdivision. note that this extension makes a fairly good prediction on the error threshold  because the use of a small non-evolved λ value coincidentally cancels out the overestimation.

in conclusion, it is crucial for the calculation of the error threshold to consider that the number of substitutions per replication is large near the error threshold.

epistasis in rna folding
the rather impressive success of the additive assumption is counter-intuitive in view of rna folding, in which many interactions occur between bases. in the next part of the paper, we study a particular rna sequence, namely the yeast trnaphe , in terms of additivity and epistasis. the objective of this study is to understand how the additive assumption achieves a good prediction in spite of a high degree of nonlinearity in rna folding  <cit> .

we compare the secondary structure of randomly sampled mutants to that of the trnaphe. similar to the previous section, a mutant is neutral if its secondary structure is the same as that of the trnaphe; otherwise, it is deleterious. to evaluate the deviation from the additive assumption, we categorize mutants into four classes as shown in table  <dig>  negative epistasis refers to a mutant which is predicted to be neutral under the additive assumption, but turns out to be deleterious due to the interaction of the base substitutions. positive epistasis refers to the reverse case.

δ is the number of deleterious base substitutions.

as fig.  <dig> shows, the additive assumption underestimates the degree of mutational neutrality. the same conclusion was drawn differently in  <cit> , where the additive neutral mutant is defined as a neutral mutant which lies in the same neutral network as that of the original sequence. our results show that positive epistasis occurs more frequently than negative epistasis in total. what actually happens is as follows. if mutants with δ >  <dig> are only considered, positive epistasis occurs very rarely compared to additive deleterious case: no more than  <dig> % of the mutants are neutral at d =  <dig> if they carry at least one deleterious substitution. if mutants with δ =  <dig> are only considered, negative epistasis is rather frequent relative to additive neutral case: as much as 35% of the mutants are deleterious at d =  <dig> even if they carry only neutral substitutions. however, replication with δ >  <dig> occurs far more frequently than replication with δ = 0: as much as  <dig> % of the replication contains at least one deleterious substitution at d =  <dig> and λ =  <dig> . therefore, the relative frequency of epistasis is flipped around. consequently, the additive assumption underestimates the degree of mutational neutrality. 

the effect of epistasis is already noticeable when d >  <dig> as seen in the comparison between the probability of neutral replication under the additive assumption  and that observed in rna folding . since the average d per replication is more than  <dig> close to the error threshold in our simulations, fig. 6a may seem to suggest that the additive assumption would substantially underestimate the effective replication accuracy  near the error threshold.

we calculate the effective replication accuracy  including the effect of epistasis in order to compare it with qe calculated under the additive assumption. the first trial was to include a "trivial" epistasis in base paired regions  as a part of the additive effect . however, the analysis showed that epistasis occurs mainly in a "non-trivial" way , and thus it is not sufficient for our sake to include a trivial epistasis. we next took a probabilistic approach to calculate qe with epistasis . the results of this method agree with the observation .

we compare qe calculated under the additive assumption to that calculated with epistasis as shown in fig. 6b . as the comparison shows, the additive assumption indeed underestimates qe; however, the underestimation becomes prominent only if the error rate is higher than the error threshold . as fig. 6b  shows, the average d per neutral replication is ca.  <dig>  at the error threshold, which is much smaller than the average d per replication . this means that the main contribution to qe under the additive assumption is from the mutants of d =  <dig> or  <dig> at the error threshold. according to fig. 6a the additive assumption is a good approximation at d =  <dig> or  <dig>  therefore, the additive assumption accurately estimates qe and thus the error threshold. when the average d per neutral replication reaches  <dig>  the additive assumption substantially underestimates qe , which is consistent with fig. 6a. 

in the above examination of the additive assumption, there are two points which must be examined further:  the analysis of epistasis was performed on a yeast trnaphe, which comprises the initial population of the rna evolution simulations, but the results may differ if the analysis is done for a sequence which appears later in the rna evolution simulations. thus, we performed the same analysis to a sequence which was chosen from the population of the fittest sequences after the evolution in the simulations . the results, however, did not change our conclusion .  if the length of sequences is larger, the average d per neutral replication may increase, and thus the additive assumption may break down before the error threshold. however, it turns out from the analytical calculation that the average d per neutral replication at the error threshold decreases as n increases when λ is invariant . furthermore, λ decrease as n increases . therefore, if the sequence length is larger, the average d per neutral replication will be actually smaller. we also conducted computer simulations of rna evolution with a longer sequence length . the results showed that the average d per neutral replication  at the error threshold was indeed smaller  than in the previous case of the shorter sequence length , and the additive assumption still predicts the results of the simulations closely .

CONCLUSIONS
• the phenotypic error threshold was formulated under the additive assumption. the formulation asserted that mutational neutrality increases the error threshold but the increase is limited.

• the importance of considering multiple substitutions per replication at the error threshold was illustrated.

• the comparison with the computer simulations and the analysis of epistasis showed that the additive assumption correctly estimates the effective replication accuracy  and thus the error threshold.

• the reason why the additive assumption achieves a good prediction of the error threshold in spite of a high degree of  epistasis in rna folding is that the average number of substitutions per neutral replication is small enough to avoid of the effect of epistasis.

