BACKGROUND
the number of sequences generated by many genome projects is soaring exponentially but most of them have not been characterized experimentally. manual annotation methods have been proposed by experts and are popular for use at the genome centers, but their annotation capacities are exceeded by the fast growing genome data. an automatic annotation scheme is in urgent need to speed up reliable functional annotation on new sequences produced. automatic annotation provides an efficient procedure for analyzing the gene sequences. most automatic solutions used to characterize the gene sequences are based on a high-level sequence similarity search against some known protein databases such as using the blast or fasta program. the correlation between sequence composition and functional characterization provides the foundation for transferring functional knowledge from a biochemically characterized protein to a homologous but uncharacterized one. however, sequence composition bias and database updating commonly influence the results of similarity searches, and they do not yield the exact share between biological function and domain composition based on the similarity threshold used  <cit> . many annotation packages have recently been developed. for example, a basic annotation, which is directly transferred from a homologue entry using a similarity threshold, is offered by the package genequiz  <cit> . other packages, such as rulebase  <cit>  and hamap  <cit> , use the classifying rules and are supported by the judgment of a curator.

in the post-genomic era, the functional annotations are of great importance in understanding the real cellular processes. a variety of enzymes and pathway databases including ecocyc, enzyme, and kegg, have been built to facilitate the prediction of the metabolic pathway. such databases are supplied as reference databases in virtual construction of the metabolic networks of other organisms. on the pathway map, enzymes are the main components used for linking the metabolic networks. the fundamental units of enzyme structure governing folding and function are domains of protein  <cit> . a domain is believed to be able to fold independently into a stable three-dimensional structure to perform a specific function. in general, a protein would comprise a single domain or several different domains. it is clear that the domain composition of a protein determines its function and pathways in which it participates  <cit> . in other words, the protein function may be inferred from the domain composition which is then used to annotate the unknown sequences sharing the same domain composition with the protein. more importantly, such rules are invariable unlike the blast results that typically vary as the database is updated. many tools are available for detecting the constituents of proteins such as cdart  and interproscan. interpro is a database of protein families, domains, and functional sites where identifiable characteristics of known proteins can be applied to annotate unknown protein sequences  <cit> . the tools of interpro, interproscan, can be also used to annotate the single domain protein sequence; however, it may be difficult to make a decision on the annotation of multi-domain proteins by the method.

this work proposes a machine learning method for identifying enzyme classes according to the rules that are related to the protein domain composition. using rules generated by machine learning algorithms, kretschmann et al.  <cit>  and bazzan et al.  <cit>  have successfully annotated the trembl database. they adopted the decision tree algorithm to obtain rules from the swiss-prot entries that are cross-referenced to the interpro database. they then used these rules to assign appropriate keywords to the trembl entries  <cit> . in this study, an association algorithm is used to mine the rules linking enzymes and domains and they are then used to annotate enzyme classes automatically. the association algorithm has been extensively employed to analyze market baskets. it is applied primarily to determine the relationships among items in a large dataset. in market basket analysis, large associated itemsets always represent items that are likely to be purchased together by customers in a single transaction. the association algorithm has also been employed to mine gene expression data  <cit>  and medical data  <cit> . this investigation utilizes an association algorithm to mine the rules linking enzymes and domains from the swiss-prot protein knowledgebase. the enzyme class and interpro accession number  are treated consistently as items in searching for rules governing the enzyme domain composition. these rules may be useful even for annotators who do not have deep knowledge on the definitions of enzyme classes.

RESULTS
data preparation
this work seeks to annotate unknown genes and establishes virtual metabolic pathways using the bioinformatics approach based on progress made in the monascus genome project at the authors' institute. only few monascus genes have been biochemically characterized so far. numerous well-characterized proteins have been stored in a public database so that it is feasible to mine the classified rules from a protein knowledgebase. the blast is a fast but insufficient method for annotating unknown genes because it does not provide information on the functional domain. analyzing the constituent domains of a gene enables the determination of possible functions of the gene. however, making a decision regarding the annotation of a multi-domain protein is difficult. in this study, an annotation model was established by applying rules derived from the domain compositions in some well-characterized proteins. the concept of annotation using the domain composition was further investigated. five datasets  were used to mine the association rules, which were then evaluated. all the datasets used herein have the ec class and ipr description. in the preliminary investigation, all the ipr accs of each swiss-prot entry were utilized to determine the association rules. unfortunately, some ipr accs were presented as a single rule whose entries were linked to approximate sequence position but assigned with different accession numbers. to reduce the redundant and insignificant ones such as the glycosylation site and others, the ida in interpro was employed to filter the ipr entries.

association algorithm used to mine enzyme composition
many data mining methods have been applied in the biological researches. for example, a decision tree has been used in keyword annotation in the swiss-prot  <cit>  and pigs  <cit>  projects. herein, the association algorithm was employed to find rules to perform automatic annotation. the association algorithm has been extensively used to elucidate the consumptive behavior. these rules are ordinarily mined from numerous transaction records. similar to the market basket analysis, the ec class and ipr acc's were treated as a single transaction record in every training entry. in the training file , each instance was composed of all the attributes  of the training dataset and all the ec class was included in the target class. the results indicated that various rules were obtained simultaneously. the candidate association rules were found redundant and many were subsets of larger frequent itemsets. table  <dig> presented the subset of fungous association rules thus obtained. the complete set of rules was shown in the additional file . the rules revealed, for instance, when the interproscan results of the protein sequence gave ipr <dig>  ipr <dig>  ipr <dig>  and ipr <dig>  the protein was identified as ec  <dig> . <dig> . table  <dig> listed the association rules obtained from the five datasets. about  <dig> ~ 70% of the rules thus obtained were the multiple domain rules . although the single domain rules dominate some datasets, the multiple domain rules are more important in the annotation tasks.

evaluation of candidate rules
as presented in table  <dig>  the testing dataset from trembl was used to evaluate the candidate rules. the precision was around 70% for the prokaryote dataset  though the coverage was less than 50%. the precision and coverage for the eukaryote datasets  were better than those for the prokaryote ones. the prokaryote training dataset appears to be more diversified than the eukaryote one which results in the number of rules obtained for the former was less than that for the latter. additionally, the prediction coverage was enhanced substantially while there were redundancies remaining in the candidate rules. in fact, the rules from the subsets of the large itemset were used to predict entries that were not exactly matched with the rules from the large itemset though the prediction accuracy was slightly decreased.

furthermore, the accuracy of the presented method was compared with the rules obtained from the interpro database. these rules were parsed where the ipr acc's were cross-referenced to enzyme in the entry_xref table of the interpro database. the rules such as {ipr <dig>  ec  <dig> . <dig> } were retained for providing the enzyme identification. there were five testing datasets used to evaluate the parsed ones. as shown in table  <dig>  the identification accuracy was below 65%. the results revealed that it was not suitable to directly parse the cross-reference between enzyme and interpro acc's without classifying the dataset beforehand. in other words, as mentioned above, the identification of enzyme classes should use the closer taxonomic rules. moreover, the rules generated from the association algorithm were highly specific in the closer taxonomic testing dataset. the association algorithm was able to select more confident rules in the protein database. as shown in table  <dig> and  <dig>  our single domain rules can identify enzyme classes with high accuracy, while multiple domain rules can lift the hit ratio in the enzyme identification. in addition, the remaining datasets which were not annotated with an ec class in the fungus dataset of swiss-prot entries were further employed to evaluate the fungus rule set. a total of  <dig> out of  <dig> test entries were found to match with the fungus rule set . most of these were otherwise poorly annotated by their functional description. these indicate that the rules mined from the association algorithm were unique to the enzyme class and could be used to annotate some unknown protein sequences.

the precision and confidence of each ec class was also evaluated in the fungus dataset. both quantities were varied among all the ec classes tested . however, a precision of greater than 75% was obtained for 60% of the ec classes tested . in this study, the swiss-prot entries were chosen as the training while the trembl entries as the test set. we aimed to find the ec classifying rules that are hidden in the protein knowledgebase and to estimate the accuracy of the classifying method. the rules mined and presented here can be used by an annotator to perform manual annotation. they can be also implemented in an automatic annotation flowchart. they are also feasible to be used in identifying enzyme classes based on their ipr signature.

CONCLUSIONS
this report proposed an alternative approach on employing the association algorithm. the association algorithm is commonly used to identify large and frequent item sets and mine hidden relationships among items. the concept can be applied in many fields other than market basket analysis. the method is extended here to mine the association rules which are then applied to identify enzyme classes. the current prediction scheme emphasizes on identifying enzymes of taxonomically closed datasets. rule sets generated from the eukaryote training datasets can be used to assign the ec classes accurately to poorly annotated entries whose real enzyme function remain unknown. extending the method to predict other types of data, including the transcription factors and structure proteins, is also worthwhile. however, the low coverage is a shortcoming of the presented scheme. the matching coverage depends on the quality of the training dataset which may be extended as a combination of various datasets with each being closed in taxonomic relationship. moreover, more rules may be generated using other association algorithms except the apriori one.

