BACKGROUND
identifying the essential components in a specific biological process and detecting the associations among these components in response to various conditions are important for understanding cellular functions. such components consist of interacting proteins, dna, and other molecules such as complexes, pathways, and regulatory programs  <cit> . therefore, a set of genes encoding proteins that are associated by functional related interactions, such as direct physical interactions between members of a complex, cascading interactions of a pathway, or regulatory interactions between a factor and it's targets, form a functional module to facilitate a specific cellular function  <cit> . to conduct a cellular process, module cooperation is necessary to properly facilitate signal transduction, regulation, and metabolism. this cooperation can be established by direct interactions among components  or through shared partners  <cit> . to adapt to changing environmental conditions, the formation of functional modules and interactions among these modules are likely to be dynamic and condition-specific. to sustain cellular activities upon changes in the extra- or intracellular environment, specific functional modules and interactions among modules are induced by a series of signaling and regulatory cascades  <cit> . for example, under low-nitrogen conditions, crosstalk is observed between two signaling pathways in saccharomyces cerevisiae, the camp and mapk pathways, which are both downstream of the small gtpase ras. these pathways in turn control the cell surface glycoprotein flo <dig> and are involved in invasive and filamentous growth  <cit> . therefore, discovering dynamically assembling modules, associations among these modules, and their condition-specific functions are critical for understanding the mechanisms of a biological process.

large amounts of yeast two-hybrid, dna microarray, and other high-throughput data are now publicly available  <cit> . these datasets not only provide information related to gene function and direct interactions among genes, but they also enable the use of clustering-based methods to discover functional modules  <cit> . by applying clustering algorithms to different datasets, various types of functional modules, including protein complexes, co-regulated modules, and signaling and metabolic pathways, can be extracted. in addition, with datasets derived from specific experimental conditions, functional modules with special properties, such as evolutionarily conserved complexes and condition-related functional components, can also be found  <cit> . based on the identified modules, researchers can use network measurement approaches to further analyze the properties of a module or to compare modules from different datasets to elucidate various biological characteristics  <cit> . clustering-based approaches, however, only focus on module identification and do not consider the connectivity between modules. therefore, these approaches do not readily provide information about associations between modules such as module cooperation.

recently, several groups have developed approaches to discover coordinated relationships between pairs of modules and to establish more complete frameworks for various cellular processes  <cit> . one type of approach searches for crosstalk pathways that significantly interact. by measuring the number of protein-protein interactions among all possible pathway pairs from a database, such as biocarta, the pathway pairs with a statistically significant number of protein interactions can be identified  <cit> . another type of approach aims to select module pairs that are coordinated in their gene expression levels by using data from gene ontology  and dna microarrays  <cit> . thus, these methods identify coordinated relationships that are co-regulated by common regulators or are co-expressed under specific conditions. both types of approaches are suitable for characterizing the properties of module association.

although the above-mentioned methods can be used to measure correlations between module pairs, they ignore interactions mediated by genes that associate with module pairs. these interactions are direct clues used to interpret the influence, function, and mechanisms of module cooperation and, importantly, to estimate the necessity of the cooperation between a module pair. moreover, as the modules evaluated by these methods are previously-defined gene sets, it is difficult to identify dynamically assembled functional modules and correlations between modules in a specific condition. therefore, tools still need to be developed to discover and study cooperating module pairs that function in important signal transduction, regulatory and metabolic reactions under specific conditions.

in this paper, we propose an approach to study module cooperation. we identified cooperating module pairs by searching for functional module pairs that significantly correlate with genes with important functions and genes that mediate communication between functional components of a process. to evaluate our approach, we also analyzed the functions, cooperating genes, and mechanisms of each identified module pair. using the yeast cell cycle as an example, we identified cooperating module pairs and predicted the mediators and interactions that are important for module cooperation in each phase of the cell cycle. the yeast cell cycle is divided into four phases: g <dig>  s , g <dig>  and m . during this cycle, a cell duplicates and divides into two daughter cells through a series of regulatory events and checkpoint mechanisms. cell cycle-specific components dynamically assemble and interact with specific factors to control progression through the cell cycle. for example, in g <dig> phase, the major regulator cdc <dig> combines with g <dig> cyclins and associates with other g1-specific transcription factors, such as the sbf complex , to regulate g1/s-specific genes and prepare the cell for dna replication  <cit> . in s phase, specific component coordination appears to promote dna replication, bud emergence, spb duplication, and spb separation  <cit> . in g <dig> and m phases, cdc <dig> and b-type cyclins form complexes that induce chromosome condensation, spindle elongation, and nuclear division  <cit> . in addition, to ensure that events of the cell cycle finish completely, checkpoint mechanisms coordinate multiple pathways to control progression through the cell cycle  <cit> . due to its complex regulation and the dynamic interactions of its components, studying the cell cycle requires a systematic approach that analyzes cooperation among functional components.

rather than considering only one type of data, our approach provides a platform that allows interaction and expression data to be integrated. the expression data provide information about dynamic correlations among genes in the yeast cell cycle, and the interaction data suggest possible interactions among genes. this information can be used to predict genes and interactions that may function in the yeast cell cycle. advantages of combining heterogeneous data were demonstrated by the studies of functional association prediction. these approaches used a probabilistic model to combine expression correlations and physical interactions between genes measured from different experimental data sets  <cit> . the combined scores were used to establish a gene network to present the functional associations between genes and to predict gene function  <cit> . to identify functional modules and the cooperating pairs that directly interact with genes essential to the cell cycle, we used a different approach to combine information from protein-protein interactions, chip-chip data, and microarrays. we did not use combined association scores between genes to construct the gene network but instead used direct physical interactions to represent links among genes. however, information from expression correlation was used to measure the essentiality of genes to the cell cycle. therefore, we can design an algorithm to search cooperating sub-networks  based on the physical interaction network. in addition, we evaluated the importance of module cooperation and only reported module pairs that significantly influence the cell cycle process. to analyze the architecture and special properties of module cooperation in the cell cycle, the resulting module pairs were further used to construct a cooperative module network . this cooperative module network presents cell cycle-specific modules and cooperative associations between the modules.

to understand the functions and communication mechanisms of each cooperative association, we also predicted genes related to each cooperative association . such genes could be regulators, signal communicators, regulated genes, or members of a protein complex. based on interactions among these correlated genes and genes within the modules, we further inferred the functions and effects of the cooperative associations in the cell cycle. thus, we used a gene set consisting of genes regulated in a specific phase of the cell cycle and regulators of each phase to verify and explore cooperating interactions of the identified module pairs functioning in specific signal transduction, regulation and other activities of the yeast cell cycle. using this phase-regulated gene set, we predicted phase-related interactions and genes mediating cooperative associations in a specific phase and then discovered dynamic changes in these interactions during the cell cycle. based on interactions of phase-specific regulators, we constructed relationship graphs for each phase of the cell cycle to identify possible crosstalk among modules through phase-specific regulators and to attempt to explain the roles of transcriptional regulators in controlling the cooperation of and connections between modules. these graphs present a dynamic view of the module interactions in the yeast cell cycle. by comparing graphs, we gained important insights into the changes in associations between the different functional modules.

RESULTS
to decipher how functional modules, such as protein complexes and signaling pathways, can cooperatively control the progress of the yeast cell cycle, we designed a method to study communication mechanisms among molecular components. the method developed in this work is outlined in figure  <dig> and was divided into three steps: the first and second steps were designed to predict cooperative module pairs during cell cycle progression and to identify correlated genes that cooperate with each identified module pair , and the final step was designed to evaluate our results and to analyze phase-related cooperative interactions among the identified module pairs . to predict and analyze important cooperative associations among modules and genes, we combined a wide range of experimental data, including gene expression profiles, protein-protein interactions and chip-chip data. these data were used to construct a weighted physical interaction network . nodes of the wpi network represent genes and physical interactions between gene products are presented by links. the weight of each node represents the degree of necessity for a particular gene in the cell cycle. the flowchart of cooperative module identification and correlated genes identification is shown in figure  <dig> 

functional module
as mentioned, a module is defined as a set of genes whose products are connected by functionally related physical interactions that perform a specific cellular function.

cooperative module pair
we defined a cooperative module pair as two modules that significantly cooperate in a cellular process with each other and/or certain functional genes. cooperation of a pair of modules can depend on direct crosstalk interactions or cooperative interactions through another gene product such as cofactors or common targets. based on our method, a cooperative module pair can be identified by searching two distinct sub-networks with a significant number of cross-links or number of common interactions to genes essential in the cell cycle in the weighted physical interaction network.

correlated genes
we defined the correlated genes of a cooperative module pair as genes which have a significant amount of direct physical interactions to both modules . cooperative interactions of module pairs can potentially be mediated by these correlated genes. correlated genes were identified for each cooperative module pair . we predicted five types of significantly correlated genes with regard to cooperative module pair modules m <dig> and m <dig> :  genes that significantly interact with genes in one of the modules via protein-protein interactions and are significantly regulated by genes in the other module;  genes that significantly interact with genes in one of the modules via protein-protein interactions and regulate a significant numbers of genes in the other module;  genes that significantly interact with genes in m <dig> and m <dig> via protein-protein interactions;  genes that are simultaneously regulated by transcription factors in m <dig> and m2; and  genes that regulate significant numbers of genes in m <dig> and m <dig> 

identification of cooperative functional module pairs in the cell cycle
module cooperation can have significant effects on the progression of a process because cooperative interactions that are mediated by genes in two modules can be required to activate or regulate genes with essential functions in that process. these cooperative effects could be achieved by transcriptional regulation, protein-protein interactions, protein phosphorylation, formation of a protein complex, or a combination of regulation and activation by genes from each module. to identify cooperative module pairs that are essential to cell cycle progression, we evaluated the possibility that any two modules cooperatively relate to cell cycle-associated genes by investigating the interactions  that bridge both modules via other intermediate genes within or outside the two modules in a wpi network.

weighted physical interaction network 
the wpi network is shown as a weighted graph in which nodes represent genes and links represent protein-protein interactions or regulatory interactions between gene products. links can be used to infer functional modules and cooperation among those modules. the weight of each node represents the degree of necessity of that gene and was derived from the degree of the node in the aforementioned co-expression network . as significantly co-expressed genes tend to be functionally related, the pearson correlation is a good scoring function used to evaluate the intensity of the functional correlation of a given pair of genes under specific conditions  <cit> . furthermore, an essential role for most hub genes in a co-expression network has been shown to be more prevalent than with other genes in previous studies  <cit> ; therefore, we used the number of co-expressed partners to estimate the probability that a gene is cell cycle-related. based on the wpi network, we identified genes and their interactions that are likely to be significant and involved in the cell cycle.

if the cooperation of two modules is important in the cell cycle, genes associated with both modules by a significant number of cooperating interactions are possibly cell cycle-related. thus, we designed the consistency score  to measure the difference between the weights of genes correlated with a pair of modules and the weights of genes that are related to only one of the modules in the wpi network . higher numbers of cooperating interactions among a module pair and essential genes  in the cell cycle process increase the consistency score of the module pair. in addition, to avoid local maxima and to incorporate genes possibly playing essential roles in the module but rarely linking to genes outside the module, we designed the mediation score  to incorporate genes that mediate interactions among genes within the module but has a few links to genes outside the module.

finally, we designed the modules' cooperation score  to measure both the consistency score  of a module pair and the mediation score . the cooperation score was our scoring function to estimate the possibility and importance of the cooperation of a module pair. a method that was designed to identify cooperative module pairs essential for the yeast cell cycle was illustrated in figure 1a, b and  <dig> .

structure and properties of the cooperative module network 
after merging overlapped modules and the removal of module pairs comprised of highly overlapped modules,  <dig> cooperative module pairs and  <dig> functional modules containing three or more genes were identified . in figure  <dig>  we generated a node to represent each of the  <dig> modules and  <dig> undirected links to indicate the identified cooperative relationships between modules and then constructed a cooperative module network . to analyze the functions and mechanisms of cooperative module pairs, we used the go term finder to identify statistical significant enriched go terms of a module  as its annotation  <cit>   and identified cell cycle-related genes in each module using the cell cycle-related gene set. the go term with the most significant p-value was chosen as the function of a module . the cell cycle-related gene set contains genes that are cell cycle-regulated or whose functions are annotated as cell cycle or dna processing in mips  <cit>  . genes contained in a module and in the cell cycle-related gene set were identified as cell cycle-related genes of the module . information about modules that link more than three modules in the cooperative module network is listed in table  <dig>  for each of these modules, table  <dig> presents its function, a subset of cell cycle-related genes contained in it, and the number of genes in it.

1the number of genes contained in a module.

2the number of links of a module in the cooperative module network .

3for each module, we only listed the most significantly enriched functional go categories  .

4a subset of cell cycle-related genes contained in each module is listed in the last column .

furthermore, we measured the significance of gene correlations within and between the putative cooperative module pairs . two types of correlation, physical interaction and co-expression, were tested . our results show that correlations within all the  <dig> modules were significant and genes of each module are highly connected by physical interactions. highly significant crosstalk relationships were also shown in our  <dig> predicted cooperative module pairs, indicating their pivotal roles in communication among biological pathways. by comparing the number of co-expressed gene pairs in the cell cycle with that in randomized expression datasets, we found that  <dig> out of  <dig> module pairs contain significant number of correlations between modules. moreover,  <dig> out of  <dig> modules showed the significant number of correlations within modules. these results suggest that most of the identified module pairs  are significantly correlated.

as shown, most modules, especially those in table  <dig> , were annotated as cell cycle-related or other specific functions with statistical significance . essential regulators that control the progress of the cell cycle, such as cdc <dig>  cyclins, transcription factors, and checkpoint-related genes, were also identified in functionally corresponding modules. the main cooperative relationships among modules and the basic function of and implicit crosstalk interactions between modules in the cell cycle are illustrated in figure  <dig> and table  <dig>  for example, we found that  <dig> of  <dig> modules contain target genes of cdc <dig>  <cit> . these results provide evidence for potential cooperative interactions between modules containing cdc <dig> and other modules. the importance of these modules can be explicitly demonstrated by the genes contained in them and the interactions in the cooperative module network . for example, module  <dig>  contains genes whose products sense dna damage, activate the dna repair system and pass this signal to other functional components such as modules involved in dna replication  to induce appropriate cell responses. more results about cooperative interactions through essential regulators are discussed in additional file  <dig> 

communication mechanisms and functions of phase-related cooperative modules
in combination with the interactions represented in the wpi network and identified correlated genes of each identified module pair , we then reconstructed a global map of the cooperative architecture of module pairs. using module  <dig>  and module  <dig>  as examples, possible interfaces of the two modules of an identified module pair and communication with other modules could be inferred by determining the direct physical interactions between the correlated genes and genes within the modules in the wpi network . the proteins in module  <dig> , particularly rad <dig> , are shown to interact directly with module  <dig>  and members of the 26s proteasome. these connections suggest that rad <dig> and rad23-related ubiquitin/proteasome processes are all necessary for nucleotide excision repair and dna damage checkpoints. in addition, fkh <dig>  regulates both the dna damage response and ubiquitin-dependent modules, suggesting that the function of these two modules might also be important in the g2/m phases of the cell cycle. these cooperative associations were also demonstrated in previous studies  <cit> .

one module may cooperate with different modules and genes to promote progression through each phase of the yeast cell cycle. we performed hypergeometric tests to evaluate our results and to investigate cooperative module pairs that significantly associate with cell cycle progression . based on the tests, we found that  <dig> identified module pairs significantly associate with the cell cycle process and  <dig> identified module pairs significantly correlate with genes that are regulated in a specific phase of the cell cycle . the number of cooperative module pairs that significantly correlate with genes that are functional in early g <dig>  late g <dig>  s, g <dig>  and m phase are  <dig>   <dig>   <dig>   <dig>  and  <dig>  respectively . to discover the most essential cooperating module pairs and to determine their functions, we ranked the  <dig> phase-related module pairs according to the number of their correlated genes that are regulated in a specific cell cycle phase. genes regulated in a specific phase were identified with the phase-regulated gene set from cho et al.  <cit>  . in this way, the top three module pairs were chosen for each phase of the cell cycle . to analyze the mechanisms of the  <dig> phase-related cooperative associations, we collected correlated genes of each module pair that are regulated in the corresponding phase of cell cycle and genes in the module pair that are connected with these correlated genes by direct physical interactions. in addition, we also collected genes that mediate crosstalk links  between two modules of a module pair.

early g1
late g1
s
m
1pair_id indicates the unique identifier of each identified module pair; : indicates the unique identifiers  of the first and second modules of a module pair, respectively.

2corrgenes indicates correlated genes of a module pairs that are regulated in the corresponding phase.

to discover cooperative module pairs essential for controlling cell cycle progression, we ranked the  <dig> phase-related module pairs  according to the number of phase-regulated genes correlated with each module pair and then listed the top three module pairs for each phase. the statistical significance of the cooperation of a module pair  and the id of a module pair are listed in the second column. to assess the effects and mechanisms of cooperation, a subset of regulated correlated genes for each module pair and genes demonstrated to be associated with these correlated genes are also listed in the table. these genes include genes contained in the first module ) and in the second module ) of a module pair. the references for these cooperative interactions are listed in additional file  <dig> table a <dig>  the serial numbers of these references are shown in the first column.

as shown in table  <dig>  these cooperative associations between cell cycle-specific components were verified in previous studies. we also found that the interactions among these modules and their phase-regulated correlated genes occur mostly through regulators that control the cell cycle and the transcription of phase-regulated genes and checkpoint-related genes. as shown in our results, cell cycle phase transitions are accompanied by changes in the main functional modules and their interactions . cooperative relationships of modules in each phase of the cell cycle seem to be established differently by different gene interactions within modules. for example, genes that function in response to dna damage stimulus  can communicate with genes related to mismatch repair  via pol <dig>  or with mitosis-related genes  at the s and g2/m checkpoints via rad <dig> . moreover, we found that signal transduction among modules occurs mainly through cdc <dig> and that cdc <dig> associates with different cyclins, transcription factors and genes regulated in different phases to promote cell cycle progression . thus, we believe that these cooperative associations cover important operations in each phase.

module crosstalk networks under the regulation of cdc <dig>  phase-related cyclins, cell division cycle genes  and transcription factors
although previous studies have focused on functions of the essential cyclin-dependent kinase cdc <dig>  cell division cycle genes  and related transcription factors, the crosstalk between modules controlled by cdc <dig> and phase-specific regulators is still not clear. we analyzed the cooperative relationships  of the correlated genes in each cooperative module pair to identify direct crosstalks that involve the regulation of cdc <dig>  known phase-related cdc genes, cyclins or transcription factors  <cit>  . table  <dig> lists the regulators for each phase and modules containing these regulators. finally, we constructed crosstalk relationship graphs for each cell cycle phase. figures 6a, 7a, 8a, and 9a show interacting relationships between modules controlled by specific transcription factors in g <dig>  s, g <dig> and m phases. figures 6b, 7b, 8b, and 9b show the cdc genes, cyclins and cdc28-associated crosstalk relationships of g <dig>  s, g <dig> and m phases. in these graphs, module pairs mediated by these regulators and modules that contain these regulators were investigated . the essential and specific associations of each relationship graph that were previously reported are summarized in figure  <dig>  the associations mediated by cdc <dig>  cyclins, and cdc genes during g <dig> and m phases were merged into the graph of g <dig> phase in figure  <dig>  thus, by identifying phase-specific module interactions involved in cell cycle regulation, we can further determine the influences and functions of module interactions and regulators in controlling the cell cycle . a total of  <dig> module pairs that correlate with these regulators were identified . figure  <dig> shows the number of identified module pairs mediated by each regulator.

essential regulators, including cdc <dig>  cyclins, cdc genes, and phase-specific transcription factors are listed for each phase. relationship graphs of each phase were constructed via cooperative interactions through regulators of the phase . to trace regulators that mediate crosstalk between cooperative modules, the ids of modules that contain these regulators are also listed in the final column.

when only connections via protein-protein interactions were considered, the relationship graphs of cdc <dig> and cdc genes of g <dig>  g <dig>  and m phase  and the relationship graph of g <dig> and g <dig> phase-related transcription factors showed a compact connectivity of modules . this type of connectivity implies that modules display direct crosstalk with each other. for example, modules  <dig> ,  <dig> , and  <dig>  all contain cdc <dig>  and these modules connect to each other to form a clique-like subgraph in the relationship graph of cdc <dig>  cyclins, and cdc genes . these relationships are primarily due to interactions involving cdc <dig>  related-cyclins, cdc <dig> substrates and phase-related transcriptional factors. regulatory relationships of s, g <dig> and m phase are mainly mediated by module  <dig>  . transcriptional factors essential in progression of s to m phase are contained in module  <dig>  these relationships suggest possible cooperations among functional modules for regulating the progression of each phase .

discussion
to construct a global map of cooperative functional components in a specific cellular process, we developed an approach to gather more information and to better understand interactions between different functional modules. as an example, we applied this approach to the yeast cell cycle. using this methodology, we identified genes and interactions related to the regulation and signal transduction of cooperative functional components in the cell cycle, in addition to cooperative module pairs. the structures and properties of module cooperation in the cell cycle were also revealed by our analyses. most of these results are consistent with previous studies and can be used to explain the complex operation of the cell cycle.

the weighted physical interaction network, search algorithm, and analytical methods enhanced the ability of our approach to identify condition-specific cooperative modules and to decipher mechanisms of module cooperation. we designed the weighted physical interaction network to capture dynamic information about genes and to measure the relationships between genes and modules. the weighted physical interaction network can be treated as a platform for integrating information from different types of experimental data. thus, the correlations between modules identified by the spanning algorithm will not be restricted to only one type. our methods can also identify important associations and genes related to module cooperation. in the cooperative module network analysis, we constructed an association graph of the cell cycle response to dna damage stimulus using cooperative module pairs identified from the previous step. based on functional annotation by go and the cell cycle-related genes contained in each module, we were able to infer specific functions of the cooperative associations and the identified modules. most modules were found to be essential for the cell cycle and important for module cooperation during different phases of the cell cycle. examples include modules  <dig> ,  <dig>  and  <dig> . module  <dig> associated with other modules specific to mitosis, whereas module  <dig>  and module  <dig>  associated with modules of more than one phase in the cell cycle . these results highlight the important roles of these modules and the cooperative associations among them.

based on our phase-related module pair analysis, we further inferred detailed interaction dynamics of each cooperative module pair during various phases of the cell cycle. for example, to initiate appropriate responses to dna damage, module  <dig> cooperates with genes within specific modules in the g <dig>  s and g <dig> phases . similarly, module  <dig> interacts with genes expressed in the g <dig>  g <dig> and m phases to regulate cell morphogenesis. these interactions also suggest possible mediators of these associations and specific functions of them in the cell cycle. in this analysis, we also calculated the number of correlated genes regulated in a specific phase of the cell cycle and thereby ranked the importance of the module pairs to each phase. these results highlight the main interactions among functional components in each phase .

finally, relationship graph analysis was also performed to display crosstalk between identified modules. this analytical method was designed to identify crosstalk mediated by a set of regulators, cdc <dig>  cyclins, cell cycle division-related genes  and phase-related transcription factors. from the relationship graphs, we could easily visualize the most essential and direct regulatory interactions in the process and discover phase-specific regulation. for example, cdc <dig> was strongly associated with the crosstalk among a group of functional modules related to mitosis and was correlated with transcriptional regulators such as fkh <dig>  fkh <dig>  and ndd <dig> during g2/m phase   <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
using the approach described here, we comprehensively identified dynamic assembling or activating modules and the cooperative relationships between them. following several analytical steps, a map of dynamic cooperative associations was constructed by identifying regulators, regulated genes and interactions correlated with cooperative module pairs. this approach could be helpful in deciphering the cooperative mechanisms of a specific condition. the advantages of this methodology in identifying important components, interactions and genes in the yeast cell cycle were demonstrated by our results. moreover, this approach can combine other data such as significantly regulated gene sets or known regulators to infer associations among functional components that are mediated by the gene sets and regulators. thus, it could also be useful in predicting specific functions of assigned gene sets, modules or interactions. as our methodology is quite flexible, it could easily be applied to experimental data from different species, conditions, or biological techniques. thus, by comparing results from different data sets, we should be able to identify unknown properties of dynamic cooperative interactions and gather new insights into dynamic cooperation mechanisms and condition-specific components.

