BACKGROUND
geneticists are often faced with the acute problem of disentangling the effects of natural selection and demographic history on the evolution of different polymorphisms  <cit> . such effects may be confounding in a number of cases: directional selection generally leads to a loss of genetic diversity within populations, which can hardly be distinguished from an effect of rapid genetic drift; balancing selection maintains genetic variation, which is also expected in case of intensive gene flow between populations; unimodal mismatch distributions may result either from purifying selection or from demographic expansion; also, linkage disequilibrium may have multiple causes among which selection and genetic drift are both strong candidates  <cit> .

although recent studies on the genetic history of human populations focus on the analysis of non-coding  or genome-wide  markers, allowing to get rid of selective effects acting on individual loci, data on classical and molecular polymorphisms related to either coding  or specific  dna regions have been widely used to reconstruct human history and thus need a specific attention. hypotheses of natural selection have been proposed for many of those markers, e.g. abo  <cit> , duffy  <cit>  and other blood groups  <cit> , mtdna  <cit>  and the y chromosome  <cit> . however, the strongest evidence for selection is certainly found for the major histocompatibility complex  in humans, hla  <cit> . this is explained by the crucial role played by class i and class ii molecules in both cell-mediated and humoral immunity. because hla frequency distributions are often observed to deviate significantly from neutral expectations towards an excess of heterozygotes, it is generally assumed that hla evolves under a pathogen-driven selection mechanism whereby hla heterozygotes would have increased fitness compared to homozygotes in a pathogen-rich environment. however, other hypotheses have also been proposed like frequency-dependent selection conferring selective advantage to rare alleles to which pathogens would not have had time to adapt, as well as fluctuating selection depending on environmental changes over time and space . these different forms of balancing selection also explain why an excess of non-synonymous compared to synonymous substitutions are found at the peptide-binding regions of the hla molecules.

despite so many empirical evidences suggesting that hla evolved under the influence of natural selection, it is not known whether selection has significantly affected the patterns of hla genetic diversity worldwide, compared to the effects of genetic drift. hla genetic distances are generally correlated with geographic distances worldwide  <cit>  and at continental scales  <cit> , indicating that natural selection did not remove the traces of human migrations throughout the world. in agreement with this hypothesis, tiercy et al.  <cit>  estimated a very low selective coefficient at the hla-drb <dig> locus , although variation in effective population size between populations may actually lead to more heterogeneous estimates. also, based on the hypothesis that non-coding regions are neutral, meyer et al.  <cit>  compared the amounts of hla and nuclear str genetic variation in a set of identical population samples to estimate the amplitude of the deviation due to balancing selection on hla, and found no indication of significantly reduced differentiation at hla loci compared to strs.

while the results mentioned above indicate a weak effect of natural selection at population level on hla loci, some hla population studies have revealed unexpected patterns that are not easily explained by the history and demography of human populations alone, in particular at the drb <dig> locus. sanchez-mazas  <cit>  found a lack of genetic differentiation  between a number of african, european and west asian populations for hla-drb <dig>  but not for hla-dpb <dig>  which is a locus that is supposed to evolve almost neutrally  <cit> . in addition, previous analyses of hla-drb <dig> revealed an absence of genetic differentiation  between some populations located on both sides of the western mediterranean region, i.e. north-western africa  and south-western europe , separated by the strait of gibraltar  <cit> . a possible explanation, which needs to be tested, is that balancing selection slowed down or prevented genetic differentiation among some populations.

actually, the case of gibraltar is particularly puzzling, because no general agreement is found on the role of this strait as a barrier to gene flow. such a barrier appears to be significant according to classical markers  <cit> , alu insertions  <cit> , x-chromosome snps  <cit> , and, most of all, the y chromosome  <cit> , although traces of gene flow have been detected for the latter  <cit> . by contrast, studies on mtdna  <cit> , nuclear and alu strs  <cit>  and the gm polymorphism  <cit>  indicate that the strait was permeable to human migrations, with an estimated contribution of north-west africa to iberia of 18% for mtdna  <cit> , compared to 7% for y-chromosome lineages  <cit> .

in view of these contradictory results, we focused our study on the genetic diversity among populations located in the gibraltar region. first, to determine the impact of the strait of gibraltar as a barrier to gene flow at distinct prehistoric periods and explain possible differences observed between some genetic polymorphisms; second, to determine whether balancing selection could have resulted in a reduced level of inter-population differentiation at the hla-drb <dig> locus, and, in such case, with what intensity of selection. considering that the strait of gibraltar is a geographic barrier between south-western europe and north-western africa, one would expect to observe higher inter-population diversity across the strait as compared to what is observed on both sides of the strait. therefore, we used a computer simulation approach within the approximate bayesian computation  framework  <cit>  to estimate several parameters of population differentiation under alternative scenarios for the peopling history of the west mediterranean region, and to estimate a selection coefficient for hla-drb <dig> 

RESULTS
observed data
intra- and inter-population indices  indicate that hla-drb <dig> and mnss are the loci which show the less overall differentiation between populations . it is particularly intriguing that the level of differentiation across the strait of gibraltar is not enhanced compared to the level of differentiation within each continental area  for these two loci . abo shows a low level of overall differentiation  but a higher level of differentiation across the strait than within each continental area . mtdna shows a higher level of overall differentiation  but only a weak increase of genetic differentiation between nwa and swe compared to genetic differentiation within each region . rh, gm, and especially the y chromosome show a much higher level of overall differentiation between populations and a clear distinction between populations from the two sides of the strait .

the first line represents the mean value for  <dig>  resamplings while the second line  represents the statistics computed using the whole dataset. p represents the proportion of indices statistically significant at 1% level or the exact p value for the whole dataset. d stands for reynolds genetic distances,  for the average number of alleles over the samples and  for the average heterozygosity  over the samples

as potential pathogen receptors of the red blood cell membrane, abo and mnss blood groups may be affected by selection  <cit> . although the ewens-watterson and slatkin's exact tests of selective neutrality did not show any significant deviation for abo after bonferroni's correction , neutrality tests performed on abo typed at the molecular level are clearly significant  <cit> . for mnss and hla-drb <dig>  a majority of populations  exhibit a significant excess of heterozygotes through ewens-watterson and slatkin tests, although selective neutrality is only rejected for hla-drb <dig> after bonferroni's correction for multiple tests. rh and gm appear to be selectively  neutral, as rejections of ewens-watterson and slatkin's exact tests are a minority  and no rejection is observed after correction for multiple tests. consequently, we decided to perform all further demographic estimations  by using only rh and gm .

abc estimation
we performed simulations using the two programs selector and splatche  <cit>  combined to the abc approach  <cit>  in order to: 1st estimate the impact of the strait of gibraltar on population migration  neutral way: gm, rh, mtdna and the y chromosome); 2nd estimate the selection coefficient required to produce the reduced genetic differentiation observed at the hla-drb <dig> locus .

evaluation of the scenarios
the first goal was to evaluate which scenario among the  <dig> proposed is  the most compatible with the observed data. in a few words, we simulated: 1) a "palaeolithic" scenario p with gene flow between small-sized populations since pre-neolithic times ; 2) a "neolithic" scenario n with gene flow between large-sized populations since the neolithic transition ; 3) a scenario pn combining the first two ones; 4) a scenario pni which also considers the expansion of the arabian empire and diffusion of islam into maghreb. see the material and method section for more details about those scenarios. as abc estimation needs many replicates and thus a huge computer power, we decided to perform the estimation of parameters only under the best scenario. we skipped abo, mnss and hla-drb <dig> at this stage, because we wanted to study the impact of balancing selection on those loci at a later stage. we ran  <dig>  simulations for each of the  <dig> scenarios . then, using the abc approach, we retained the  <dig> % best simulations among the  <dig>  simulated and we looked at the proportion of those simulations which belonged to any of the  <dig> alternative scenarios.

as shown in figure  <dig>  in all cases  the most probable scenario is scenario p. at the opposite, scenario n is incompatible with the data  except for the y chromosome. scenarios pn and pni, including both the neolithic transition and the arabian conquests, do not fit the data better than scenario p alone. consequently, we decided to perform all further estimations under scenario p, which best explains the data. in order to evaluate the effect of deme size on the results, we also performed an identical scenario evaluation by using a smaller grid  with a much reduced number of simulations . supplemental figure s <dig>  shows that the results are globally robust to deme size, with the notable exception that scenario n is favoured over scenario p for the y-chromosome strs.

estimation of parameters
still using the abc approach, we estimated the composite demographic parameters nmintra and nminter for rh, gm, mtdna and the y chromosome . we decided to estimate composite parameters rather than single parameters k, mintra and minter because the proportion of parameter variance explained by the summary statistics  is substantially higher for nmintra and nminter , which indicates that composite parameters have a higher potential to be correctly estimated. at the opposite, the growth rate r has a very low potential to be correctly estimated . we thus only present and discuss the estimations for nmintra and nminter below.

for abo, mnss and hla-drb <dig>  we also estimated the selection coefficient s. these estimations have been performed under scenario p. results are presented in figure  <dig> and supplemental table s <dig> . we took the mode of the weighted posterior distribution as the point estimator because performance tests show that this statistic performs generally better than the mode and the mean, especially for the coefficient of selection .

performance evaluation
the performance evaluation shows that nmintra is the parameter which has the best potential  and which is by far the better estimated . this parameter is particularly well estimated for allele frequency data and the multi-locus estimation, while it is slightly underestimated for the two haploid loci. overall, the performance test shows that the true value is found within the 95% ci in at least 95% of the cases. we can thus be confident in the estimation of nmintra. the point estimate for the coefficient of selection s may be relatively imprecise . however, the 95% ci shows a good coverage  and we can thus consider this ci to be reliable. note that s is better estimated when nminter is low, suggesting that estimating s should be performed in regions where a barrier to gene flow exists. the growth rate r has a low potential to be correctly estimated . the lack of information about this parameter in our dataset is confirmed by the 95% ci of the posterior distribution which encompasses a very large portion of the prior . unfortunately, one of our main parameters of interest, nminter, is very poorly estimated despite a good potential . only the 95% ci shows a relatively good coverage  and we consequently focus on this ci when interpreting the results. we believe that the intra-continental statistics that we used to measure the reduction of gene flow across the strait of gibraltar  are not sensitive enough  to estimate nminter with precision. in other words, we do not have sufficient information about this particular parameter in our dataset. moreover, our representation of the strait of gibraltar as a simple barrier to gene flow may be too simplistic to capture accurately its complex demographic role .

estimation
nmintra
if we look at the 95% ci for the multi-locus estimation , we get values between  <dig>  and  <dig>  with a mode of  <dig>  . locus-independent estimations give point estimates at  <dig>  for gm ,  <dig>  for rh ,  <dig>  for mtdna  and  <dig> / <dig>  for the y chromosome strs/snps . adding sex-specific nmintra estimated for females  and males  gives a number  close to the estimations obtained for nuclear loci , as theoretically expected. nmintra estimated for the y-chromosome is thus more than 5-fold lower compared to that for mtdna.

nminter
despite the fact that the information about nminter that can be drawn from our dataset is relatively limited , we get the following 95% ci for this parameter:  <dig>  to  <dig> . the point estimate is  <dig> , thus about  <dig> times smaller than the estimation for nmintra, but this direct comparison has to be taken with caution given the large ci around nminter .

r
it seems that there is not a lot of information about this parameter, as the estimated interval encompasses almost all the prior distribution:  <dig>  to  <dig>  . the point estimate is  <dig>  but it varies largely over the loci . this estimation is thus certainly not very reliable.

estimation of the selection coefficient for hla-drb1
discussion
loci comparison
the mediterranean area is a key region for the study of human genetic differentiations as it represents a natural geographic boundary between europe and africa, with people of different cultural backgrounds located on both sides. from a genetic point of view, north africans are closer to southern europeans than to sub-saharan africans  <cit> , but different markers reveal heterogeneous results regarding the amount of genetic differentiation or gene flow between the northern and southern shores of the mediterranean sea  <cit> . in this study, we focused on the region of the strait of gibraltar encompassing the iberian peninsula and western maghreb to try to understand the genetic patterns exhibited by different classical and molecular loci in relation both to natural selection - in particular that affecting the hla locus - and demographic history. to this aim, we chose  <dig> independent loci  evolving under different evolutionary forces and all tested in a representative number of populations located on both sides of the strait.

after applying an appropriate re-sampling procedure on the observed data to overcome the problem of data heterogeneity among the different loci, we first estimated several statistics describing genetic diversity in the region under study . three loci - abo, mnss, and hla-drb1- showed a very low level of differentiation among populations, with  no difference across gibraltar compared to what was observed on both sides of the strait. the first two loci code for blood group antigens usually typed by serological methods. abo exhibits very homogeneous frequencies of its classical a, b and o alleles at the worldwide scale, except in amerindians where o is almost fixed in most populations  <cit> . the global distribution of mnss haplotype frequencies is more heterogeneous, but, similar to abo, the patterns are not easily interpreted in relation to the geographic distribution of human populations. like for many other blood groups, the molecular basis of abo and mnss have been clarified recently and previous suspicions of natural selection acting on these systems  <cit>  have been confirmed by population genetics analyses: actually, abo is one of the most polymorphic genes in humans  <cit> . although neutrality tests performed on classical abo frequencies do not allow to conclude to any kind of selection , this polymorphism shows clear evidence of balancing selection at the molecular level, in particular within the o null-allele class  <cit> . interestingly, only  <dig> % of the genetic variance is accounted for by differences among populations within the o alleles  <cit> , which is less than 7-9% estimated for the hla-b, -c and -drb <dig> loci  <cit>  and much less than the 15% average estimated for other classical and dna polymorphisms  <cit> . balancing selection is thus also compatible with the observed apportionment of abo genetic diversity.

the mn polymorphism is determined by the glycophorin a  gene for which significant departures from neutral expectations towards an excess of heterozygotes have been confirmed at the population level both on allele frequencies  and on molecular data  <cit>  . these results argue in favour of the "decoy hypothesis" whereby gypa receptors, the most abundant on the erythrocyte surface, would attract pathogens and prevent them to affect more vital tissues  <cit> . however, the rapid evolution of human glycophorins may have also been driven by p. falciparum,  as both gypa and gypb are receptors of this malaria parasite  <cit> . in the present study, the low proportion of genetic variance due to differences between north-western africa and south-western europe is almost as extreme for mnss than for hla-drb <dig> . however, the estimated selection coefficient is much higher for hla-drb <dig>  than for mnss , and is not significantly different from zero for the latter . also, we found s =  <dig> , ci 95%  for abo. therefore, our study suggests that natural selection had a significant influence on the evolution of hla-drb <dig> but is not - or no more - detectable on the other two loci. other studies failed to demonstrate the consequence of balancing selection on hla genetic patterns despite clear evidence of deviation from neutrality  <cit> . this is probably because natural selection is weak on this gene  and would only be detectable by exploring regions where gene flow is reduced  and where differences with neutral markers would be unambiguous. in addition, natural selection may have operated at unequal intensities in different environments , leaving heterogeneous signals in the genetic pool of human populations. we tested this latter hypothesis on our hla-drb <dig> data by estimating s independently in nwa and swe. interestingly, we found that s was higher in nwa  than in swe  where it is not significantly different from zero . these results suggest that the two regions may have undergone a different environmental history, which is a reasonable hypothesis over the  <dig>  years period chosen for our simulations, during which important climatic variation occurred .this opens new perspectives for the study of human genetic history where the genetic patterns of partially selected polymorphisms like hla would be explored in relation to environmental factors varying in space and time, in addition to other parameters.

in sharp contrast with abo, mnss and hla-drb <dig>  the level of genetic differentiation among populations appears to be particularly high across the strait of gibraltar for the y chromosome. y-chromosome markers are known to discriminate populations and groups of populations much more than other polymorphisms, with a global variation among populations of 33-39%  <cit> . despite the fact that the estimations of gene flow  on each side of the strait of gibraltar or across it are remarkably similar for str and snp datasets, the genetic differentiation  between nwa and swe measured with snps is more than twice that measured with strs. this result, which was reproduced in an analysis of a smaller dataset that included exactly the same individuals tested for snps and strs , is independent of the pattern of differentiation among populations: population pairwise fsts  were indeed highly correlated . genetic differentiation measured by strs could be lowered because of the specific mutation process driving the evolution of microsatellite loci, which can produce alleles identical in state but not identical by descent, thereby rubbing out the effect of genetic drift  <cit> . however, rousset  <cit>  has shown that homoplasy has no simple effect on fst, because this measure is not only affected by the mutation rate at microsatellite loci but also by the mutational model governing them. on another hand, a recent study that compared large-scale snp and str genotyping in the human genome diversity panel  concluded that snp-based fsts could be inflated by ascertainment bias  <cit> . it seems thus plausible that a combination of factors, i.e. ascertainment bias in y-chromosome snps and homoplasic effects in y-chromosome strs concur here to make estimations of population subdivision diverge. note also that we encountered problems to reproduce by simulation some characteristics of both y-chromosome snp and str datasets: i.e. the very high variance of genetic diversity between samples for strs  and the very high genetic differentiation between continents for snps . this discrepancy between observed and simulated statistics could be due either to an overrepresentation of frequent mutations in the snp dataset  <cit>  or to a choice of very polymorphic strs , a kind of ascertainment bias that we are not able to reproduce by simulation.

whichever the nature of the markers used, the remarkable finding of higher levels of continental subdivision associated with the y chromosome than with other polymorphisms could be due to the fact that haploid components of the genome are more influenced by genetic drift and selection than diploid genes, due to their smaller effective population size  <cit> . however, a very different pattern  is observed in this study for mtdna, which is also haploid, thus arguing for a higher female effective population size  <cit> . the peculiar behaviour of the y chromosome could then indicate some sex-specific history of migration in the mediterranean area, with a major demographic effect of males in both europe and north africa, at least during the neolithic  <cit> ,  <cit> , and significant female gene flow across the strait of gibraltar. therefore, although contradictory results have been obtained elsewhere between observed mtdna/y-chromosome diversity patterns and their expectations based on patrilocality and matrilocality  <cit> , a higher level of female migration, as that observed at a global scale  <cit> , is here evidenced for the first time across a sea barrier. finally, beside sex differences in migration rates, another possible explanatory factor for higher female than male effective population size that is receiving more attention now is a higher variance in reproductive success for males than for females  <cit> . all the hypotheses given above to explain the results of the y chromosome are of course not mutually exclusive.

rh, gm and mtdna exhibit close and intermediate proportions of genetic variation across the strait of gibraltar, compared to abo, mnss, and hla-drb <dig>  on one side, and the y chromosome, on the other side. we thus consider that they are closer to an average for neutral markers, with a significant fct between  <dig>  and  <dig> % across the strait, and a genetic variation  of  <dig>  to  <dig> % on both sides of the strait . this result is particularly relevant because close values are found for two nuclear loci  and one sex-specific molecular marker , which are a priori difficult to compare.

ancient genetic pattern
because demography is acting simultaneously on the whole genome , we used  <dig> loci  to infer the demographic scenario which best fits the current genetic structure around the strait of gibraltar . our simulations show without ambiguity that the genetic pattern observed in the western mediterranean was mostly constituted in pre-neolithic times. indeed, the most probable scenario  involves gene flow since  <dig>  years, not only between populations located on both sides of the strait but also across the strait. time elapsed since the neolithic transition was too short to allow for the current genetic structure to emerge during this period. this is revealed by the very low probability associated to scenario n compared to all other scenarios involving gene flow during the palaeolithic . this result is compatible with the fact that the genetic pool of south-western europe  has been only weakly modified by the neolithic transition  <cit>  and that the genetic impact of the neolithic transition in north africa has been limited to eastern regions according to classical genetic markers  <cit> , although the picture is less clear for mtdna  <cit> . the notable exception is the y chromosome for which a non-negligible proportion of simulations starting in the neolithic period give compatible results. it has been suggested that the y-chromosome genetic structure observed in both north africa  <cit>  and europe  <cit>  is mainly the result of early food-producing societies, which matches rather well our observations. however, we cannot be conclusive about the scenario that best fits y-chromosome diversity because scenarios n or p may be alternatively preferred depending on marker types  and deme size . moreover, as already stated above, our simulations of y-chromosome data failed to reproduce the actual data with as much accuracy as they did for the other genetic systems.

it is relatively surprising that we do not obtain a better fit to the observed data when considering the neolithic transition and the arabian conquests, in addition to the gene flow occurring in the palaeolithic era . the first obvious explanation is that our simple models for the neolithic transition and arabian conquests do not capture the principal features of those two events. alternatively, recent demographic events would not have substantially disturbed the genetic pattern established during the palaeolithic, which seems compatible with recent theoretical studies suggesting a strong inertia of local genetic pools  <cit> . in any case, our results support the view that the genetic impact of the arabian conquest in the maghreb has been limited, particularly in morocco and even less in the iberian peninsula which was invaded mostly by maghreb berbers under arab leadership  <cit> . more refined modelling would be necessary to better study the impact of those events on the genetic structure.

gene flow on both sides of the strait of gibraltar
our results show that gene flow between populations either within south-western europe or within north-western africa is not particularly reduced. we compensated the relative lack of precision of the point estimates obtained individually with each marker by multi-locus analyses. nmintra is thus estimated between  <dig>  and  <dig> in our study. this estimation is lower than the estimation of  <dig> +/-  <dig> obtained for a worldwide str dataset  <cit>  but is concordant with another estimate obtained for post-neolithic populations from mtdna . under our model, nmintra represents a rough estimate of the mean gene flow between populations in the studied area since the last glacial maximum . this rough estimate neither takes into account the variation of nm over time, nor at specific periods such as after the neolithic transition.

unfortunately, we did not obtain very precise estimations for the other demographic parameters, notably nminter which measures gene flow across the strait of gibraltar. we estimated a nminter between  <dig>  and  <dig>  with respect to the mean gene flow between populations located on each side of the strait  but the overall reduction is not as strong as the one estimated for the y chromosome . this rough estimation confirms that the strait of gibraltar does not constitute such a strong barrier as suggested by y-chromosome data. for comparison, nm estimated on the basis of mtdna for nowadays hunter-gatherer populations is smaller than  <dig>  <cit> . substantial gene flow across the strait is not particularly surprising considering that its width has been at maximum equal to  <dig> kilometres . our main explanation of the wide interval obtained for the estimation of nminter is that our model lacks certain features that may have impacted on the level of gene flow between populations across the strait of gibraltar: i) migrations may have been periodical rather than continuous over time. one can imagine that gene flow across the strait resulted from the movement of groups of individuals at several periods of time, due for example to climatic changes  or for cultural reasons; ii) the mediterranean sea had a profound impact on exchanges between populations located around it  <cit> , but its exact role as a vector or barrier to migration may have been variable in time and in different regions. in particular, the mediterranean sea may have promoted east-west migration along its coasts but its influence on north-south migration is uncertain. our model of constant gene flow is maybe too simplistic to capture the impact of maritime movements over the mediterranean sea; iii) very different migration patterns for males and females across the strait may also contribute to blur the signal.

balancing selection at hla-drb1
we obtained an estimation of about 2% for the coefficient of selection independently of the deme size considered . this coefficient is very close to that estimated at hla-drb <dig> by satta et al.  <cit>  from the comparison of pairwise differences in silent and replacement sites in the peptide binding region of the molecule . such similarity indicates that this result is very robust, although slatkin and muirhead  <cit>  found a lower value based on a simpler model. the close agreement between the molecular studies of satta et al. and ours, despite completely different approaches, indicates that our method is powerful and that a similar approach is likely to be applied successfully to estimate coefficients of selection at the other hla loci as well. the very good fit of the two estimations obtained in the present study with the two different grid size also suggests that our estimation is relatively robust although our performance tests demonstrate a tendency to an overestimation of the coefficient of selection . one interesting result is that the precision of the estimation is inversely proportional to nminter, the largest bias being obtained when gene flow between north-western africa and south-western europe is the highest . consequently, the estimation of s would certainly be improved if we were able to better characterize nminter than in the present study, as both parameters are strongly linked. this indicates that further studies aiming to estimate selection at hla loci ought to be performed in areas where gene flow is reduced.

CONCLUSIONS
while contrasted conclusions were obtained by previous studies based mostly on single genetic loci, our study clarifies the role of the strait of gibraltar regarding its permeability to gene flow. indeed, our multi-locus approach led us to take into account variations between loci when trying to infer past history of human populations around the gibraltar area. we were thus able to show that the y chromosome on one side, and hla-drb <dig> on the other side constitute two extreme cases of very strong and very weak  genetic differentiations between populations across the strait. the lack of genetic differentiation for hla-drb <dig> is particularly interesting because it can be explained by balancing selection . given the huge worldwide dataset available for this locus, a better understanding on the mechanisms of selection at hla loci could be very helpful to the study of human evolution, and more generally mhc. our results obtained for gibraltar have to be confirmed by further studies in other areas, especially where gene flow between populations is reduced. this work thus constitutes a step forward towards a better characterization of the combined effects of selection and demography on the genetic structure of populations, and especially on their genetic differentiation.

