BACKGROUND
visual-tactile cross-modal plasticity due to visual deprivation has been reported  <cit> . for visually-deprived persons, braille is the most successful system for the transmission of written information. in braille, the visual perception of printed characters is replaced by the tactile interpretation of raised dots. braille reading is known to activate the visual cortex of the blind, indicating remarkable cortical plasticity. however, such findings typically come from experiments in subjects who have been blind from a very early age and who also have undergone braille training from a young age. as a result, it is not clear whether the visual cortex activation is related to long-term braille training or to visual deafferentation. a previous study has shown that non-braille haptic processes activate the visual cortex of blind subjects who read braille proficiently, which is consistent with the latter hypothesis  <cit> . additionally, the occipital cortex of blind subjects without braille training was activated during tactile discrimination tasks, whereas that of control sighted subjects was not  <cit> . hence the activation of the association visual cortex of blind subjects while performing a tactile discrimination task may be due to sensory deafferentation, wherein a competitive imbalance favors the tactile over the visual modality. recent studies indicate that both tactile and visual processing of objects are represented in the visual association cortex  <cit> , indicating that visual and tactile processing may be competitively balanced in the association cortices where the inputs adjoin  <cit> . therefore, visual deafferentation may cause less demand on bottom-up visual processing, which may in turn introduce an opportunity for the expansion of tactile representations in the visual association cortex.

these findings indicate that cross-modal plasticity may be induced not only by sensory deafferentation but also by learning. recently, audio-visual cross-modal plasticity due to learning has been shown while pianists observe piano playing  <cit> . well-trained pianists are able to identify pieces of music by watching the hands touch the piano keys; thus the visual information from observing the sequential finger movements was transformed into the auditory modality during "key-touch reading". viewing the bimanual hand movements of a piano player making key presses actually activated the left planum temporale  of well-trained subjects. the naïve and less well-trained groups did not show activation of the left pt during any of the tasks  <cit> .

anticipating a similar learning effect in visual-tactile cross-modal plasticity, we conducted fmri studies in persons with normal sight who have had long-term tactile shape discrimination training on mah-jong tiles  <cit> . mah-jong is a chinese game similar to card games, involving two-dimensional plastic tiles with various marks carved on one side. some well-trained mah-jong players can identify the carved patterns by touch. our hypothesis was that the subjects who are well-trained on the tactile discrimination of mah-jong patterns would show more prominent activation in the visual cortex when performing this task, including the multi-modal ventral association visual cortex, than the naïve subjects. furthermore, as we expected the same effect even with unfamiliar materials, the mah-jong experts also underwent a tactile discrimination task using braille characters, to which they were naïve.

RESULTS
the mean percentage of correct responses during mah-jong tile discrimination was  <dig>  ±  <dig> %  in the expert group, which was significantly better than the control group . the mean accuracy during braille discrimination by the seven subjects in the expert group was  <dig>  ±  <dig> %, which was significantly worse than the mah-jong discrimination  by the same subjects , and comparable with the accuracy scores of the control group during mah-jong discrimination .

as our region of interest was the occipital cortex, we searched for task-related activation in the occipital lobe. in the expert group there was significant occipital midline activation, possibly incorporating the primary visual cortex  and the lateral occipital cortex  on the left . both groups showed significant activation  in the left lo  coordinates, x = - <dig> mm, y = - <dig> mm, z = - <dig> mm)  <cit> . compared with the control group, the primary visual cortex  and the left lo  of the expert group were more prominently activated . there was no significant activation in the occipital cortex when we contrasted ctl > mj experts.

the expert group also revealed significant activation in the left lo  and in v <dig>  during the braille task. the activation of v <dig> by the braille task in the expert group was significantly more prominent than that in the control group by the mah-jong task . although our main interest was in the occipital cortex, we also evaluated the parietal cortex. there was no significant group difference in the parietal cortex, particularly in the primary somatosensory area  . the time course of the s <dig>  v <dig>  and lo activation of a representative subject from each group is presented in figure  <dig>  when we included the non-experts, performance on the mah-jong tactile discrimination task and the v <dig> activity were positively correlated . typical individual data are shown in figure  <dig>  revealing that the mah-jong discrimination activated the regions adjacent to the calcarine salcus, and hence v <dig> . furthermore, the inter-subject variation of calcarine sulcus with respect to the distance from the local maxim of interest, , was small: the distance was  <dig>  mm +/-  <dig>  mm  calculated with the y-z plane of the normalized individual anatomical mri. this study showed that the left lateral occipital cortex was activated by the tactile shape discrimination task. based on talairach's coordinates  <cit>  – converted from mni coordinates using an established formula  <cit>  – this area corresponds to lo  <cit> , a functionally defined region posterior to human mt  that is topographically similar to the macaque v <dig>  <cit> . like the macaque v <dig> , lo lies immediately posterior to mt  and expands and curves postero-inferiorly, to the area anterior to vp. lo showed greater activation in response to visual images of natural objects than to a wide variety of non-object control stimuli including textures, random dots, gratings, and highly scrambled images of objects. activation in lo did not appear to be affected by either the object's category or its level of familiarity to the subjects  <cit> . hence, lo acts as an intermediate processing stage between the primary visual cortex and the higher-order "cognitive" object-recognition stages. it has been speculated that broad population coding of either object prototypes or object components underlies lo responses  <cit> . recent human imaging studies suggest that subsequent, more cognitive stages involved in object identification activate more anterior and ventral areas.

the cross-modal activation revealed in the present study is in accordance with that found in previous studies  <cit> . amedi et al.  <cit>  first demonstrated consistent somatosensory activation in the occipito-temporal region during 3d object naming. they concluded that cortical neurons in the occipito-temporal region in humans may function as a multimodal object-selective network  <cit> . the activation in the occipito-temporal region reflects stored object-related visual information that can be accessed via cues from somatosensory modalities, and possibly from other modalities as well  <cit> . this argument suggests that direct interactions among modality-specific sensory pathways underlie the multimodal representation of objects  <cit> . according to this view, the bimodal activation occurred in the visual cortex rather than the somatosensory areas because object recognition relies primarily on vision. stoesz et al.  <cit>  reported that 2d macrospatial form perception, compared with microspatial form perception, preferentially activated the lateral occipital complex, a part of the ventral visual pathway active during visual form perception. these authors concluded that the lo is cross-modally activated during form perception.

the present study showed that tactile discrimination of mah-jong tiles activated v <dig> in well-trained subjects in addition to activation in the left lo. in the naïve subjects, the lo was activated but v <dig> was not activated. both the lo and v <dig> of the well-trained subjects were activated by braille tactile discrimination, to which all the participants were naïve. the expert group was naive to the braille task as was the control group to the mah-jong task. both groups performed comparably well for the different tasks they were both naive to. unfortunately, we have not tested the control group to perform the braille task but from previous studies  <cit>  we can report that the performance of braille task for naive subjects is comparable to the performance of the mah-jong experts that are nevertheless naive to the braille task. still there was a significant difference in the task-related activation of v <dig> between the two groups. therefore a difference in difficulty is unlikely to be the cause of the v <dig> activation. the 2d patterns of the mah-jong tiles and braille characters were distinctively different in terms of the concavity/convexity and the type of shape  . therefore, it was unlikely that the braille characters were cross-modally associated with a visual representation. hence the v <dig> activation in trained subjects was not caused by cross-modal paired associations  <cit>  or visual imagery, but rather is due to cross-modal plastic changes produced by the effects of long-term training on one set of cards  that generalizes to an untrained set of cards .

burton et al.  <cit>  showed that simple vibrotactile stimulation activates both lower tier visuotopic  and several higher tier visual areas . early blind participants showed the most extensive distribution of activity. late blind participants exhibited activity in mostly similar regions, but the response magnitudes declined with the age of onset of blindness. three sighted individuals had supra-threshold activity in v <dig>  these results suggest that vibrotactile inputs probably activate the visual cortex through some latent pathway common to both blind and sighted subjects  <cit> . burton et al.  <cit>  also suggested that the learning effect may be important in the v <dig> activation in the blind. using fmri in late-onset but braille naïve blind individuals, and auditory-presented phonological tasks, they found task-related activation in both lower tier and higher tier visual areas. burton et al.  <cit>  speculated that visual deprivation alone induces reorganization of the visual cortex, particularly in regions with already strong multisensory properties, where a competitive shift to non-visual inputs may readily follow visual deprivation  <cit> . in contrast, cross-modal reorganization of the lower tier visual areas, which are not cross-modally responsive in sighted people, may be recruited particularly through regularly attending to selected non-visual inputs. such learning might be needed to strengthen the more remote connections with multisensory cortical areas  <cit> . cross-modal reorganization of lower tier visual areas may thus be triggered in sighted subjects by learning skills such as mah-jong discrimination.

the present finding is in agreement with amedi and colleagues' prediction about visual-tactile cross-modal plasticity  <cit> . using blind subjects, their study showed that in the absence of visual input the somatosensory activity in the occipito-temporal region expands to the rest of the lo and to earlier retinotopic areas such as v <dig> and v <dig>  amedi et al. therefore speculated that cross-modal plasticity occurs between neighbouring areas.

the present study suggested that cross-modal activation of v <dig> resulting from long-term learning does not appear to have a critical period, because our subjects all acquired their skills after their mid-teens. this is in contrast with the cross-modal plasticity occurring due to sensory deafferentation. previous studies on blind subjects who had different ages of the onset of blindness  <cit>  revealed a critical period for the involvement of v <dig> during tactile discrimination. this discrepancy might be explained by differences in training. the sighted subjects learning mah-jong essentially had been performing a matching-to-sample task, i.e. matching tactile to visual information. on the other hand, blind subjects learn braille in the tactile modality only, because they usually begin learning braille after they have lost their sight. this point could be tested by examining whether there is a critical period of v <dig> activation in blind subjects for mah-jong discrimination. our prediction would be that a blind person would show a critical period for mah-jong tile discrimination as well as braille discrimination.

CONCLUSIONS
the present study showed that long-term training modified the tactile-to-visual cross-modal responses in the primary visual cortex of sighted subjects. the training effect in the primary visual cortex generalized to new tactile-to-visual stimulation material but did not enhance the recognition performance for this new stimulation material.

