BACKGROUND
several methods have been developed for the detailed global comparison of multiple whole genomes and the production of global phylogenies. most of these methods require the prior identification and selection of a reasonably small subset of putative orthologs within which individual homologous sites are identified with some degree of confidence using alignment  <cit> . frequently, detailed alignment information is subdivided and compressed into a smaller number of complex characters , which are then used for quantitative comparison , but the more or less direct use of large scale sequence alignments have also been attempted  <cit> .

though generally less developed, many non-alignment methods, considered initially by blaisdell  <cit> , are currently being explored for a similar purpose . rarely do such methods simultaneously provide 1) detailed and unbiased comparisons of a high fraction of biomolecular sequences within full genome datasets, and 2) globally consistent gene and species trees based on this exhaustive comparison. we have recently developed an svd-based phylogenetic method that provides accurate comparisons of a high fraction of sequences within whole genomes without the prior identification of orthologs or homologous sites  <cit> . this method has been successfully applied to a number of diverse genome datasets, including mitochondrial genomes, bacterial genomes, and viral genomes  <cit> . here we apply this method to a diverse set of nine complete eukaryotic nuclear genomes, resulting in the production of a species tree based on the automatic identification and simultaneous comparison of over  <dig> conserved amino acid motifs and gene families.

RESULTS
proteome data sets and sequence conversion
the nine eukaryotic genomes compared in this analysis are listed in table  <dig>  the protein sets obtained from ncbi for the malaria parasite  and the budding yeast  each contributed only 3% of the  <dig>  total proteins in the dataset, while the proteins for frub provided nearly 21% of the total. only the frub proteins were obtained from the ensemble genome browser  <cit> , since protein predictions for this organism were not available from ncbi. differences in methods used to predict proteins by these two organizations might be responsible for the large difference in the number of proteins predicted for comparable vertebrate genomes . these differences could, in principle, drastically effect the gene and species trees derived from a global comparison of all proteins. however, the position of frub in the final species tree suggests that these effects were relatively minor . we have noted previously that even drastic genome size differences can be accommodated by our method  <cit> .

svd-derived vector definitions for motifs and gene families
all the proteins in the dataset were recoded as overlapping tetrapeptide frequency vectors and the resulting data matrix was decomposed by the svd. a total of  <dig> singular triplets were obtained as output. the "protein" vectors provided in the "right" factor matrix are known to provide reduced dimensional definitions for all proteins in the dataset as linear combinations of the orthogonal "right" singular vectors . conversely, the right singular vectors themselves frequently represent "ideal" versions of proteins defining a given gene family  <cit>  protein vectors having the strongest projections on a given rsv are therefore likely to represent members of a given gene family. in this analysis, the proteins with the five strongest projections  for each rsv were used to identify and summarize a number of gene families. the total number of proteins from each species that appear in the "top 5" for all  <dig> right singular vectors are listed in table  <dig>  although the fraction of "top 5" proteins identified by the svd roughly parallels the fraction of total proteins from each species, the mammalian proteins tend to dominate the analysis.

each right singular vector can potentially define two distinct gene families. in this case, the highest positive elemental values within a vector identify proteins associated with one protein family, while the highest negative values identify proteins associated with an anti-correlated family . frequently, however, strong family definitions are provided for just one protein family. in this case, the anti-correlated proteins are seen to be derived from a mixture of two or more families. since the choice of sign is arbitrary, strong family definitions are equally likely to be provided by either the positive or the negative values within a vector. family definitions provided by positive vector values are denoted below using the simple vector index . those provided by negative vector values are followed by an "a" . its worth noting at this point that protein family definitions provided by the svd necessarily account for not only "what is there" , but also "what is not there" .

protein family definitions provided by right singular vectors
an abbreviated list of  <dig> protein families identified within the  <dig> svd-derived singular triplets are provided in table  <dig>  for each listed singular triplet, the gi# of an example protein chosen from among the "top 5" values within the right singular vector is provided, along with its corresponding name and a protein description provided within the ncbi annotation for that protein. in general, proteins described by the more dominant singular triplets were selected for presentation from the complete list of  <dig> triplets. however, some were chosen due to their historical utility for evolutionary comparisons  and/or their tendency to be accompanied by strongly correlated peptide motifs . relatively few families appear in the table due to the fact that some vectors strongly describe only one family rather than two, some vectors describe only families from species that lack annotation or are poorly annotated at ncbi , some vectors describe protein families listed by ncbi merely as "unknown" or "conserved unknown", some vectors describe proteins with weakly conserved motifs, and some vectors describe distinct subfamilies of proteins. in the latter case, multiple right singular vectors are apparently required in combination to describe some of the more diverse families of proteins. included in table  <dig> is the number of singular vectors that include the chosen example protein within its "top 5". when multiple vectors are involved in defining multiple related subfamilies, the most "dominant" vector  is listed in the first column. thus, some proteins are seen to have multiple subfamily affiliations. the multiple vectors observed per family effectively subdivide the  <dig> families into  <dig> distinct subfamilies. for instance, table  <dig> includes a set of  <dig> ribosomal protein families described by a total of  <dig> singular vectors . ribosomal proteins are frequently well conserved, effectively aligned, and commonly used for estimating evolutionary relationships. their presence within our list of dominant singular vectors suggests their utility for establishing evolutionary relationships even in the absence of explicit alignments and explicit a priori assignments of orthology.

the diverse families of ras proteins present within the eukaryotic data set provide good examples of the ability of svd-derived singular triplets to identify and describe both superfamilies and subfamilies of proteins. the ras proteins are well described by at least  <dig> vectors, including the  <dig> dominant vectors highlighted in italics in table  <dig>  all the "top 5" members of the protein families identified by these  <dig> vectors are listed in table  <dig>  vector 197a summarizes the brain-associated ras <dig> subfamily , vector 236a summarizes the aplysia-related ras subfamily , vectors  <dig> and 277a summarize the brain-associated ras  <dig> subfamily  and the complex ha/k/nras subfamily  respectively, vector 350a summarizes the ras-related c <dig> botulinum toxin substrate  <dig> subfamily , and vector 387a summarizes the brain-associated ras1b subfamily . the most dominant ras vector, 389a, appears to describe a more generalized version of the rab <dig> subfamily, since this vector includes both rab1a and rab1b proteins within the "top five". in addition, as explained below, this vector also summarizes a high fraction of the entire set of  <dig> ras sequences within all subfamilies.

for comparison, kog and homologen memberships are also listed, when available, for each of the "top 5" proteins listed in table  <dig>  table  <dig> provides a similar comparison for a set of four arbitrarily selected protein families unrelated to ras or to each other . since most of the genomes used in our study have not yet been included within the kog classification scheme, only fly and human proteins have official kog affiliations. however, we expect with high likelihood that most if not all of the top  <dig> proteins listed in tables  <dig> and  <dig> would also be members of the particular kog family listed for each vector. given this, there would be a good correspondence in tables  <dig> and  <dig> between kog family members and the proteins identified by singular vectors. in contrast, the homologen resource appears to provide a more selective classification method, dividing the kog protein families into two or more subfamilies within which members are more likely to represent specific orthologs.

conserved motif definitions provided by left singular vectors
members of any particular ras subfamily represented by a given right singular vector share a uniquely conserved set of correlated tetrapeptides we have previously referred to as a "copep motif". these motifs are explicitly described by the corresponding "left" singular vectors  comprising a given singular triplet. the lsv's describe these copep motifs as linear combinations of the  <dig>  possible tetrapeptides. those with high positive values identify peptides found with high probability in the conserved motif of a given subfamily, while those with a high negative value identify peptides excluded with high probability. therefore, like the rsv's, the lsv's frequently describe two distinct anti-correlated entities  using either positive or negative values within the vector. using essentially the same procedure described above for any given rsv, the tetrapeptides having the largest positive or largest negative projections on any given lsv were identified in order to provide a focused summary of the motifs described by that vector. for motif extraction, however, an arbitrary cut-off value  was used to identify dominant tetrapeptides.

in most cases, it is possible to cluster the resulting short list of dominant tetrapeptides into several uninterrupted copep strings formed by tetrapeptides that overlap in  <dig> of  <dig> consecutive amino acid positions. using this procedure, one long copep string was identified for each of the singular triplets listed in table  <dig>  the length of the identified long copep string and its corresponding e-value  are provided as a summary in the last column. the precise amino acid sequences of the long copep strings identified for all listed vectors are provided in a supplementary table . the e-values listed provide a measure of the specificity with which each corresponding protein is identified by the copep string extracted from a given lsv. its important to note that the long copep string provides only an approximate summary of the lsv from which it is extracted, yet the small e-values clearly indicate that the vast majority of the proteins identified in table  <dig> are very specifically recognized by their corresponding copep string.

instead of simply providing restricted motif summaries using the most dominant elements of the left singular vectors, we have also attempted to examine entire vectors in order to gain a better understanding of the motifs  they describe. a reasonably efficient method for depicting left singular vectors is presented in figure  <dig>  using vectors  <dig> and  <dig> as examples. both vectors are shown as frequency distributions  that summarize the approximate magnitudes of the projections provided by all  <dig>  tetrapeptides on the vector in question. these distributions are compared to a normal distribution having the same standard deviation . in both examples, a significant fraction of tetrapeptides have high or low values in considerable excess of that expected from a normal distribution. many of these also exceed the arbitrary cut-off value of  <dig>   used to extract the dominant tetrapeptides that serve to summarize the corresponding motifs. parts of the rab <dig> and haras motifs extracted from vector  <dig> are shown in figure 2a as overlapping dominant tetrapeptides with associated projection values. similar motifs extracted from vector  <dig> are shown in figure 2b. in the latter case, a motif from the large subunit ribosomal protein rpl <dig> represents the "anti-motif"of the ras/rab proteins described by the extreme vector elements of opposite sign.

species vectors for the production of species phylogenies
the detailed comparative information contained within the hundreds of singular vectors and their corresponding motifs and gene families was subsequently used to build a species phylogeny by summing all the svd-derived right protein vectors separately for each organism and then comparing the relative orientation of the resulting species vectors  <cit> . figure 3a shows the svd-based topology obtained for the nine eukaryotes compared in this study. this tree supports a coelomate rather than ecdysozoan lineage. two distinct re-sampling methods were used to estimate branch statistics for this tree. the top value of each pair of support values for each branch shown in figure 3a was generated using a traditional bootstrap procedure  <cit> . in this case,  <dig> random sets of  <dig> re-sampled singular vectors were made and used to construct  <dig> species trees. alternatively, a novel "successive, delete one" jackknife procedure  <cit>  was used to generate the bottom value shown for each branch. in this case, the least dominant singular vector was removed successively  to generate  <dig> ordered sets of singular vectors, and a new tree was estimated following each removal. although bootstrap support values for the branches grouping arthropods with vertebrates  and worms with other metazoa  are relatively weak, support values for these branches are strong  using the modified jackknife procedure. all other branches are strongly supported by both procedures. the branch separating cele from the coelomates is of special interest, since the weak bootstrap support observed  might suggest a significant affinity between cele and the arthropods consistent with the "ecdysozoan" model . bootstrap support for the alternative ecdysozoan cluster, however, was only 24%.

use of the "successive, delete-one" jackknife procedure as a species tree branch statistic is justified by the fact that svd provides singular triplets in order of their "dominance" in explaining the data set  <cit> . mathematical dominance provides an objective measure of importance that can be utilized to weight characters. since the modified jackknife procedure used here deletes the least dominant singular vectors one at a time in order, the more dominant singular vectors  are automatically weighted more heavily within the consensus tree. hence, one can argue that our novel jackknife procedure provides stronger support for the derived phylogeny because the most dominant singular vectors generally contain stronger information about gene and species relationships.

poorly described proteins and species tree quality
while our svd-based analysis technically considers all proteins present within all nine genomes of the data set, it is likely that accurate vector definitions are provided for only a small fraction of these proteins. theoretically, the  <dig> singular triplets could effectively describe as many as  <dig> ×  <dig> =  <dig> protein families. however, many of these vectors appear to best describe particular subfamilies of larger groups of closely related proteins. thus, the  <dig> protein families listed in table  <dig> are each represented by anywhere from  <dig> to  <dig> triplets. although, as mentioned earlier, some protein families lacking clear functional annotation were omitted from this table, it still serves to provide a conservative lower estimate of the number of well-described protein families provided by the svd. assuming the number of identifiable protein families in our nine genome data set significantly exceeds the  <dig> to  <dig> protein families unambiguously demarcated and subdivided in our analysis, then hundreds or perhaps thousand of the poorly described proteins included in our species vector sums might be contributing a high fraction of "noise" to the definition of species.

in an attempt to increase the fraction of well described proteins used to define species, proteins having poor projections on all  <dig> right singular vectors were ignored during the summation process. arbitrary vector magnitude cut-off values of  <dig>  or  <dig>  were applied to reduce the number of poorly described proteins used to build species trees. even though the highest and most stringent cut-off value removed the majority of proteins during summation, both new species trees had identical topologies to that of the tree shown in figure 3a in which all proteins were included. bootstrap and modified jackknife branch support values for these tree are shown in figure 3b along with those derived from the inclusive analysis. the removal of only a small fraction of poorly described proteins  resulted in 22% bootstrap and 100% modified jackknife support for the coelomate lineage, but 0% support for the ecdysozoan lineage. removal of a much higher fraction of poorly described proteins  produced an equivalent result. hence, poorly described proteins contribute little to the support that our analysis provides for the coelomate model.

CONCLUSIONS
as demonstrated above, an svd-based analysis of multiple genomes automatically interprets proteins from input genomes as potential members of a limited list of hierarchically defined protein families and subfamilies. each subfamily is defined in detail by one or more singular vectors as linear combinations of a large number of peptides . potentially, a large number of proteomes lacking annotation can be directly interpreted using this method, assuming a sufficient number of annotated proteomes are included in the analysis. although most of the genomes used in the present analysis were already accompanied by detailed protein annotations, formal annotations of the frub and agam proteins were not readily available. nevertheless, our svd-based analysis was able to provide precise protein motif descriptions and subfamily affiliations, not only for the six frub or agam proteins shown in figure  <dig>  but also for any of the hundreds of other frub or agam proteins exhibiting strong vector projections on any of the  <dig> derived singular vectors .

our method bears partial resemblance to a recently described graph-theoretic method for rapidly clustering massive datasets of whole genome protein sequence  <cit> . in this case, the protein definitions generated were not used to derive gene or species trees, but to provide for a comprehensive clustering of all proteins into families having one or more members. the nodes of their graphs, like the vectors from the right matrix in our analysis, represent proteins, while the edges between nodes in their graphs, like the angles between vectors in our analysis, contain the distance information used to compare proteins. however, the distance information in their analysis was obtained ultimately from exhaustive pairwise blast alignments. in contrast, our distance information was derived without alignment, by reference to the  <dig> most dominant svd-derived orthonormal left singular vectors. these vectors provide "motif models" expressed as particular linear combinations of the  <dig>  possible tetrapeptides. the projections of these motif models on a given protein vector serve to quantitatively define the protein. since no more than  <dig> motif models would be provided by our truncated svd, our method would be less effective than other methods for providing comprehensive family designations for all proteins in a dataset  <cit> . however, a high fraction of these protein families are found to contain only one or a few members  <cit> . singletons and small families would generally provide unimportant contributions to relative species definitions, since the majority of species would lack a homolog for comparison. hence small or poorly conserved protein families, presumably represented by the weaker singular triplets in a complete svd, are profitably ignored in our analysis.

although our descriptive analysis of singular triplets  suggests that the protein vectors in our high dimensional definition space can be effectively clustered, we have not applied any specific clustering algorithm. hence no explicit clustering of proteins, equivalent to the identification of orthologs or homologs, is required. nevertheless, the application of a clustering algorithm to our vector based symmetric protein distances is clearly feasible and results in accurate clustering for a high fraction of proteins. in fact, the accuracy with which proteins are clustered into known families via neighbor joining was used previously to establish optimal dimensionality for a well characterized data set  <cit> . in addition, unlike other methods, our method provides a straightforward vector addition mechanism for converting relative protein definitions into relative species definitions for the production of species phylogenies.

alternative non-alignment methods exist for comparing sequences . some of these methods may prove to be scalable and adaptable to the problem of whole genome phylogeny. for example, a comprehensive bacterial phylogeny was recently derived using species vectors that include a set of background corrected pentapeptide or hexapeptide  frequency values  <cit> . although apparently effective for producing global species phylogenies, this method fails to provide quantitatively comparable protein definitions or interpretable predictions for conserved motifs. while many phylogenetically informative pentapeptides and hexapeptides are likely derived from homologs or orthologs, no mechanism exists for extracting, summarizing, and interpreting this information in terms of motif and gene family definitions. this high stringency method provides a low false positive rate , but comes at the expense of a high false negative rate . for organisms exhibiting a significant level of horizontal gene transfer  <cit> , models for motifs and protein families may be crucial tools for identifying "borrowed" genes and assessing their impact on phylogenetic hypotheses.

our svd-based species tree supports the traditional "coelomate" model of animal phylogeny. other large-scale, genome level analyses also tend to support this model  <cit> . the alternative "ecdysozoan" model is supported by comparative analyses of rrna and analyses that include morphological characters  <cit> . although genome-scale analyses should perhaps carry considerable weight due to the higher fraction of "total information" used as input, the separation of "signal" from "noise" represents a serious hurdle for these methods. our method represents a uniquely independent solution that provides a noise-reduced simultaneous global comparison of all proteins within multiple genomes without the need for alignments and without the prior application of operational definitions of orthology. as such, it provides a global perspective on gene and species relationships that is based on a much larger subset of information than that normally used. since it is a non-alignment method, it provides a fundamentally different kind of analysis, and to the extent that the resulting species phylogenies agree with those provided by other analyses that depend upon highly filtered subsets of aligned orthologs or close homologs, we may derive an additional degree of confidence in these relationships. however, the balanced comparison of a large number of additional whole genome sequences from a variety of animals will likely be required in order to produce an unambiguous and universally accepted animal phylogeny.

