BACKGROUND
the separation of transcription and mrna processing in the nucleus from cytoplasmic translation affords the eukaryotic cell an added level of regulatory complexity for gene expression. additionally, the nucleus provides an architectural framework in which the chromosomes are non-randomly organized into chromosome territories, although the position of chromosomes within the nucleus varies between cell types and among populations of cells . this variation in chromosome positioning is thought to reflect certain properties of the chromosome, such as size and transcriptional activity  <cit> .

the relationship of transcriptional activity with the intra-nuclear positioning of genes has been well documented, particularly relative to the periphery of the nucleus . localization at the nuclear periphery is traditionally a hallmark of gene silencing. the cystic fibrosis transmembrane regulator  gene, when silent, is associated with the nuclear periphery, but is more interior when expressed  <cit> . in the budding yeast saccharomyces cerevisiae, silenced telomeres are localized to the nuclear periphery via the nuclear pore complex   <cit> , and repression of the silent mating type loci is associated with npc components and the nuclear periphery  <cit> .

however, recent studies have suggested that the association with the nuclear periphery is not exclusively for gene silencing. one such study in s. cerevisiae demonstrated the activation of a reporter gene by npc components and nuclear transport machinery via a boundary activity that isolates the gene from silent chromatin  <cit> . we have since demonstrated through a yeast genome-wide localization analysis that components of the npc and transport machinery are associated with a subset of actively transcribed genes, as well as the expected silenced genes  <cit> . furthermore, we have shown inducible genes involved in galactose metabolism, specifically the gal <dig>   <dig>  and  <dig> genes , shift from the nuclear interior to the npc upon growth in galactose  <cit> . we also observed recruitment of genes to the npc from thirteen different chromosomes that are activated in response to the yeast pheromone alpha factor  <cit> . recruitment of the ino <dig> gene to the nuclear periphery upon transcriptional induction  <cit> , and the association of several npc components with transcriptional activation  <cit>  both provide further evidence that the nuclear periphery is a complex region of transcriptional regulation.

although there is a defined shift in position of certain activated genes from the nuclear interior to the npc, the mechanism and functional significance of this phenomenon remain unclear. chromosomes exhibit a constrained diffusive motion  <cit> , which may be a means of bringing genes into association with the nuclear periphery. transcription itself, as indicated by the rna dependency for association of alpha factor-induced genes with the npc  <cit> , may be involved. furthermore, specific connecting factors may include components of the mrna export machinery that also exhibit associations with the transcriptional machinery.

in the study presented here, we report that gal locus motion becomes tightly constrained at the nuclear periphery upon transcriptional induction. from this and the observation of transient "sampling" of the nuclear periphery by the gal locus, we propose a model of active-gene recruitment to the nuclear periphery. furthermore, we present the use of real-time chromosome motion in live cells coupled with machine visual screening as a reporter system for gene localization at the nuclear periphery, and propose its application to other studies of this type.

RESULTS
visualizing gal locus position and movement in living cells
to study the chromosome dynamics associated with transcription, we tagged the gal locus in a haploid strain of saccharomyces cerevisiae by integrating an array containing  <dig> lac operator  sites into the intergenic region between the gal <dig> and gal <dig> genes, and co-expressing a green fluorescent protein-lac repressor fusion ;   <cit> . the site of integration preserves the promoter elements of gal <dig> and the 3' elements of gal <dig>  such that the strain exhibits normal regulation of the gal system . in addition to marking the gal locus, we also fused two nuclear pore proteins, nup <dig> and nup <dig>  with a yeast codon-optimized dsred variant, tdimer <dig>  <cit>  in order to mark the nuclear periphery  <cit> .

to determine the ability of our live-cell fluorescence system to correctly report the position of the gal locus, we grew cells in yp-raffinose and split the culture into yp-galactose  and yp-glucose  media for 3-hours. cultures were then collected and placed on 2% agarose pads on glass slides for imaging. image sequences  were generated from cells in which the gal locus spot was visible and used to score whether the gal locus was at the periphery for the entire time of the image sequence or not . this analysis was repeated for four separate galactose and glucose treatments, and we observed a similar trend as previously reported for gal position  <cit> ; about 50% of cells had the gal locus at the periphery upon transcriptional induction, and only 28% in repressed conditions .

it should be noted that in both transcriptionally induced and repressed cultures we observed the same types of gal locus motion behaviors, but in different proportions. in total, we observed three major types of motion behavior exhibited in cell populations in both glucose and galactose conditions : loci that are restricted to the nuclear periphery , transiently associated with the nuclear periphery , or never associated with the periphery .

using manual visual scoring of gal loci at the nuclear periphery in live-cell image sequences, we tested whether a key mrna export factor, sac <dig>  was involved in the localization of active genes to the nuclear periphery. we constructed a knockout of sac <dig> in the laco-tagged gal locus haploid strain. the lack of sac <dig> prevented the normal galactose-dependent increase in the per cent of cells with the gal locus at the nuclear periphery  cells, but only a  <dig> +/- 1% enrichment in sac <dig> mutant cells), supporting a role for this protein in linking active-genes to the npc.

gal locus dynamics in transcriptionally induced and repressed conditions
to characterize differences in gal locus motion relative to sub-nuclear location and associated transcriptional activity, we captured single-nucleus image sequences with auto-focus for the gal locus, similar to prior studies  <cit>  of chromosome dynamics. we first compared our data with that previously established for general yeast chromosome motion  <cit> , and performed a mean squared displacement analysis  to determine differences in spatial constraints of diffusion  <cit> . an extension of the open source software imagej  <cit> , called spottracker  <cit> , was used to align the nuclear periphery signal for each frame to compensate for nuclear motion and subsequently calculate the nuclear center and position of the gal locus  <cit> . in order for spottracker to accurately calculate the nuclear center, parameter optimization was required for the software to effectively find the nuclear periphery. from these data, the distance, d, between nuclear center and gal locus was determined for each frame. for free diffusion, the plot of the square of the average change in d  versus particular time intervals  would yield a straight line with a positive slope. under repressed conditions , where gal loci are largely not at the nuclear periphery, we see by msd calculation that gal locus motion is constrained as it yields a curve demonstrating an increasing slope followed by a plateau  as previously reported for other chromosomal regions  <cit> . the plateau seen here is at ~ <dig>  μm <dig>  similar to that reported for the centromeres of yeast chromosomes iii and iv  <cit> . this represents a confinement radius estimated at ≤  <dig> μm  <cit> . this is consistent with the chromosomal position of the gal locus and laco tag, which are centromere proximal at approximately  <dig> kb from the centromere of chromosome ii . not unexpectedly, we find motion of the gal locus much more constrained when associated with the nuclear periphery , which is enriched for upon galactose induction. the corresponding msd curve is very similar to that reported for telomeres  <cit> , which are known to be highly associated with the npc and nuclear periphery  <cit> .

machine visual screening of gal locus motion
to further elucidate the mechanisms of active-gene recruitment to the nuclear periphery, we sought an easier way to study gene localization. current assays for gene localization at the npc involve chromatin immunoprecipitation , fluorescence in situ hybridization , or manual analysis of live-cell imaging, all of which are time consuming and/or technically demanding. here we examine the use of real-time chromosome motion in live cells, coupled with machine visual screening as a reporter system for gene localization at the nuclear periphery. unlike the previously described msd analysis employed with spottracker, machine visual screening should not involve any pre-analysis parameter optimization or geometric segmentation of the visual data, resulting in easier and more accurate analyses.

to demonstrate the application of machine visual screening to the study of chromosome dynamics, we took the same image series analyzed by traditional geometric methods above and applied the machine visual screening software, visible discovery  <cit> . this software generates an aggregate change index , which is a measure of movement; in this case how spatial organization of fluorescent intensity shifts over time for each frame of the green and red channels. aci generation does not require parameter optimization or machine-visual segmentation of the gal locus or the nuclear periphery; all intensity values over the period of the experiment are used . the calculation of aci for a given frame involves a comparison with all of the other frames in an image series, so that a frame with a large overall change relative to the rest of the image series will have a larger aci than other frames.

to compare the motion of the nucleus and gal locus described by aci, a diffusion index was generated for each time point  t; the diffusion index is the root mean square of aci, for the aci's of all frames up to and including time t. in this fashion, we calculate the way aci changes over time . the diffusion indices of the green channel are then compared via a pearson correlation to the red channel. if the gal locus were physically connected to the structural framework of the nucleus, such as the nuclear periphery, or both undergoing similar motion patterns, we would find a positive correlation between the two. on the other hand, lack of correlation between the motion pattern of the gal locus and the nuclear periphery would strongly suggest the two are not physically connected. we found that indeed, when the gal locus was scored at the nuclear periphery for cells grown in galactose , the correlation between the two channels shows a consistent positive correlation . in contrast, the correlation of the channels from glucose-grown cells for which the gal locus was not scored at the periphery ranged from around  <dig> to strongly negative .

discussion
the transcriptional regulation of genes has been linked to their sub-nuclear positioning, particularly relative to the periphery of the nucleus. the nuclear periphery has been traditionally characterized as a zone of repression. however, recent work from our laboratory and others showing the presence of active genes  <cit>  has established that the regulatory milieu at the nuclear periphery is more intricate than first thought.

there are several prevailing ideas as to how and why activated genes relocate to the nuclear periphery. work by menon et al  <cit>  suggests that npc components themselves are involved in transcriptional activation, and that genes are repositioned in the nucleus in order to be brought into a concentrated region of transcription factors for activation. our laboratory has recently shown the opposite, that the interaction of the npc component mlp <dig> with genes induced by the yeast mating pheromone alpha factor is dependent upon rna, suggesting that gene association with the nuclear periphery occurs after transcription has begun  <cit> . work by brickner and walter  <cit>  detailing recruitment of the ino <dig> locus to the nuclear periphery upon induction, demonstrated that artificial recruitment of the ino <dig> gene to the nuclear membrane altered the regulation of the gene, but did not directly result in its activation. to better clarify the mechanism behind active-gene recruitment to the npc in yeast, we assessed the transcription-associated chromosome dynamics in live-cells, specifically of the inducible gal gene locus.

we confirmed that laco/gfp-laci tagging of the gal locus was representative of gal localization. previously, via fish and npc-immunofluorescence , we demonstrated that the gal locus was at the nuclear periphery with a slightly greater enrichment than observed here. however, the image sequence element of this work may result in differences, as several gal loci scored at the nuclear periphery in the fish/if technique likely represent transient associations at the periphery. furthermore, the percentages reported here are similar to those observed in the fixed-image, laco/gfp-laci reporting of the ino <dig> intra-nuclear position in response to transcriptional induction  <cit> .

the laco-tagging technique has been previously used to track the motion of several different chromosome regions in yeast  <cit> . in these prior studies, the motion of chromosomes is defined as constrained diffusion, and our data is consistent with this classification. one study, using a similar 2-dimensional tracking, showed that telomeric regions exhibited the greatest motion constraint throughout interphase, while centromeres had an intermediate constraint, and ars regions had the least constraint  <cit> . furthermore, s-phase and the process of replication resulted in the specific increase in constraint of ars-region motion  <cit> .

here we have shown a similar "constraining" phenomenon for the gal locus that is dependent upon transcription-activating conditions, and associated with the specific position of the locus at the nuclear periphery. the gal genes are located near  the centromere of yeast chromosome ii, and, as expected, exhibit a similar degree of motion constraint when not restricted to the npc as that reported for the centromeres of yeast chromosomes iii and iv  <cit> . when found positioned at the nuclear rim, gal locus motion was highly constrained, comparable to previous observations for telomeric regions  <cit>  and suggesting a physical anchorage to the npc  <cit> . such restriction in movement is in agreement with data showing peripheral localization correlates with increased motion constraint in human cells  <cit> . this notion is further supported by analysis with the visible discovery software  <cit> , in which the motion of the gal locus is positively correlated with the movement of the nucleus when induced and at the periphery.

interestingly, when not restricted to the nuclear rim, the gal locus often exhibited transient overlaps with the nuclear periphery. this is significant as these transient interactions may bring specific factors  into proximity. the result of a successful interaction would be gal locus constraint at the nuclear membrane, which is what we observe upon gal induction. that we still see a fraction of cells with gal loci not at the periphery in galactose-induced populations may reflect the stochasticity of gene expression in a population of cells , coupled with a certain probability of gene-npc interaction. the probability of interaction would be a function of both the chance of a transient interaction of the gal gene with the npc resulting from a chromosome's constrained random walk and the on-rate of the interacting factors.

a model for dynamic genomic compartmentalization involving transcription and mrna export
if our model suggests there is an increased affinity of the gene for the nuclear periphery upon transcription-activating conditions, what might be responsible for this increased affinity? previous work from our lab has suggested that rna is a mediating factor of active-gene and npc component connectivity  <cit> . this suggests that a number of mrna-binding proteins and export factors, which have an affinity for the npc and associated components, could bridge the interaction between a transcribing gene and the npc. in these studies, we showed that at least one key factor involved in transcriptional enrichment of loci at the nuclear periphery is the mrna export protein sac <dig>  given the vast array of interactors documented for sac <dig>  <cit> , there are a number of possibilities for how sac <dig> may link activated genes to the nuclear periphery. sac <dig> is localized at the npc  <cit> , and interacts with transport factors  <cit>  and a component of the transcription-activating saga complex  <cit> , sus <dig>  <cit> . interestingly, the localization of sus <dig> at the nuclear periphery is disrupted in the absence of sac <dig>  <cit> , perhaps indicating a lack of saga-dependent genes, such as the gal genes  <cit> , at the nuclear rim.

based on these data, we propose a working model for active-gene recruitment to the npc . as transcription occurs, the appropriate mrna binding proteins are recruited and deposited on the nascent transcript. it is at this point we propose the cognate gene region has acquired an increased affinity towards the npc, via sac <dig>  the active-gene region, which now hosts many sac3-interacting proteins, is now primed for capture at the npc.

chromosome dynamics as a potential phenotypic screen
upon characterizing the motion of the gal loci by the previously employed segmented geometric particle tracking methods, we desired to harness the differences in motion observed between npc localized gal and sub-nuclear gal to aid in the further phenotypic characterization of tethering of active genes to the npc. to this end, we tested the visible discovery machine visual screening analysis software, which is more automated than geometric particle-tracking methods. we demonstrated that, when corralled at the nuclear periphery, the motion of the gal locus was correlated with that of the nucleus, as inferred by automated measurements of movement indices. this not only reinforces the model that genes become physically associated with the npc at the nuclear envelope, but also demonstrates that movement is a phenotype that can be easily queried.

the geometric particle tracking methods  require various estimations and assumptions about the data for analysis and currently requires extensive tweaking and manipulation of the data for the software to "find" the nuclear periphery and spot center. the visible discovery analysis platform frees us from these restraints and tedious preparations, and is much more amenable to adaptation for high-throughput analysis. in this case, a visual field of live cells with a tagged gal locus and nuclear periphery could be monitored over a time course and each nucleus analyzed.  a percentage of cells in which the gal locus motion is correlated with nuclear motion could then be quickly calculated. this motion correlation could, conceptually, also be used for screens of gene associations with different nuclear compartments. for our purposes, to make sure a gene showing correlated motion with the nucleus was actually associated with the nuclear periphery, a simple automated check of signal localization could be made.

an experimental screen would involve the perturbation of the system via mutants or chemical treatments in which this percentage of cells would be assessed for change. in such a way, the molecular details of the mechanism linking active genes with the npc could be elucidated. furthermore, the use of motion as an easily screened phenotype could be employed for the studies of many other systems. as we have defined a means of easily monitoring the connectivity of a gene with components of the nuclear periphery, any process involving a gene-nuclear rim association, such as yeast telomere positioning, could be monitored in this fashion.

CONCLUSIONS
this work demonstrates the transcription-associated dynamics of the inducible gal locus in yeast populations, and a method for machine-screening chromosome localization. observations of gal locus movement in populations of transcriptionally induced and repressed conditions lead us to a proposed model for recruitment of an activated gene to the npc: recruitment results from the random sampling of the nuclear periphery by a gene locus undergoing diffusion that is "captured" upon activation by a mechanism dependent upon sac <dig> and nascent mrna . the machine visual screening analysis, coupled with a high throughput study design, will allow for the easier screening of mutants or chemical treatments on active gene recruitment to the npc in order to further dissect the molecular mechanism of the process. furthermore, such a motion phenotype-based screen could be applied to the study of other functions involving alterations in chromosome motion and/or nuclear sub-compartmentalization.

