BACKGROUND
in recent decades, we have become increasingly aware of the complex history of plastids, with red algae and green algae  harnessing “primary” plastids from a single ancient cyanobacterium, and red algae subsequently lending “secondary” plastids to most eukaryotic phytoplankton , and kelps  <cit> . some dinoflagellates even possess “tertiary” plastids derived from haptophytes, cryptophytes, and diatoms  <cit> , and other organisms sequester plastids temporarily, with uncertain degrees of integration  <cit> . plastid acquisitions can be difficult to study genetically, as even small amounts of contamination can provide false impressions of photosynthetic gene transfer to the host’s nuclear genome. this is further complicated by the fact that many of these organisms are rare, unicellular, and have yet to be cultured in lab.

polykrikoid dinoflagellates are a distinctive group of uncultivated eukaryotes, including heterotrophic, photosynthetic, and mixotrophic species. they are recognized by their large, multinucleated cells or “pseudocolonies,” and include species that regulate harmful algal blooms by grazing on toxic dinoflagellates  <cit> . early-branching polykrikoids, such as polykrikos geminatum and p. hartmanii, have plastids with three membranes and triple-stacked thylakoids that are characteristic of the secondary peridinin-type plastids of most dinoflagellates  <cit>  . the plastids of p. lebouriae, however, are unusual; they are reported to be enveloped by only two membranes, a trait that is more consistent with primary plastids, and to contain double-stacked thylakoids similar to those found in haptophytes and diatoms  <cit> . p. lebouriae also has a conspicuous phylogenetic position, as a plastid-bearing mixotroph nested among three heterotrophic species  . leander and hoppenrath  interpreted this as evidence of either multiple losses of photosynthesis among p. herdmanae, p. schwartzii and p. kofoidii, or a single loss at the base of this group, followed by acquisition of tertiary plastids in p. lebouriae from a diatom or haptophyte  <cit> . these hypotheses remain untested, as several attempts to cultivate p. lebouriae have been unsuccessful , and pcr amplification of plastid genes in p. lebouriae has consistently failed with pcr primers used successfully in other taxa.fig.  <dig> maximum likelihood  tree inferred from the 31-taxon alignment  of concatenated small and large ribosomal rdna sequences using the gtr + Γ substitution model. bootstrap support values  <dig> or higher and bayesian posterior probabilities are listed above each branch the illustrations depict the pseudocolonies of polykrikoid species; orange indicates a photosynthetic pseudocolony, and gray indicates a non-photosynthetic pseudocolony



multiple displacement amplification is a powerful tool for whole-genome amplification from small amounts of template dna, but it is nonspecific and therefore prone to contamination  <cit> . we employed this technique to amplify a partial plastid genome of polykrikos lebouriae, and supplemented this with a dinoflagellate-specific transcriptomic approach, both to ensure that our plastid amplification did not stem from non-dinoflagellate environmental contaminants , and to test whether the plastids are functionally integrated into the cell  rather than being simply retained as kleptoplastids. we synthesized cdna from single p. lebouriae cells, which we primed for pcr with a 21 bp spliced leader sequence specific to dinoflagellates, via slpcr. previous researchers have established the effectiveness of slpcr for amplifying dinoflagellate transcripts from a large volume of wild-caught plankton  <cit>  or coral tissue  <cit> , and this is the first study to apply slpcr at the scale of single cells .

mda and slpcr allowed us to illuminate regions of the plastid genome in p. lebouriae as well as nuclear gene expression. in concert, these methods provided evidence of the presence and provenance of functional plastids in p. lebouriae, and allowed us to test hypotheses for plastid evolution in this uncultivated group.

RESULTS
genes for plastid-targeted proteins obtained from a single-cell transcriptome
polykrikos lebouriae was identified by morphology in marine sand, and single cells were manually isolated for transcriptome and genome sequencing . the identification was confirmed by comparing dna fragments of hsp <dig> and lsu rrna genes from single cell sequence data to sequences obtained from previous isolates of polykrikos lebouriae . in order to sequence the transcriptome, transcripts were reverse transcribed and amplified using dinoflagellate spliced leader and polya primers. for transcripts over  <dig> base pairs, the average length, after assembly, was  <dig> base pairs . estimates of genome coverage were not possible as no sequenced genome is available for polykrikos lebouriae or any species within its more inclusive clade .table  <dig> nuclear-encoded plastid-targeted genes transcripts  expressed by polykrikos lebourae. identifies were assigned using blastx queries against all proteins in genbank

alexandrium fundyense
68 %
symbiodinium sp.
61 %
heterocapsa triquetra
65 %
h. triquetra
85 %
h. triquetra
71 %
a. affine
100 %
lingulodinium polyedrum
79 %
h. triquetra
69 %
a. tamarense
82 %
h. triquetra
57 %
h. triquetra
70 %
h. triquetra
51 %
h. triquetra
62 %
h. triquetra
50 %


slpcr amplified a diverse array of nuclear transcripts from p. lebouriae , suggesting that the cell expressed genes spanning a broad range of functions, including photosynthesis. fourteen transcripts over  <dig> base pairs long were associated with photosynthesis, and all were most closely related to dinoflagellates . these were all nucleus-encoded, plastid-targeted genes, supporting the presence of a plastid that is functionally integrated with the cell. among these transcripts were two peridinin-chlorophyll a-binding precursor proteins, which are restricted to the peridinin-type plastids of dinoflagellates.fig.  <dig> transcripts expressed by a single cell isolate of polykrikos lebouriae. transcripts are ranked from values  <dig> to  <dig> in abundance, and annotated according to level  <dig> subsystem hierarchical classification in mg-rast. predicted photosynthetic transcripts are shown in green



plastid-encoded genes obtained from single cell genomic data
in order to examine the genome of the plastid itself, we also sequenced a genomic library created by multiple displacement amplification  from a single cell. unlike the dinoflagellate specificity achieved through slpcr, our total genomic amplification through mda yielded a majority of reads  from bacteria, with most of the remainder  stemming from dinoflagellates, and a small fraction of viral or uncertain provenance . of the eukaryotic reads, 5 % were from plastids, with most other reads originating from the massive dinoflagellate nuclear genome. bacterial sequences were primarily from delta proteobacteria, specifically francisella sp., which is known from cosmopolitan marine and freshwater strains as well as symbiotic strains found among animals and protists  <cit> . the eukaryotic sequences were most similar to dinoflagellates, as expected, and we identified and assembled three protein-coding genes from the plastid photosystem that are universally plastid-encoded: complete psaa and psbc genes and a partial plastid atpa gene. after confirming the identity of each plastid photosystem gene using molecular phylogenetic analyses of the individual proteins , the three proteins were concatenated and added to a 44-taxon alignment containing diverse dinoflagellates and other photosynthetic eukaryotes. both bayesian analysis and maximum likelihood methods demonstrated that the p. lebouriae plastid sequences branch with homologues from peridinin-type plastids of other unarmored dinoflagellates . the sequences from p. lebouriae were highly divergent, but branched with strong support after the amphidinium clade and before the clade consisting of togula jolla and all armored dinoflagellates. thus, the phylogenetic relationships inferred from the alignment of concatenated plastid-protein sequences are generally consistent with the placement of p. lebouriae as inferred from ribosomal gene sequences .fig.  <dig> maximum likelihood  tree inferred from the 44-taxon alignment  of concatenated plastid genes psaa, psbc, and atpa using the protgamma model in raxml. bootstrap support values  <dig> or higher and bayesian posterior probabilities are listed above each branch. the inset depicts a differential image contrast  micrograph of the pseudocolony of polykrikos lebouriae used for single-cell transcriptomics; this cell was undergoing mitosis when the image was captured 



discussion
the majority of microbial species are not available in culture, and therefore the application of single cell methods at the genomic level is highly desirable  <cit> . in this case, we used both single cell transcriptomics and single cell genomics to investigate the biology of plastids in p. lebouriae and test hypotheses for their origin, which were otherwise difficult to resolve. single-cell spliced-leader transcriptomics was particularly powerful, and using this method we were able to obtain a diversity of nuclear-encoded transcripts from p. lebouriae, despite the presence of environmental contamination from bacteria  and potentially even other non-dinoflagellate eukaryotes. both nucleus-encoded transcripts and plastid-encoded genes consistently demonstrated that p. lebouriae is photosynthetic, with all photosynthesis related genes and transcripts grouping with those found in dinoflagellates with peridinin-type plastids, including a protein with the principle function of binding the pigment peridinin. no abnormalities were seen in the plastid targeting sequences to suggest that p. lebouriae, which we found to bear typical type i and ii presequences , as described in dinoflagellates with triple membrane bound peridinin plastids . thus is it unclear whether the two plastid membranes reported by hoppenrath and leander were an accurate interpretation, a misinterpretation, or an artefact.

peridinin plastids in polykrikos lebouriae
while we cannot falsify the possibility of transient or hidden plastids in some polykrikoids, our findings are contrary to the hypothesis that polykrikos lebouriae acquired photosynthesis from diatoms or haptophytes and support the presence of peridinin-type plastids in p. lebouriae. the most parsimonious source for these plastids is direct inheritance from ancestral polykrikoids. polykrikoid phylogeny, though lacking strong support at some deeper nodes, shows an unequivocal sisterhood between p. lebouriae and heterotrophic p. herdmaniae—which necessitates a recent loss of photosynthesis in p. herdmaniae. a second loss is evident in the p. kofoidii - p. schwartzii clade, as they are strongly supported sister lineages, and therefore represent a loss independent from that found in p. herdmaniae.

hypothesis for polykrikoid plastid evolution
several losses of photosynthesis have previously been established in dinoflagellates  <cit> , primarily among parasitic stem groups or within groups of questionable monophyly . interestingly, multiple losses of photosynthesis appear to have occurred within polykrikoids alone, and the evolutionary reasons for this are worth considering. a prominent trend in polykrikoid evolution is a gradual increase in size  <cit>  . this makes polykrikoids effective predators, as they are able to consume groups of dinoflagellates linked in defensive chain formations  <cit> . yet size is known to make photosynthesis less effective for single cells, as chloroplast self-shading increases, and absorptive surface area diminishes relative to volume  <cit> . as a mixotroph, p. lebouriae is known to prey on other dinoflagellates , and our isolate possessed extrusive organelles such as nematocysts and taeniocysts. the presence of such specialized predatory features, as well as mixotrophy and large cell size, may have predisposed polykrikoids to multiple losses of photosynthesis, as seen in p. herdmaniae, a sister species that shares the same habitat as p. lebouriae  <cit> . factors allowing the loss of photosynthesis probably vary by lineage, as losses have also occurred among smaller free-living and parasitic dinoflagellates.

dinoflagellates are fascinating models for the study of organelle evolution, for in addition to plastid loss, they represent many stages in the process of plastid acquisition  <cit> . for instance, “dinotoms” house virtually intact diatom symbionts  <cit> ; pfiesteria piscicida scavenges temporary kleptoplastids with a limited lifespan  <cit> ; and karenia and karlodinium have haptophyte-derived plastids that are nearly as integrated as native peridinin-type plastids  <cit> . the challenge in studying endosymbiosis at the earlier stages  lies partly in differentiating symbiont-expressed transcripts from those of the host. slpcr circumvents this problem by ensuring dinoflagellate specificity  <cit> . in the future, this approach is expected to grant insight into endosymbioses in other uncultivated dinoflagellates, such as the plastid or symbiont-bearing noctilucales  <cit>  and new lineages of dinoflagellates with cryptophyte or pelagophyte symbionts .

CONCLUSIONS
understanding trends in the evolution of microbial eukaryotes will require a synthesis of ecology, phylogenetics, and genomics—the last of which has been particularly limited in its applications to uncultivated groups. while slpcr has previously been applied to bulk rna samples  <cit> , we show here that it is applicable to single cells. in principle, this method is applicable to any system with uniform spliced leaders, as found in dinoflagellates, euglenids, kinetoplastids, and a growing number of invertebrates  <cit> . slpcr shows promise not only in avoiding contaminants in environmental isolates, but in capturing gene expression of a single cell at a given point in time, such as stages of the cell cycle, cells perturbed my experimental stimuli, or simply cells in the dynamism of their natural habitats.

