BACKGROUND
ticks are obligate hematophagous ectoparasites of wild and domestic animals and humans, and are important vectors of diseases to humans and animals worldwide  <cit> . ticks are classified in the subclass acari, order parasitiformes, suborder ixodida and are distributed worldwide from arctic to tropical regions  <cit> . despite efforts to control tick infestations, these ectoparasites remain a serious threat for human and animal health  <cit> . recently, both vaccine studies using key tick antigens as well as characterization of tick gene function by rna interference  have provided new information on genes that impact tick life cycle and the tick-pathogen interface  <cit> .

one of these genes, subolesin , was discovered recently in ixodes scapularis and was shown by both rnai and immunization with recombinant proteins to protect against tick infestations, resulting in reduced tick survival, feeding and reproduction  <cit> . the silencing of subolesin expression by rnai in ticks resulted in degeneration of gut, salivary gland, reproductive and embryonic tissues as well as causing sterility in males  <cit> . in addition, targeting subolesin by rnai or vaccination decreased the ability of ticks to become infected with anaplasma marginale or a. phagocytophilum  <cit> .

evidence of the conservation of subolesin throughout evolution was provided by the high homology of amino acid sequences in higher eukaryotes, which suggests an essential conserved biological function for this protein  <cit> . for example, the expression of subolesin orthologs has been detected in a variety of adult and immature tissues of several tick species  <cit> , drosophila melanogaster  <cit>  and caenorhabditis elegans  <cit> . these studies have suggested that subolesin orthologs may be involved in the control of developmental processes in these organisms  <cit> . however, despite the important role that subolesin plays in tick reproduction, development and pathogen infection, the biological function of subolesin and its orthologs has not been reported.

because of the profound effect of subolesin knockdown in ticks and other organisms we hypothesized that subolesin may play a role in gene expression, thus affecting multiple cellular processes. herein, gene expression is understood as the process by which a gene gets turned on in a cell to make rna and proteins and therefore may be affected at the transcriptional and/or translational levels. the objective of this study was to provide evidence for the role of subolesin in gene expression through a combination of methodological approaches that included characterization of subolesin-interacting proteins, the effect of gene knockdown on tick gene expression pattern and the prediction of subolesin post-translational modifications. although the biological function of subolesin is unkown, the results provided evidence that this protein plays a role in gene expression in ticks and most likely other organisms.

RESULTS
identification of subolesin interaction proteins by yeast two-hybrid screen and co-affinity purification
for discovery of subolesin-interacting proteins, subolesin was used as a bait to search for preys in rhipicephalus  microplus using the yeast two-hybrid system. two sequences, gi and gii, were identified that encoded for candidate subolesin-interacting proteins. these sequences were represented in 50% and 10% of the positive clones, respectively. blast analysis of the gi sequences did not result in identity to known sequences, except for the est <dig> from a r. microplus cdna library. however, a transduction/transcription domain was found within the gi open reading frame  . the gii sequence was 99% identical  to amblyomma sp. elongation factor- <dig> alpha  and to other proteins containing ef1_alpha_ii and ef1_alpha_iii domains . both gi and gii sequences contained multiple n-myristoylation and casein kinase ii  and protein kinase c  phosphorylation sites .

the proteins encoded by gi and gii were expressed in escherichia coli fused to a 6xhis tag with molecular weights of  <dig> and  <dig> kda, respectively and the interaction of these proteins with subolesin was confirmed by co-affinity purification on ni-nta columns . in the absence of either gi or gii recombinant proteins or in the presence of an unrelated his-tagged protein, co-purification of subolesin did not occur, confirming the specificity of the interaction between subolesin and gi or gii .

characterization of the effect of gi and gii knockdown on tick survival, feeding, oviposition, hatching and egg development
rnai was used to study the effect of the knockdown of subolesin-interacting protein-coding genes, gi and gii, on female tick survival, feeding, oviposition, hatching and egg development. subolesin, gi or gii dsrnas or injection buffer  were injected into either unfed or replete r. microplus female ticks. the injection of gi dsrna did not affect tick survival, feeding and oviposition, a fact that correlated with the absence of gi knockdown in ticks . although gi expression was reduced in tick eggs, it did not affect hatching . gene knockdown was demonstrated for gii and subolesin in both ticks and eggs . gii knockdown produced a phenotype similar to that obtained with the silencing of subolesin expression. the injection of gii dsrna in unfed ticks resulted in reduced tick survival, feeding, oviposition and hatching when compared to control ticks . when gii dsrna was injected into replete ticks, hatching and egg development were affected . undifferentiated egg masses were observed in eggs oviposited by replete ticks injected with gii and subolesin dsrna when compared to saline injected controls .

athe expression silencing of target genes was determined by real-time rt-pcr and average ± sd mrna levels calculated and compared between dsrna and saline-injected control ticks by student's t-test with unequal variance . amplification efficiencies were normalized against β-actin.

bticks which completed feeding and those removed after  <dig> days  were weighed individually and average ± s.d. calculated and compared between dsrna and saline-injected control ticks by student's t-test with unequal variance .

ctick mortality was evaluated as the ratio of dead female ticks after day  <dig>  to the total number of female ticks placed on the animal and was compared between dsrna and saline-injected control ticks by χ2-test .

dthe egg mass oviposited by each tick was weighed individually and average ± s.d. calculated and compared between dsrna and saline-injected control ticks by student's t-test with unequal variance .

ethe hatching rate was determined  <dig> weeks after oviposition and compared with the saline-injected control ticks by student's t-test with unequal variance .

abbreviations: nd, not determined because ticks did not laid eggs.

areplete r. microplus ticks were collected and weighed individually before injection with dsrna, all within  <dig> hours after dropping of the host. the average weight and variation  of each group are shown. no significant statistical differences were observed .

bthe egg mass oviposited by each tick was weighed individually. the average egg mass and variation  was calculated and compared with the saline-injected control ticks by student's t-test with unequal variance. no significant statistical differences were observed .

cthe hatching rate was determined  <dig> weeks post oviposition and compared with the saline-injected control ticks by student's t-test with unequal variance .

dthe expression silencing of target genes was determined in eggs by real-time rt-pcr and average ± s.d. mrna levels calculated and compared between dsrna and saline-injected control ticks by student's t-test with unequal variance . amplification efficiencies were normalized against β-actin.

characterization of the effect of subolesin knockdown on tick gene expression profile
the results of the subolesin-protein interactions and rnai experiments with gi and gii, encoding for subolesin-interacting proteins, suggested that subolesin may be involved in gene expression in ticks. therefore, the subsequent experiments were directed towards analyzing the effect of subolesin knockdown on the tick gene expression profile.

in the first experiment, the kinetics of subolesin silencing by rnai was investigated in unfed i. scapularis female ticks. the results showed that over 90% silencing of subolesin transcription was obtained  <dig> days post injection  and continued until at least  <dig> dpi . significant differences  in tick weight between subolesin dsrna  and saline injected controls  were observed in ticks that completed feeding on the host in the presence of males at  <dig> dpi.

in the second experiment, unfed i. scapularis female ticks were injected with subolesin dsrna or injection buffer alone. ticks were then placed on a sheep without males and collected at  <dig> and  <dig> dpi, by which time subolesin knockdown was regarded as significant based on the rnai kinetics experiment . subolesin knockdown was corroborated by real-time rt-pcr as  <dig> ± 3% and  <dig> ± 5% silencing at  <dig> and  <dig> dpi, respectively. a group of ticks collected after  <dig> days of feeding with males was used to corroborate the effect of subolesin knockdown on tick weight, giving results similar to those obtained in the rnai kinetics experiment described above. the ticks collected at  <dig> and  <dig> dpi were then dissected and used to extract rna for suppression-subtractive hybridization  and microarray construction and analysis.

the ssh libraries constructed with the rna of subolesin dsrna and saline injected ticks collected at  <dig> dpi were used for random clone amplification and microarray construction. this microarray was enriched for genes differentially expressed after subolesin knockdown. the microarray was hybridized with total rna prepared from subolesin dsrna- and saline-injected ticks at  <dig> and  <dig> dpi to evaluate how the expression pattern of candidate differentially expressed genes varied at two different time points after subolesin knockdown . the results revealed  <dig> unique  genes that were down or up-regulated by at least two-fold after subolesin knockdown at  <dig> or  <dig> dpi . of these genes,  <dig> were down-regulated and  <dig> were up-regulated after subolesin rnai. of the down-regulated genes,  <dig> were down-reglated at  <dig> dpi,  <dig> at  <dig> dpi and  <dig> at both  <dig> and  <dig> dpi . up-regulated genes were found at  <dig> dpi only . in the microarray analysis, subolesin expression was silenced by approximately 35% at both  <dig> and  <dig> dpi. although 62% of the unique differentially expressed genes did not have homology to available sequences or were identical to genes with unknown function, the remaining sequences indicated that various biological processes were affected by subolesin knockdown. these included regulation of protein and nucleic acid metabolism , energy pathways , immunity , cell communication and signal transduction  and transport .

aclone id identifies the clone based on ssh library plate_well.

bname: this output only contains descriptions of the top blast hit .

cfold change is of the global normalized ratio ) of background-corrected means averaged between replicates . only genes down-regulated  and up-regulated  after subolesin knockdown by at least two fold at  <dig> or  <dig> dpi were considered.

dsd is the standard deviation determined from the normalized average log <dig> ratio .

three of the down-regulated genes after subolesin knockdown, identical to i. scapularis putative secreted salivary wc peptide  and putative secreted protein  and macrobrachium rosenbergii copper/zinc superoxide dismutase  , were selected to corroborate the results of the microarray analysis by real-time rt-pcr. the results demonstrated that the expression of these genes was silenced after subolesin rnai by 98% and 100% , 41% and 59%  and 93% and 74%  at  <dig> and  <dig> dpi, respectively. ticks injected with an unrelated 4a <dig> dsrna control did not show silencing of these genes after rnai. the possibility of subolesin rnai off-target effects was analyzed and complementary  <dig> bp regions were not found between all possible 20– <dig> bp subolesin sirnas and tick cdna sequences of differentially expressed genes identified in the microarray analysis.

prediction of subolesin conserved post-translational modifications
i. scapularis subolesin  and human ortholog c6orf <dig>  proteins were compared to predict conserved post-translational modifications. three conserved pkc phosphorylation sites were found , which were also present in all known tick subolesin protein sequences .

discussion
subolesin, discovered and characterized in i. scapularis as a tick protective antigen  <cit> , is an evolutionary conserved protein which is involved in modulation of tick blood digestion, reproduction and development  <cit> . in other organisms, subolesin orthologs may be involved in the control of developmental processes  <cit> . although the function of subolesin is unknown, these results suggest a conserved function for subolesin. because of the profound effect of subolesin knockdown in ticks and other organisms  <cit> , our hypothesis was that subolesin may have a role in gene expression, thus affecting multiple cellular processes. therefore, the objective of this study was to provide evidence of the role of subolesin in gene expression. to test this hypothesis, three experiments were conducted. in the first series of experiments, subolesin-interacting proteins were identified and characterized in r. microplus, suggesting the interaction of subolesin with regulatory proteins. therefore, in the second series of experiments, the effect of subolesin knockdown was analyzed in i. scapularis and showed the effect of subolesin on gene expression affecting different biological processes. finally, post-translational modifications were predicted for tick subolesin. all together, the results of these experiments suggested a role for tick subolesin in gene expression.

to identify proteins that interact with subolesin in yeast two-hybrid experiments, we used a cdna library obtained from tick eggs because subolesin is expressed in tick embryos and gene knockdown affects egg development  <cit> . two genes, gi and gii, were identified encoding for proteins that interact with tick subolesin. these proteins contained domains and post-translational modification sites found in proteins with regulatory functions. the transduction/transcription domain found in gi is present in phosphorylated proteins involved in transcriptional regulation and other cell functions related to gene expression  <cit> . the ef1_alpha_ii and ef1_alpha_iii domains present in gii are found in proteins with different functions such as protein biosynthesis, dna binding, transcriptional regulation, rna processing, structural constituent of cytoskeleton as well as atp and gtp binding that are also involved in gene expression .

the results reported herein suggested that subolesin may interact with regulatory proteins. in other organisms, subolesin orthologs interact with proteins with gene expression regulatory activities. the human subolesin ortholog interacts with lnxp <dig> , dipa  and spg <dig>  proteins. lnx is an e <dig> ubiquitin-protein ligase that mediates ubiquitination and subsequent proteasomal degradation of numb, implicated in the control of cell fate decisions during development. dipa interacts with the viral phosphoprotein hepatitis delta antigen  and acts as a repressor of gene transcription  <cit> . spg <dig> binds to the hydrophobic c-terminal amino acids of cd <dig> which are involved in repression of t cell activation  <cit> . in d. melanogaster, the subolesin ortholog bhringi  may act to regulate twist activity through recruitment of the chromatin remodeling brahma complex  <cit> . therefore, subolesin may exert its effect on gene expression through the interaction with gi, gii and possibly other regulatory proteins. interestingly, the gii knockdown phenotype was similar to that obtained with subolesin, suggesting that these proteins may functionally interact in ticks.

the results of the microarray analysis of gene expression profile in ticks after subolesin knockdown provided evidence for the role for subolesin in gene expression. subolesin knockdown affected the expression of genes involved in multiple cellular pathways. the nonspecific effect of dsrna injection on tick global gene expression was not addressed in these studies. however, the injection of an unrelated dsrna did not affect the expression of selected genes differentially expressed after subolesin knockdown. although we cannot rule out off-target effects of subolesin rnai in ticks, evidence suggested that this was not a likely possibility to explain the effect of subolesin knockdown on tick gene expression pattern. firstly, we did not find complementary sequences between subolesin and identified differentially expressed genes that could support off-target effects of subolesin rnai. to search for complementary sequences between subolesin and identified differentially expressed genes, we used the approach proposed by birmingham et al.  <cit>  who showed that although maximum complementarity by itself is an unsatisfactory predictor of off-target rnai effects, a highly significant association exists between off-targeting and exact complementarity between the seed region  of sirna and their off-targeted gene 3' untranslated region . secondly, the analysis of d. melanogaster subolesin ortholog rnai off-target effects demonstrated the presence of a single off-targeted gene  <cit> , suggesting that off-target effects of subolesin rnai may also be minimal in ticks.

a common characteristic of many regulatory protein sequences is the presence of phosphorylation sites. although we did not demonstrate phosphorylation of tick subolesin, there is evidence that the human ortholog protein undergoes phosphorylation at serine  <dig>   <cit> , a pkc phosphorylation site that is conserved in tick sequences. therefore, as with other regulatory proteins, subolesin may be regulated by reversible phosphorylation by pkc.

CONCLUSIONS
in summary, the results presented herein provide evidence that support a role for subolesin in gene expression in ticks and other organisms. the regulatory function of subolesin in gene expression may be exerted through interaction with other regulatory proteins at the transcriptional level . in fact, a recent publication by goto et al.  <cit>  that appeared after submission of our work renamed subolesin orthologs in insects and vertebrates as akirins and proposed that they constitute transcription factors required for nf-kb-dependent gene expression in drosophila and mice. alternatively, subolesin may also interact with proteins involved in translational control in ticks . the experimental approach used in this study may be important for the annotation of tick sequences that result from genome sequencing efforts  <cit>  and for the characterization of candidate tick protective antigens for the development of vaccines for the control of tick infestations and the transmission of tick-borne pathogens  <cit> .

