BACKGROUND
throughout the twentieth century, the american elm  has been a favoured urban tree for planners and landscape architects in many north american cities, providing shade along innumerable streets and boulevards. the elm is a particularly popular choice in northern climates because of its resistance to extremes of weather and harsh urban growing conditions, while its abundant crown foliage is large enough to span a city street  <cit> . unfortunately, populations of this urban tree have been decimated by dutch elm disease. the disease in north america can be attributed to two separate introduction events: the early epidemic caused by the non-aggressive sub-group o. ulmi and the later, more severe epidemic, caused by the highly pathogenic aggressive sub-group of o. novo-ulmi, which continues to threaten elm populations of western canada.

genomic fingerprinting methods are useful for resolving phylogenetic relationships among closely related populations and species  <cit>  and for the reconstruction of population histories, especially for a species introduction, where there can be rapid population development  <cit> . isolates of o. novo-ulmi sampled across saskatchewan and manitoba were analyzed using both nuclear and mitochondrial genetic markers and only limited genetic variability was detected. all of the isolates represented the aggressive sub-group and included only two distinct nuclear and four mitochondrial genotypes  <cit> . the vast majority of isolates were of a single genotype, suggesting that one genetic individual dominated the sample area. later analysis in the same region compared isolates collected in  <dig> and  <dig>  using both rapd markers and an evaluation of vegetative compatibility   <cit> . it was hypothesized that new vc types would develop quickly after the disease front had passed through the region  <cit> . compatibility tests confirmed a single vc group, demonstrating that a genetically uniform population persists in western canada. in contrast, a much greater diversity of vc types has been documented in the eurasian aggressive  race of o. novo-ulmi, as compared to populations of the north american aggressive  race  <cit> ; the ean and nan subpopulations of o. novo-ulmi have since been re-designated as subspecies novo-ulmi and americana, respectively  <cit> . a low diversity of vc types for the americana subspecies appears to be concentrated in the southern great lakes, which is consistent with its initial detection in this region; areas colonized more recently, including western canada, display very limited vc diversity  <cit> . in areas of europe experiencing a well established epidemic of subspecies novo-ulmi that was initially characterized by a uniformity of vc types, vegetative incompatibilities have been reported within six to ten years  <cit> . in contrast, the comparatively low diversity of vc groups observed for the subspecies americana is atypical of an established pathogen epidemic, although rapidly expanding pathogen populations have previously been reported to exhibit low genetic diversity  <cit> .

factors influencing the development of vc groups and increased genetic diversity in subspecies novo-ulmi must therefore be significantly different from those encountered by subspecies americana. there is no clear explanation for the limited genetic variability observed in the o. novo-ulmi subspecies americana population in western canada. the report of only two nuclear genotypes, and no transitional genotypes, suggests that sexual events are rare and that its propagation has been predominantly by asexual means within the time frame of this epidemic  <cit> . in a previous study of north america populations of this species, two possible factors contributing to low vc diversity were suggested: the infrequent occurrence of deleterious d-factor viruses in populations provide a low level of selection for new vc types and the frequent predominance of single vc clones on a host substrate does not favour the establishment of novel vc types  <cit> . the role of host genetic diversity has not been evaluated to any extent in studies of dutch elm disease and it should be noted that surveys of elm populations in western canada have been conducted primarily in urban environments and may thus have favoured planted nursery stocks of this species. this may represent a more limited diversity compared to wild u. americana trees.

from a perspective of disease management, the genetic uniformity of the subspecies americana population could be exploited as a target for the control of dutch elm disease in western canada through the use of fungal hypoviruses and related genetic tools to reduce pathogen virulence  <cit> . the presence of double-stranded rna  viruses in isolates of o. novo-ulmi has been well-documented  <cit>  and may play a role in strain fitness and the genetic diversity of the pathogen, including the diversity of vc types  <cit> . extensive studies have been done to understand the mechanisms of virus-determined hypovirulence observed in the causal agent of chestnut blight, cryphonectria parasitica, and to establish its utility as a method of disease control for the north american tree species american chestnut  <cit> . similarly, the introduced ascomycete o. novo-ulmi has become a serious pathogen of a major tree species and represents a good candidate for virus-mediated control.

until recently, there has been little work on profiling gene expression in o. novo-ulmi. a study focused on the transcriptome represents an opportunity for extensive gene discovery. the primary benefit of this approach is the detection and assessment of genes potentially implicated in pathogenicity and parasitic fitness. wound pathogens, such as o. novo-ulmi, directly enter the host through a pre-existing wound. ophiostoma novo-ulmi is a dimorphic fungus, alternating between a budding yeast-like growth form and a filamentous growth form, and this morphology switch appears to have great significance to pathogenicity  <cit> . the yeast phase has been proposed to be involved in dissemination of the pathogen from tree to tree by the insect vector as well as translocation of the infection within the host tree  <cit> . the mycelial form is required to penetrate from one vessel to another and may thus be considered the invasive form  <cit> . the yeast - hyphal transition is regulated by environmental factors and occurs in the homokaryotic  state  <cit> . the cataloguing and functional categorization of a library of expressed sequence tags  from the yeast form of this fungus provides a means of identifying genes integral to the first stages of infection. a more complete understanding of the genetic basis of pathogenicity could provide targets for gene regulation, leading to methods of disease control the recent demonstration of targeted gene disruption in o. novo-ulmi by rna interference  <cit> , combined with knowledge about specific target genes as detected by est analysis, makes this goal more readily achievable.

the canadian ophiostoma genome project was first initiated in  <dig> as a collaborative effort with the general objective of the large-scale collection and analysis of genome data for species of this genus  <cit> . longer-term studies will include the examination of specific genes that are differentially expressed, especially those that relate to mechanisms of pathogenicity in these species. the objectives of the current study were to  construct a low-redundancy est library using total rna extracted from the yeast-like growth phase of isolate h <dig> of ophiostoma novo-ulmi,  annotate the est information by determining their closest matches to known or theoretical sequences in public databases, and  categorize the known est collection to obtain a functional profile of the o. novo-ulmi genome, as expressed under these conditions of growth. this work will eventually be assisted by the construction of an est microarray or rna seq analysis to facilitate genome-level studies of gene expression.

RESULTS
sequencing of library and blastx analysis
analysis of novel sequence data typically begins with the assignment of putative identities based on alignments with derived proteins in public databases  <cit> . recent genome sequencing projects have resulted in the deposition of hundreds of thousands of theoretical proteins, predicted by analysis of sequenced genomes. theoretical proteins frequently match with novel ests at a high alignment score, but are of little consequence if they do not assign function or identity to the est. a protein of known function or identity will provide more meaningful information, even at a lesser alignment score. while automated alignment and annotation algorithms serve to provide a good approximation of most est identities, manual scrutiny and annotation is necessary to improve fidelity. with these constraints in mind, we began an analysis of the expressed sequences of the dutch elm pathogen o. novo-ulmi.

the dna sequence was determined for  <dig>  clones of a library that was estimated to contain a total of  <dig>  clones. the proportion of unique sequences identified in the entire yeast lmw library gradually declined as sequencing progressed, but remained above 30% of all sequences read within the final 96-well cell culture plate. this suggests that there still remains a sizable resource of unique o. novo-ulmi sequences in the cdna library.

library data is summarized in table  <dig>  of the  <dig>  est clones sequenced,  <dig>  gave readable sequence information  and included inserts ranging from  <dig> to  <dig> bp with an average insert size of  <dig> bp. a total of  <dig>  of the  <dig>  readable sequences matched entries described in ncbi and genbank public databases, as determined by blastx analysis  <cit> . these included  <dig>  matches with known proteins and  <dig> matches with unknown  proteins. matches with known proteins included  <dig> unique transcripts corresponding to  <dig> % of the est sequences in this category. applying this same ratio to the category of unknown proteins would generate an additional  <dig> unique transcripts among this group, for a total of  <dig>  single matched sequences.

a total of  <dig>  of the  <dig>  readable sequences drew no matches by blastx analysis. it may be assumed that 20% of these clones contained non-authentic sequences, due to the ligation of random fragments of dna into vectors during the creation of the est library, thus reducing the total to  <dig>  sequences without a match. based on the results for matched readable sequences, it was estimated that approximately 50% of unmatched est sequences were unique, thus yielding an additional  <dig> sequences that are at present unidentified. the total number of unique sequences from all categories is therefore estimated to be  <dig>  . given that the o. novo-ulmi genome is estimated to contain  <dig>  -  <dig>  genes  <cit> , the total number of unique sequences in this library is estimated to represent about 22% of this genome. additional sequencing of est library clones will add further depth to this analysis.

functional assignment of ests
functional assignment of expressed sequences requires a consideration of the metabolic pathway in which a gene product is likely to be active. in some instances, the presence of a characteristic functional group or structural domain indicates the probable molecular mechanism of a protein, but offers no insight into the physiological function that protein serves  <cit> . while the specific molecular mechanism of a specific protein may be known, inferences regarding the physiological role of similar proteins can be made based on their conservation of consensus sequences  <cit> . sequences involved in target-ligand interactions are often similar among related proteins and provide a means of deducing their putative physiological role by comparison with previously categorized proteins bearing similar consensus sequences. the  <dig> matched unique transcripts were selected as a subset of the  <dig>  est fragments and subjected to further blast analysis to obtain the three highest scoring alignments. these data were manually scrutinized and each est was manually annotated using the funcat system. a summary of results for the unique transcripts is provided in additional file  <dig> 

functional assignment of o. novo-ulmi yeast lmw ests to primary categories
the assignment of the o. novo-ulmi yeast lmw ests with known identities  into functionally related groups yielded  <dig> primary functional categories . the unclassified category  represented ests for which a protein identity could be assigned based upon an alignment with known sequences, but the metabolic function of that sequence remained unknown. the largest categories for the functional assignment of ests of known function included  metabolism , protein synthesis , sub-cellular localization , biogenesis of cellular components  and transcription . individual categories that represented less than  <dig> % of total assignments included protein fate , protein activity regulation, , cell cycle and dna processing , transposable elements, viral and plasmid proteins , interaction with the environment , cell fate  and cell type differentiation .

classification by
all remaining categories
assignment of est fragments by functional category and the percent representation of each category in the collection of the o. novo-ulmi yeast lmw library.

1based upon the mips classification scheme for the functional annotation of protein sequences  <cit> .

2classification of known yeast lmw sequences, as determined by blastx searches and homology to sequences of known identity.

3relative percentage of known yeast lmw sequences in each functional category.

functional assignment of o. novo-ulmi yeast lmw ests to subcategories
each of the eight primary functional categories that represented more than  <dig> % of all identified ests were categorized to the secondary level within each category . the subcategories represented in each group exhibited a wide variation in both the number detected and in the proportional distribution among these subcategories. funcat  <dig>  represented  <dig> standardized functional assignments of ests.

the funcat  <dig>  was comprised of  <dig>  standardized functional assignments of identified ests, making it the most highly represented functional category. within this primary category, eight subcategories relating to metabolism were represented. expressed sequence tags associated with carbon compound metabolism  were the most highly represented, comprising  <dig> % of funcat  <dig>  enzymes implicated in the metabolism of fatty acids  and amino acids  were also highly represented, comprising  <dig> % and  <dig> %, respectively, of these subcategories. the functional assignment of ests associated with nucleotide metabolism  were also important . the remaining subcategories represented the metabolism of nitrogen and sulphur , phosphate , vitamins, cofactors and prosthetic groups , and secondary metabolism , each of which comprised  <dig> % or less of all subcategories.

a total of  <dig>  standardized functional assignments and seven subcategories were represented within funcat  <dig> , with the vast majority of ests occurring in the respiration  category , followed by fermentation  and energy conversion and regeneration . the tca cycle  was also well-represented . those subcategories exhibiting the least representation within funcat  <dig> included ests classified within metabolism of energy reserves , electron transport and membrane-associated energy conservation , and the pentose-phosphate pathway .

of the eight primary functional categories examined at the secondary level, funcat  <dig>  exhibited the least complexity, with  <dig>  standardized functional assignments of ests in three subcategories, primarily rna synthesis , rna processing  and rna modification .

the expression profile for funcat  <dig>  had a similar distribution of functional assignments, with ribosome biogenesis representing the largest subcategory , followed by translation  and aminoacyl-trna synthetases , with a total of  <dig>  standardized functional assignments. genes in the largest subcategory were dominated by 40s and 60s ribosomal proteins.

the assignment of ests to subcategories within funcat  <dig>  included  <dig>  standardized functional assignments. this category was comprised of three subcategories, two of which were highly represented, transport routes , transported compounds   and transport facilitation .

within funcat  <dig>  a total of  <dig>  standardized functional assignments were made in three subcategories. the assignment of ests associated with stress response  and detoxification  were almost equally represented at  <dig> % and  <dig> %, respectively, followed by the subcategory of disease, virulence and defence . those ests associated with stress response were represented by inducible gene products sensitive to environmental stimuli, such as uv irradiation, desiccation and heat shock.

the greatest number of subcategories was observed for funcat  <dig> . a total of  <dig>  standardized functional assignments were distributed among ten subcategories. those ests associated with cytoplasm biogenesis represented the largest subcategory  and included a number of chitin synthase  proteins, of importance to cell wall biogenesis  <cit> . the cell wall subcategory was the next largest group  and included genes coding for beta-glucanase/beta-glucan synthetase , stomatin, mucin, and cell wall surface anchor family protein. subcategories with fewer assignments included mitochondrion  and cytoskeleton  biogenesis. the six remaining subcategories, totalling  <dig> %, included peroxisome , nucleus , vacuole or lysosome , extracellular/secretion proteins , plasma membrane , and endoplasmic reticulum  biogenesis. in the peroxisome subcategory, the woronin body major protein  was identified and is known to be important to cellular integrity during growth  <cit> .

the subcategories of funcat  <dig>  totalled  <dig> standardized functional assignments, that were distributed among seven subcategories. the greatest proportion of ests were associated with cytoplasm localization . other main subcategories included ests associated with endoplasmic reticulum localization  and plasma membrane/membrane attached subcellular localization . the subcategories of cell wall  and nucleus  subcellular localization were also prominent, followed by genes coding for vacuole or lysosome  and cytoskeleton  localization that both comprised  <dig> % of all assignments in each category.

the o. novo-ulmi unique transcript collection was reviewed and we identified a number of expressed genes that may be placed in these gene families of importance to ascomycetous pathogens . genes of interest included those relevant to cell wall biogenesis, pathogen defense mechanisms during infection and the host infection process.

beta-glucanase/
chitin synthase
species acronyms: an = aspergillus nidulans, af = aspergillus flavus, bc = botrytis cinerea, bd = blastomyces dermatitidis, cgl = chaetomium globosum, cgr = colletotrichum graminicola, cl = colletotrichum lindemuthianum, cn = cryptococcus neoformans, fg = fusarium graminearum , fs = fusarium spp., hc = histoplasma capsulatum, mg = magnaporthe grisea, pb = paracoccidioides braziliensis, pm = penicillium marneffei, sn = stagonospora nodorum, ss = sclerotinia sclerotiorum. fgi = fungal genome initiative, broad institute http://www.broad.mit.edu/annotation/fungi/fgi/index.html

discussion
understanding pathogenicity in o. novo-ulmi
the construction of an est library provides an initial gene expression profile for the yeast phase of a highly aggressive strain of the elm pathogen o. novo-ulmi. this est library will be the first step in elucidating the complex mechanisms determining fungal pathogenicity, through the study of multiple candidate genes that are potentially implicated in the infection process. historically, studies of pathogenicity were limited to one or a small number of candidate loci. with the creation of an est library and the eventual use of microarray analysis to evaluate the expression of many genes under defined conditions, it will be possible to study whole organism gene expression as it relates to pathogenicity. the multigenic character of fungal pathogenicity can thence be more effectively assessed by this approach. past efforts focused on single genes have attained limited success and have only confirmed the complex nature of fungal pathogenicity in o. novo-ulmi  <cit> . information gained from future studies will be of benefit to understanding the elm pathogen, as well as other fungal pathogens of woody plant species.

comparision with other ophiostoma species
the est library will also serve as a comparative database for other studies underway in the ophiostoma genome project for other growth states o. novo-ulmi and for other species of the genus ophiostoma that target different hosts  <cit> . associated data from the current project includes a total of  <dig> est fragments  from libraries that selected for perithecial , synnematal , mycelium grown at 15°c  and mycelium grown at 31°c  growth phases  <cit> . the comparison of expressed sequences for different life phases will facilitate our preliminary analysis of differentially expressed genes in o. novo-ulmi and provide direction for future studies of genes relevant to pathogenesis. existing est projects for other ophiostoma species include the sap-staining fungi ophiostoma piliferum , grosmannia clavigera   <cit>  and ophiostoma floccosum 

the search for proteins associated with the pathogenic life phase of ophiostoma spp. has produced various strategies designed to favour the expression of the relevant gene families. the use of suppressive subtractive hybridization pcr for the screening of genes differentially expressed in yeast and mycelia forms of the sap-stain fungus ophiostoma piceae has demonstrated one strategy for the identification of genes involved in morphology switching  <cit> . more recently, an est library was created for the lodgepole pine pathogen g. clavigera, using selective media to favour the detection of fungal genes expressed in the presence of oleoresin, one of the key host tree defense mechanisms against fungal pathogens  <cit> . this study described  <dig>  est fragments  and their preliminary functional analysis was generally focused on those genes implicated in fungal growth within the host and pathogenicity. similarly, an est library for o. piliferum was constructed by culturing the fungus on different carbon sources to obtain a total of  <dig>  est fragments ; this species has been considered for industrial applications, including the biopulping process  <cit> . useful insights into gene families linked to virulence and growth within the host for o. novo-ulmi could be obtained by reviewing the est data for g. clavigera and o. piliferum. molecular mechanisms underlying dutch elm disease were recently studied with the construction of an interaction cdna library, by means of suppression subtractive hybridization from elm callus tissue following inoculation with o. novo-ulmi. fifty three up-regulated elm host-specific unique transcripts were identified, including genes coding for known classes of pathogenesis-related proteins  <cit> .

strategies for detecting genes that influence virulence in o. novo-ulmi
the ncbi public database for submitted fungal est sequences includes a total of  <dig> , <dig> entries for  <dig> species, with  <dig> , <dig> entries for  <dig> species of ascomycetes alone . among the ascomycetous species, there are a number of phytopathogens that have been the subject of genome sequencing projects, many of which are available in public databases  <cit> . in our efforts to indentify unique fungal genes relevant to pathogenicity, two general strategies have been followed in studies of o. novo-ulmi. we have considered other phytopathogenic ascomycete species as the most relevant group of organisms that may share common genes of importance to the host infection process, as well as dimorphic species of ascomycete pathogens that undergo radical changes in morphology upon host infection. a comparison of gene inventories for filamentous pathogenic and non-pathogenic ascomycetes identified a set of gene families that appear to have increased in diversity over evolutionary history and may play a role in pathogenicity  <cit> . genes seen in phytopathogenic fungi are not necessarily unique to pathogen species, but have developed a greater diversity of related genes for specialized functions of a pathogenic lifestyle, when compared to homologues that are found in non-pathogenic species  <cit> . these specialized functions can include the production of secondary metabolites , the ability to use a variety of nutritional substrates, phenotypic plasticity  and complex signalling pathways relevant to the infection process .

ophiostoma novo-ulmi exhibits mycelial and yeast-like growth phases at different stages of growth and infection of the host elm. possession of a variable growth phase is shared with some important human pathogenic fungi, where specific cues from the host species will induce the change in morphology. a multigenic approach has been pursued with these ascomycete pathogens and has begun to provide some important findings regarding the regulation of specific pathogen loci and the infection process  <cit> . a consideration of these genes in the screening of o. novo-ulmi library may therefore provide useful information. histidine kinases in blastomyces dermatitidis and histoplasma capsulatum appear to act as global regulators in these dimorphic, human pathogenic ascomycetes, functioning in a two-component signalling system to regulate dimorphism and virulence. they directly influence the transition from mycelial to yeast phase in the body of a host and have been demonstrated to regulate the expression of several yeast-phase specific genes  <cit> . a single histidine kinase was identified in the est library , providing a potential gene target for further evaluation. also in b. dermatitidis, h. capsulatum and paracoccidioides braziliensis the gene alpha--glucan synthase and several other loci are considered yeast-phase specific virulence genes, as they are up-regulated with the switch to the pathogenic yeast form at 37°c in the host  <cit> . in the species h. capsulatum, this is one of the genes regulated by a histidine kinase. the o. novo-ulmi library also contains glucan synthase  and related genes that code for polysaccharides and other cell wall components.

a number of candidate virulence factors are under consideration for human pathogenic fungi and include melanin compounds, oxidative and nitrosative stress defense mechanisms, cell adhesion compounds, specific secreted products, arginine catabolism, cell surface composition, and those genes that are preferentially expressed in the parasitic yeast phase  <cit> . since the transition of these dimorphic fungi from a mycelial to a yeast phase is required for virulence, this latter category has received much attention. for genomic studies of the species of h. capsulatum and p. brasiliensis, a large number of differentially expressed genes have been identified  with the transition to the pathogenic yeast phase  <cit> . these genes fall into a number of functional categories and have provided a valuable resource for current studies of phase-specific gene expression in these species. further study of the current yeast est database created for o. novo-ulmi and its comparison to the est library constructed for the mycelia growth phase of this species should allow the detection of phase-specific gene expression. this will ultimately be done by the functional comparison of identified transcripts in each library and an assessment of their variability in gene expression through microarray analysis or rna seq analysis.

the development of control measures for o. novo-ulmi
the multigenic approach to assessing gene expression in o. novo-ulmi will also serve the future objective of identifying gene targets that play a key role in the determination of pathogenicity for this species. such genes will be further studied to assess their potential as targets for biological control strategies. one of the main criteria in the identification of such gene targets will be to confirm that the modification of gene expression at the chosen locus will only induce changes in the fungal species and not in the host, or in other non-target species. as a precursor to this assessment, it will be necessary to compile a prioritized list of possible gene targets identified following the functional characterization of the est library. a preliminary list of genes has been assembled in the current study and their evaluation can be assisted by the concurrent evaluation of whole organism gene expression made possible by microarray analysis.

the screening of candidate genes is best done by rna interference  as a means of down-regulating the expression of these gene targets. this approach has been used to successfully characterize the role of alpha--glucan synthase  in the pathogenicity of h. capsulatum  <cit> , for the down-regulation of the polyketide synthase  gene of the melanin pathway in ophiostoma piceae and ophiostoma. floccosum  <cit>  and, more recently, for the evaluation of gene expression by the endopolygalacturonase  gene, a pathogenicity factor in o. novo-ulmi  <cit> . this proven method of gene regulation will provide a means of effectively screening multiple candidate genes from the est library. transformed wild type strains of o. novo-ulmi with modified expression of selected genes can now be more easily screened in bioassays to assess the impact of targeted rnai upon strain pathogenicity.

CONCLUSIONS
the creation of an est library for o. novo-ulmi has provided an opportunity for gene discovery and the functional analysis of gene expression in this important plant pathogen. this library will also provide useful information for the study of other ophiostoma spp. of economic importance. a number of genes that may influence virulence and fitness in o. novo-ulmi have been identified and these will be the focus of subsequent studies to evaluate their role in host infection. promising gene targets will be assessed using an rnai strategy to establish their importance to pathogenicity. these findings will determine the approach of future biological control research to control dutch elm disease in canada. this research will be complemented by whole genome expression studies for o. novo-ulmi and related species.

