BACKGROUND
infections by pathogenic marine bacteria are a major problem for both the shellfish and finfish aquaculture industries, causing severe disease and high mortality, which seriously affect aquaculture production and cause significant economic loss  <cit> . this problem particularly affects the survival and growth of fish and shellfish during the larval and juvenile stages  <cit> . opportunistic pathogens from the vibrionaceae and at least one member of the roseobacter clade cause disease in a variety of shellfish  <cit> . for example, vibrio tubiashii, a reemerging pathogen of larval bivalve mollusks that causes invasive and toxigenic disease, has been responsible for massive mortalities among larval pacific oysters  in hatcheries on the west coast of the united states  <cit> . additionally, roseovarius crassostreae, a member of the roseobacter clade and the causative agent of juvenile or roseovarius oyster disease , can cause high mortalities in juvenile eastern oysters  in the northeastern united states during the summer when water temperatures are ≥20 °c  <cit> . although antibiotics and vaccines can be used to control some infectious diseases in aquaculture, they have some distinct disadvantages and limitations. use of antibiotics increases the risk of development and transfer of antibiotic resistance  <cit> . vaccines, which rely on an adaptive immune response, are only effective for vertebrate organisms and cannot be used to protect shellfish  <cit> .

probiotics represent a promising alternative strategy to control infection and some probiotic strains are already used commonly in aquaculture as biological control agents in finfish and shellfish  <cit> . for example, the probionts bacillus subtilis and bacillus licheniformis are widely used in shrimp aquaculture to provide beneficial effects potentially including improved health and water quality, control of pathogenic bacteria and their virulence, stimulation of the immune system and improved growth  <cit> . several phaeobacter species have been shown to be effective probiotics for both finfish and shellfish. for example, d’alvise et al.  <cit>  demonstrated that phaeobacter can be used as a probiotic treatment to reduce the density of the fish pathogen vibrio anguillarum in cultures of cod larvae, resulting in the reduction of mortality by vibriosis. the probiotic activity was dependent upon the production of tropodithietic acid  by p. gallaeciensis. further, d’alvise et al.  <cit>  demonstrated that a different tda-producing strain of phaeobacter was able to reduce or eliminate v. anguillarum from a combined liquid-surface system. these and other studies strongly suggest that antagonistic interactions by probiotic bacteria against marine pathogens may be useful in protecting commercially important species of shellfish and finfish from infectious disease.

phaeobacter inhibens is gram-negative α-proteobacteria from the roseobacter clade. the roseobacter clade, an important member of the marine microbiota, accounts for ~4 % to as much as ~40 % of bacterial dna from the ocean and plays an important role in the organic sulfur cycle of the ocean . several species in this clade exhibit inhibitory activity against the growth of marine pathogens, including v. anguillarum, v. tubiashii and r. crassostreae  <cit> . additionally, several potentially probiotic species from the roseobacter clade can be routinely isolated from larval production facilities for turbot  <cit> . further, phaeobacter species are typically excellent biofilm formers, colonizing a variety of surfaces including the walls of rearing tanks, microalgae, the skin of finfish, and the shells of mollusks  <cit> . although, biofilm formation is thought to be essential for probiotic activity by a variety of mechanisms including competition for adhesion sites, oxygen, nutrients, and by preventing contact between pathogens and hosts  <cit> , the role of biofilm formation in the probiotic activity of phaeobacter species against shellfish pathogens has not been thoroughly investigated.

previously, we isolated p. inhibens s <dig> from the inner shell surface of a healthy oyster  <cit> . this bacterium is a short rod with 1– <dig> flagella on one or both poles. it has pleiomorphic morphology and will elongate into long rods and filaments under specific conditions . it can form rosettes and is an excellent biofilm former and a dominant colonizer of surfaces in marine environments. p. inhibens s4sm is a spontaneous streptomycin-resistant mutant of the parental s <dig>  when s4sm was used as a potential probiotic treatment of oyster larvae, it showed strong anti-pathogen activity and increased host survival  <cit> , but the actual mechanisms of probiotic activity used by this isolate are not fully understood.

in this study we examined the roles of biofilm formation and tda production in probiotic activity of p. inhibens s4sm in oysters challenged by the pathogen, v. tubiashii. in order to determine the contributions of tda production and biofilm formation to the probiotic activity of s4sm, mutations in clpx  and an exopolysaccharide biosynthesis gene   were created by insertional mutagenesis. the effects of these mutations upon tda production, biofilm formation and probiotic activity were determined.

RESULTS
p. inhibens s4sm secretes the antibiotic tropodithietic acid
bioassay-guided fractionation of p. inhibens supernatants resulted in the purification of a single secondary metabolite possessing antimicrobial activity. the molecule was identified as tropodithietic acid  based upon a molecular ion of + =  <dig>  <cit>  and comparison of 1h nmr chemical shift data  with literature values  <cit>  . all assays described below were conducted with this purified tda. uhplc analysis data  confirmed that tda was present in s4sm supernatant.fig.  <dig> reversed-phase hplc chromatograms of ethyl acetate extracts from phaeobacter strains to detect tda. a authentic tda and extract from wild type strain s4sm. b inhibition zone assay of s4sm, clpx mutant , clpx complement , exop mutant  or exop complement  on yp <dig> plates coated by v. anguillarum , v. tubiashii  or r. crassostreae  after  <dig> h at  <dig> °c. c authentic tda and extracts from clpx mutant strain , clpx complement , exop mutant strain , exop complement . the data presented are averages of two independent experiments and each independent experiment has three replicates. error bars represent one standard deviation



differential sensitivities of marine pathogens to tda
we examined the relative sensitivities of three pathogens of marine organisms, v. anguillarum nb10sm, v. tubiashii re22sm, and r. crassostreae cv919sm, to p. inhibens s4sm by looking at the inhibition of growth around a colony of s4sm. v. anguillarum nb10sm was most sensitive to s4sm with largest zone of inhibition  ; r. crassostreae exhibited slightly less sensitivity to s4sm ; and the least sensitive pathogen to s4sm was v. tubiashii re22sm  . these data were consistent with the results for minimum inhibitory concentration  of tda against each of the three pathogens: the mic for tda against nb10sm was  <dig>  μg/ml, against r. crassostreae the mic was 5 μg/ml, and against re22sm the mic was  <dig>  μg/ml.

biofilm formation by p. inhibens s4sm
s4sm formed thick biofilms on glass, as determined using the crystal violet staining assay. the od <dig> value for the s4sm biofilm after 60 h was ~ <dig>  at 27 °c under static conditions . in contrast, all three marine pathogens  used in this study formed biofilms that were between  <dig> - <dig>  % of the s4sm  . these data suggested that s4sm was able to form a thick, dense biofilm matrix on glass coverslips and tubes.table  <dig> quantification of biofilm formation by measuring optical density at 580 nm  of crystal violet dye attached to the cells forming biofilms on glass tubes at 27 °c under static conditions at 60 h










abiofilm formation quantified by crystal violet dye assay as described in the materials and methods. the data presented are the average of two independent experiments, each with three replicates. sd = standard deviation


bstatistically significant difference  compared to s4sm



effect of clpx gene mutation on tda production
in order to examine the roles of tda production and biofilm formation in the probiotic activity of s <dig>  we constructed mutations in the tdaa, tdab, and tdbd, genes, previously shown to be part of the tda biosynthesis pathway  <cit> . these mutants not only lost tda production, but also were defective for biofilm formation . to differentiate the roles of tda production and biofilm formation in probiotic activity in oysters, we constructed mutants deficient in either tda synthesis or biofilm production. it was previously shown that mutation in clpx resulted in the loss of tda production in phaeobacter sp. strain 27– <dig>  <cit> . the clpx gene was pcr amplified and sequenced. the derived amino acid sequence was compared  to other clpx genes already available for phaeobacter strains in the non-redundant protein genbank database. the s4sm clpx protein has 100 % identity to other p. inhibens clpx proteins. the clpx gene was found to encode a  <dig> amino acid atp-dependent protease atp-binding subunit and is part of the clpxp multimer . mutation of clpx by insertional mutagenesis resulted in the loss of tda production. uhplc analysis data  showed that no tda was present in clpx mutant supernatant. further, there were no inhibition zones around the clpx mutant cells when tested against the three pathogens, v. anguillarum nb10sm, v. tubiashii re22sm, and r. crassostreae cv919sm . additionally, culture supernatant from the clpx mutant was not able to kill nb10sm cells . complementation of the clpx gene restored tda production  and anti-vibrio activity . mutation of clpx did not result in defective biofilm formation . the clpx mutant and the clpx complement exhibited the same growth rate and final cell density as the wild type when grown in yp <dig> under shaking and static conditions .table  <dig> killing ability of culture supernatant of various p. inhibens strains against v. anguillarum nb10sm cellsa



aculture supernatant from each strain collected after two-day incubation. the data presented are from a representative experiment of two independent experiments


bsd = standard deviation


cnss: nine salts solution



effect of exop gene mutation on biofilm formation
in order to develop a strain of s <dig> defective in biofilm formation but able to produce tda, the exop gene, which encodes an exopolysaccharide biosynthesis domain protein , was identified in p. inhibens s4sm strain. mutation of exop resulted in decreased biofilm formation, with the exop mutant exhibiting only ~40 % of the wild type level of biofilm formation  . complementation of exop gene restored biofilm formation to wild type level . mutation of exop did not result in defective tda production . the exop mutant and the exop complement exhibited the same growth rate and final cell density as the wild type when grown in yp <dig> under shaking and static conditions .

effect of clpx and exop mutations on the ability of p. inhibens biofilms to antagonize colonization of coverslips by vibrio species
the clpx mutant  and the exop mutant  allowed us to examine the relative roles of biofilm formation and tda production on the ability of 24 h biofilms of s4sm to: 1) antagonize colonization of glass surfaces by v. tubiashii re22sm and 2) decrease the cell density  of the pathogen in the liquid culture media. when a co-colonized glass coverslip was examined after 72 h of incubation by laser scanning confocal microscopy, more re22sm cell clusters were observed in the biofilm matrix of the clpx mutant than in the biofilm matrix of either s4sm wild type or exop . these observations were reflected in the viable cell counts of the v. tubiashii re22sm in both biofilms  and in suspension  when grown in the presence of biofilms of p. inhibens s4sm wild type, the clpx mutant or the exop mutant. for example, as shown in fig. 2b at 123 h, the number of viable re22sm in the biofilm on a coverslip was 1 × 104 cfu when precolonized with s4sm. in contrast, the number of re22sm cells increased 180-fold  when grown in the presence of the clpx mutant. this was about the same number of cells on a coverslip as when re22sm was allowed to colonize alone . further, when grown in the presence of the exop mutant the number of viable re22sm cells on the coverslip was  <dig> -fold higher  than in the presence of s4sm cells  . this is a significant difference in re22sm biofilm formation . in suspension, the cell density of re22sm reached 2 × 108 cfu/ml under conditions of precolonization by the clpx mutant; this was similar to the density of re22sm grown alone , but about two orders of magnitude higher than when re22sm was co-cultured with either s4sm  or exop  at 123 h . these data showed that the clpx mutant was not able to inhibit re22sm growth or biofilm formation under the tested conditions. while the exop mutant was able to inhibit re22sm biofilm formation to the same extent as the wild type s4sm, the exop mutant showed decreased ability to inhibit re22sm planktonic growth.fig.  <dig> competition assay between ofp-labeled p. inhibens s <dig> strains and gfp-labeled v. tubiashii. p. inhibens stains were allowed to grow and form biofilms on the glass surfaces for 24 h before the addition of v. tubiashii re22sm-gfp. the mixed cultures are s4sm-ofp with re22sm-gfp, clpx-ofp with re22sm-gfp and exop-ofp with re22sm-gfp. a merged confocal microscopy images of mixed biofilm development by ofp-producing strains  and gfp-producing v. tubiashii  strain on the surface of glass coverslip at 72 h. the data presented are from a representative experiment of two independent experiments. b growth of sessile p. inhibens s4sm strains  and v. tubiashii re22sm in a co-culture system. c growth of planktonic p. inhibens s4sm strains  and v. tubiashii re22sm in a co-culture system. the data presented are average of two independent experiments and each independent experiment has three replicates. error bars represent one standard deviation



effects of exogenous tda on the antagonistic activity of the clpx mutant
in order to confirm the relationship between the loss of tda production and the inability of the clpx mutant biofilm to block colonization by the tested pathogens, exogenous tda  or the same volume of distilled water  was added to the co-culture system of the clpx mutant  and re22sm at the same time as the pathogens. addition of tda suppressed biofilm formation  and planktonic growth  by re22sm cells for 24 h. this was seen in mixed cultures of re22sm plus either s4sm or the clpx mutant or in the monoculture of re22sm. further, the number of re22sm cells in all three tda-supplemented cultures, whether as biofilms or planktonic cells, was not statistically different. however, the effects of a single dose of exogenous tda were transitory. at 48 h, the amount of re22sm cells co-cultured with the clpx mutant and exogenous tda increased over 160-fold, and were not significantly different from the values for re22sm cultured alone . the confocal micrographic images of biofilms from 48 h cultures confirmed that more re22sm cells  were observed in the clpx mutant biofilm  than in s4sm biofilm .fig.  <dig> effects of tda supplementation on competition assays between p. inhibens strains and v. tubiashii re22sm. a growth of sessile re22sm on a glass coverslip in co-culture with either the s4sm wild type or the clpx mutant strain  supplemented with or without tda . b single channel and merged confocal microscopy images of mixed biofilm development by ofp-producing strains of p. inhibens s4sm  or the clpx mutant  with the gfp-producing strain of v. tubiashii re22sm  on the surface of a glass coverslip at 48 h after addition of re22sm and tda. c growth of planktonic re22sm in co-culture system with either the s4sm wild type or the clpx mutant strain supplemented with or without tda . the data presented are averages of two independent experiments with each experiment done in triplicate. error bars represent one standard deviation



effects of v. tubiashii on growth of p. inhibens strains in competition assays
in order to see if v. tubiashii would affect the growth of our various p. inhibens strains, we compared the growth of p. inhibens strains in the presence of v. tubiashii with growth in monoculture controls. growth of wild type s4sm and the exop mutant were not affected by v. tubiashii on the coverslip  or in suspension . in contrast, the growth of the clpx mutant was affected by v. tubiashii. at each time point tested, the density of the clpx mutant  was lower than that of the monoculture control . for example, at 72 h the biofilm density of clpx mutant cells grown in the presence of re <dig> was  <dig>  % of clpx mutant cells grown axenically . similarly, the planktonic cell density of clpx mutant cells grown in the presence of re22sm was  <dig>  % of clpx mutant cells grown axenically . additionally, when v. anguillarum nb10sm was co-cultured with either s4sm or the exop mutant, it did not affect their growth; however, nb10sm did inhibit the growth of the clpx mutant .fig.  <dig> effects of v. tubiashii on the growth of p. inhibens strains in a competition assay. p. inhibens s4sm strains were allowed to grow and form biofilms for 24 h before the addition of v. tubiashii re22sm. the mixed cultures are: s4sm-ofp with re22sm-gfp, clpx-ofp with re22sm-gfp and exop-ofp with re22sm-gfp. a growth of sessile s <dig> cells  in a co-culture system and a monoculture control. b growth of planktonic s <dig> cells  in a co-culture system and a monoculture control. the data presented are averages of two independent experiments with each experiment done in triplicate. error bars represent one standard deviation



effects of co-incubation with phaeobacter strains on pathogen growth and biofilm formation
to determine if p. inhibens s4sm can compete against vibrio pathogens when added at the same time, competition assays were performed . the amount of re22sm cells in the biofilm was ~ <dig>  × 107 cfu/coverslip at 48 h . this was 830-fold more re <dig> cells than detected in the biofilm which was pre-colonized with s4sm for 24 h . similarly, without pre-colonization by the p. inhibens mutants  re22sm exhibited 10- to 100-fold more cells in the mixed biofilm compared to biofilms formed with pre-colonization by the p. inhibens mutants  . further, when s4sm was added at the same time as the pathogen, cell density of planktonic re22sm  was ~  <dig>  × 108 cfu/ml , more than 30-fold higher than the density of re22sm observed in the pre-colonized culture  . in contrast, pre-colonization with s4sm was not necessary to antagonize v. anguillarum . in experiments where s4sm and nb10sm were inoculated together, nb10sm was eliminated from both the coverslip biofilm and the liquid culture by  <dig> to 48 h . further, the exop mutant inhibited nb10sm biofilm formation and growth in suspension almost as well as s4sm. in contrast, the clpx mutant  exhibited almost no inhibition of either biofilm formation or planktonic growth of nb10sm, compared to nb10sm grown alone. these observations are also illustrated by the confocal images of biofilms formed by ofp-tagged p. inhibens strains and gfp-tagged nb10sm  cells .fig.  <dig> competition between p. inhibens s4sm strains and v. tubiashii re <dig> without pre-colonization by p. inhibens. the mixed cultures are: s4sm-ofp with re22sm-gfp, clpx-ofp with re22sm-gfp, and exop-ofp with re22sm-gfp. a growth of sessile s <dig> strains and re22sm in a co-culture system. b growth of planktonic s <dig> strains and re22sm in a co-culture system. the data presented are averages of two independent experiments with each experiment done in triplicate. error bars represent one standard deviation



effect of mutations in clpx and exop on probiotic activity of p. inhibens against v. tubiashii in oyster larvae
in order to determine if mutations in tda production or biofilm formation would affect the probiotic activity of s4sm against v. tubiashii in vivo, larval oyster challenge assays were performed as described by karim et al.  <cit> . p. inhibens mutants showed a significant reduction in their ability to protect larval oysters against v. tubiashii challenge compared to wild type s4sm . the clpx mutant exhibited a >50 % decline in oyster larvae survival compared to s4sm , while the exop mutant provided almost 70 % of the protection as s4sm  . thus, both p. inhibens mutants still provided partial protection. survival in larvae pretreated with either the clpx or exop mutant  was significantly higher than the survival of larvae treated only with re <dig>  .fig.  <dig> oyster larvae survival in the presence of p. inhibens strains after challenge with v. tubiashii. the p. inhibens s4sm strains  were introduced 24 h before larvae were challenged with v. tubiashii re22sm . oyster larvae treated only with artificial seawater served as control . oyster larvae survival  was determined 24 h after challenge with re22sm bars marked with an asterisk  show significant differences . representative of at least  <dig> experiments. error bars represent one standard deviation



discussion
several phaeobacter species are known to have probiotic activity and are able to protect fish species against bacterial pathogens  <cit> . the production of the broad-spectrum antibiotic, tropodithietic acid , is regarded as one of the major factors contributing to probiotic activity against v.anguillarum infection in turbot and cod  <cit> . we recently reported that the new isolate p. inhibens s4sm protects the eastern oyster  from infection by two oyster pathogens, v. tubiashii and r. crassostreae  <cit> . in this report, we dissect the roles of tda biosynthesis and biofilm formation in promoting probiotic activity by p. inhibens s4sm, showing that both mechanisms are involved.

although the tda biosynthetic pathway has not been fully elucidated, many of the genes required for the formation of tda and much of the pathway have been discovered  <cit> . one gene reported to be involved in tda biosynthesis is clpx   <cit> . clpx is an aaa+ atpase that functions as an unfoldase chaperon for clpp  and with clpp forms the multimeric clpxp protease  <cit> . an insertional mutation in the clpx gene specifically blocked the biosynthesis of tda in s4sm  without affecting biofilm formation  or growth . further, the effects of mutations to clpx upon cell physiology are subtle and diverse . in contrast, mutations in tdaa, tdab, and tdbd, all block tda biosynthesis and also affect biofilm formation in s4sm. the mechanism by which clpx affects tda production is still unknown. additionally, the reasons why mutations in tdaa, tdab, and tdbd decrease biofilm formation, as well as tda biosynthesis, are not understood, and are not the focus of this study.

the clpx tda deficient mutant was unable to inhibit v. tubiashii growth in either liquid or as a biofilm on a glass coverslip ; however, when cultures were supplemented with tda, the growth of planktonic v. tubiashii growth was inhibited . it is well known that organisms in biofilms are more resistant to antibiotics than when suspended in liquid  <cit> . this is consistent with our data showing that tda antibiotic activity was more potent against planktonic re <dig> cells than towards re <dig> cells living in a biofilm. these data, in which the effect of the wild type was restored by adding tda to the clpx antibiotic activity mutant, strongly suggest that the loss of tda production is responsible for the defect in antagonistic activity in the clpx mutant. further, 48 h after the addition of tda into the co-culture the inhibitory effect of tda disappeared, likely due to instability of tda over time or metabolism by v. tubiashii. except for the loss of tda synthesis, the clpx mutant exhibited no other defects in growth or biofilm formation compared to the s4sm wild type when grown in pure culture . the results reported here confirm the role of tda as an antibiotic promoting probiotic activity of phaeobacter species described previously by d’alvise et al.  <cit>  in another host-pathogen system. it is interesting to note that the growth of the clpx mutant is depressed by re <dig> , suggesting that tda production allows p. inhibens to compete with faster growing species for available nutrients.

p. inhibens, a member of the abundant marine roseobacter clade, is known to be an excellent colonizer of environmental surfaces  <cit> . while no study of the effects of biofilm formation on the probiotic mechanism of phaeobacter has been reported, it is interesting to note that prol garcia et al.  recently reported that biofilm formation is not a prerequisite for tda formation in p. inhibens. in that study, the authors, using tn <dig> transposon mutagenesis, identified  <dig> tda-positive mutants with defects in biofilm formation. among classes of genes identified as contributing to biofilm formation were those involved in exopolysaccharide formation. in our study, the exop gene was identified in s4sm  as an exopolysaccharide biosynthesis gene, which is thought to be involved in biofilm formation. mutation of exop resulted in a large decrease in biofilm formation , and exhibited no other defects in growth or tda formation . thus, our observations correspond to those reported by prol garcia et al.  that biofilm formation is not a prerequisite for tda production and also that mutation of a gene involved with exopolysaccharide production can affect biofilm formation. while the exop mutant was modestly defective in its ability to inhibit vibrio species in competition assays  it did exhibit significantly decreased probiotic activity in the oyster challenge assay against v. tubiashii , these declines were less than those seen in the clpx mutant. we suggest that while in the in vitro  model the exop mutant forms much less biofilm than the wild type, enough tda accumulates to inhibit re <dig> to levels near those caused by wild type cells. however, in the in vivo oyster challenge model, the reduced biofilm of the exop mutant results in decreased tda production that is diluted by the larger volumes of the system and the feeding activity of the oyster larvae causing less inhibition of re <dig>  these data suggest that biofilm formation contributes to the probiotic activity of s4sm. biofilms may contribute to probiotic activity in two ways. first, biofilms would allow p. inhibens to physically occupy potential sites of colonization and prevent the oyster pathogens from gaining access to the oyster. second, the formation of an extensive biofilm with cells at high density may induce the production of tda  <cit> . a more extensive biofilm would produce more tda and, therefore, more effectively inhibit the ability of pathogens to infect the oyster host.

as a broad spectrum antibiotic tda inhibits the growth of several marine pathogens  <cit> . however, in the ocean environment tda will be rapidly diluted once it is secreted. we suggest that p. inhibens requires both tda production and biofilm formation for effective probiotic activity. the biofilm matrix creates a microenvironment within which tda can accumulate to reach concentrations high enough to inhibit pathogens. in the absence of tda, a p. inhibens biofilm does not eliminate pathogens and provides only modest protection against disease. further, p. inhibens growing with a diminished biofilm also exhibits significantly reduced probiotic activity probably due to the decreased mass of cells producing tda and the increase in available sites for pathogens to colonize. our data indicate that maximum probiotic activity requires both tda production and biofilm formation.

karim et al.  <cit>  reported that oyster larvae were best protected when p. inhibens s4sm was added 24 h prior to challenge by either of the two oyster pathogens, v. tubiashii and r. crassostreae. the data presented in this report is consistent with those previous observations and reveal that pre-colonization of a surface by s4sm is more effective than co-incubation at inhibiting v. tubiashii re <dig> from either colonizing the glass coverslip surface or from growing planktonically . one potential reason for this need for a 24 h pre-treatment is the rapid generation time of vibrio species in yp <dig> , which is less than 1 h , while the doubling time for p. inhibens s4sm is ~ <dig>  h. successful probiotic activity by s4sm may be dependent upon growth rate and having enough tda producing cells in the biofilm to successfully antagonize and out-compete the oyster pathogens. interestingly, we show in our study that v. anguillarum cells are more sensitive to tda than are v. tubiashii cells, and that, while pre-colonization of surfaces by s4sm was required to prevent the colonization of coverslips by v. tubiashii, it was not required to prevent the colonization by v. anguillarum. consistent with these observations, d’alvise et al.  <cit>  showed that it was not necessary for p. gallaeciensis to precolonize the wells containing cod larvae in order to antagonize v. anguillarum and significantly reduce cod larvae mortalities. our experiments indicate differences between vibrio species on how they interact with the s4sm probiotic. interestingly, precolonization with re <dig> reduces the ability of s <dig> and mutants to grow & colonize glass cover slips and to grow planktonically , suggesting that re <dig> is able to modulate the probiotic activity of s4sm through negative impacts on the ability to grow and/or colonize surfaces.

CONCLUSIONS
the results presented in this study demonstrate that both tda production and biofilm formation contribute to the probiotic activity of p. inhibens s4sm. specifically blocking tda production by mutation of the clpx gene resulted in a significant decline in probiotic activity as determined by coverslip colonization assay or by survival of oyster larvae challenged by v. tubiashii re <dig>  while reducing biofilm formation by mutation of the exop gene also resulted in a significant decline in probiotic activity as determined by survival of oyster larvae challenged by v. tubiashii re <dig>  but only a modest decline as measured by coverslip colonization assay. it is possible that biofilm formation contributes to probiotic activity in two ways: 1) occupying potential colonization sites and 2) increasing cell density-dependent induction of tda biosynthesis. future investigation will examine these possibilities.

