BACKGROUND
the outcome of high-throughput experiments, such as dna microarray experiments, is typically a list of hundreds of genes that could be relevant to the studied phenomenon. further analysis is required to relate the genes to relevant biological processes and to identify potentially interesting relationships between the genes. in the early days of dna microarray data analysis, extracting the required information about genes depended solely on researchers retrieving information from the huge corpus of scientific literature. nowadays, the need for computational support in the interpretation of high-throughput experiments has become widely recognized.

however, much of the knowledge on genes and proteins is locked in unstructured free text and cannot be used directly in computational systems. to make this knowledge more accessible, several databases have become available that offer structured information on genes and proteins. these databases are either public, e.g. the databases offered by the gene ontology annotation  project  <cit>  and the kyoto encyclopedia of genes and genomes  project  <cit> , or corporate, e.g. as delivered by genego  <cit>  and ingenuity  <cit> . for a large part, these databases are filled with manually encoded information generated by experts reading scientific literature. manual encoding is generally considered a reliable method for extracting information from literature, but due to its labor-intensive nature it is limited in scope and flexibility. complementary to manual encoding, research effort is currently spent on text-mining: the development of computerized algorithms for extracting information from scientific literature  <cit> . automated methods have the advantage of speed and adaptability, with the challenging obligation to achieve both high precision and recall.

in text-mining, broadly two approaches can be distinguished. one approach is focused on the extraction of explicitly stated direct relationships between genes and other biomedical concepts. early proposed systems for this task were based on the co-occurrence of terms in texts  <cit> . currently, the grammatical structure in a sentence is typically used for the task of relation mining and a wide variety of techniques has been developed. these techniques range from the detection of simple patterns such as "protein a – action x – protein b"  <cit> , to the complete parsing of whole sentences  <cit> . the other approach is focused on the identification of indirect associations between concepts, such as genes. for instance, two genes can be found to have an association, because they are described in separate papers to be involved in the same biological process. to retrieve such indirect associations, the explicit, direct associations of the genes are compared. in this approach, syntactic structures are typically ignored, and only the statistics of occurrences and co-occurrences of words or terms in a text come into play.

here we focus on the second approach. several co-occurrence based methods have been developed for the analysis of dna microarray data. geisha  <cit>  took a cluster of genes from a dna microarray data analysis. the system annotated this cluster with the most discriminant terms, and also retrieved relevant co-occurrences, sentences, and abstracts. the system was word-based but automatically identified common word combinations and treated them as single concepts. shatkay et al.  <cit>  used a kernel document to represent a gene, and used this document to retrieve a set of similar documents. a list of keywords was generated to summarize the recurring theme in the genes' sets of retrieved documents. subsequently, genes were associated to each other by comparing the genes' sets of retrieved documents. raychaudhuri et al.  <cit>  analyzed a list of genes by identifying clusters of genes that show "functional coherence" according to their literature-based neighbor divergence measure. we introduced the associative concept space   <cit>  as an aid to find associations between genes for microarray data analysis. the algorithm positioned concepts, in an iterative process, in a virtual space based on co-occurrence information. the idea behind the acs is that concepts that are placed close to each other will be more likely to share an actual semantic relationship and the visualized acs allowed browsing for associations between concepts, which is intuitively appealing. several authors  <cit>  employed the vector space model, in which a gene is represented by means of a vector that characterizes a set of texts associated with the gene. the methods varied in the features, or dimensions, of the vector. chaussabel and sher  <cit>  used a simple word-based approach to generate a list of co-occurring words for each gene. for the analysis of a list of genes, they attempted to bring to light interesting co-occurrence patterns by clustering both the genes and the co-occurring words. glennison et al.  <cit>  used concepts from a thesaurus as features, and identified terms in texts referring to thesaurus concepts. they used five thesauri to obtain different views on the associations of a gene and used clustering to find genes with similar profiles from a gene list. others used factorization techniques to reduce the high dimensionality encountered when using words or concepts as features: küffner et al. and homayouni et al. used singular value decomposition  <cit>  and chagoyen et al. employed non-negative matrix factorization  <cit> . the claim is that reduction of the dimensionality in this manner leads to a more robust data.-analysis, which is less sensitive to sparse and noisy data  <cit> .

from a user's perspective, the current approaches leave several requirements unfulfilled. for example, the acs and raychaudhuri methods suffer from a lack of transparency, i.e., a user will not easily understand how the programs come to their associations, which is important to know in an actual research setting. transparency is also at stake when using factorization in vector space approaches, as it is not clear what the newly defined dimensions mean, or even whether the have a semantic interpretation at all. the methods described by glennison and chaussabel and sher are transparent but use empirical methods for the weighting of concepts, which have problematic statistical properties . also, it would be desirable for a user to have more control on which concepts or words are used to compute an association than is possible in the mentioned approaches.

our aim in this paper is to create a text-mining system for the interpretation of gene lists derived from dna microarray data that is transparent. furthermore, in contrast to many earlier published text-mining systems, we will apply the system to actual research problems, in cooperation with molecular biologists. the approach we propose finds associations between genes by means of concept  occurrence statistics and employs the vector space model, similar to glennison et al.  <cit> . for each gene we generate a vector of weights, which we refer to as a concept profile. the features in the concept profile are thesaurus concepts that characterize a set of documents associated with the gene. a thesaurus concept is an entity with a definition and a set of terms that are used in texts, to refer to the concept. every concept is also assigned a semantic type, such as "disease" or "gene". the set of concepts used in the concept profiles is filtered by semantic type using a user defined semantic filter. an important issue is the selection of the measure to weigh the association of a concept in a profile. the weight should distinguish between a concept that co-occurs through chance with the concept of interest and a concept with a semantically interesting association. with this in mind we adopted a test-based method based on likelihood ratios  <cit> , which has been successfully used for the identification of interesting collocations  <cit> . compared to other test-based methods, the likelihood ratio does not require the data to have a normal distribution and is known to yield good results even on small samples. we developed a program called anni to work with the concept profiles. with this program, genes associated with similar topics in literature are identified by hierarchical clustering of the corresponding gene concept profiles. anni has a high degree of transparency. it provides for every identified cluster anni a coherence measure, and also a p-value to illustrate how exceptional the cluster is, and a complete annotation of the underlying overlap of the concept profiles. also, a link to the underlying texts is provided for all associations in the concept profiles. the program is freely available at .

we evaluated the method in two steps. firstly, we present an evaluation based on a controlled test set and compare it to our earlier published acs algorithm  <cit> . secondly, we give a systematic analysis of the data from two dna microarray experiments and evaluate the results together with domain experts.

RESULTS
performance evaluation on a controlled test set
the concept profile method and the acs were compared based on a controlled test set, as described before  <cit> . the test set was made by pooling five groups of genes that share a biological relationship: chaperone activity , glycolysis , breast cancer , spermatogenesis  and lysosome . a table with all  <dig> genes is given in additional file  <dig>  for each gene the methods were evaluated on their ability to distinguish between group members and non-group members. receiver operating characteristics  curves were constructed for every gene and the area under the roc curve  supplied the evaluation measure. as can be seen in figure  <dig>  the concept profile method has high auc scores for  <dig> out of  <dig> gene groups. it significantly outperforms the acs in  <dig> out of  <dig> groups and has higher median scores for the other groups as well. overall, taking the genes from all groups together, the concept profile method significantly outperforms the acs . as discussed in  <cit> , the poor score for the chaperone group is caused by the scarce reference in the literature to this function. we examined with anni the concept profiles of each gene group and looked for the ranking of the concept that characterizes the group's shared biological association. in their respective group annotation the concept "breast neoplasms" was ranked first, "lysosome" came second, "spermatogenesis" second, "molecular chaperones" first and "glycolysis" fifth. all groups, with the exception of the chaperone group, had significant cohesion scores .

dna microarray dataset 1: gene expression profiles of acute myeloid leukemia patients
based on gene-expression profiles of leukemic cells,  <dig> acute myeloid leukemia  patients were separated into  <dig> groups  <cit> . several of these groups coincided with known classes of aml patients. aml cases are classified by the occurrence of genomic aberrations in the leukemic cells. according to the report, group  <dig>  one of the larger groups with  <dig> patients, does not associate with a known karyotypic abnormality and little is known about the background of the leukemic cells in this cluster  <cit> . the set of genes that characterize this patient group were analyzed with the literature-based clustering provided by anni. we sought to find shared processes and other associations that could be indicative for the background of the leukemic cells.

a total of  <dig> gene clusters were found for the  <dig> genes in patient group  <dig> . based on this annotation we put forward the hypothesis of an association of patient group  <dig> to monocytes on the following grounds: two clusters of genes were found to be involved in phagocytosis: a cluster of cathepsins and a cluster associated with respiratory burst. of the cathepsins, ctss, ctsb and ctsl are implicated in antigen presentation on the surface of cells from the monocytic lineage  <cit> . respiratory burst is a process characteristic for a sub-type of blood cells called phagocytes. from the group of phagocytes, we can exclude granulocytes as we identified a cluster associated with the major histocompatibility complex class  <dig> . the presence of mhc ii is a distinguishing factor between the myeloid cell types for it is absent in neutrophils, basophils and eosinophils  <cit> . this leaves us with monocytes.

also within several other clusters genes were found to have an association with monocytes in their concept profile. several of these genes indeed had a functional relationship with monocytes. a cluster of chemokines and chemokine receptors is associated with chemotaxis and macrophage inflammatory proteins. from this cluster ccr <dig> and ccr <dig> are involved in monocyte chemotaxis  <cit> . a cluster associated with antigens contained cluster differentiation genes, and cd <dig> is a monocyte lineage specific marker. the immunologic receptor cluster contained a number of genes strongly associated with monocytes. one of these, lilrb <dig>  is a cell surface molecule selectively expressed by the myeloid antigen presenting cells of the monocytic lineage  <cit> . as we did not find clusters characteristic for other myeloid cell-types, such as erythrocyte precursors, we postulate that aml patient group  <dig> is associated with precursor cells from the monocytic lineage.

in the original paper by valk et al.  <cit>  morphological characteristics of the leukemic cells were presented by means of the widely used  <dig> subtypes of the french-american-british  classification system. using this classification we could verify whether our postulate is in concordance with the cells' appearance. in the study, patient group  <dig> contained specimens with fab m <dig> or m <dig> subtypes. specimens with an m <dig> classification contain cells that show granulocytic or monocytic maturation, and those with m <dig> have cells classified as monoblastic or monocytic.

finally, we verified the presence of the mentioned genes and clusters in the other patient groups . there is a considerable overlap with patient group  <dig>  but not with other groups. according to the original paper, group  <dig> is indeed also composed of a mixture of the fab classifications m <dig> and m <dig> 

* the cathepsins of group  <dig> include  <dig> down-regulated and  <dig> up-regulated genes.

the upper half of the table shows for the patient groups the presence of the clusters of genes that were discussed for patient group  <dig>  several patient groups are not shown as the sam analysis only yielded very few distinguishing genes. the size of the clusters is indicated and the arrows indicate if the genes are up- or down regulated. the lower half of the table shows the presence of the genes that were discussed in the text.

dna microarray dataset 2: agonistic stimulation of the androgen receptor
in the second evaluation experiment on microarray data, we used anni for the analysis of the list of  <dig> differentially expressed genes as measured with a dna microarray following the agonistic stimulation of the androgen receptor in a prostate cancer cell line. the androgen receptor is a transcription factor, activated by the androgens testosterone and dihydrotestosterone and is responsible for development and maintenance of the function of the normal prostate and for growth of early stage prostatic cancer  <cit> . the complete annotation of the mentioned gene list is given in additional file  <dig> 

the tightest cluster of genes consists of the genes rab27a, rab27b, myrip and mlph, see figure  <dig>  and has an average cosine of  <dig> , indicating a very strong within-cluster correlation. in table  <dig> we show which concepts contribute the most to this average cosine score. the four gene concepts themselves are in the top of this list, which implies that these genes are regularly co-published. other notable concepts are several myosin related concepts, the concepts melanosomes and melanocytes, and the concepts exocytosis and secretory vesicles. according to the mesh vocabulary definitions: myosin type v is involved in organelle transport and membrane targeting. melanosomes are melanin containing vesicles found in melanocytes and they are involved in skin pigmentation. the concepts exocytosis and secretory vesicles are both associated with the cellular release of material with membrane-limited vesicles. with a manual check of the literature linked by anni to the four genes, we verified that the genes are indeed involved in the same process and their biological activity is in concord with the calculated annotation: all genes are associated with in the transport of melanosomes to the cell surface by interaction with myosin type v  <cit> . certainly, there is no pigmentation in the prostate, but what quickly becomes apparent from literature is that these genes more generally deploy their activity in secretory lysosomes, of which melanosomes are only one example  <cit> . secretory lysosomes are modified lysosomes that can proceed to regulated secretion in response to external stimuli, with a special role for rab27a  <cit> . terms associated with lysosomal processing are also part of the annotation, but are not shown in table  <dig> since their contribution was below  <dig> %.

in the first column the concept names are shown, in the second the percentage contribution of this concept to the average cosine score  of this group. we limited the number of concepts to a contribution of  <dig> % to the average cosine score. the remaining columns show the weight of the concepts in the concept profiles of the genes whose names are shown in the column headings. these weights form the basis of the clustering of the  <dig> genes.

secretory lysosomes may play their part in the major function of the prostate: the production and secretion of prostatic fluid. several of the substances found in prostatic fluid point to a role for secretory lysosomes. some of the secreted enzymes may be lysosomal; prostate acid phosphatase has for instance been localized in the lysosome  <cit> . alternatively, rab27a and associated proteins may be involved in the secretion of small vesicles called prostasomes. the latter hypothesis is supported by the identification of the rab27a protein in prostasomes by proteome analysis  <cit> . it appears the potential roles of rab27a and secretory lysosomes in the secretory processes of the prostate have currently not yet been investigated or reported. semantic analysis of the literature associated with the genes differentially expressed in the microarray experiment, thus leads us to the novel hypothesis that secretory lysosomes are involved in the production of prostatic fluid and that their development and/or secretion are androgen-regulated processes.

discussion
we evaluated our concept profiling method in two steps. firstly, we applied it to a controlled test set and compared its performance to that of our previously published acs method  <cit> . the concept profiling method obtained high median scores for  <dig> of the  <dig> groups in the controlled test set, and performed significantly better than the acs method for  <dig> groups, as well as overall. secondly, we applied our method to actual research problems and annotated two dna microarray datasets.

the first dna microarray data set we analyzed, was the gene expression profile of the leukemic cells of a group of aml patients as identified in  <cit> . little is known about the background of the leukemic cells in this cluster. with the anni annotation and the underlying literature it was possible to identify several groups of genes and individual genes in the profile that indicate an association of the leukemic cells to cells of the monocytic lineage. this finding was in concordance with the morphological classification of the cells. the second data set consisted of a list of differentially expressed genes following the agonistic stimulation of the androgen receptor in a prostate cancer cell line. the anni annotation revealed a cluster associated with, amongst others, melanosomes and secretory vesicles. based on this finding and the underlying literature we formulated a hypothesis about the role of secretory lysosomes in prostate function. we conclude that anni can be successfully used by molecular biologists studying dna microarray datasets as a tool to automatically use the explicit and implicit information in literature.

the projected use of our method is the analysis of gene lists from high-throughput experiments. our method is a useful addition to the current tool suite based on manual annotations or on automatic relation mining by analysis of the grammatical structure of sentences. manual approaches, such as the goa project, are limited in focus and tend to be incomplete due to the labor intensive annotation process. for example, in the case of the four melanosome-associated genes that we discussed, only rab27a and rab27b have, at the time of writing, a manual annotation by goa. for these two genes the only curated annotation concerns their gtpase activity, even though there are numerous articles in pubmed describing other features for which there are relevant gene ontology  concepts, such as "melanosome". the computerized extraction of relations suffers from the limitation that the systems need to be trained to retrieve specific relations and entities. hence, if the extraction algorithm is not trained for a specific relation it is likely to miss it. for example, the company ariadne genomics has constructed a relation database based on extensive natural language parsing . they focused on the recognition of proteins and small molecules and their relationships. for both entities, at the time of writing, their database contains approximately  <dig>  entries, but for biological processes there are only  <dig> entries which is a mere fraction of the more than  <dig>  recognized in go. the point is that the co-occurrence based method is simple and versatile. associations can be retrieved between any two concepts once they can be recognized in text. also the interpretation of associations differs from that of relationships. the association strengths in a concept profile for a concept a quantitatively reflect the statistical overrepresentation of concepts in texts in which concept a occurs. hence, a concept profile of a particular concept can be seen as a view on the literature in which the concept is mentioned. this feature has value from an information retrieval point of view. the use of associations is also casting the net wide: not only are specific functional relationships retrieved, all significant associations between entities are retrieved, potentially even those not made explicit by the authors. this feature has been exploited for knowledge discovery purposes .

compared to other co-occurrence based approaches with similar objectives, our method may be considered an improvement on several points:

 <dig>  anni was developed to be transparent, i.e. it is visible how the system comes to its associations. transparency is a known problem with the acs. the acs was developed for knowledge discovery purposes and it uses an iterative algorithm to map concepts to a multi-dimensional space using concept co-occurrence data as input. in this space, the distance between concepts reflects the strength of one- and multi-step co-occurrence paths between the concepts. when applying the acs, transparency was a problem for users of the system, as tracing distances between concepts back to the underlying literature was challenging. compared to acs, the anni system is much more transparent: anni provides a link to the underlying texts for every association between concepts. the system provides a coherence measure for a group of genes as well as the probability of a chance-occurrence of the group. additionally, anni illustrates the contribution of specific concepts to the coherence measure and shows the overlap between the concept profiles of the group members. it is, therefore, traceable why genes are clustered together. it is also trackable why certain concepts are associated with genes as the underlying articles can be accessed. in this aspect, anni also contrasts favorably with, for instance, systems that use dimension reduction techniques  <cit> . dimension reduction leaves the meaning of the dimensions unclear, and makes it difficult to verify, by consulting the underlying texts, whether the association between a gene and a dimension is true or relevant.

 <dig>  we used the controlled vocabulary medical subject headings  in addition to a gene thesaurus to identify concepts in texts. the use of thesauri allows the identification of multi-word concepts and the mapping of synonyms for the same concept, which reduces the noise caused by natural language variation. in addition, a thesaurus maps words or phrases to an abstract concept, thereby connecting it to all information available from other sources linked to this concept. for instance, a reference to a gene can be linked to its sequence or, as shown in this paper, semantic types can be used for filtering, and definitions of a concept can be used for interpretation. we used the semantic types associated with the biomedical concepts to focus the concept profiles on our area of interest. several earlier approaches did not use a thesaurus for identifying biomedical concepts other than genes or proteins, e.g.  <cit> . the semantic filtering we used is more precise and adaptable than using different vocabularies as was done by  <cit> .

 <dig>  the log-likelihood measure we use for the weighting of the associations between concepts is an important feature of our approach and has a sound statistical foundation. some of the empirical approaches described in literature have properties that can be considered problematic. for example, glenisson et al.  <cit>  took the normalized inverse document frequency as the weight for a concept in a document. to produce the weight of a concept in a concept profile based on a selected set of documents, they averaged the concept's weight over the set. however, this procedure favors more frequently occurring concepts. suppose two concepts in a large set of documents occur with rates r <dig> and r <dig>  with r <dig> <r <dig>  and thus for their weights will hold w <dig> > w <dig> in individual documents. when averaging the weights in a given subset of documents in which, say, both concepts occur with the same rates r1and r <dig>  then the ratio of their original weights, w1w2
 mathtype@mtef@5@5@+=feaafiart1ev1aaatcvaufkttlearuwrp9mdh5mbpbiqv92aaexatlxbi9gbaebbnrfifhhdyfgasaach8aky=wiffydh8gipec8eeeu0xxdbba9frfj0=oqffea0dxdd9vqai=hguq8kuc9pgc9s8qqaq=dirpe0xb9q8qilsfr0=vr0=vr0dc8meaabaqaciaacagaaeqabaqabegadaaakeaadawcaaqaaiabdeha3naabaaaleaacqaixaqmaeqaaagcbagaem4dac3aasbaasqaaiabikdayaqabaaaaaaa@31ee@, will be reduced  in the resulting concept profile. this may result in the weight of the more common concept becoming higher than that of the rarer concept.

our approach had several limitations. firstly, the thesaurus had to be curated for unnecessarily ambiguous concepts. we chose to do this in order to achieve a better precision, but, especially for genes, this will have reduced our retcall. despite our curation efforts we encountered a small number of errors during our evaluation caused by polysemy, e.g. by gene symbols such as "protein s" as a synonym for the gene pros <dig>  more frequently we encountered errors in the thesaurus caused by errors in the underlying databases, such as "protein-tyrosine kinase" as a synonym for the gene musk. we expect our approach to further improve with a word-sense disambiguation module, as well as with progressive thesaurus curation. a second limitation in our study is the coverage of the thesaurus. new concepts arise constantly and may be very specifically used by a small group of specialists. hence, to achieve optimal results for a thesaurus approach an up-to-date and domain-specific thesaurus is mandatory. a more flexible and dynamic approach to thesaurus construction is desirable. a third limitation is inherent in the use of co-occurrences to derive associations between concepts. associations between concepts based on co-occurrences need not reflect actual biological relationships, even when their co-occurrence rate is far above the chance level.

CONCLUSIONS
anni was applied to a controlled dataset and to two dna microarray datasets. we conclude that our method can be used to efficiently analyze a dna microarray dataset based on both explicit and implicit information in the literature and expect that our system can be useful for the interpretation of high-throughput experiments.

