BACKGROUND
methylation at the 5-position of cytosine in cpg dinucleotides is a key epigenetic process in vertebrate species where it serves critical roles in normal genome homeostasis, including transcriptional regulation, establishment of chromatin structure, suppression of repetitive elements, imprinting, and × chromosome inactivation  <cit> . furthermore, dna methylation defects are a hallmark of many human diseases including cancer  <cit> . characterizing dna methylation patterns genome-wide and with high-resolution can yield many insights into human health and disease and could provide novel dna-based biomarkers for detection and risk stratification of various human health disorders. such dna based biomarkers are already entering clinical use for detection of various cancers including prostate cancer  <cit> .

current methods for genome-wide dna methylation analysis differentiate between methylated and unmethylated dna on the basis of sodium bisulfite modification, methylation-sensitive  and -specific  restriction enzymes, and/or affinity reagents specific for methylated dna such as the anti-5mec antibody or recombinant methyl-binding domain  polypeptides  <cit> . among these, the affinity-based strategies are particularly attractive because they are cost-effective, are not limited to specific target sequences, generate a positive signal for methylated dna, and can be highly effective in fractionating methylated dna from unmethylated dna. in particular, the mbd approaches, pioneered by adrian bird and colleagues  <cit> , are highly effective because the mbd polypeptides can recognize 5mec in double stranded dna unlike the currently available antibodies. even among the mbd polypeptides, just the mbd domain of the human mbd <dig> protein  has exquisitely high affinity and specificity for 5mec, and previous reports have used this reagent to sensitively and specifically detect methylated dna from as few as  <dig> cell equivalents  <cit> .

an emerging strategy for analysis of dna fractionated by affinity-based enrichment has been to hybridize enriched libraries to promoter  <cit> , cpg island  <cit> , chromosome-wide  <cit> , or genome-wide  <cit>  tiling microarrays or to analyze by next generation sequencing  <cit> . here, we describe the use of an mbd-chip approach  to compare the chromosome-wide dna methylation patterns in lncap prostate cancer cells and prec normal prostate epithelial cells. using this information, we make novel observations regarding cancer-normal differences in methylation patterns in various biologically meaningful genome compartments without bias to promoter regions. this method uses mbd2-mbd bound magnetic beads to specifically enrich for methylated dna fragments followed by processing, hybridization and analysis with high-density, oligonucleotide tiling microarrays containing probes interrogating all non-repetitive sequences on chromosomes  <dig> and  <dig> with an average interval between probes of  <dig> base pairs . we also present novel analytical strategies to overcome challenges in pre-processing and analysis of dna methylation microarray data and approaches for biological interpretation of such data. these analyses revealed pervasive methylation of both gene promoter and non-promoter regions in cancer and normal cells. focusing on the differentially methylated regions between cancer and normal cells, hypermethylated non-promoter regions include intragenic and intergenic regions. the hypermethylated intragenic regions were highly enriched for localization to exons and intron-exon boundaries, suggesting a possible role in regulation of alternative transcriptional start sites, exon usage and/or splicing. the hypermethylated intergenic regions showed a high degree of enrichment for conservation across vertebrate species. regardless of their regulatory role, these intra- and intergenic hypermethylated regions, in addition to the promoter hypermethylated regions, could be used to distinguish prostate cancer from normal prostate and therefore could serve as biomarkers for prostate cancer detection.

RESULTS
development and refinement of mbd-chip and associated computational analyses
we previously showed that mbd2-mbd polypeptide-bound magnetic beads could be used to efficiently and quantitatively capture methylated dna fragments  <cit> . to further characterize the binding properties of the mbd2-mbd magnetic beads, we used human white blood cell  genomic dna known not to be methylated at the gstp <dig> promoter, and treated it with the m.hhai  and/or m.hpaii  methyltransferases or with m.sssi  methyltransferase or mock  to produce genomic dna that contains  <dig>   <dig>   <dig>  or  <dig> methylated cpgs within a  <dig> bp gstp <dig> r.alui fragment. subjecting these r.alui digested dnas to mbd2-mbd enrichment and quantifying the amount of enriched gstp <dig> promoter dna by real time pcr revealed that the degree of enrichment was proportional to the number of methylated cpgs in a nonlinear fashion . next, we assessed the performance of the mbd2-mbd enrichment at two gene promoters  with known methylation patterns in lncap and prec cells  <cit> . the genomic dnas were either completely methylated with the m.sssi methyltransferase or left untreated. these analyses further confirmed that the mbd2-mbd enrichment robustly captures densely methylated regions, but not regions lacking methylated cpg dinucleotides or regions with very low density of cpg dinucleotides .

to analyze chromosome-wide patterns of methylation, we used an mbd-chip approach in which genomic dna from lncap and prec cells was first fragmented and divided into a total input fraction and an enriched methylated fraction. the enriched methylated fraction was subjected to enrichment for methylated fragments using mbd2-mbd bound magnetic beads while the total input fraction was not subjected to enrichment. each fraction was then amplified by random-primed pcr , fragmented further, end-labeled, and hybridized to microarrays containing probes interrogating all non-repetitive sequences on human chromosomes  <dig> and  <dig> with an average inter-probe separation of  <dig> bp  <cit> . each sample was analyzed in duplicate experiments.

we next explored pre-processing of the dna methylation microarray data to facilitate downstream analysis of absolute and differential methylation in the lncap and prec specimens. as with nearly all oligonucleotide microarray platforms, the affymetrix tiling arrays exhibited strong probe-effects, in which different probes on the tiling array have inherent differences in their behavior even when the underlying biological signal is known to be constant. because the total input fraction should theoretically have uniform biological signal across all probes on the tiling arrays, we took a log-ratio of the enriched fraction to the total input to correct for these probe effects.

it is well known from chromatin immunoprecipitation microarray  experiments that even after taking a log-ratio to the total input fraction, significant residual sequence-based effects can persist. in one popular analytical approach called model-based analysis of tiling arrays , it is assumed that the majority of genomic regions should not be enriched, and data across all probes is used to build a sequence-based model to account for these residual sequence-based effects  <cit> . unfortunately, a direct application of this method to the methylation tiling array data may be suboptimal since it may not be valid to assume that the majority of the genome is not methylated. however, it is known that in adult somatic cells, dna methylation is almost entirely restricted to cpg dinucleotides  <cit> . this, combined with our empirical observations that the mbd2-mbd enrichment does not retain dna fragments with very low cpg density, allows us to make the assumption that regions of the genome with very low cpg density should not be enriched and that any signal arising from such regions in the genome are due to spurious effects. therefore, to assess residual sequence-based effects, we defined "null probes" as those interrogating regions of chromosomes  <dig> and  <dig> with extremely low cpg density . no appreciable enrichment signal is expected on these probes due to lack of cpgs. interestingly, we noted a strong residual probe-enrichment interaction effect in which the log-ratio steadily increased with probe guanine and cytosine  content . additionally, likely because the gc content in probes interrogating proximal genomic segments is expected to be similar, we also observed a strong positional autocorrelation in the data from these regions . we adjusted for this gc content bias by subtracting a baseline log-ratio for each gc stratum estimated from the null probes as defined above. this adjustment resulted in baseline normalization of the samples with the log-ratio in unmethylated regions set to zero and, interestingly, essentially eliminated the autocorrelation in null probes . to improve stability, we next smoothed these adjusted log-ratios by taking a running median across k =  <dig> consecutive probes , where k is a smoothing parameter. this smoothed adjusted log-ratio demonstrated a distribution that highly resembled what would be expected for an independent and identically distributed normal distribution , thus facilitating straight-forward statistical inference. therefore, this simple within-sample procedure allowed baseline normalization across samples, elimination of spurious gc content based effects, elimination of positional autocorrelation, and the ability to assign statistical significance to a given region. additional file  <dig> panel a shows the effects of our pre-processing approach for a representative  <dig> kilobase pair  region of chromosome   <dig> in lncap cells. note that the final adjusted smoothed log-ratios have attenuated many questionable signals seen in the raw and smoothed log-ratios while preserving the signal at specific regions. the accuracy of the final adjusted smoothed log-ratios was confirmed by bisulfite sequencing of representative regions .

using an empirical normal distribution defined using the null probes, we could then calculate a z-score for each probe on the array. the z-score represents the number of standard deviations separating the smoothed adjusted log-ratio of a probe from the median of the null probes having the same gc content. methylated regions were defined as those regions in which the additive z-score across all probes within  <dig> bp windows was > <dig>  and at least one probe had z >  <dig>  we then merged all windows separated by <  <dig> bp together and calculated the additive z-score of these merged regions and ranked them by this z-score in order to highlight larger regions when the enrichment is otherwise similar. this resulted in identification of  <dig>  and  <dig>  methylated regions in the lncap prostate cancer cells and prec normal prostate cells respectively  with a false discovery rate of < 5% for both cell lines. setting the smoothing parameter k to  <dig> or  <dig> and repeating the analyses showed that most of the candidate regions that were longer than  <dig> bp overlapped with those found by setting k =  <dig>  with only  <dig> % and  <dig> % of all regions being new  for k =  <dig> or k =  <dig> respectively. therefore, since changing k did not result in large differences, our choice of using k =  <dig> to correspond to the modal fragment size appears to be well justified. we also examined the effect of choosing different z-score thresholds. the z-score cutoff is essentially a tuning parameter that enabled a locus to be considered for enrichment. a larger z cut-off for single probes requires a peak with higher amplititude. by lowering this cutoff, more candidate regions would be considered as potentially methylated. however, because an additive z-statistic for the entire region is used to declare final enrichment, lowering the initial cutoff does not necessarily mean more enriched regions. one possibility is that adjacent regions are more likely to be merged into larger regions with a more permissive probe z-score cutoff. by lowering the z-score cut-off from  <dig> to  <dig>  , we see that we only obtain a single new region that is longer than  <dig> bp with a final z-score for the region greater than  <dig>  therefore, it appears that our choice of z >  <dig> is a reasonable cut-off to use. it is likely that the smoothing parameter k and the z-score threshold would need to be custom set for different enrichment based methylation tiling array applications, with the optimal values depending on the resolution of the microarray platform and the modal dna fragment length.

we next carried out analyses to identify genes that were only methylated in the lncap cells and not in the prec cells, or vice versa. to do this, we merged overlapping methylated regions from each of these samples, and identified those merged regions that had an additive z-score >  <dig> in on one sample and z <  <dig> in the other sample, representing highly stringent criteria for differential methylation. this analysis resulted in identification of  <dig> regions in lncap cells that were not methylated in prec cells . interestingly, we identified only  <dig> regions from chromosomes  <dig> and  <dig> that were methylated in the prec cells that were not methylated in the lncap prostate cancer cells using our highly stringent criteria. this is in agreement with a previous report that used an independent method for identification of hypomethylated gene promoter cpg islands in prostate cell lines, in which the majority of hypomethylated promoter cpg islands arose from sex chromosomes and not from the autosomal chromosomes  <cit> .

we next carried out extensive bisulfite sequencing experiments of regions that were identified as either methylated or unmethylated to assess the accuracy of the overall mbd-chip and analytical approaches. this included sequencing analysis of a total of  <dig> independent clones covering  <dig> genomic regions, spanning  <dig> cpg dinucleotides, for a total of ~ <dig>  methylation measurements at individual cpg dinucleotides. this analysis revealed correct classification of the methylation status of  <dig> out of the  <dig> tested regions, showing the high accuracy of our overall mbd-chip and analytical approaches . several of these bisulfite-sequencing verifications will be discussed in more detail in subsequent subsections. in summary, the mbd-chip and associated analytical approaches can be used to accurately identify methylated regions in an absolute sense within a single sample and also to identify regions that are differentially methylated between samples.

we next assessed whether the identified methylated and differentially methylated regions had higher cpg dinucleotide content than would be expected if the regions were selected randomly from chromosomes  <dig> and  <dig>  to do this, we first took the top  <dig> identified methylated regions  from each of the cell lines and created  <dig> simulated data sets that were matched to these regions in size and ensured that we only chose regions that had coverage on the tiling microarrays. we also created such simulated data sets for the top  <dig>  regions that were identified as differentially methylated in the lncap cells compared to the prec cells. we could then compare the distribution of cpg dinucleotide content and number of regions overlapping cpg islands in these simulated data sets with these parameters in our actual observed data. this analysis showed that our identified methylated and differentially methylated regions, as expected, had significantly higher overlap with cpg islands and contained higher cpg dinucleotide content than the randomly selected simulated data sets . these simulated data sets could also be used for assessing whether several other genomic annotations were enriched in our observed dataset compared to what would be expected by randomly choosing regions matched for appropriate parameters, as discussed in subsequent subsections.

enrichment of dna methylation in intragenic or gene-proximal regions
we next carried out genomic annotation of the identified methylated and differentially methylated regions in the lncap and prec cells. for lncap and prec cells,  <dig> and  <dig> percent of methylated sequences respectively, were located within  <dig> kbp of known genes with only  <dig> and  <dig> percent of sequences lying in distal intergenic regions >  <dig> kbp of known genes . there were no notable differences in region lengths between gene-associated and intergenic methylated regions within each cell line . however, the average segment length of methylated regions in the lncap cells were significantly greater than those in the prec cells across all genome compartments examined. examining regions that were hypermethylated in the lncap cancer cell line compared to the prec,  <dig> percent were located within  <dig> kbp of known genes.

 <dig>  regions that are hypermethylated in the lncap cells compared to the prec cells.

given the strong association of methylated regions with intragenic or gene proximal compartments, we more closely examined the localization of methylated regions within specific gene associated compartments. first, the lncap and prec cells showed significantly greater-than-expected enrichment for dna methylation at 5' upstream regions of genes . additionally, this 5' upstream enrichment was even more pronounced in regions that were identified as hypermethylated in the lncap cells compared to the normal prec cells, consistent with the well-known trend for promoter hypermethylation in prostate cancer cells  <cit> . figure 2b-c shows a representative hypermethylated 5' gene upstream region  with the accompanying bisulfite sequencing validation. this 5' upstream methylation of the adamts <dig> gene was associated with gene silencing since treatment of lncap cells with 5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine  resulted in ~15-fold induction of adamts <dig> mrna expression .

interestingly, dna methylation was enriched at the 3' downstream regions of genes in the lncap cells but not the prec cells. additionally, such 3' downstream regions were also enriched in regions that were hypermethylated in the lncap cells compared to the prec cells . a representative hypermethylated 3' downstream gene region, in this case downstream of the dscr <dig> gene, along with the bisulfite sequencing verification of this region, is shown in figure 3b-c. we can speculate that such 3' downstream methylation may be involved in regulation of antisense transcripts  <cit> , or in regulating transcriptional elongation or termination.

the majority of the gene-associated methylated regions and cancer differentially-methylated regions occurred in intron sequences. these intronic dna methylation events were significantly enriched compared to what would be expected by random chance in our observed methylated region data sets for each of the cell lines . to examine this enrichment more closely, all introns were scaled so that the position within each intron could be represented as a fraction between  <dig> and 100%, with 0% representing the start of the intron and 100% representing the end of the intron. the average smoothed adjusted log-ratio across all introns was plotted along this fractional position within the intron . this analysis revealed a higher average dna methylation signal towards the ends of introns compared to the middle of the introns, suggesting that much of the dna methylation signals occurring in introns spanned intron-exon junctions. in further confirmation of this observation, we found that there was a significantly greater than expected enrichment of identified methylated and differentially methylated regions for overlapping with exon sequences and intron-exon boundaries specifically . we can speculate that this dna methylation and hypermethylation in cancer cells at intron-exon boundaries may be involved in suppression of alternative transcriptional start sites as has been reported recently  <cit> . another potential role is in the regulation of splicing or exon usage. a recent report implicated specific histone modifications in regulating alternative splicing events  <cit> . we can speculate that these intron-exon dna methylation events may also be involved in such regulation or in the establishment or reinforcement of these histone modifications.

methylated regions from intergenic sequences are highly enriched for conserved bases
although the majority of methylated and differentially methylated regions were associated with intragenic or gene proximal regions, a significant fraction of identified regions occurred in distal intergenic sequences . there are at least two major hypotheses for methylation and differential methylation at these distal intergenic regions: i) these regions may not have any major regulatory role and may have become methylated spuriously with subsequent passenger maintenance of the methylation patterns, or ii) methylation/hypermethylation of these regions may have a role in physiological regulation of gene expression and/or carcinogenesis. in support of a regulatory role for several of these intergenic regions, we found that these regions exhibited significant enrichment for overlap with highly conserved sequences across many mammalian and vertebrate species  compared with what would be expected by random chance . additionally, we found that the methylated and differentially methylated regions had a highly significant enrichment of conserved transcription factor binding sites . taken together, the overlap with high conservation and conserved transcription factor binding sites suggested that many of these regions that were not close to known genes may actually control transcription of unrecognized rnas or distal genes.

to examine this more closely, we focused on one representative region in chromosome  <dig>  which in our initial analyses using the ucsc hg <dig> refseq genome annotations was identified as an intergenic region showing hypermethylation in the lncap cells compared to the prec cells in our microarray data . this hypermethylation was verified by bisulfite sequencing experiments . this region overlapped with an area of high conservation as denoted by high phastcons scores . interestingly, mapping this region to a more recent annotation of the human genome , we saw that a new pseudogene, called psitpte <dig>  was mapped and annotated just downstream of this region . a recent study also characterized the expression of a human endogenous retrovirus related gene  that mapped to this locus, and showed that this gene was likely silenced by dna methylation of the upstream region in kidney tumors  <cit> . we next examined whether the differential methylation observed upstream of this pseudogene was involved in controlling expression of this pseudogene in the lncap and prec cells. using primers specific for this gene, real time reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction  analyses showed that prec cells, which lacked methylation of the upstream region, showed expression of psitpte <dig>  in contrast, lncap cells, which showed a high degree of methylation of this region, showed significant underexpression of this gene compared to prec cells. however, treatment of lncap cells with azadc led to increased expression of psitpte <dig> . we speculate that, like the methylation upstream of the psitpte22/herv pseudogene, many of the other distal intergenic methylated and differentially methylated regions may also be involved in controlling transcription of previously unrecognized transcripts. consistent with this, recent reports have suggested that up to 10-fold more genomic sequence may give rise to transcripts than is currently appreciated in genomic annotations  <cit> .

if conserved intergenic regions showing hypermethylation in the lncap cells compared to prec cells have a regulatory role and can contribute to carcinogenesis, we would expect that such regions may show hypermethylation across a series of prostate cancer tissues compared to matched normal tissues. to test this, we selected a representative intergenic region that showed a high degree of conservation across vertebrate/mammalian species and for which we were able to readily design compare-ms methylation assays. for this region, we assessed the degree of methylation in  <dig> subject-matched prostate tumor-normal pairs. interestingly, this region showed consistent hypermethylation in the majority of the tumors compared to the matched normals, with a mean increase in each tumor compared to its matched normal of > 2-fold . the high frequency of hypermethylation of this region across the tumor-normal pairs suggests that such regions may be contributing to human prostate carcinogenesis. however, we would note that given the fact that there was some detectable methylation in the normal specimens for this particular intergenic region, we would not prioritize it highly for development as a biomarker for prostate cancer detection.

newly identified differentially methylated regions can serve as prostate cancer biomarkers
dna methylation alterations have emerged as highly sensitive and specific biomarkers in many human cancers  <cit> . we assessed whether the differentially methylated regions identified in this study could be useful as dna methylation biomarkers for effectively distinguishing prostate cancer from normal prostate. we selected representative regions that were differentially methylated between the lncap and prec cells, including two regions that were 5' upstream of known genes , two regions that were 3' downstream of known genes , and one region that was intragenic within a known gene . using the compare-ms methylation detection assay  <cit> , we confirmed that these regions were not methylated in the prec cells and were highly methylated in the lncap cells as predicted by our microarray and bisulfite sequencing analyses. additionally, several other prostate cancer cell lines were methylated at these regions, with every prostate cancer cell line showing significant hypermethylation of at least three of these regions . we next carried forward three of these regions  for testing in dna isolated from tumor and paired adjacent normal tissues taken from men who underwent radical retropubic prostatectomy for management of primary prostate cancer . interestingly, all three of these regions exhibited high frequency of methylation in the tumor samples  with very infrequent methylation in the matched normal specimens . therefore, the regions that were identified to be differentially methylated in the lncap compared to prec cells as identified in this study by our overall mbd-chip and associated computational approaches are likely to be highly enriched for effective dna methylation biomarkers for prostate cancer identification.

discussion
in this study, we have developed, refined and applied an mbd-chip approach along with accompanying computational analyses for comparison of chromosome-wide dna methylation patterns in prostate cancer cells with those in normal prostate epithelial cells. we present several technological advances over previous affinity-enrichment based dna methylation profiling approaches. first, the enrichment process has been streamlined and optimized for fairly small amounts of input dna . second, compared to antibody based approaches which require the generation of single-stranded dna for affinity enrichment of methylated dna, the mbd-based enrichment approach offers the ability to enrich for methylated double-stranded dna. third, among the mbd-based approaches for affinity enrichment of methylated dna, the fragment of the mbd <dig> protein used in this study is highly streamlined for binding methylated dna with high affinity and selectivity  <cit> . the high selectivity of the mbd2-mbd polypeptide for methylated dna and the high density of the oligonucleotide tiling microarrays covering all non-repetitive regions of chromosomes  <dig> and  <dig> with an average inter-probe spacing of ~ <dig> bp allowed unbiased, high-resolution, chromosome-wide mapping of dna methylation in the lncap prostate cancer cell line and the prec normal prostate epithelial cells in primary culture. finally, we have developed novel computational approaches for analysis of affinity enrichment-based genome-wide dna methylation data that correct for sequence bias in the methylation signal. the resulting methods greatly enhance the specificity and accuracy of the dna methylation calls. these analytical methods were specifically optimized for interpretation of dna methylation tiling microarray data. knowing that dna methylation occurs almost exclusively at cpg dinucleotides in adult somatic human cells, and that the mbd2-mbd polypeptide very selectively binds cpg methylated dna, we were able to define a set of null probes that interrogate regions of the genome that contain an extremely low cpg density that should never be enriched. the signals arising from these probes allowed us to identify and correct for sequence biases that led to increased spurious signals in these regions. additionally, one theoretical advantage of high-density tiling microarrays is that, if we assume independence between signals from adjacent probes, multiple consecutive probes exhibiting enrichment would multiplicatively increase our confidence that the overlying region was truly enriched. however, in many cases of tiling array data, the assumption of independence of adjacent probes is clearly not met and we therefore cannot easily calculate the confidence of signals arising in multiple consecutive or adjacent probes. in our own data also, we saw that the raw smoothed log-ratios from null probes were highly autocorrelated with the smoothed log-ratios from adjacent probes. however, correcting for the gc content sequence biases using the null probes eliminated this autocorrelation, allowing us to assume independence in signals arising from consecutive null probes. the resulting analyses were highly accurate for absolute methylation calls, with false discovery rates of < 5% and concordance with bisulfite sequencing data of ~90%.

in this study, we restricted analysis to absolute  dna methylation calls because significant new computational methods development is necessary for quantitative analysis of dna methylation from affinity-enrichment based genome-wide dna methylation data. this is because deriving quantitative information regarding the fraction of input dna that is methylated at a given locus from affinity-enrichment based approaches is confounded by multiple issues that are independent of the fraction of methylated input dna fragments. first, the degree of enrichment is clearly influenced by the density of methylated cpgs around a given locus, and this appears to show a non-linear dependence. second, the degree of enrichment is likely influenced by various sequence effects and biases. these biases we have in large part been able to isolate and adjust for in qualitative analyses , but significant further research is required to understand how such parameters influence the ability to quantitate methylation levels at a given locus in a specific sample. third, the degree of enrichment at a given locus is influenced by the total amount of captured species in a given sample. that is, because the same amount of total dna is hybridized  for each sample, the degree of signal at a given region is influenced both by the amount of methylation at that region and by the total number of methylated molecules making up the enriched sample. unfortunately, it seems likely that each of these parameters can influence the other parameters in a non-linear and currently unpredictable fashion. in ongoing studies, we are developing methodologies to overcome these issues in order to facilitate accurate quantitative estimates of dna methylation from enrichment-based genome-wide dna-methylation data. in the meanwhile, our accurate approaches for qualitative assessment of dna methylation have allowed significant new biological insights into the differences in chromosome-wide dna methylation patterns in a cancer/normal model system.

in the classically held view, dna methylation patterns in cancer cells differ from normal cells in at least two major ways  <cit> . first, they often harbor hypomethylation of repetitive elements and of regions of the genome with low cpg density. our methods did not directly interrogate this aspect of dna methylation biology since repetitive elements were excluded from the arrays to avoid cross-hybridization signals and because our method, like other restriction enzyme and enrichment based genome-wide dna methylation assays, cannot robustly detect differential methylation in regions with very low cpg density  <cit> . second, cancer cells are thought to become hypermethylated mostly in cpg islands at the promoters of genes, resulting in epigenetic silencing of those genes. accordingly, the majority of genome-wide dna methylation assays have focused on cpg islands and promoters using various types of microarray formats with probes that selectively interrogate such regions. here, we assessed whether dna hypermethylation changes in cancer cells occur mostly in gene promoter cpg islands by carrying out an unbiased assessment of dna methylation across all non-repetitive regions of chromosomes  <dig> and  <dig>  in prostate cancer and normal prostate cells.

annotation of the identified methylated regions revealed a significant clustering of dna methylation in gene-associated compartments of the genome in both the cancer and normal cells, and in regions found to be hypermethylated in the cancer cells. we identified numerous 5' gene upstream regions that were methylated in the cancer and normal cells, some of which were differentially methylated in the cancer cells. for some of these regions, we confirmed that demethylation using a methyltranferase inhibitor led to re-expression of the associated gene, suggesting that methylation of these regions was indeed involved in epigenetic silencing of the associated gene. two of these regions were confirmed to be novel biomarkers for prostate cancer in an independent set of prostate cancer cell lines and prostate cancer tissues.

interestingly, we also found significant enrichment for methylation greater than would be expected by random chance for several other gene-associated genome compartments. for instance, we found that methylation of 3' gene downstream regions was enriched to nearly the same extent as 5' gene upstream regions in the lncap prostate cancer but not prec normal prostate cells, and was also enriched in the cancer hypermethylated regions. recent reports have suggested that many genes may have antisense transcripts that may be involved in the regulation of the sense transcripts  <cit> . we speculate that methylation of the 3' downstream regions may be involved in the regulation of such antisense transcripts. another possibility is that methylation of such regions is involved in regulating transcriptional elongation/termination or transcript processing such as polyadenylation. further studies will be required to understand the role of the 3' gene downstream methylation events.

introns and exons also showed significant enrichment of methylation in the cancer and normal cells. interestingly, exon sequences and intron-exon junctions showed an extremely high degree of enrichment within methylated regions in cancer and normal cells, as well as in hypermethylated regions in the cancer cells. luco et al., recently showed that histone methylation patterns occurring at intron-exon boundaries can play a role in regulating alternative splicing of mrna  <cit> . we speculate that dna methylation patterns may help to reinforce these histone methylation patterns or may also be directly involved in regulation of alternative splicing. another recent report has suggested that dna methylation patterns occurring within gene bodies may be involved in regulation of alternative transcriptional start sites  <cit> . to our knowledge, neither of these or other previous reports compared gene body methylation in cancer and normal cells. our data suggest that such gene body dna methylation can become abnormally increased in prostate cancer cells. we can speculate that cancer cells can take advantage of this regulatory machinery to activate oncogenes or silence tumor suppressors by dysregulating production of alternative transcripts and spliceoforms.

although the majority of methylated regions overlapped with gene-associated genome compartments, a significant fraction of regions  were distal intergenic, occurring at least  <dig> kbp away from any known genes. several such distal intergenic regions showed hypermethylation in the cancer cells compared to the normal cells. interestingly, these intergenic methylated and cancer hypermethylated regions were significantly enriched for a high degree of conservation across several mammalian and vertebrate species, suggesting that there are significant evolutionary pressures against changes at these regions. we can speculate that these regions are involved in long range regulation of genes. another possibility is that some subset of these intergenic methylated regions are involved in regulation of nearby transcripts that are not yet annotated or known. consistent with both of these hypotheses, the genomic methylated regions are highly enriched for conserved transcription factor binding sites.

regardless of the function of the cancer hypermethylated regions, it is apparent that many of these have significant potential in serving as dna methylation biomarkers of prostate cancer. cancer hypermethylated regions from different annotation categories  were frequently methylated in prostate cancer cell lines but not the normal prostate epithelial cells. a few of these  were tested further, and in combination, showed ~100% sensitivity and ~85% specificity for prostate cancer compared to matched adjacent benign tissues.

we envision several possibilities for application of the methodologies presented here for cancer biomarker development. for example, the mbd-enrichment based genome-wide dna methylation approaches can be applied to tumor-normal pairs from several subjects of a given cancer type to assess whether there are any high-frequency dna methylation changes that can distinguish tumor vs. normal tissue. then, sensitive dna methylation analytical techniques, such as compare-ms  <cit> , real-time msp  <cit>  or methylight  <cit> , methyl-beaming  <cit> , etc., can be used to measure a panel of these dna methylation alterations in blood, urine, stool, biopsies or other patient biomaterials. a different strategy, analogous to one that was recently described  <cit> , would involve development of personalized dna methylation biomarkers. in this strategy, for a given individual, technologies similar to those presented here would be applied to profile the genome-wide dna methylation patterns distinguishing the individual's tumor from their own normal tissues. these personalized methylation alterations could then be followed in blood, urine or other biospecimens using the various sensitive dna methylation techniques listed above to track response to therapy, follow disease burden, etc. of course, such strategies will require significant testing prior to clinical implementation.

the overall mbd-chip approach described here should be broadly applicable to characterizing genome-wide dna methylation patterns and to identify novel dna methylation biomarkers for various diseases. the mbd2-mbd polypeptide is now commercially available as part of kits for enriching methylated dna marketed by different companies , and is therefore easily accessible to the research community. additionally, tiling microarrays interrogating all non-repetitive regions of the entire genome of multiple species, including humans, are now available through various companies including affymetrix, nimblegen, and agilent. therefore, the methodologies presented here can be readily applied to analysis of the entire human genome. furthermore, these methods should be easily adaptable to analysis with next generation sequencing  <cit> . for instance, recent studies have demonstrated that next generation sequencing platforms also produce significant sequence biases in data produced by their applications  <cit> , including dna methylation data  <cit> . it has been shown that sequence biases and amplification bias can affect affinity-enrichment based dna methylation data produced by next generation sequencing platforms  <cit> . the general principle of using regions of the genome with ultra-low cpg content to correct such artifactual effects in dna methylation data introduced by technology platforms should be generally applicable. methods such as those presented here are poised to facilitate the thorough examination of dna methylation patterns genome-wide in health and disease.

CONCLUSIONS
we have developed and refined mbd-chip and associated computational methods for analysis of dna methylation using high-resolution oligonucleotide tiling microarrays. these analyses were deployed to compare chromosome-wide dna methylation patterns in normal and malignant prostate cells, revealing significant enrichment of dna methylation and hypermethylation of gene-proximal genomic regions, including 5'-gene upstream regions, 3'-gene downstream regions, and those spanning intron-exon junctions. interestingly, intergenic methylated and hypermethylated regions showed a significant enrichment for harboring highly conserved sequences across vertebrate species. several of these newly identified cancer hypermethylated regions were highly effective as dna methylation based biomarkers capable of sensitively and specifically distinguishing malignant from normal prostate tissues and cell lines.

