BACKGROUND
the main stream in drug discovery has focused on identifying compounds targeting specific malignant agents, such as cancer subtypes or virus strains. in many cases, however, the target of drug therapy is a heterogeneous population of malignant agents, each characterized by a different degree of aggressiveness and response to therapy. drug resistance is a clear example, whereby an induced or preexisting subpopulation of malignant agents is not responsive to a drug, escaping treatment.

drug combinations can improve over single therapeuthic agents in two ways. synergy between two drugs may result in a better response than the two drugs independently. a drug combination may also be more effective when targeting heterogeneous populations of malignant agents. in the latter case, although each single drug may be only effective for a subset of the malignant agents, the drug set as a whole may cover all malignant agents.

uncovering drug combinations by direct screening is quite challenging due to the large number of potential combinations. a recent high-throughput screen was able to systematically test about  <dig>  different two-drugs combinations  <cit> . yet, programs like the nci <dig> anticancer drug screen count with a stock of above  <dig>  potential therapeuthic agents  <cit> , resulting in more than  <dig> ×  <dig> two-drugs combinations. the situation becomes even worse when addressing combinations of more than two drugs. more important, assuming that most drug combinations will not improve significantly over single drugs, attempting such high-throughput screens is highly inefficient.

some interesting techniques are starting to emerge to tackle the potential scarcity of good combinations. the discovery process can be accelerated and the screening costs reduced using stochastic search algorithms and close-loop optimization  <cit> . modeling and network approaches can help us to anticipate synergistic effects  <cit> . yet, there is no general method to identify effective drug combinations from a very large drug stock.

in this work we introduce a systematic framework to uncover effective drug combinations. our approach is based on the existence of a population of malignant agents , a stock of drugs to target them and certain measure quantifying the response of each strain to each single drug. starting from this data we construct a strain-drug response graph. using this graph we show that the problem of finding the minimal number of drugs with a putative effective response over all strains is equivalent to the minimal hitting set problem in mathematics. we illustrate the applicability of this framework using data from the nci <dig> anticancer drug screen as a case study. we report  <dig> drug combinations with a putative effective response over cancer types represented by the nci <dig> panel of tumor derived cell lines.

RESULTS
mapping to a minimal hitting set problem
to start addressing the drug combination problem, let us assume we count with a stock of drugs to target different strains that can be found in the patient population. the strains are characterized, in principle, by a different response to the drugs in our stock. our goal is to find a minimal set of drugs, taken from the available stock, such that each of the strains will respond well to at least one drug in our set.

this problem is better understood using the graph representation in fig.  <dig>  we use one class of vertices  to represent the strains and another class  to represent the drugs. whenever a strain responds well to a drug we draw an edge between the vertices representing them. in the following we refer to this as the strain-drug response graph. the drug vertices are further divided into covered , meaning that they form part of the drug cocktail under consideration, and uncovered  otherwise. now our problem can be rephrased as: determine the minimal number of covered circles  such that each square  is connected to at least one covered circle, and find such a set  with a minimal number of drugs. the latter problem is known in the mathematical literature as the minimal hitting set problem  <cit> , with strains representing sets and drugs representing set elements.

let us show how this work in a specific example. the nci <dig> is a program developed by the nci/nih aiming the discovery of new chemotherapeutical agents to treat cancer  <cit> . their drug stock is made of above  <dig>  compounds and response data for  <dig>  compounds is publicly available. their population of cancer cell lines  is made of  <dig> tumor derived cell lines, representing nine tissues of origin. the cell lines response to the chemical agents is quantified by the ic <dig>  the drug concentration necessary to inhibit the growth of a exposed cell line culture to 50% relative to the untreated control.

to determine what constitutes a good response we use as a reference the ic <dig> distribution over all pairs , after performing a z-transformation of the ic50s in a logarithmic scale . this reference distribution peaks at zero and decays very fast beyond two standard deviations. values to the left denote small sensitivity – bad response – and values to the right denote high sensitivity -good response. in the following we assume as a good response positive values above two standard deviations . applying this criteria to each pair of  we obtain a graph equivalent to that in fig.  <dig> for the nci <dig> system.

finding minimal hitting sets
having constructed the strain-drug response graph we proceed to identify minimal hitting sets. the hitting set is a computationally hard problem  <cit> . there is no efficient algorithm to solve it in all possible instances. yet, using current heuristic algorithms we can estimate the size of the minimal hitting set  <cit> . in the nci <dig> case study, we observe there are some drugs connected to  <dig> or more cell lines .

covering any of these drugs will automatically reduce to half the size of our computational problem. thus, we first use a greedy algorithm, first reported in  <cit> , that recursively covers and removes a drug randomly selected among those drugs with the current highest number of connections, until there are no more samples connected to drugs .

using the greedy algorithm we obtain a hitting set with three drugs. now three is a sufficiently small number to attempt an exhaustive test of all combinations of one, two and three drugs. in this way we found no hitting sets with one or two drugs, and a total of  <dig> minimal hitting sets with three drugs . the  <dig> minimal hitting sets were also found using a simulated annealing algorithm . the simulated annealing algorithm results in a significant reduction in running time of the nci <dig> analysis, from several days to one day in a desktop computer. it may be used to uncover minimal hitting sets in more computationally demanding problems, where exhaustive test is unfeasible. fig. 2c shows the graph associated with one of the solutions. it is made of an antimetabolite , a mtor inhibitor  and a compound of unknown mechanism of action , where nsc stands for cancer chemotherapy national service center number. among the cell lines,  <dig> out of  <dig> are covered by more than one drug. furthermore, the methotrexate derivative is the drug covering more cell lines. this three drug combination looks promising since mtor inhibitors have been recently shown to work synergistically with methotrexate in the treatment of lymphoblastic leukemia  <cit> . further work is required, however, to determine the contribution of the third drug , with currently unknown mechanism of action. most of the components of the other hitting sets have unknown mechanisms of action as well . this is the case for the most recurrent compounds nsc <dig> and nsc <dig>  appearing together in  <dig> out of the  <dig> hitting sets. while waiting for further study, our analysis suggests that these are putative effective drug cocktails for anticancer therapy.

all minimal hitting sets for the nci <dig> system. nsc stands for cancer chemotherapy national service center number. the names and mechanism of action  of these drugs are reported in table  <dig> 

the list of drugs in the minimal hitting sets reported in table  <dig>  nsc stands for cancer chemotherapy national service center number. na stands for not available.

discussion and 
CONCLUSIONS
exhaustive screening of all possible drug combinations is an ineffective strategy to identify good drug combinations. current screens for single drugs should help to anticipate potentially effective drug combinations, allowing us to narrow down from a see of drug combinations to a short list. the latter can be subject to direct testing, but now with a dramatic decrease of the screening costs.

the strain-drug response graph and the associated minimal hitting set problem provides a systematic framework to tackle this problem. the single agent screen data is represented by a bipartite graph, with a class of vertices representing drugs and another representing malignant agents/strains. furthermore, the good response of a strain to a drug is represented by a connection between the corresponding vertices in the graph. using this construction as input, we can search for effective drug combinations, defined as minimal set of drugs such that each strain responds well to at least one drug. the latter problem is mapped to the minimal hitting set problem in mathematics.

the analysis of the nci <dig> anticancer drug screen shows how these ideas can be implemented in practice. in this specific example it was possible to identify all minimal hitting sets by exhaustive evaluation of all combinations up to three drug cocktails. an approximate algorithm based on simulated annealing was able to identify all minimal hitting sets as well. the latter algorithm is far more efficient and could be used in problems that are more computationally demanding, with a larger drug stuck or a potentially larger number of drugs in the minimal hitting sets.

the strain-drug response graph and the associated hitting set problem have some caveats. from the technical point of view, we may encounter situations where not all drug-strain pairs have been tested, resulting in an incomplete drug response graph. in this scenario the minimal hitting set size estimated from the incomplete drug-response graph represents and upper bound. this is illustrated in fig.  <dig> for the nci <dig> analysis. as anticipated above, the estimated minimal hitting set size increases with decreasing the percent of strain-drug pairs tested.

the exhaustive search is not a feasible strategy for very large datasets. therefore, even when the strain-drug response graph is complete, we would rely on approximate algorithms to obtain an upper bound to the minimal hitting set size. besides the highest-degree-first and simulated annealing algorithms discussed here, there are other heuristic algorithms  <cit>  that in some specific problems may result in better estimates.

from the biological point of view, the identified drug combinations are minimal hitting sets for the nci <dig> panel of cell lines. a cell line not included in this panel may not respond well to any of these combinations. furthermore, using the single drug response data we cannot anticipate potential interactions between the drugs in a given minimal set. finally, we have not addressed other important issues such as toxicity which may exclude a drug combination for clinical use.

in spite of these caveats, the strain-drug response graph and the associated minimal hitting set problem provide a solid mathematical foundation to the drug combination problem. when information is incomplete and the estimates are approximate, it provides an upper bound to the actual minimal hitting set size. it can be applied to larger panels of cancer cell lines to increase the coverage over the population of cancer cell lines. it narrows down to a short list of drug combinations which can be subject to validation, testing combinatorial effects and toxicity.

in a more general perspective, our formulation can also find applications in drug discovery programs targeting viruses with high mutation rates such as hiv. in this context we would require a collection of virus strains found in the patient population, a stuck of antiviral drugs, and a quantitative measure of how well each virus strain responds to each antiviral drug.

