BACKGROUND
pseudomonas aeruginosa  is a ubiquitous gram-negative, opportunistic bacterium that is spread in hospitals on the hands of healthcare workers and by contact with improperly cleaned hospital surfaces and equipment on which it can persist over long periods  <cit> . pseudomonas aeruginosa can cause, sometimes invasive, infections of burns and surgical wounds that can be life-threating  <cit> . pseudomonas aeruginosa has intrinsic multidrug resistance and several strains have acquired resistance to a wide variety of antimicrobials, including 3rd and 4th generation cephalosporins and carbapenems . multi drug resistant pseudomonas aeruginosa  are thus a significant and growing source of nosocomial infections that have few treatment options and that are especially problematic for immunocompromised patients and intensive care units  .

the dissemination of antimicrobial resistant bacteria from hospital wastewater treatment plants  has been a cause for concern for public health professionals . previous studies have identified mdrpa as the primary pathogen found in the discharge of hwwtp, suggesting that the bacterium could have an important role in the spread of antimicrobial resistance, which is a global and increasing healthcare problem  <cit> . consistent with this notion, studies investigating the distribution and persistence of p. aeruginosa have shown that the bacterium is widely distributed in the environment and that p. aeruginosa, including mdrpa, discharged from hwwtp can persist in the environment over extended periods  <cit> . the discharge of mdrpa in hospital effluents is thus increasingly being seen as having an important role in the global spread of antimicrobial resistance and is therefore an important public health concern  <cit> .

in this study, we have conducted a preliminary evaluation of the public health threat that mdrpa pose to individuals that live in contact with hwwtp contaminated waters in the city of manaus . using a range of molecular and culturing techniques we have investigated the diversity, persistence and origin of mdrpa in an urban stream in manaus. the mindu stream is used by some of manaus’s most deprived residents for bathing, basic domestic cleaning  and receives discharge waters from three hwwtp as it crosses the city . the stream can also contaminate drinking water wells during times of flooding. our results suggest that hwwtp are polluting the mindu stream in manaus with antibiotic resistant p. aeruginosa and may be putting residents that live in contact with these contaminated waters at risk to nosocomial infections.fig.  <dig> study setting.  manaus city , state of amazonas , brazil .  mindu stream crossing manaus to its rio negro drainage site .  mindu stream flows from its source in the ducke forest reserve and crosses manaus receiving non-treated wastewater and wastewater from the treatment plants of at least three hospitals. red points show the sites where surface water samples were collected for the preparation of metagenomic libraries. the blue points show the sites where surface water collections were made from the mindu stream and green squares show hospitals near to mindu stream



RESULTS
bacterial diversity at the mindu stream´s source and drainage sites
as a preliminary and general assessment of the bacterial ecology of the mindu stream, two bacterial 16s rrna gene metagenomic libraries were constructed from bacterial concentrates made from the surface water of:  a site close to the stream’s source  and  a site close to where the stream drains into the rio negro  . a total of  <dig> 16s rrna clones were randomly chosen for sanger sequencing from the two libraries,  <dig> from the s-library and  <dig> from the o-library. sequence comparisons made with  <dig> high-quality sequences obtained from the s-library and reference sequence deposits maintained at the ribosomal database project  and the national center for biotechnology information  allowed for  <dig>  to be confidently classified to the bacterial genus level, including  <dig>  from the pseudomonas genus. four of these pseudomonas genus sequences were identical to p. fluorescens , two were identical with p. plecoglossicida , and one identical sequence match  was found for three other pseudomonas species: p. putida, p. segetis and p. azotoformans. no p. aeruginosa were detected from our s-library sequencing.

a total of  <dig> high-quality 16s rrna gene sequences were obtained from the  <dig> o-library clones that were randomly selected for sequencing. of these high-quality sequences, database similarity matches allowed  <dig> sequences to be confidently classified to bacterial genus. a very similar proportion of the o-library,  <dig>  %  as was observed at the s-library , were classified by database similarity comparisons as belonging to the pseudomonas genus. however, in contrast to the s-library, a high proportion of the pseudomonas sequences from the o-library,  <dig>  were identified as p. aeruginosa. four of the o-library sequences  were classified as p. fluorescens and two  were classified as p. alcaliphila. pseudomonas otitidis and p. pseudoalcali sequences were also identified as occurring in the o-library. hospital effluents are a major source of environmental contamination and contribute substantially to changes in the pseudomonas communities. our metagenomic data is therefore in agreement with previous studies that have shown that hospital wastewater discharges can change the structure and composition of the bacterial communities that they are discharged into .fig.  <dig> proportions of pseudomonas genus and species recovered by metagenomic analysis from source and outfall of the mindu stream: a proportion of pseudomonas genus b proportion of pseudomonas species isolated from the source c proportion of pseudomonas species isolated at outfall



antimicrobial resistance profiles of p. aeruginosa from the mindu stream and a manaus hwwtp
a total  <dig> p. aeruginosa isolates were tested for drug susceptibility with a panel of  <dig> antimicrobials . nine p. aeruginosa cultures were prepared from bacteria obtained from the raw hospital effluent  that is fed into the hwwtp for processing and eight were prepared from treated hospital water effluent  samples, which are usually discharged into the mindu stream. a further eight p. aeruginosa cultures were prepared from mindu stream surface water samples which were taken from two locations, upstream and downstream of the treatment site . as can be seen in fig. 3a, a total of  <dig> widely variant antimicrobial resistance profiles were found among the hwwtp p. aeruginosa isolates. overall the isolates from the hwwtp can be seen to display resistance to between one and  <dig> antimicrobials, with the rhe displaying resistance to an average of  <dig>  antimicrobials and those from the the displaying resistance to an average of  <dig> . in stark contrast to what was observed with the p. aeruginosa isolates from the hwwtp, only one resistance profile was detected from the mindu stream isolates: dual resistance to ampicillin and amikacin. our results show that p. aeruginosa with antimicrobial profiles matching some of the antimicrobial resistant p. aeruginosa discharged in the the are able to persist in the mindu stream and thus are consistent with what would be expected from the observations of others  <cit> . our results thus suggest that our studied hwwtp could be polluting the mindu stream and could be a public health risk to manaus residents that live in contact with this stream.fig.  <dig> antimicrobial resistant and biofilm formation analysis. diagram showing  the antimicrobial resistance profiles of  <dig> p. aeruginosa isolates obtained from water samples tested in this study. isolates are labelled with either rhe, the or st to indicate their origin: rhe for raw hospital effluent, the for treated hospital effluent and st for stream sample. the susceptibility testing was carried out according to the protocol of the clinical laboratory standards institute  using  <dig> different antimicrobials: levofloxacin ; norfloxacin ; ciprofloxacin ; ceftriaxon ; cefepime ; ceftazidima ; meropenem ; imipenem ; amicacina ; gentamicina ; ampicilin ; piperaciline-tazobactam ; aztreonam monobactan ; and polimixina b-i . black-squares are used to indicate resistance and white-squares are used to indicate susceptibility. b frequencies of antimicrobial resistant phenotypes were calculated as percentages of antimicrobial resistance among isolates of same origin. c-d comparison of biofilm formation in lb broth with or without shaking. biofilm production expressed as absorbance measurements taken at 600 nm. comparison between mdrpa versus p. aeruginosa ; comparison between he versus st isolates ; e-f linear regression analysis showing that the number of antimicrobials a mdrpa is resistant to correlates with the amount of biofilm it produces independently of shaking



genetic characterization of mindu stream and hwwtp p. aeruginosa
figure  <dig> shows pulse field gel electrophoresis  fingerprints generated for each of the  <dig> p. aeruginosa isolates used in the antimicrobial testing . these fingerprints were generated by running genomic dna xbai restriction enzyme digestion products on a pfge gel. although clear similarity between these fingerprints are observable between the isolates taken from the hwwtp, there is also clear evidence of high levels of genetic diversity among the rhe and the bacterial isolates as well as those obtained from the mindu stream. this approach did not, however, help to resolve the precise origin of antimicrobial resistant p. aeruginosa isolates from the mindu, but did show that, despite the fact they all have identical antimicrobial resistance profiles, they are not all closely related to one another. these results thus suggest that the p. aeruginosa of the mindu stream are most probably derived from multiple origins which adds weight to the notion that the p. aeruginosa with resistance to ampicillin and amikacin are at a selective advantage in this stream  <cit> .fig.  <dig> pulsed-field gel electrophoresis dendogram of  <dig> isolates of p. aeruginosa obtained from hospital effluent  and mindu stream  water samples . pfge profiles were compared and aligned by bionumerics software. the pulse-types were not classified



the biofilm formation of mindu stream mdrpa
all  <dig> above mentioned p. aeruginosa isolates where also assessed for their ability to form biofilms under shaking and non-shaking growth conditions. biofilm formation was observed to be significantly higher with mdrpa than non-multi-resistant p. aeruginosa  while no differences were seen when the isolates were classified based on their origin . these data indicate thus that biofilm formation is a characteristic of mdrpa. consistent with this notion, we also observed a positive association between the number of antimicrobials a p. aeruginosa isolate was resistant to  and the extent of biofilm it formed. our results are thus consistent with other studies that have suggested that multi-drug resistance is associated with biofilm formation .

CONCLUSIONS
a hwwtp in manaus is discharging mdrpa into the urban mindu stream, where antimicrobial resistant p. aeruginosa may be at a selective advantage and are certainly able to persist. many of manaus’s most vulnerable residents that live in contact the mindu stream are being exposed to antimicrobial resistant p. aeruginosa and any and all health risks posed by such bacteria. more research is required to determine the extent to which hwwtps are contributing to the occurrence of antimicrobial resistant p. aeruginosa in the mindu stream and to determine the public health importance of such bacteria.

