BACKGROUND
transcriptional regulation is modulated by a complex network of interactions between regulatory proteins and their binding targets on dna. to comprehensively understand gene regulation at a systems level, a primary goal is to decipher the "regulatory code" that consists of knowledge of all transcriptional regulators, their dna binding profiles, and their regulatory targets  <cit> . regulatory information can be inferred from the combined analysis of genomic sequence with an abundance of microarray based methods such as chip-chip  <cit>  and transcription factor perturbation experiments  <cit> . however, highly reliable regulator specificies have been unattainable for many regulators probed by such genomic-scale methods  <cit>  since weak signals from regulators are often very difficult to isolate from experimental noise.

thus, from a computational standpoint, a major challenge is to develop techniques that can extract maximal regulator specificity information from imperfect data. a common strategy among computational tools developed for this purpose is to first obtain a small group of genes in which a given motif may be statistically over-represented, from which the motif can then be elicited using methods such as position weight matrix updating and word enumeration  <cit> . while highly effective in some cases, a potential drawback of this approach is that the process of isolating a subgroup of sequences, typically done using clustering, cutoffs, or functional categorization, can be arbitrary. the delineation of signal from background may be poor for noisy experimental data, where cutoffs can lead to significant loss of information. other algorithms, such as dictionary-  <cit>  or steganalysis-based  <cit>  methods, do not rely on clustering but can benefit from subgroup selection.

a technique used by many motif-finding algorithms is to integrate expression data into the search process  <cit> . for example, the algorithm reduce  avoids subgroup selection in a natural way by genome-wide fitting of motif counts to expression data  <cit> . reduce is a deterministic method that first enumerates oligonucleotides and then identifies words whose occurrence in promoter sequences correlate most strongly with expression data. this procedure is applied iteratively to produce a set of oligonucleotides that produce the best simultaneous fit to the data. reduce requires only a single expression dataset and makes use of the entire genomic dataset  to assess the significance of individual motifs. this method, which has already been widely applied  <cit> , allows greater sensitivity to weak transcriptional signals and facilitates the discovery of combinatorial effects between regulators.

one weakness of reduce is that it can miss weak but biologically significant variants of the regulator site. highly degenerate motifs whose individual variants fall below the detection threshold will be missed altogether. this is particularly the case for regulators in higher mammalian genomes, which can exhibit strong site to site variation in specificity. thus, we have generalized the reduce approach to examine words containing degenerate iupac symbols representing multiple bases . however, a straightforward extension of reduce using exhaustive enumeration of degenerate motifs becomes impractical when the motif length or number of degenerate positions increase. specifically, by including m iupac symbols in a word of length l the motif search space increases by a factor of l!m!!m where  <dig> is the number of iupac symbols . for example, the computational cost is increased by 340-fold for l =  <dig> and m =  <dig>  and by 3500-fold for m =  <dig>  therefore, we have developed fast-reduce , a significant re-implementation of the reduce algorithm that allows efficient searches of the extended space of degenerate motifs. we have applied freduce to detect multiple motifs for transcription factor binding sites in yeast as well as human.

RESULTS
algorithm
the original version of reduce identifies motifs by exhaustively correlating all oligonucleotides up to length l in promoter sequences with expression data. however, the direct computation of the pearson correlation coefficient is computationally laborious and is not well suited for analyzing large spaces of degenerate oligonucleotides. freduce uses the following strategy to efficiently compute the pearson coefficients of the most significant degenerate motifs : 1) a list of degenerate motifs that can be derived from the sequence data is generated. 2) for each degenerate motif, we can quickly compute a "pseudo-pearson" coefficient, an estimate of the actual pearson coefficient. the pseudo-pearson coefficient is guaranteed to be an upper-bound on the actual pearson coefficient and is used as a filter to eliminate most  of the motif list. 3) actual pearson coefficients are computed and the top motif is found and 4) the contribution from the top motif is subtracted from the expression data to form a residual, which is used for subsequent rounds of motif searching.

performance assessment with yeast chip-chip
to assess the performance of freduce, we applied the algorithm to  <dig> chip-chip experiments from harbison et. al.  <cit>  involving  <dig> known and putative transcription factors in the budding yeast s. cerevisiae. for each chip-chip experiment, we correlated the normalized array data to the corresponding yeast intergenic sequences, eliciting motifs of up to length  <dig> and containing up to  <dig> iupac degenerate symbols. in order to verify the correctness of our predictions, we compared these results to a benchmarking set consisting of  <dig> high confidence motif logos assembled from the predictions of six separate motif finding algorithms  <cit> . for  <dig> of  <dig> benchmarks freduce produced an iupac motif that was identical to the annotated motif, including correct degeneracies . in comparison, we ran alignace  <cit>  on the same  <dig> chip-chip experiments. using the same filtering and comparison criteria, we found that alignace detected the annotated motif for only  <dig> of  <dig> regulators. we also compared the performance of freduce with those of the other  <dig> motif finding algorithms used to assemble the benchmark motifs . even though the benchmark motifs are likely to be biased toward the six programs from which they were originally found, freduce still stood out as having the best individual performance.


                              factor
                              known site
                              condition
                              motif
                              p-value
                              freduce match?
                              alignace match?
freduce predictions from  <dig> yeast chip-chip experiments of harbison et. al. check marks  indicate that freduce matched the iupac string corresponding to the benchmark logo. the results of a similar analysis with alignace is given in the right column.

we also examined the performance of freduce on  <dig> regulators for which harbison et. al. detected motifs with lower confidence . noting that many of these  <dig> predicted motifs could contain inaccuracies, freduce matched  <dig> of these predictions while alignace matched  <dig> 

comparision to the original reduce and to matrixreduce
to assess the ability of freduce to correctly capture motif degeneracies, we systematically compared the predictions made by freduce to those made by its predecessor reduce on the subset of benchmark motifs containing significant degeneracy. of  <dig> degenerate benchmark motifs, freduce assigned iupac degenerate symbols identically to the benchmark in  <dig> cases . in the  <dig> remaining cases  freduce made a prediction which is consistent with the benchmark motif while having a different degeneracy . in all of these cases, freduce assigns the degenerate motif a more significant p-value than the corresponding non-degenerate motif. we note that in some cases motif degeneracies can be detected by the original reduce as separate motif predictions. this is especially true for regulators with strong signal . however, in  <dig> cases degeneracies successfully predicted by freduce were not detectable at all by reduce . this is typically characteristic of regulators with weaker signal.

we also compared the performance of freduce to matrixreduce, a recently introduced reduce-variant that refines motifs elicited by reduce into position specific affinity matrices   <cit> . matrixreduce matched  <dig> of the  <dig> benchmarks as well as  <dig> of  <dig> motifs in the lower confidence set . in the high confidence set, six predictions were specific to freduce  while two were specific to matrixreduce . specific predictions from the lower confidence set included rox <dig>  swi <dig>  ume <dig> for freduce and put <dig>  rlm <dig> for matrixreduce. overall, freduce has a slightly stronger joint performance with  <dig> uniquely correct predictions from the two sets versus matrixreduce's  <dig>  in the former cases, matrixreduce did not seem to begin with the correct seed, suggesting that an enumeration strategy is beneficial for some regulators. in the latter cases, freduce does not find the correct motif because the long and fuzzy nature of these motifs makes them too costly for enumeration. we note that some of these differences are dependent on run parameters; with the parameters we have used matrixreduce took an order of magnitude longer to run on average than freduce .

prediction of novel motifs from yeast chip-chip
next we looked to see whether freduce was capable of detecting novel motifs for transcription factors with uncharacterized specificities. of the remaining transcription factors in the chip-chip study with no benchmark logo, we found  <dig> cases where freduce made nontrivial  motif predictions with p-values under 10- <dig> . in all of these cases, there has been little to no experimental information available regarding the specificity, and existing computation methods have yielded little additional insight. nevertheless, in a few cases we found evidence in the literature which supports the novel motif predictions we have made with freduce. for example, the binding site of aro <dig>  a regulator of the aromatic amino acid structural genes, has been characterized in two genes as being tandem repeats of the sequences taaccg and ttgccg  <cit> . from the chip-chip data, freduce elicited the motif gataaccg with high significance  as well as the degenerate motif tccg , which is similar to both of the characterized repeat elements and reflects their degeneracies. we also considered the regulator mth <dig>  which negatively regulates the glucose sensing signal transduction pathway by interacting with the transcriptional repressor rgt1p  <cit> . although it is unknown whether mth1p has intrinsic dna sequence specificity, rgt1p has been shown to have the specificity cgganna  <cit> . freduce found the matching motif ggagra , which is compatible with the notion that mth1p binds to dna in association with rgt1p.


                              regulator
                              predicted site
                              p-value
                              motif from literature search
we searched the literature for evidence supporting our motif predictions and the matching examples are highlighted. *the annotated motifs for rgt1p.

motif elicitation in human hepatocytes
in higher eukaryotes, motifs tend to be more degenerate and dispersed among longer intergenic regions. a common benchmark set used to evaluate the performance of computational algorithms in higher eukaryotes is the liver specific dataset  <cit> . krivan et. al compiled a set of experimentally defined regulatory elements upstream of genes that were expressed exclusively in liver or in a small number of tissues including liver. from this set of genes, they found that hepatocyte-specific gene expression is mainly regulated by a small set of transcription factors , including hnf- <dig>  hnf- <dig>  hnf- <dig>  and c/ebp. hnf- <dig>  hnf- <dig>  and c/ebp are known to be transcriptional activators based on transfac  <cit>  annotation.

we ran freduce on human adult hepatocyte expression data to capture binding sites of liver-specific transcription factors. freduce captured both the forward and reverse complement of the hnf- <dig> binding site as well as two key degeneracies in the motif core as published in krivan et. al. . hnf- <dig> is known to be linked to gene expression in mature liver  <cit> , which is consistent with the expression data set used in our analysis. in contrast, reduce was not able to capture the known binding sites, which is most likely due to the degeneracy involved in the known consensus. these results show the potential of using freduce to identify regulatory elements in higher eukaryotes, including human.

discussion
despite the availability of powerful techniques such as chip-chip, the binding specificities of many transcription factors remain uncharacterized. this can be due to several reasons, including 1) regulators that have few genomic targets 2) regulators which interact weakly or indirectly with their targets and 3) regulators which bind to their maximal set of targets only under very specific environmental cues, which may be hard to find experimentally. freduce offers increased sensitivity in these cases because it 1) uses the entire array data set for correlation and 2) searches all possible degeneracies. while freduce is in some respects similar to motif regressor  <cit>  and matrixreduce, a key distinction is that freduce detects degenerate motifs de novo by exhaustive enumeration. in contrast, matrixreduce refines degeneracies from non-degenerate seeds and motif regressor selects among candidate matrices using correlation with expression. thus, freduce may be advantageous when motifs are difficult to detect in a non-degenerate form or are missed in the candidate set.

by comparison to  <dig> benchmark logos in yeast, we see that freduce is comparable to or greater in detection power versus algorithms like alignace for strong motifs that are relatively easy to detect. even in these cases, freduce outperforms the original reduce algorithm by accurately predicting known degeneracies. the most advantageous use of freduce, however, is for the detection of weak motifs which may lie at the border of detection. it is difficult to verify the correctness of many of the motifs elicited in these cases because of their poor characterization. nevertheless, we have found two cases where freduce was sensitive to subtle signals: aro <dig>  for which sites are highly degenerate, and mth <dig>  which may have a weak signal due an indirect interaction with dna. we have also shown that freduce is capable of capturing the hnf- <dig> binding site in hepatocytes, demonstrating that this algorithm is generally applicable to the detection of degenerate motifs in mammalian cells.

CONCLUSIONS
we have presented the motif prediction algorithm freduce, a refined variation of reduce specialized for the detection of degenerate motifs. the two primary strengths of freduce are 1) it maximizes data utilization by fitting all expression data and 2) it searches motif degeneracies in a comprehensive and unbiased way. we have shown that freduce is an improvement upon the existing reduce algorithm for degenerate binding profiles and that it can outperform existing motif finding methods on yeast chip-chip benchmarks. furthermore, freduce is able to detect degenerate signals in yeast and human. thus, freduce should be a valuable computation tool for the detection of subtle motifs.

