BACKGROUND
studies of plant development aim to understand processes that occur from the molecular scale through to the cellular and tissue scales, to the organism as a whole. such studies routinely make use of live imaging, combined with transgenic modifications to introduce fluorescent reporters for observing a process of interest. for studying multicellular interactions and morphogenetic processes, imaging makes use of whole plants or tissue explants, yielding useful information for both the complete structure and the influence this structure has on the molecular processes within the cells. single, isolated cells permit easier access to the subcellular dynamics, especially for cell types that are poorly accessible or difficult to orient for imaging. it is, however, difficult to isolate processes on the single cell-scale whilst concurrently maintaining the tissue-scale response to external signals from a 3d environment. this makes a new model system based on cultured cells interacting within a tissue-like scaffold a desirable biological tool.

current plant cell methodologies place cultured cells mostly on flat, two-dimensional  surfaces  where they cannot interact with 3d environments. one exception is the use of lithographically defined microfluidic channels that have been useful tools for determining the behaviour of pollen tube growth in response to controlled chemical gradients and mechanical obstacles  <cit> . microfluidic methods have high potential to provide single cells with defined quantities of diffusive signals and a confined environment akin to that of plant cells in vivo, however, microfluidic devices at present do not integrate 3d tissue-structures  in the confined environment to better mimic native tissue conditions.

human tissue engineering employs 3d scaffolds mimicking the extracellular matrix  to provide a tissue-environment and this culture method of animal cells in vitro are the subject of intense development  <cit> . the design and engineering of suitable scaffolds that capture the complex in vitro 3d physiology have been refined over the last 20 years  <cit> . an optimised scaffold should provide micropores that permit cell penetration, a biocompatible nano-topography and fibres with tuneable tissue-specific mechanical properties. polymeric microfibres can give a scaffold cell-size pores and a broad range of mechanical strength but cannot provide the nano-topography required for cell attachment; whereas polymeric nanofibres alone can provide ecm-mimicking and biocompatible nano-topography but are limited in the achievable range of mechanical properties and pore sizes required for different cell types. hence, alternating layers of nanofibres and microfibres is a major strategy for constructing tissue scaffolds . commercial 3d printing still does not have the resolution for fine tissue patterning, and combining it with nanofibres in a single process has been a challenge  <cit> . the combined processes cannot achieve a scaffold that is profitable to manufacture at an industrial scale whilst providing the desirable micro- and macroscopic properties.

shear spinning is a recently commercialised technology  that can achieve high-yield production of integrated micro- and nano-fibre scaffolds with an appreciable thickness  necessary for the 3d cell models  <cit> . the process extrudes and shears a polymer solution in a non-solvent and is able to produce continuous or staple nanofibres or microfibres, that can be mixed and dried to form scaffolds of various density and porosity  <cit> . while such scaffolds are emerging in the study of mammalian biology, their suitability for fundamental plant biology has not been explored.

this study applies 3d tissue engineering to the plant sciences and reports  the development of an effective protocol for plant cell culture in scaffolds;  the characteristics of the scaffold required for optimal plant cell attachment;  the influence of the scaffold structure on cell morphology;  the potential to study physiological responses to phytohormones. we make use of commercially available and cost-effective shear-spun 3d scaffolds, constructed from a mix of biocompatible poly  microfibres and polylactide  nanofibres. these allow imaging of cells with high spatial resolution similar to that in other single cell studies, but in a 3d fibrous environment mimicking the extracellular matrix. the cells display morphologies previously not seen in cultured cells and not normally visible in planta, while at the same time enabling us to record 3d and 4d data of cell growth and cell-environment interactions. we demonstrate these advantages using a fast protocol of seeding callus-derived liquid cultures of the laboratory model plant arabidopsis thaliana in the scaffold. we show evidence of specific adhesion interactions of the cells to the scaffold, which likely influence the growth and geometry of the cells. this work defines a new suite of techniques for the growth and time-lapse imaging of plant cells interacting with each other and with tissue-like environments.

RESULTS
seeding fibres using liquid culture cells derived from seed calli
arabidopsis transgenic seeds are induced to form calli. arabidopsis transgenic lines, containing various fluorescently labelled reporters, can be readily prepared as a cell suspension in as little as 7– <dig> days , by using a defined medium containing phytohormones. the suspension cultures contain a large proportion of single cells compared to clumps. cultures are used to seed pre-wetted scaffolds consisting of pet  : pla  in a ratio of 70 % : 30 %. the scaffolds are organised as a layered-meshwork of the pet microfibres incorporating the finer pla nanofibres . cells expressing cytoplasmic mcherry are seeded on the scaffolds and visualised with a confocal microscope, where the pet microfibres are also visible due to their auto-fluorescent signal at wavelengths above 600 nm . scaffolds are capable of maintaining cell growth and morphogenesis for 72 hours after seeding without further manipulation. by replacing the culture media daily after 72 hours of seeding, cells may be maintained within the scaffold beyond 10 days .fig.  <dig> scanning electron microscopy  and confocal images  showing the 3d polymer scaffolds and arabidopsis thaliana cell growth in the scaffolds. a-b sem images of 30 % pla nanofibres, 70 % pet microfibre scaffold before cell seeding: a front-view, b side-view. c-d 3-dimensional reconstructions of confocal z-stacks showing cells of arabidopsis thaliana expressing a reporter construct expressing cytoplasmic mcherry: c day  <dig> and d day  <dig> growth of cells inside the scaffold. proliferation and growth were observed throughout the scaffold. cells increased in number and size from day  <dig> to day  <dig>  cells formed local points of attachment on the fibres  and subsequently expanded in size into the porous space either by stretching from or winding around microfibres. for example, arrows  <dig> and  <dig> point to a cell attached to a microfibre at point  <dig> and growing into the depth of the fibrous scaffold as shown at point  <dig>  arrow  <dig> highlights a cell wrapping around a microfibre. scale bars: 100 μm



developing an effective sterilisation procedure for routine use of the 3d scaffolds
the protocol to sterilise the scaffolds before coming into contact with the sucrose-containing suspension medium is important to prevent fungal contamination. sterilisation techniques by ethanol, ultraviolet  irradiation and x-ray irradiation have been tested. additional file 1: figure s <dig> shows the morphology of the scaffold before and after various sterilisation treatments. x-ray sterilisation is the most effective method. x-ray sterilisation for up to 18 minutes at 417 cgy/min irradiation results in no appreciable change of fibre morphology . uv irradiation has been the most common practice for sterilising nanofibre-scaffolds. however, for thicker 3d constructs used in this work, at  <dig>  ±  <dig>  mm average scaffold thickness, uv light fails to penetrate the centre of the scaffold and frequent fungal contamination originates from this region. ethanol-treated scaffolds do not allow cell growth and pla nanofibres appear fused. ethanol is a nonsolvent of pet but a poor solvent of pla. hence, the reasons of poor cell growth on ethanol-sterilised scaffolds may be two-fold:  ethanol renders the scaffold morphology unsuitable for cell attachment;  the arabidopsis cell cultures are sensitive to residual ethanol. in addition, we note that ethanol sterilisation is also ineffective against bacterial contaminations  <cit> .

plant cells interact with the scaffold components
cells appear to have fixed positions in the scaffold and do not exhibit brownian movements within the field of view  during microscopy whether they are larger or smaller than the pores created by the fibres around them. cells remain fixed in the structure after the cell-seeded scaffolds are transferred to fresh media and agitated at 130 rpm for 60 minutes . furthermore, cells are observed to be in contact with the microfibres .

to determine whether the cell-fibre attachments are active cellular interactions with the artificial structure or simple passive entrapment of cells by the porous scaffold, we have repeated the cell culture experiment in the scaffold using fluorescent silica particles of similar size and concentration to the arabidopsis cells in suspension. the particles have a size range of 40–200 μm that resemble the size range of arabidopsis cells. we observe that the silica particles become passively trapped in the scaffold, which acts as filters, but the particles readily detach from the scaffold. by analysing scanning electron microscope  images  and counting the number of silica beads on the scaffold surface, we find approximately 94 % of the silica beads filtered in the scaffold have detached from the scaffold after agitation in the cell culture medium at 130 rpm.

the adherence of the cells to the fibres is not due to excess mucilage released during cell culture from the seed-derived calli. stable arabidopsis cell culture lines not derived from seed also grow in the scaffold and interact with the fibres. both seed-derived and non-seed derived cells exhibit similar behaviour of winding and twisting around microfibres as observed by light microscopy , demonstrating that cell-scaffold interactions are not due to seed mucilage.

microfibres can be clearly imaged using confocal microscopy but nanofibres cannot be visualised. to understand cell-nanofibre interactions, a focused ion beam is used to remove part of the cell surface during sem, showing a cell adapting its shape to enclose a nanofibre . sem experiments are done under both variable pressure  and high vacuum modes . under variable pressure sem mode, moist samples are imaged at 40 pa and cells deflated gradually over several minutes. cell-fibre attachments are observed and remain constant . when the sem mode is changed from variable pressure to high vacuum mode, cells deflate but remain attached to the scaffold. yellow arrows in fig. 4b reveal the firm focal attachment between the deflated cell and the neighbouring pla nanofibres. the cell remains wound around microfibres . in examples shown in fig. 4c and d, where cells do not wind around a fibre, but reach between two fibres, the deflated single cell with no other support does not detach from cell-fibre focal points  and remains immobilised like a bridge between two microfibres. another example of a cell bridging gaps between microfibres is shown in fig. 1c.fig.  <dig> 
a sem image of a cross-section of a cell on top of a microfibre sliced by a focused ion beam, showing the attachment of the cell to a nanofibre . the surface of the cell, attached to the fibre, is shown by a red arrow. internal cellular structures have been exposed after ion beam milling. b-d sem images under high vacuum conditions showing strong cell-fibre attachment to surrounding fibres, indicated by red arrows. scale bars: a 10 μm, b-d 50 μm

fig.  <dig> variable pressure sem images obtained at 40 pa, showing cell-fibre interactions in the scaffold. local points of attachment between the cell wall and the fibres are highlighted by red arrows. a an overview of cells in scaffold. b-d images of single cell-fibre interactions.scale bars: 100 μm

fig.  <dig> sem images obtained under high vacuum conditions showing cell-fibre interactions in a 3d microenvironment. attachment points between the cell wall and the micro- and nanofibres are highlighted by red and yellow arrows, respectively. a overview of the abundant presence of cells in the scaffold. examples of cells are indicated by blue arrows. b-f images of cells winding around or reaching between microfibres  with direct attachment to nanofibres . as the cell deflated under vacuum, the cell wall pulled back with parts of the cell remaining attached to the fibres. scale bars: 100 μm



the observations that  cells of diverse shape and size are immobilised, and  cells maintain contact with one or more fibres upon application of force, suggest a physical interaction between the cells and the fibres is more consistent with active adherence rather than passive entrapment. as evidenced by the adherence interactions above, the fibrous scaffold is able to provide a three-dimensional support for plant cell culture growth and morphogenesis. plant cells respond to nanofibre concentration in the scaffold in a similar fashion to that observed in mammalian cell culture  <cit> , in which the initial cell attachment density increases with increasing nanofibre percentage in the scaffold. specifically, cell count increases from  <dig>  ±  <dig>  cells/mm <dig> for 0 % nanofibres, to  <dig>  ±  <dig>  cells/mm <dig> for 10 % nanofibres, to  <dig>  ±  <dig>  cells/mm <dig> for 30 % nanofibres . all scaffolds contain the same mass of pet with increasing mass of pla nanofibres. compared to the pet microfibres, pla nanofibres can be described as a more voluminous and tufted material. this led to an increase in the thickness of the scaffold per unit area with an increasing pla content, but also resulting in an overall relatively unchanged porosity value  for all scaffolds despite the changing nanofibre content. hence, the increasing cell seeding density with respect to nanofibre percentage in the scaffold is not due to changes in porosity of the material that may change the space available for cell attachment and growth. in addition, arabidopsis cells appear to adhere with nanofibres at the cell surface, and continue to conform and adapt their shape and orientation according to the adjacent microfibres.fig.  <dig> 
a-c sem images at day  <dig> after seeding cells in scaffolds of varying nanofibre percentage. a no pla nanofibres, 100 % pet microfibres. few cells grew on the scaffold, though a cell can be observed to interact with a pet microfibre . b 10 % pla nanofibres, 90 % pet microfibres. c 30 % pla nanofibres, 70 % pet microfibres. compare the scale bars: 500 μm



cells interact with scaffolds and display shapes not usually seen in planta
large cells are found to grow adjacent to, between and around microfibre supports, as well as across several microfibres. cultured and newly seeded cells commonly exhibit shapes that are round, elongated-straight or elongated-arced. adhered cells can be seen to exhibit anisotropic expansion, growing between gaps within the fibre. where gaps are narrow, cells appear to alter their shape to continue growth and the regions in narrow gaps appear as constricted regions along the length of the cell. for example, where parts of the cells seem severely restricted and “pinched” between two microfibres , the rest of the cell appears to have expanded and explored new space. cells can also be found to occupy space along the length of the same microfibre . 48– <dig> hours after seeding, cells are seen to be very elongated, with numerous examples of spiral-shaped cells around microfibres . as cells grew much larger they are seen to adopt more complex shapes . cells remain immobilised inside the scaffold when we vary the vacuum condition from variable pressure to high vacuum using a variable pressure sem. these extreme geometries and orientations of very long and twisted cells are not present in the culture at the time of seeding.fig.  <dig> confocal images of actin-labelled arabidopsis cells expressing the reporter construct 35s::gfp-fabd <dig>  showing the actin patterns in growing cells and the orientation of cells as they interact with the scaffold. a a pinched cell expanding. microfibres exist in front of and behind the constriction point  b spiral shape of cell as it attached, interacted and wound around fibres inside the scaffold. red arrows indicate points of cell-fibre interactions. the large mass of actin corresponds to the nuclear basket. scale bars: 100 μm

fig.  <dig> confocal z-projections showing cells adapting their shape to interact with the fibrous environment. a an overview. b-h higher resolution examples of cell shapes.white arrows indicate small round cells. yellow arrows indicate cell-fibre interaction. red asterisks in a-b indicate heterogeneous growth between neighbouring cells, demonstrating the ability of the cells to slip past each other and continue elongation, a behaviour unobserved in native tissues. gfp-labelled microtubules in cells expressing reporter construct 35s::gfp-mbd. scale bars: 100 μm

fig.  <dig> confocal z-projections showing gfp-labelled microtubule arrays in a. thaliana cells expressing reporter construct 35s::gfp-mbd. white arrows indicate microtubules. dotted lines trace fibres. a-c a cell spiraling twice around a microfibre. d-f diagonal microtubules in spiral cells bending around the central axis. g-h conventional microtubule patterns perpendicular to direction of elongation. i radial/criss-cross pattern of microtubules in small round cells  and the tips of elongating cells. scale bars: 100 μm



cytoskeletal organisation in response to cell-fibre interactions
control of plant cell expansion requires the correct deposition of cell wall material, which is influenced by the arrangement of the underlying cortical cytoskeleton formed of microtubules and actin. in longitudinally  expanding cells, for example in hypocotyl or root epidermal cells, actin appears as a complex network of thick bundles or narrow fibres found in various orientations within a single cell and the actin network has been shown to transport the golgi apparatus and various types of post-golgi compartments that contain cell wall material  <cit> . live observations of actin can be carried out using confocal microscopy of a gfp fusion with a portion of the arabidopsis fimbrin <dig> protein . at sites of apparent space constriction, or where the cell interacts with a fibre, actin can sometimes be observed to bundle as shown in fig. 6a, where intensely fluorescent actin is observed close to the intersection of two microfibres . figure 6b shows actin in a cell undergoing spiral growth, where long actin filaments emanating from the ends of the cells appear to converge on the nuclear basket. these observations may reflect local differences in transport of wall material to achieve a shape change.

we next looked at microtubules in cells expressing a fusion between gfp and the microtubule-binding domain of the mouse map <dig> protein. in cells exhibiting anisotropic expansion, microtubules are observed to orient perpendicular to the long axis  – consistent with their role in directing cell reinforcement by influencing cellulose deposition  <cit> . in ovoid  cells and in cells exhibiting complex shapes , microtubules orientations are not transverse to the long axis . an enlarged view of a highly elongated portion of an irregular shaped cell is shown in additional file 1: figure s <dig>  in which microtubules are oriented predominantly along the long axis. in the ovoid portions of the same cell, the microtubules exhibit a mesh-like configuration. in cells growing in spirals around individual fibres , microtubules are often arranged diagonally, except for the ends of the cells that, when viewed faced on, adopt the mesh-like configuration. unlike natural tissues, in which cells cannot grow past each other and often show homogeneous growth between neighbouring cells, the single cells in the scaffold show heterogeneous growth between adjacent cells. larger, elongating cells are capable of growing past fibres and other obstructing cells to fill the available space . as a proof-of-concept we could track the growth and catastrophes of individual microtubules in a 4d data series . further work based on the 3d cell culture method reported in this work will correlate microtubule orientations and cell wall formation in arabidopsis cells interacting with the 3d environment over time.

applicability to other cell lines
the 3d scaffolds are applicable to studying cells of species besides arabidopsis. we cultured mesophyll cells of zinnia elegans inside the scaffold. when cultured in “non-inductive medium”, where cells do not differentiate into tracheary elements, zinnia cells continually exhibit growth  <cit> . by imaging autofluorescence of the wet cell-seeded scaffold, zinnia elegans cells are observed to grow along the fibres, and fewer cells are found in spaces without the fibres . high vacuum sem  reveals regions of high density cell seeding, together with apparent attachment points as previously found for the arabidopsis cells. the high density regions permit a closer look at cell-cell interactions that are more akin to native tissue conditions, in which cells are tightly packed. in a confined space delimited by fibres , three cells of similar size line up next to each other and maintain contact along their long edges. this contrasts to what we have seen in arabidopsis where neighbouring cells grow past each other .fig.  <dig> average projection of images of z. elegans cells taken 3 days after seeding in scaffolds. shown are autofluorescence in the red spectrum  and the corresponding transmission micrograph . locations of fibres are marked as dashed lines. alignment of cells in a confined space is indicated by arrows. scale bar: 100 μm



encapsulating plant growth substances within the scaffold fibres
in mammalian 3d cell culture, hormones can be encapsulated in polymeric scaffolds for sequential and timed release of implanted bioactive agents  <cit> . auxin is a principal regulator of growth and pattern formation in plants. the synthetic auxin,  <dig> -dichlorophenoxyacetic acid , is readily soluble in organic solvents that facilitates its incorporation during the formation of the scaffolds. briefly during scaffold fabrication,  <dig>  % w/w of  <dig> -d is dissolved in a 15 % w/w pla solution and the mixture is shear-spun to form a fibrous pla scaffold . although the release profile of auxin from the scaffold fibres is unknown, we find 5 % w/w  <dig> -d or higher incorporation in the fibre-forming solution results in rapid cell death, consistent with its herbicidal properties. at  <dig>  % w/w  <dig> -d in the polymer solution, cells on the resulting fibres can be maintained for up to 3 days. as relatively small amounts of auxin are already present to maintain plant cells in culture, it is not immediately apparent if there is any physiological response to the scaffold-released auxin. the dr5::gfp construct has been used in by <dig> cells, encoding a marker to visualise auxin uptake activity  <cit> . in our work, arabidopsis dr5::gfp-er yields a signal in some cells within the liquid cultures, consistent with dr <dig> response to the exogenous  <dig> -d. we observe no morphological responses of the cells to the extra auxin released from the scaffold during the 3-day period of cell culture, however, after 48 hours no gfp signal is observed for cells seeded in the scaffold without the encapsulated auxin, whereas the dr <dig> gfp signal is maintained within the auxin scaffolds . auxin efflux carriers, encoded by pin genes, are known to be polarly localised  <cit> . a polar distribution of pin indicates the presence and propagation of auxin gradients. pin7-gfp is observed in some liquid cultured cells as discrete punctae representing intracellular vesicles, however, this pattern of localisation remains unchanged in the auxin scaffolds , suggesting that either no microgradients exist or the isolated cells are unable to detect or respond to these gradients. we found no detectable signal from a fusion between the principal efflux protein pin <dig> and gfp either in liquid culture or the cultures where  <dig> -d is released from the scaffold, suggesting pin <dig> is not expressed in these types of cultured cells.

discussion
a number of technologies are shared in plant and animal biotechnology. recent efforts with plant cells have used lithographically defined structures to clarify the behaviour of pollen-tube growth and microfluidic systems in general have allowed the control of local chemical gradients and study of interactions with mechanical obstacles . both lithography and microfluidic systems are well known systems for mammalian cell biology in healthcare applications such as diagnostics, cancer research and regenerative medicine . microfluidic systems provide cells with a confined and well controlled environment akin to the in vivo plant tissue environment, but lack the structural sophistication of a tissue environment. the 3d cell culture method presented here is a complementary method useful for studying morphological changes of isolated cells that interact with an extracellular structure. future work incorporating 3d scaffolds in a microfluidic device may enable a better biomimetic environment.

other methods and materials, such as 3d scaffolds in tissue engineering and regenerative medicine of animal cells have potential applications in plant sciences. we have demonstrated that 3d nano- microfibre scaffolds can be applied as an effective tool for studying plant cell morphogenesis and can help identify new capabilities of growth at the cellular level. the scaffold materials, pla and pet, are both hydrophobic and require pre-wetting of the fibre scaffold in culture media prior to use. despite the hydrophobicity, cells are completely immobilised within the scaffold, and focal points  are observed with the sem. further studies will investigate if the attachment is through adhesion, by investigating known components such as the type and distribution of pectin. if attachment is found to be through adhesion, it would suggest cells of land plants have retained the ability to adhere to relatively inert supports, much like single-celled organisms from their ancestral lineage, represented by the green algae of the charophyta  <cit> . a recent report has found similarities in composition and structure between the adhesive matrix of penium, a charophytic green alga, and the middle lamella of land plants that permits the integration of cells into complex tissues  <cit> . one biological focus of future work is to determine whether the interface between cell-fibre contacts is similar to those of cell-cell contacts.

shapes of cells in scaffolds range from regular ovoid or cuboid to complex shapes with constrictions where local space appears limited, some even have projections resembling, to some degree, the lobes of leaf pavement cells . coupled with these complex shapes, growth resulted in large sizes of some cells . this may be due, in part, to having a tissue-like environment without the constraints of tightly packed or attached cells and we envisage that the scaffolds will help us determine the factors that govern the upper size limit of a plant cell, a subject of recent discussion  <cit> .

long cells often grow and orient along the microfibres in either a left-handed or a right-handed spiral conformation. we assume that spiral growth is akin to growing along a flat surface but, given that the diameter of the cell  is many times that of a microfibre , the cells grow around the support. to maintain such spiral growth, the cell would likely adhere to the microfibre. it seems likely that the stiffness of the microfibre also contributes to cell growth, and this may be why we do not see spiral morphologies associated with nanofibres. the interaction and adhesion between cells and the microfibres are most likely due to cell wall-fibre interactions. the cell wall defines plant cell shape, which is dependent on the balance between turgor pressure and the structure and composition of the cell wall that is in a constant flow of synthesis and remodelling, based on the type and developmental stage of the cell  <cit> . for a cell to change its shape, the cell wall must first undergo controlled and sometimes local loosening  <cit> . a number of experimental studies indicate that a sensing and signalling system exists in the plant that monitors the structure and integrity of cell walls  <cit> . the new method of 3d plant cell culture reported here has potential to explore the relationships between signalling, synthesis and remodelling of the wall through genetic strategies such as use of existing collections of arabidopsis insertion  lines and more reporter constructs. future work will make use of other materials that are bio-inert or bioactive, including cellulosic fibres, to further study the cellular sensing and responses to external materials that resemble the cell wall.

it is noteworthy to compare the cellular responses described here with those of a study looking at improving the production of secondary metabolites by lindsey and coworkers  <cit> . the latter study took carrot and pepper suspension cultures, immobilised in polyurethane foam, and concluded that the immobilised cells have a metabolism that is closer to the respective whole plant – a useful property for industrial applications. similar to our 3d culture, the polyurethane foam provides pores that are occupied by the cells, however, the polyurethane foam pores require a high seeding density for cells to be immobilised whereas the fibre scaffolds can immobilise single isolated cells. the foam-immobilised cells are also firmly attached since agitation does not dislodge them – an identical result to our 3d scaffolds. for carrot cells, the foam-immobilised cells can grow to a large size  and show a variety of shapes. although these shapes do not achieve the complexity observed for our fibre scaffolds, the tight packing of the diverse carrot cells within the pores does resemble a simple intact tissue. tight packing is observed in confined region of scaffold containing z. elegans cells where cell growth and shape appeared largely homogenous. arabidopsis cells are seen to grow past each other and no close packing or homogeneous growth of cells are observed for these cultures. the differences we observe between z. elegans and arabidopsis in scaffolds may be a function of  the higher seeding densities achieved with z. elegans, which is 100x higher than arabidopsis; and  the tissue the cells are derived from .

the cytoskeleton, in particular the microtubules, are believed to play important roles in guiding the morphological changes of cells in response to the surrounding scaffold. drugs that affect cytoskeleton function, such as oryzalin, latrunculin b and nocodazole, can be used in future investigations to better understand cell growth and morphological changes in scaffold-embedded culture media. future work will also explore the possibility of targeting delivery of growth effectors such as hormones and cytoskeletal inhibitors by incorporating them directly into the scaffold. as a proof-of-concept, we have encapsulated the synthetic auxin,  <dig> -d, within fibres. the next challenge is to better manage its release from the scaffold. this would potentially give rise to similar microgradients as found in the whole organism.

in summary, nano-structured scaffolds provide a powerful mechanism to encourage and direct cell behaviour ranging from cell adhesion to gene expression in animal tissue culture  <cit> . we envisage similar responses for plant cells leading to existing imaging, biochemical and genetic techniques being applied in fibris.

CONCLUSIONS
we have developed a simple system that permits the study and facilitates imaging of fluorescently labelled cells interacting with a 3d environment. we have demonstrated that physical interactions with the local environment result in complex growth and morphogenesis.

