BACKGROUND
plant-microbe interactions play an important role in agriculture and a lot of effort has been dedicated to analyse these interactions in detail. one of these interactions is the rhizobium-legume symbiosis, a process that allows the growth of the plant in the absence of externally supplied nitrogen. this is a well studied agronomically important process that is also used as a model to study general genetic aspects of plant-microbe interactions  <cit> . rhizobial bacteria and legumes have evolved complex signal exchange mechanisms in which a lot of genes are involved  <cit> . to probe this complexity further we chose to study the model rhizobial symbiont genome sinorhizobium meliloti  <cit> . s. meliloti is a model bacterium that can engage in a symbiotic interaction by infecting the roots of members of the genera medicago and melilotus, being the s. meliloti-medicago truncatula interaction the model system for indeterminate type nodules  <cit> .

the sequencing of hundreds of complete genomes from diverse species is having a tremendous impact on our understanding of biology by enabling the identification of all proteins and the analysis of their function. despite the vast body of literature about the rhizobium-legume interaction there have been no systematic large-scale attempts to identify its components and function using a systems biology perspective, and most studies have been restricted to the analysis of individual proteins. however, biological functions results from the interactions of proteins so that understanding the network of biological linkages utilizing functional genomics information is becoming a hot topic in current research projects  <cit> . the main advantage of creating these networks lies in the ability to understand biological processes from a system level perspective. this would ideally require the application of computational and experimental techniques to combine experimental observations of protein-protein interactions  and computational predictions derived from different data sources. to date a variety of methods have been developed to derive large scale networks of ppis for a variety of organisms. these range from experimental methods such as yeast two-hybrid screens, or tandem affinity purification coupled with mass spectrometry  <cit> , to computational methods such as genome context methods  <cit> . the integration of these types of data helps to provide a complete overview of gene networks of high value for characterizing many biological processes, and ultimately, for understanding the basis of host-microbe interactions including diseases  <cit> . however, experimental information is sometimes missing and deriving gene networks from different computational approaches is not an easy task. computational predictions such as those obtained by applying genome context methods usually measure functional interactions between proteins. the assumption is that proteins are most likely to interact if: a) their proteins are either present or absent together across multiple genomes   <cit> ; b) a gene fusion event occurred in other species   <cit> ; c) the genes are in physical proximity   <cit> ; or d) the genes are conserved in physical proximity and in phylogenetically distant genomes   <cit> . these methods have the advantage over experimental methods and other computational methods based on protein conservation such as interologs  <cit>  or literature mining  <cit> , that they are not biased towards well studied or conserved proteins or interactions  <cit> . therefore, genome context methods are able to highlight organism-specific features since they just rely on genome structure. the outputs derived by these methods can be computationally integrated in order to reconstruct network models of the relations between genes  <cit> . data integration for inferring protein associations is advantageous for two main reasons. first, combining data from diverse studies and methods generates data sets of higher quality, and second, integration effectively captures different aspects of organism's biology  <cit> . further exploiting the topological properties of these networks, clustering algorithms have subsequently allowed proteins to be organized into discrete interconnected units known as functional modules representing either protein complexes or biochemical pathways  <cit> . in addition, integration of additional functional and comparative genomics data sets are further providing insights into how these modules and their components are co-ordinated and how they may have evolved  <cit> .

due to the scarcity of large-scale experimental assays aiming to study this important microorganism-host interaction, we chose to apply a systems-based computational approach to evaluate and organize our current knowledge about this complex biological process further. here, we first reconstruct an extensive and accurate functional network in s. meliloti by integrating the functional associations present in the two well known databases prolinks  <cit>  and string  <cit>  . these databases host functional linkage predictions obtained mainly by the four different computational genome context approaches described above. second, we present an analysis of the 'symbiosis interactome'  by first mapping proteins known to be involved in symbiosis on top of the s. meliloti network, and secondly, by extending this resulting network by means of a novel method, referred here as 'phenotypic profiling', which is further extended by incorporating data from the computational prediction of functional modules. this computational approach potentially revealed the complex interplay of functional interactions between proteins involved in s. meliloti-medicago symbiosis providing a way to expand the current understanding of symbiosis by enabling hypothesis generation based on our predicted network. finally, since one of the major advantages of constructing ppi networks is the ability to predict functions for proteins based on their association with well known proteins, we identified and tested the functions of candidate proteins and demonstrate that novel symbiosis interactome proteins can still be discovered despite the many decades of effort dedicated to study this important and complex biological process.

RESULTS
the s. meliloti network
an initial template functional network was generated from the confident interactions obtained by merging s. meliloti functional genomics data hosted by the prolinks  <cit>  and string  <cit>  databases  . these data were derived by using the following genome context methods: the phylogenetic profile method  <cit> , which uses the presence and absence of proteins across multiple genomes; the gene cluster method  <cit> , which uses genome proximity; rosetta stone  <cit> , which uses a gene fusion event in a second organism; and the gene neighbor method  <cit> , which uses both gene proximity and phylogenetic distribution. in this model, some linkages may represent direct physical protein-protein interactions  and other are functional associations  such as regulatory, genetic or metabolic associations. for the purpose of this study, we call these linkages functional interactions. therefore, our integrated network represents a description of functional coupling between genes in s. meliloti. we combined and integrated these data into two non-redundant datasets formed by the interactions present in both databases , consisting of  <dig>  proteins  involved in  <dig>  functional interactions, and the union of both data sets , consisting of  <dig>  proteins  involved in  <dig>  functional interactions. the original confidence scores of the interactions present in the two databases were integrated and re-scored, and the resulting networks were validated by calculating the area under roc curves  . the analysis showed that the intersection dataset has a higher accuracy  than the union dataset , and these two networks have bigger accuracies than any of the two independent databases. based on the results, unless otherwise noted, the intersection s. meliloti network was chosen for further analyses.

unfortunately, the lack of large-scale protein interaction data on s. meliloti make it impossible to validate experimentally this initial functional network. however, besides calculating aucs, we can also assess the quality of our preliminary intersection network by comparison with other available bacterial interaction datasets. we thus compared our predicted network with three other escherichia coli experimental interaction data sets: one small- and one large-scale datasets obtained from the database of interacting proteins   <cit> , and a third large-scale dataset recently published  <cit> . reciprocal best-hits s. meliloti orthologs of e. coli were used to predict s. meliloti interologs . the network similarity  between our network and the small-scale e. coli data was  <dig> %, significantly more than random networks   . the overlap between our network and the large-scale e. coli data was also significantly greater than expected by chance. furthermore, the ns of s. meliloti interactions versus small-scale is higher than versus large-scale assays, and the overlap with the small-scale data is similar to that for the e. coli large-scale data sets. the number of proteins shared between each other data sets was also comparable . the results show that the predicted network also has similar rates of true positives, false positive and negatives compared to other high-quality experimental networks further demonstrating its accuracy, and potential for hypothesis-generation and further experimental validation. nonetheless, for other type of analyses, such as accuracy prediction using only computational methods as reference datasets or network evolution studies, it might be more relevant to compare functional linkage data from two sources , rather than functional linkages of one organism and physical interaction of another.

the s. meliloti network demonstrated to have properties of scale-free network  like other biological networks, the internet and social networks  <cit> . most of the proteins had few interacting partners, where a subset of 'hubs' form a far greater number of connections. scale-free networks are predicted to be robust against random node removal but vulnerable to hub removal, a property that might be preserved across evolution  <cit> . furthermore, the average clustering coefficient  of the intersection network and its diameter or average shortest path length   suggests properties of a small-word network  typical of intracellular network in which the nodes are connected when they are involved in the same biological processes  <cit> .

prediction of functional modules
while defining accurate ppi networks is important, the ultimate goal of interactome analyses is to identify the functional modules in these networks, that is, proteins with related functions that tend to be clustered into highly interconnected subnetworks  <cit> , and to validate them. to assess if our network could also be clustered into such subnetworks, we first tested the capacity of the s. meliloti network to form groups of highly interconnected proteins, as indicated by its average clustering coefficient  . indeed, the acc of the s. meliloti network is much higher  than other large-scale e. coli  and h. pylori  <cit>   experimental, and random networks  suggesting the organization of the s. meliloti network in functional modules.

we further predicted the structure of these subnetworks by using the markov cluster  algorithm  <cit>  . mcl simulates random walks within graphs using the language of markov  matrices in order to partition a graph into highly connected clusters. this procedure works efficiently on large dense graphs  <cit> , and have the advantage over other methods such as pathblast  <cit>  that does not rely on conservation, therefore, being able to detect species-specific clusters. nonetheless, the performance of different clustering methods varies widely and usually drops for networks including noisy data. reliable criteria for evaluating the quality of the predicted modules are also lacking, making difficult to compare the results obtained by different clustering procedures, or to assess the biological relevance of the predicted modules. in our study we chose mcl because of our own experience and expertise and the fact that it has been applied to numerous key studies, showing mcl clustering as one of the state of the art methods for network clustering . the network was thus organized into  <dig> highly interconnected clusters containing three or more proteins . modules derived from our s. meliloti network appear to be much more functionally homogeneous  and produced similar distributions of module sizes  compared with the modules derived from random networks highlighting the non-random organization of proteins into modules.  <dig>  of these predicted clusters possessed a high proportion  of common clusters of orthologous groups  functional annotations  <cit>  . these results a priori suggest that most of these predicted clusters correspond to known functional modules in the form of protein complexes, metabolic or regulatory pathways. less functionally well defined modules  may correspond to multi-functional modules involved in pathway cross-talk . the remaining may represent novel functional modules  . to compute the significant of finding specific cogs functional modules, we generated  <dig>  random module sets of the same size, and counted the number of times we found each cogs module in each randomized network. for each module, a p-value was computed based on the distribution of the random sets  and our module predictions, therefore, representing the probability of seeing such modules at chance. this yielded  <dig> clusters  that were significantly enriched in cogs functional categories  , thus likely representing true functional modules. an additional  <dig> clusters had no cogs assignments  thus potentially representing novel functional modules  . finally, a total of  <dig> modules  were considered for further network analyses .

the symbiosis interactome network
we first undertook an exhaustive literature-search analysis to identify and compile a list of bacterial proteins whose role in the symbiosis rhizobium-legume has been widely studied . these proteins were classified as "classical-known" proteins in different categories according to the stage of symbiosis they are involved in.

to place the bacterial proteins involved in symbiosis  in biological context, the 'classical-known' proteins were used to generate a subnetwork of this complex biological process . a total of  <dig> s. meliloti 'classical-known' components were then used to anchor a subnetwork of functional interactions within the s. meliloti network . this yielded our 'initial symbiosis interactome network' formed by  <dig> proteins involved in  <dig> interactions. from the classical-known list the only gene names that did not map any of the two functional networks  were the genes nov, cps, vis and mos. these mostly represent either genes not known in s. meliloti or absent in the networks we generated. the resulting subnetwork was further extended based on the expectation that: first, the 'classical-known' components identified by our preliminary literature curation should remain central to the network, and secondly, neighbor proteins of those classical-known components in the s. meliloti network are more likely to participate in similar biological processes . this is consistent with the idea that interacting proteins in the network often function in the same pathway or protein complex and, therefore, close network neighbors of the classical-known proteins may be potentially involved in symbiosis. the preliminary symbiosis interactome set was then extended by allowing the addition of other proteins absent from the literature-search but predicted from our s. meliloti map. this was done through three extra rounds of node and edge additions: first, adding first-level indirect interactions , and mapping phenotype-specific information by mean of a novel method referred here as 'phenotypic profiling' . this was done by adding nodes with the following phenotypic profiles: "fn", proteins with homologs in other plant-nitrogen fixing organisms or s. meliloti-specific genes to account for genes potentially involved in symbiosis; "fnfl", proteins with homologs in other nitrogen fixation free-living organisms; and "cflfnpppssyo" and cfnpppssyo", the two most common phenotypic profiles obtained from the list of 'classical-known' proteins . table 3). this resulted in an extension of our initial symbiosis interactome map by adding both the proteins with these profiles and their linkages mapping the intersection s. meliloti network. we also allowed additional functional linkages formed by one component with a "fn" or "fnfl" profile, and the other component having any of the profiles mentioned above, since we hypothesized that these new linkages may represent novel interactions involved in symbiosis. we called this network 'the phenotypic network' formed by  <dig> proteins involved in  <dig> interactions. secondly, we mapped functional modules  <cit>   on top of the initial symbiosis interactome network to account for the completion of the functional modules the classical-known and other direct-neighbors proteins may participate in. we called this 'the module network' formed by  <dig> proteins involved in  <dig> interactions. finally, we added those 'classical-known' proteins that did not map the intersection s. meliloti network but did map 'the union s. meliloti network'  to extend the module network with the only condition that these proteins have to interact with themselves or with any of the proteins present in 'the module network'. the final 'symbiosis interactome network' contained a total of  <dig> nodes  and  <dig>  edges  . using the sigcleavage software  <cit>  we predicted the periplasmic location of all s. meliloti proteins . the accuracy of sigcleavage has been reported to be high and similar to other computational approaches, therefore the proteins predicted as periplasmic or cytoplasmic are likely to be of correct subcellular localization. interestingly, we found that  <dig>  of the  <dig> symbiosis interactome components have a predicted signal peptide . this is consistent with recent studies showing that a large number of periplasmic proteins are upregulated during symbiosis  <cit> . our results suggest a membrane location in a high proportion of network proteins and potential involvement in plant-microorganism interactions  <cit> . furthermore, our results show that the symbiosis interactome does not act in isolation, rather it involves many interactions formed by highly conserved proteins participating in many other well known cellular functions . in addition, like the intersection s. meliloti network, the acc of the the symbiosis interactome and its diameter suggests properties of a small-world and scale-free topology , highlighting both the complexity of this subnetwork, and its robustness to node attacking  <cit> .

prediction of functional annotation and stage of symbiosis
a major goal for many functional genomics and proteomics projects is the generation of accurate functional information for every gene and its product. although tremendous progress has been made through the application of such systematic studies, we found that within the s. meliloti proteome  <dig>   proteins were not assigned to a functional category according to cogs,  <dig>  have been assigned category s , and a further  <dig>  proteins have only been assigned into category 'r' . there has been recent progress in the development of novel methods of functional inference based on network connectivity  <cit> . the availability of our s. meliloti functional network thus provides a valuable resource for future studies aimed at predicting the functions of these high number of functionally 'orphan' proteins. in order to test the ability of our functional network to accurately infer reliable functional annotations and the stage of symbiosis where components of the symbiosis interactome may participate, we investigated a basic network-based approach based on functional category membership within predicted functional modules. to provide estimates of the accuracy of functional modules on inferring reliable functional annotations, we applied a cross-validation procedure to predict functional annotations . we were able to identify correct annotations for 87%–100% of the proteins contained in modules depending on the stringency of cogs category assignments . the accuracy of this type of functional module predictions has been found to be superior to other methods based merely on direct interacting partners . these findings highlight both the quality of the network and the predicted functional modules for hypothesis generation and future experimental validation.

based on these results, module  <dig>  for example, includes three proteins q92qs <dig> , q92qs <dig>  and q92vp <dig>  . the first two proteins are involved in m  while the third one has no cogs category assignment. we therefore predict the latter is potentially involved in this biological process. furthermore, interestingly, we correctly identify the stage of symbiosis for 92%–100% of the proteins contained in modules depending on stringency . again based on these promising results, module  <dig>  for example, includes two nodulation proteins: nodp <dig>  and nodq <dig> ; and the novel protein q92vh <dig>  , therefore, being tempting to speculate the participation of the latter in nodulation.

the conservation and evolution of the symbiosis interactome network
to investigate the conserved nature and evolution of our predicted symbiosis interactome network, the classical-known and novel symbiosis interactome components were classified into different node ages according to their phylogenetic distribution . a total of  <dig>  proteins were classified as old nodes  suggesting an old evolutionary origin for symbiosis  <cit> . furthermore, of the  <dig> classical-known proteins previously identified as components of the symbiosis interactome  <dig>  had homologs with distantly related genomes, indicating that these highly conserved proteins were a valid system from which to derive a model of symbiosis. in addition, highly conserved genes tend to involve essential genes  <cit> . since most of the genes known to be involved in symbiosis are highly conserved  this suggests that these genes could be essential for organism's survival or at least determinant for symbiosis. indeed, many of the novel genes predicted by our approach are missing from a s. meliloti mutant collection recently published  <cit>   suggesting an essential role for many of these novel genes. it has also been shown that nodes with high network connectivity tend to be essential nodes  <cit> . since most of the 'classical-known' and other novel symbiosis interactome proteins have multiple interacting partners  and  <dig>  proteins using the symbiosis interactome and the complete intersection s. meliloti network, respectively, interact with more than one protein in the network) , this suggests that these proteins may indeed have a key role in this important biological process. it follows from these findings that the number of interactions of the symbiosis interactome proteins are positively correlated with its conservation  supporting a model of evolution of the symbiosis interactome from core components by adding additional ones over time  <cit> .

experimental validation
examination of proteins in the s. meliloti network revealed that proteins involved in the same biological process tend to interact directly or being in close proximity to each other . for example,  <dig>  interactions , out of  <dig>  for which we could obtain cogs annotations for both interaction partners, have the same cogs annotation assigned to both protein partners at distance  <dig> , compared to 9%  of interactions with the same cogs annotation using  <dig> random networks, thus, providing an indirect measure of network accuracy . the symbiosis interactome network presented here, therefore, can be used to predict the biological role of unknown proteins based on the functions of their interacting partners, as demonstrated for other ppi networks  <cit> . therefore, a major goal of this study was to find novel components among many proteins of still unknown function in symbiosis. however, the validation of computational methods is a major issue in systems biology because only a small fraction of predictions can be tested experimentally with reasonable time and costs. many predictions can be then summarized as 'priority lists' of potential proteins involved in a biological process or with a particular function. to demonstrate the implication of these novel symbiosis components, and, at the same time, beginning to validate our symbiosis interactome map and our approach, we have studied the symbiotic properties of several s. meliloti strains mutated in novel genes, and provide the rest of predictions as "priority list" for future experimental validation. the selection of novel genes to be experimentally tested was guided by using four different network scenarios  : direct-high scenario, novel proteins supported by direct network evidence at high probability  by targeting protein etfb <dig> ; direct-low scenario, novel genes supported by direct network evidence at low probability by choosing protein q92tc <dig> ; direct-low module scenario, novel genes supported by direct evidence in functional modules at low probability  by targeting protein msba <dig>  ; and indirect-high module scenario, novel genes supported by indirect evidence in functional modules at high probability  by choosing protein q92p <dig>  .

m. sativa plants were inoculated with s. meliloti strains mutated at these genes, using s. meliloti  <dig> as control wild-type strain . we could not observe any difference in nodulation phenotypes between plants inoculated with the strain mutated in q92tc <dig> and the  <dig> control strain . on the other hand, differences in nodulation were observed when plants were inoculated with the other mutants. a 20–30% decrease in nodule number  was observed in plants inoculated with the strain mutated in etfb <dig>  and a 20–25% decrease in nodule number in plants inoculated with the mutant in q92p <dig>  these differences have been shown as biologically significant in other symbiosis studies  <cit> . in addition, it is important to notice that a high percentage of small nodules  was also observed in plants inoculated with etfb <dig> mutant. surprisingly, plants inoculated with the strain mutated in msba <dig> showed a 20–25% increase in nodule number when compared with control strain . in summary, these results clearly suggest that still there could be a number of non-described proteins involved in the rhizobium-legume interaction.

further functional predictions
based on our experimental results and the interactions of the novel targeted proteins, etfb <dig> acts in a module involved in energy production and conversion, and we predict it to be potentially involved in nitrogen fixation ; in fact, the high percentage of small non-fixing nodules induced by the strain mutated in this gene is consistent with this role. msba <dig> functions in a module together with ndva and exsa genes and is potentially involved in glucan synthesis; and q92p <dig> is functioning within a module involved in lipid transport and metabolism in coordination with nod genes, and may be potentially involved in the regulation of the first stages of nodule formation. these novel findings only represents hypothesis and still have to be analysed in more detail to shed more light on their precise biological role and mechanistic details but, nonetheless, the predictions highlighted here represent a tempting guide for further experimental validation.

discussion
the building of our final 'symbiosis interactome network' complemented our initial classical-known list in many different ways. first, we extended the initial set from  <dig> to  <dig> known components . second, we identified  <dig> potential novel symbiosis interactome components, representing ideal targets for further experimental validation . third, the incorporation of functional modules in the network provides additional information concerning the structure and functional organization of the symbiosis interactome. interestingly, functional modules tend to be formed by proteins involved in the same stage of symbiosis  suggesting that distinct symbiosis-stages are organized and coordinated as distinct functional modules. therefore, the incorporation of modules apart from providing another structural dimension to the symbiosis interactome also allows the prediction of both protein function and the symbiosis-stage a novel component may participate . this highlight both the quality of the network and the functional modules we predicted as guide for direct experimental validation. the final 'symbiosis interactome network', therefore, hosts the organization of the symbiosis interactome into functional interactions and modules, and constitutes the first attempt toward the representation of this complex biological process .

novel predicted components include many conserved proteins of unknown functions and others participating in a variety of cellular processes . novel proteins may represent false negatives components not identified by current experimental techniques perhaps because they are highly specialized components or maybe recruited to the symbiosis interactome under specific conditions that have escaped from detection and are therefore absent from our 'classical-known' preliminary data. our experimental results yielded a preliminary notable success  for predicting novel s. meliloti-m. sativa symbiotic components by using our computational approach. the results also provide tempting clues in regard to the predictive potential of our approach for hypothesis generation and guiding future experimental validation. for example, the two module-network scenarios presented here suggest high accuracy at predicting novel components and functional modules. furthermore, high scored interactions based on our probability scores are experimentally validated as opposed to low quality interactions for which we could not find any direct experimental evidence, at least not for the gene q92tc <dig> tested here. for this particular protein and the remaining  <dig> non-tested novel proteins, it is difficult to determine how many of them could be really involved in this complex biological process. it has been described that mutations in some bacterial nodulation genes do not have any influence in the symbiotic properties of the bacteria. for example, s. meliloti cells mutated in fixt gene are not affected in nodulation with m. sativa host plants  <cit> . the expression of this fixation gene is regulated by fixh protein, which is essential for nodulation . it has been suggested that some nodulation proteins could have a role in symbiosis when the expression of essential proteins is blocked. in the same manner, there are proteins that could be essential for nodulation in special situations, such as biotic and abiotic stress. in addition, there are proteins that could be involved in the symbiotic competitiveness of the rhizobial strain. finally, another alternative explanation is that the potential involvement of the gene q92tc <dig> in symbiosis might be compensated by other genes performing similar functions. indeed, a gene family analysis by using sequence similarity clustering through the mcl algorithm  <cit>   revealed an intriguing gene family expansion in this particular case , whereas in the other  <dig> mutated genes we do not observe such drastic family expansions ,  <dig>  and  <dig> gene family members, for the genes q92p <dig>  etfb <dig>  and msba <dig>  respectively). this interesting result suggests that other members of this large gene family might rescue its potential role in symbiosis through the establishment of backup circuits, such as occurs in other well studied model organisms  <cit> . there is evidence of direct backup compensation between gene duplicates with overlapping functions where one gene can cover for the loss of its paralogue, and sometimes these compensations occur only for certain functions under given conditions  <cit> . in all these situations, the single mutation of these genes in conventional laboratory conditions would not be the best experiment to assess their role in symbiosis. we believe this novel finding supports the model of network robustness through gene duplication  <cit> , and it also has very interesting implications regarding the selection of the right candidate genes and experimental method in future validation studies.

while the functional network presented here provides valuable clues about the components of the bacterial symbiosis interactome, the main limitation of our study is the lack of experimental information on ppis which made us to consider as input only computationally derived functional genomics data. integration of computational approaches with recently published  <cit>  and future experimental interaction data would likely improve the quality of our network and the prediction of novel components. this can be done by using bayesian or probabilistic models shown to result in accurate confidence scoring systems . furthermore, although we believe we have been very flexible by allowing interactions between proteins with potential phenotypic profiles and not directly interacting with the giant-central network component, our symbiosis interactome network can still serve as a platform to add other interactions and components potentially involved in symbiosis. for example, we can choose other proteins with other interesting phenotypic profiles to extend our network such as those profiles showing homologs in other symbionts and/or pathogenic species since these bacteria often use the same core molecular mechanism to maintain their associations with hosts  <cit> . future analyses will also include further network extensions based on recently characterized symbiosis components  <cit> , inclusion of other interesting phenotypic profiles , a larger-scale experimental validation of the novel components predicted to be involved in symbiosis, and further analyses of the components and pathways involved in host-microbe, and host  interactions. finally, through an iterative process, novel symbiosis interactome components once experimentally confirmed, can be then added to the known set, potentially increasing the list of novel components and finally revealing the complete picture of the symbiosis interactome network.

CONCLUSIONS
the essential contribution of symbiosis to understand host-microbe interactions underscores the importance of further studying the structure and organization of the symbiosis interactome. here we presented a novel 'systems-based model' that provided for the very first time new insights into the functional organization of the s. meliloti symbiosis interactome and the necessary framework on which to build, in an iterative manner, to further our understanding of symbiosis. we have identified  <dig> potential novel symbiosis components, and have demonstrated experimentally the participation of novel proteins involved in this important process. these novel proteins might not be essential for symbiosis but still determinant for the microbe-plant interaction since most of the essential components for this process have been described through decades of effort. understanding the biology of this important model organism is essential not only for having a network view of how this biological process functions at a molecular level but also for the development of anti-microbial drugs since many of the proteins and modules involved in bacterial-symbiosis may be conserved, and thus, performing similar functions, in other microbial pathogens  <cit> . furthermore, we can use our network as a template to derive other symbiosis interactome networks for other bacteria-related species which is particularly important given the difficulty and cost of obtaining high throughput screens. those maps should provide an useful starting point for predicting functional interactions and modules, and the function of unknown proteins. it remain to be seen which of these interactions and components do indeed occur and what is the specific role they play in each of these organisms. we believe that this model adds a new view and dimension to our understanding of host-microbe interactions, and can be extended to study other complex biological processes such as those involved in diseases.

