BACKGROUND
a major challenge of the combined fields of ecological and evolutionary parasitology is to understand the determinants of variation in parasitism between closely related host species  <cit> . some of the proposed determinants include size of a host species’ geographic distribution  <cit> , host size  <cit> , taxonomic relatedness of host species  <cit>  and habitat requirements of both hosts and parasites  <cit> . most of the research in this area has been done on vertebrate hosts . a question remains as to whether it is possible to extrapolate findings of studies on vertebrates and their parasites to similar problems with invertebrate host species and their parasites.

some generalities can be drawn from studies on parasitism of vertebrates as a guide to explorations of parasitism of invertebrate hosts. for example, host species with a greater geographic range may come into contact with infective stages of more parasite species and therefore have higher diversity of parasites or higher parasitism levels  <cit> . alternatively, hosts with larger geographic areas might evolve more generalized immune responses and therefore have fewer parasites in local areas . using damselflies and gregarines, mlynarek et al.  <cit>  demonstrated that in three out of seven species pairs, one host species had a statistically higher prevalence of gregarines, when controlling for collecting site. in two of those species comparisons, the sibling species with the smaller geographic distribution had higher prevalence; in the latter comparison, the species with the larger geographic distribution had the higher prevalence. similarly, in two out of seven species pairs, the species that had a smaller geographic distribution had a statistically higher gregarine intensity  <cit> .

other studies with vertebrates and their parasites have demonstrated that host geographic distribution size can be related to parasite species richness  <cit> . the recurrent relation between host geographical range and parasite species diversity has been explained in part by increased chance of intense localized encounters between interacting species with the increasing range size of the host species  <cit> . although host species with larger geographic distributions are expected to have more parasite species than closely related host species with smaller geographic ranges  <cit> , it is unknown whether such patterns are observed often at given sites. species with larger geographical ranges typically occupy more sites and might be subjected to more studies: a potential problem recognized early  <cit> .

several studies have looked at relationships between host and/or habitat characteristics and parasitism levels in insect host-invertebrate parasite associations. durrer and schmid-hempel  <cit>  studied regional and local abundance of bumblebees with respect to external and internal parasite load and diversity. those researchers found that there was a positive correlation with parasite load and colony size, and also that parasite diversity correlated positively with regional distribution of hosts, but host body size did not affect any of the measures. jaenike and perlman  <cit>  reviewed the role of nematode parasites on mycophagous drosophila behaviour, reproduction and community structure. their work demonstrated that parasitism facilitates co-existence between closely related hosts and reduces fertility in female drosophila. one other study compares parasitism levels explicitly between species differing in geographical representation, but there the focus is on gregarine parasites of calopterygid damselflies in allopatric versus sympatric associations  <cit> .

for various reasons, the extent to which parasitism and parasite diversity varies as a function of geographic range can be explored effectively using coenagrionid damselflies and arrenurus water mites. first, there is interspecific variation in ecological and evolutionary traits in closely related damselfly host species . second, it is known that there are several generalist species among mites  <cit> . third, arrenurus infection has been demonstrated to vary between closely related lestid host species in different habitats  <cit>  and between more distantly related host species in the same habitat  <cit> . fourth, arrenurus water mites first parasitize teneral adults and are easily recognized as unengorged but live, unengorged and resisted, and engorged external parasites. importantly, these mites remain on one host for the duration of their parasitic life stage  <cit> . larval arrenurus embed their mouthparts into the teneral cuticle of their host and secrete a stylostome or feeding tube. mites remain usually on the ventral side of the thorax, between the legs, or the last abdominal segments  <cit> . once the host returns to a water body to mate and/or lay eggs, the water mite detaches and falls into the water to continue its life cycle. different species of water mite are also known to inhabit different types of water bodies  <cit> , setting the stage for particular associations to be habitat specific.

the objectives of this study were several-fold. first, we tested whether closely-related host species were differentially infected by water mites. we then determined if the relative size of geographical distribution of sibling host species was associated with relative parasitism levels and moreover whether the occasional patterns observed between gregarines and damselflies documented in mlynarek et al.  <cit>  was also observed when considering ectoparasitic mites. more specifically, we were testing whether host species with smaller geographic distribution have higher levels of ectoparasitism, by analogy. we then assessed whether closely-related host species were infected by the same putative arrenurus species using molecular techniques for parasite identification thereby making comparisons of parasitism between sibling host species more direct. related to this objective, we were interested in whether the host species with higher measures of parasitism were also those with greater numbers of parasite species. in addressing these objectives, we also examined the extent to which arrenurus water mite species show habitat or host species preferences. in summary, we were interested in whether a host species geographical distribution influenced measures of ectoparasitism and whether the patterns were repeatable or potentially affected by moderator variables .

RESULTS
measures of general arrenurus parasitism
in total,  <dig> damselflies were collected across four sites in southeastern ontario, within a 20-km radius of the queen’s university biological station .

n represents the number of individuals of each species sampled. geographic range of the host is provided. confidence limits for prevalence and intensity are shown respectively.

prevalence of arrenurus varied considerably between host species and species pairs . overall prevalence varied between 4% in argia moesta and 54% in enallagma vesperum. both of those species were collected from lake opinicon. significant or near significant differences in prevalence between species in sibling species pairs were found in two of five comparisons. in particular, there was a significant difference in prevalence between the species of enallagma   where 54% of enallagma vesperum individuals were infected compared to 27% of e. signatum. ischnura posita had a prevalence of 5% whereas i. verticalis had a prevalence of 17%. the difference in prevalence in this species pair was close to significant . in comparison, no significant differences in prevalence were found for argia, enallagma subgenus enallagma and nehalennia .

the data on mean intensity of infection told a similar story. overall, the minimum mean intensity was  <dig>  in a. moesta and the maximum was  <dig>  in enallagma ebrium . in enallagma , enallagma boreale was infected by an average of  <dig>  mites per infected host individual, but e. ebrium was infected by an average of  <dig>  mites per individual . in argia, enallagma , ischnura and nehalennia no significant differences in intensity were found between the species .

at least two species pairs showed no differences in either prevalence or mean intensity of infection and yet sibling species differed in geographical distribution . the other three species pairs had a significant or near significant difference in prevalence or a significant difference in intensity. in enallagma , e. vesperum had significantly higher prevalence of parasitism: this species has the smaller geographic distribution of the pair . similarly, in enallagma , e. ebrium had significantly higher intensity of parasitism; e. ebrium is less widely distributed  than e. boreale . in ischnura, i. verticalis has both nearly significant higher prevalence of water mite infection and larger geographic distribution than i. posita . thus in 60% of cases, sibling host species with differences in size of geographic distribution differed in either prevalence or intensity of parasitism, but in those cases the actual differences are inconsistently related to relative size of the pair member’s geographic distribution.

dna barcoding
coi was amplified from  <dig> water mites, with  <dig> characters in total,  <dig> constant,  <dig> parsimony-uninformative and  <dig> parsimony-informative. mean base pair frequencies  were found to be homogenous across all specimens .

bayesian inference  of the coi dataset was performed for  <dig> million generations, producing  <dig> trees , which were summarized in a majority rule consensus tree  . the bi consensus tree was well supported, with most nodes having moderate to high posterior probabilities and jackknife support . the ingroup are divided into nine well-supported clades, hereafter referred to as otu . average interspecies divergence was 15% ± <dig>  , and average intraspecies divergence was  <dig> % ± <dig>  . average divergence between otu  <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> was 9% ± <dig>  divergence between otu  <dig> and  <dig> was 6% ± <dig> , between  <dig> and  <dig> was 10% ± <dig> , and species  <dig> and  <dig> show 8% ± <dig>  divergence. considering the high level of divergence between otu and the low divergence within each otu, as well as the strong support for each otu in the phylogenetic reconstruction, it appears that each otu may be distinct. however, we do not advocate the notion that these are new species, distinguishing between species using pairwise distances from a fragment of a single gene is not a reliable taxonomic approach  <cit> .

based on our bayesian tree , we found in argia that there are three arrenurus otus that infect argia moesta and a. violaceae. otu  <dig> is specific to a. violaceae and otu  <dig> to a. moesta . each of these otus is associated with a single host species, therefore we consider them to be candidates for specialist parasites. otu  <dig> was collected both a. moesta and a. violaceae, and also two other enallagma species  from lake opinicon indicating that this mite has a broad host species spectra . in addition, there is one record of this mite otu present on ischnura verticalis in a marsh habitat. interestingly, this broad host generalist was the only otu collected from e. vesperum . thus, we discovered that mites of two host species pairs  shared a mite species .

similarly, the two enallagma  host species were both infected by two closely related otus . these otus are distinct, based on sequence divergence and branch support, but are closely related to one another . therefore these two otus were collected from at least these two species of damselflies. however, we could not determine whether these two parasite species were present on other host species. again, it appears that sibling species share mite species. ischnura is an interesting species pair in that four different otus have been collected from these hosts, despite the limited sampling. otu  <dig> and  <dig> were collected from both ischnura species again supporting sharing of parasites. but otu  <dig>  the aforementioned generalist on damselfly host species in the lake, was found on one ischnura verticalis individual from a marsh inlet site. additionally, otu  <dig>  infecting i. posita is shared with enallagma  damselfly hosts from a different marsh. finally, both nehalennia species collected in the bog are infected by otu  <dig>  <cit> . the results show that the sharing of mite species by sibling species of damselflies  is a common occurrence . species richness and composition within the host species pair did not differ  as much as between species pairs where the bray-curtis dissimilarity index ranged between  <dig> - <dig> . the dissimilarity index on  <dig>  was determined between a. violaceae and e. vesperum, which share water mite otus . figure  <dig> is also annotated with whether or not the host and mites were collected from a lake, marsh or bog. it appears that mite species are restricted to one type of habitat but this is not a “hard and fast” rule.

discussion
relative geographic distribution size did predict relative prevalence of parasitism in some species pairs, but not reliably across all species pairs. to reiterate, there were significant differences in prevalence for enallagma  species pair where the less widespread species had a higher prevalence of arrenurus spp. in one instance  did the more widespread host species, i. verticalis, have significantly higher intensity of arrenurus than the more geographically restricted host species i. posita. even referring to these two comparisons, geographic distribution is not a reliable predictor of parasitism in these types of insect host-invertebrate parasite associations. across all other species pairs, differences in geographic distribution were evident, but no species differences is relative prevalence of ectoparasitism was observed. and furthermore, in only in the enallagma  species pair, did the less widespread species have a higher mean intensity of infection by arrenurus than the more widespread enallagma species. across all other species pairs, there were no species differences in mean intensity of mite parasitism.

in comparison to the findings in this study, tella et al.  <cit>  tested other factors that could potentially mask the effect of host geographic distribution such as sampling effort, vector availability and embryonic development time, but the researchers concluded that hematozoan prevalence appears determined by host geographic distribution. mlynarek et al.  <cit>  also reported that measures of gregarine parasitism were higher in the less widespread species pair in four out of the seven damselfly species pairs. additional comparisons with this study demonstrate that the species pairs respond differently, depending on the type of parasite studied. for example, in mlynarek et al.  <cit> ischnura posita had a significantly higher prevalence of gregarines than its more widespread counterpart, ischnura verticalis. in this study, ischnura verticalis has a near significant higher prevalence of arrenurus water mites than i. posita. relative size of a host’s geographic distribution, therefore, can have different or no effect on relative parasitism, depending on the type of parasite studied.

based further on mlynarek et al.  <cit>  and this study,  <dig> species comparisons were done with respect to prevalence or intensity of either gregarines or mites. in half of the  <dig> species pair comparisons, there were statistical differences between species in either or both prevalence and intensity of either gregarine or mite infections. in four of these cases, the less widespread host species had higher prevalence and/or intensity of the parasite of interest whereas in the two remaining cases, it was the more widely distributed host with the higher parasite levels . in one case, enallagma , there were significant differences in both prevalence of mites and prevalence of gregarines whereby the less widespread host had higher prevalence of parasites. stated another way, in four  of the seven comparisons involving gregarines and in three  of the five comparisons involving mites, closely related host species differed in one or more measures of parasitism. in the remaining 40% of the cases, the closely related species did not differ in measures of parasitism despite showing differences in geographical range. further, in one  of four comparisons involving significant differences in gregarines, it was the more widely distributed host that had higher gregarine prevalence. a similar result was found where one  of three comparisons  involving significant differences in mite intensities, was attributed to the species with the greater geographic range.

in this study, using coi barcodes, there are nine otus within arrenurus infecting the ten damselfly species. arrenurus otu  <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> appear specialized on a specific damselfly host species , but sampling was limited. otu  <dig> infects four host species in lakes. the arrenurus otus  <dig> , <dig>  and  <dig>  collected in the marsh and bog, infect at least two species each. water mites appear affiliated with a habitat and not so much specialized on phylogenetically related host species. similarly to krasnov et al.  <cit> , habitat was a strong factor influencing flea parasitism on rodents in the negev desert. as well, in our case and that of krasnov et al.  <cit> , both host species’ and habitat characteristics are important in determining parasite species composition. except for otu  <dig>  collected from an i. verticalis host, all the water mites are restricted to one particular habitat type. a potential reason could be that this i. verticalis individual was a vagrant into the marsh where it was collected, or that this mite is found in many habitats, mostly in lakes and rarely in others. the important point is that comparisons of parasitism between sibling species based on broad taxonomic identification of the parasites is somewhat permitted because all sibling host species share at least one mite species. if there was some strong interaction between a host geographic range and the intensity of interactions with given parasite species, it should be detected using even broad taxonomic comparisons, where only mites are being compared and not every parasite is identified to species.

there is a different pattern when comparing a group of parasites without considering broad taxonomic identification. when considering parasite species richness, it is expected that the more widespread hosts have a higher richness of parasite species  <cit> . in cricetid rodents, host geographic distribution was strongly associated with demodex mite species richness  <cit> . in waterfowl, gregory  <cit>  demonstrated a clear positive relationship between host geographic range and parasite species richness, using cross-species comparisons. in european fresh-water fish, simková et al.  <cit>  concluded that host geographic distribution influenced parasite species richness through its effect on host local abundance and occurrence. their research was based on  <dig> fish host species and a comprehensive assessment of internal and external parasites. in our case, we did not see this occurring but only can report on nine mite species across five pairs of damselfly host species. notwithstanding, host species in each pair have a comparable number of mite species infesting them, even though certain host species might have species-specific parasites. the only exception in our study was enallagma  species pair where the more widespread e. signatum has two arrenurus otus  whereas e. vesperum, the more restricted species, is only infected by one arrenurus otu. even here, the conclusion that one host species has a higher parasite species diversity has to be met with scepticism, especially given that, when controlling for site, only one out of six instances does the more widespread species show this tendency toward higher parasite species richness.

CONCLUSIONS
in this study, we documented host- parasite associations in multiple species pairs. we observed that there appear to be varying degrees of specificity in host range of arrenurus mites. in conjunction with the findings of mlynarek et al.  <cit>  on internal parasites of damselflies, our findings suggest that host species’ geographic distribution size does not reliably explain relative species differences in measures of parasitism. water mites species found in one type of habitat tend not to be present in another type of habitat but can parasitize few to many host species found in a habitat. more work is needed to further elucidate arrenurus species boundaries, using additional molecular markers or rearing larvae for adult identification. further work is needed on determining host species use before we can test the importance of other ecological factors  on past and ongoing evolution of these associations.

