BACKGROUND
functional connectivity between brain areas determines the way the brain processes information. several studies  suggest that sleep is important for the activity and recruitment of different brain areas to form networks for optimal information processing during the wake state; yet the differential sensitivity of brain areas to the effects of sleep and conversely, sleep deprivation, have hardly been addressed. we here report findings of regionally specific and frequency-dependent effects of sleep deprivation on brain functional networks.

functional mri  studies have shown that correlations between activity of frontal and posterior areas of the default mode network , a resting state network that is suppressed during a task, are attenuated during deep sleep  <cit> . gujar et al.  <cit>  showed that sleep loss triggers an imbalance in the activation of midline posterior and anterior brain regions of the dmn during subsequent wake. the magnitude of this imbalance was related to the amount of prior sleep of the subjects. shao et al.  <cit>  showed that connectivity with subcortical areas is also affected by sleep deprivation; functional connectivity between the thalamus and frontal and temporal gyri was decreased after sleep deprivation. this implies that sleep affects activity and  functional connectivity between brain areas during rest and that specific brain areas show vulnerability to the effect of sleep deprivation.

to capture network dynamics of brain functioning, graph theory offers an insightful framework. watts and strogatz  <cit>  showed that complex  networks could be described using only two parameters. the first is a measure of local functional interconnectedness, called the clustering coefficient c. the second, termed path length , describes global functional connectivity of the network . these parameters are computed for all nodes in the network and subsequently averaged to determine the functional connectivity of the overall network. networks can range between highly ordered networks  and random networks . it has been suggested that a small world network, which is in between an ordered and a random network, is optimal for synchronizing neural activity between brain regions . especially electroencephalography  and magnetoencephalography  are methods well-suited for graph theory-based investigations of the human brain, owing to their high time resolution that allows to capture ongoing brain dynamics. using graph theoretical analysis, ferri et al.  <cit>  have shown that the functional connectivity of the brain as measured using eeg during sleep becomes more similar to the organization of a small-world network for frequencies < 15 hz. in addition, we have shown  <cit>  that after sleep deprivation, the overall brain network is more random as compared to after sleep. both studies support the idea that sleep is required to optimize the brain functional connectivity for processing information the following day  <cit> . it remains incompletely understood, however, whether sleep facilitates optimal functional connectivity equally across different brain areas: regional sensitivity of the functional brain network to sleep deprivation may underlie specific consequences for cognitive functioning. we acquired high-density eeg in a within-subject study of the effects of sleep vs. sleep deprivation on subsequent waking brain activity . we adapted graph theoretical analysis to compute c and l for each node in the network individually and applied a cluster analysis to determine regional changes in functional connectivity. to our knowledge, this is the first study to assess topographical changes in functional connectivity at the individual electrode level after sleep deprivation using graph theory.figure  <dig> 
clustering coefficient and path length. the circles represent brain areas  and the lines between the circles represent the connections between nodes . it takes one step to go from node x to node a, two steps to go from node x to node d etc. the average path length of node x is therefore 1 + 1 + 1 + 2 + 3 +  <dig> /6 =  <dig> . node x is directly connected to node a, b and c  the clustering coefficient  is therefore 2/3 =  <dig> .
schematic depiction of the protocol. after a night of normal sleep or total sleep deprivation , subjects underwent a protocol of repeated resting-state  measurements using high-density 61-channel eeg. each rs block consisted of  <dig> alternating 1-minute eyes-open  or eyes-closed  measurements.



RESULTS
graph analysis
in the eyes-closed condition, the distribution of the sleep deprivation-induced changes  in cluster coefficient c and path length l was robust across different values of degree k . a significant decrease in c was exclusively found at a prefrontal location in the alpha frequency band . l was significantly increased frontally only in the theta frequency band . these significant changes were found regardless of k . c was significantly increased posteriorly in the beta frequency range , but only for k =  <dig>  l was decreased centrally in the beta range only for k =  <dig> . no other significant changes were detected in the delta, beta or gamma frequency bands . sleep deprivation did not significantly affect connectivity parameters in any of the frequency bands  during in the eyes-open condition .figure  <dig> 
local integration. the difference in distribution of clustering coefficient  during resting wakefulness following sleep deprivation as compared to wakefulness following a normal night of sleep. for all frequencies, the topographies show the uncorrected t-values plotted on the scalp for different values of k . thick black dots indicate electrodes belonging to significant clusters  in the eyes closed resting state. note that there is a consistent frontal significant decrease in c in the alpha frequency band.
global integration. the difference in distribution of path length  during resting wakefulness following sleep deprivation as compared to wakefulness following a normal night of sleep. for all frequencies, the topographies show the uncorrected t-values plotted on the scalp for different values of k . thick black dots indicate electrodes belonging to significant clusters  in the eyes closed resting state. note that there is a consistent frontal significant increase in l in the theta frequency band.



volume conduction effects
mediation analysis was applied to evaluate whether the regional changes in alpha and theta connectivity , respectively) could be secondary to regional changes in alpha and theta power. the sobel test of mediation was done for all electrodes within the significant clusters for k =  <dig> . power spectral density was computed for these electrodes and entered as a mediator variable in the mediation regression models, as described in the method section. a sleep deprivation-induced decrease in alpha power partially mediated sleep deprivation-induced changes in alpha connectivity , β with psd − <dig>  , sobel test z-score = − <dig>  ). this mediation effect was only partial since sleep deprivation remained a significant predictor of the cluster coefficient in the alpha frequency band in a multiple regression model that included both power and sleep deprivation as regressors to predict connectivity parameters. a sleep deprivation-induced increase in theta power did not mediate sleep deprivation-induced changes in theta connectivity since adding psd to the regression model with sleep deprivation as a predictor of connectivity parameter l did not diminish its effect on theta connectivity , β with psd  <dig>  ).

main findings and implications
our findings indicate that total sleep deprivation alters brain functional connectivity in a topographically specific way. sleep deprivation most prominently affected functional connectivity involving electrodes overlying prefrontal areas. in the alpha frequency band cluster coefficient c, a measure of local functional interconnectedness, and in the theta frequency band path length , a measure of global functional connectivity, were significantly decreased and increased, respectively, in a cluster overlying the prefrontal cortex. this was consistent across different degree levels . the changes in path length for the theta frequency band were not secondary to changes in power, making it unlikely that this result was caused by volume conduction. the changes in the cluster coefficient in the alpha frequency band are at least partially independent of changes in power. interestingly, our results indicate that the effects of sleep deprivation on the contribution of frontal areas to the brain network differ depending on frequency band: for interactions in the alpha frequency range, the network showed regionally reduced clustering; in addition, interactions in the theta frequency range showed that the network was characterized by higher path length after sleep deprivation. our findings are in agreement with fmri studies showing an imbalance in the activation of posterior versus anterior brain regions  <cit>  of the default mode network  after sleep deprivation. it should be noted that these studies derived dmn activity from task related deactivation, rather than examining it during a resting state. even though this is an important difference with our study, together these results point out that prefrontal brain regions are affected by sleep deprivation. an advantage of our method, in comparison with fmri based studies, is the possibility of detecting more subtle and differential changes depending on frequency band; indeed, we show different results in the alpha and theta frequency band, that both indicate reductions in local and global efficacy, respectively, of the frontal regions as part of the network.

previous research  <cit>  has shown that the medial prefrontal cortex is one of the hubs in the dmn to which all other parts of the dmn are correlated. the finding of the current study shows parallels with studies revealing that especially prefrontal functions such as working memory  <cit> , inhibition  <cit>  and emotion regulation  <cit>  suffer from sleep deprivation. this raises the question whether switching between the intrinsically driven ‘resting’ state and the extrinsically driven ‘active’ state is mediated by the prefrontal cortex and whether this mediation in part depends on the effects of sleep. although we cannot infer this based on our results, previous studies  <cit>  suggest that this is indeed the case, showing that a network based on the anterior prefrontal cortex, the so-called ‘fronto-parietal control network’, acts as a mediator between two other brain networks, i.e. the default mode brain network and competing networks supporting externally driven cognition .

significant differences in prefrontal functional connectivity after sleep deprivation relative to ns were selectively visible in the alpha and theta frequency band. this is partly in agreement with the study by koenis et al.  <cit>  who showed that global network properties, defined by graph theory, in the alpha, theta and gamma band moved to a more random network after sleep deprivation compared to after sleep. note that while koenis et al.  <cit>  found an overall decrease in path length in the theta frequency band, in this study we found an increase in path length in electrodes covering prefrontal locations. the difference between these results is due to the fact that, in case of the study of koenis et al.  <cit> , a local increase of a graph theoretical parameter will remain undetected when there is an overall decrease in the same graph theoretical parameter. this implies that studying topographical changes in connectivity in addition to global connectivity offers a more refined view of changes in network properties.

previous research has shown that alpha and theta power in the wake eeg are decreased and increased, respectively, after sleep deprivation . moreover, power in these frequency bands correlated with activity of the fmri dmn . instead of eeg power at electrode level, which reflects locally synchronized neural activity, we studied synchronization between eeg electrodes, representing interactions between underlying sources, composed of groups of neurons. we found significant changes in the eyes closed condition only, but do not want to exclude the possibility of more subtle effects of sleep deprivation on functional connectivity in the eyes open condition that did not reach significance in our study.

we can only speculate which aspect of sleep plays a role in maintenance of functional connectivity of the prefrontal cortex since we did not record sleep eeg of the subjects in our experiment. the most likely candidate is nrem sleep since it seems to have a restorative effect on prefrontal areas  <cit> . for example, cerebral blood flow is particularly low in this area during nrem sleep  <cit> . furthermore, a study by mander et al.  <cit>  showed that an increase in delta band power during recovery sleep  improved inhibitory performance during a go/nogo task through an effect on the prefrontal cortex. the restorative function of slow wave sleep may not be limited to task-related brain activity  <cit>  but may also be of importance for resting state activity; the occurrence of slow waves has been related to brain regions comprising parts of the default mode network  <cit> . further support for a beneficial effect of especially nrem sleep on prefrontal functioning is given by the findings that boosting of prefrontal slow waves by means of transcranial direct current stimulation  improves declarative memory, while suppressing them interferes with brain activation necessary for proper memory formation  <cit> .

further studies are needed to evaluate the intriguing possibility that nrem sleep is of importance in maintaining proper connectivity of the prefrontal cortex within the resting state network, and in maintaining the ability for fast ‘switching’ between intrinsically and extrinsically driven brain states.

limitations
regarding the small world network parameters, only an unweighted c and l  was computed. because network parameters change depending on the threshold used for calculating c and l, it is difficult to determine which threshold k would lead to the ‘true’ representation of the network. in this study, however, different values of k were used as an attempt to overcome this problem and we only considered results robust when they appeared irrespective of k.

a further note of caution concerns the age range of the study group: as the age of participants spanned from 20– <dig> years of age, the findings represent those of healthy young brains and do not necessarily extrapolate to those of younger or older age groups.

CONCLUSIONS
in summary, this study showed that total sleep deprivation changes the structure of neural networks in prefrontal brain regions during the eyes closed resting state, as measured with eeg, possibly resulting in a network that is driven towards a less optimal state for information processing . furthermore, we have shown that graph theory can be adapted to study local changes in network characteristics in addition to its usual application of quantifying global network properties only. one function of sleep may be to homeostatically regulate connectivity of especially prefrontal brain networks, allowing for optimal cognitive performance.figure  <dig> 
location of the electrodes showing significant changes in graph parameters. significant electrodes are plotted on the scalp for a representative value of k . only for nodes overlying the prefrontal cortex, sleep deprivation significantly attenuates the clustering coefficient in the alpha band and increases path length in the theta band.



