BACKGROUND
transcription anti-termination is a regulatory mechanism commonly encountered in all lineages within the bacterial kingdom . in transcription anti-termination, the regulation of transcription occurs after the initiation of rna synthesis, but before transcription of the coding region. the mechanism of anti-termination involves a structural change in the rna transcript that is dependent on the interaction of the transcript with, for instance, a regulatory protein  <cit> , a trna  <cit>  or a metabolite  <cit> . the structural elements that compose these anti-terminators are encoded by conserved sequences on the dna and can be found by searches for the related sequence motifs in upstream regions of regulated genes  <cit> .

a well-studied anti-termination element is the so-called t-box. t-box anti-termination is an elegant and sensitive mechanism by which many bacteria maintain constant levels of trna charged with amino acids  <cit> . when there is a sufficient supply of charged trna in a cell, the t-box folds into a terminator structure, thereby blocking further transcription. transcription can only proceed upon conversion into an anti-terminator structure, which is induced by binding of a highly conserved 5'-ncca-3' of the uncharged trna with a conserved '5-uggn-3' sequence in the t-box  <cit> . although anti-terminator formation involves contacts between many nucleotides, the specificity of the interaction seems largely dependent on the interaction of a tri-nucleotide -codon in the so-called specifier loop of the t-box with the anti-codon of an amino acid-specific trna  <cit> . the structural and kinetic details of this interaction have been well-studied  <cit> . the appropriate assignment of the specifier codon has been used previously to improve the functional annotation of various genes located downstream of the t-box  <cit> . the t-box controlled genes identified thus far encode functionalities that reflect perfectly the pivotal role of uncharged trnas in the regulatory mechanism. these functionalities include not only trna ligation, but also amino acid biosynthesis and transport  <cit> . the encoded proteins are involved in modulation of the level of uncharged trna in the cell, either directly by charging the corresponding trna with its cognate amino acid or indirectly by controlling the intracellular concentration of the specific amino acid.

to date, t-boxes have been identified predominantly in the genomes of bacterial species of the phyla firmicutes  and actinobacteria  <cit> , although anti-termination systems have been argued to be among the oldest regulatory systems in bacteria because of their independence of regulatory proteins  <cit> . to investigate this further, we have explored the occurrence of t-boxes in all sequenced prokaryotic genomes. to circumvent potential differences between t-box systems in different bacterial lineages, an iterative hmm-based identification search was performed using the best conserved region of the t-box sequence. species- and amino acid-specific t-box regulation networks were reconstructed. most importantly, the acquired knowledge on amino acid specificity could be used to propose an improved functional annotation for many t-box controlled genes and to shed light on the evolution of the regulatory element itself.

RESULTS
i) a comprehensive collection of t-boxes
the analysis of the taxonomic and functional distribution of t-boxes was started by de novo identification of t-box motif characteristics. conserved nucleotide sequence motifs upstream of trna-ligase encoding genes in species of the phylum firmicutes were recovered and used to identify t-boxes located at other positions in the same genome as well as in the genomes of other species . these searches showed that a t-box could be specified best by a  <dig> nt motif that is extremely well-conserved and positioned in the 3'-region of the terminator/anti-terminator loop . in fact, this motif is known as 'the t-box sequence' since its discovery  <cit> . later it was recognized that this conserved region belongs to a larger conserved rna structure known as the t-box element  <cit> . this element contains four other highly conserved regions .

the initial search showed prominent variations in the number of t-boxes per genome between different classes of the phylum firmicutes and between different phyla. therefore, additional searches with phylum-specific and class-specific t-box hmms were performed, but generally did not yield novel hits. only in the case of the clostridia a limited number of  <dig> additional t-boxes were identified. further iterations did not expand the dataset. visual inspection of the upstream regions of all genes encoding a t-rna ligase in the firmicutes indicated that indeed all those regions that contain the distinctive t-box motifs were identified by our algorithm. a comparison of the number of t-boxes identified by us for a representative set of organisms with the number obtained using the rfam t-box model  <cit>  proved that our recovery procedure was very efficient .

identification of the specifier codon and amino acid specificity
although t-boxes were readily identified, it was more difficult to define their amino acid specificity. to that end, the phylogeny of homologous genes preceded by a t-box from different species was determined and the upstream regions corresponding to each orthologous group were aligned. in all the cases of t-boxes for which the specifier codon had been identified experimentally  <cit> , we observed that the specifier codon aligned perfectly within the related orthologous sequences. in fact, this was true for almost all orthologous groups of sequences. moreover, most of the alignments could easily be clustered by eye into larger groups for which the specifier codon remained directly apparent from the alignment. the resulting alignments and the annotation of the specifier codon can be found at  <cit> . nevertheless, there remained a few less clear cases. for some  a secondary structure prediction could be used to provide the additional information required to define the specifier codon in the specifier loop  <cit> . taken together, a specifier codon could be identified directly for over 90% of the identified t-boxes.

codon usage in the specifier codon
most amino acids are encoded by multiple codons. leu for instance, is encoded by six different codons . remarkably, the t-boxes had a conserved preference for certain codons within as well as between species . evaluation of these preferences showed that they complied almost perfectly with the rules observed by elf et al. for the codon usage by e. coli  <cit> . in an elegant study these authors analyzed the dependence of the charging of various codon-specific trnas on the use of various codons in particular proteins. they concluded that: "when codon reading is part of a control loop that regulates synthesis of missing amino acid, the translation rate of the selected codon should be as sensitive as possible to starvation"  <cit> . and, in their paper they showed which codons are the most sensitive in e. coli. we found that for all but one of the most predominantly used specifier codons in t-boxes, the corresponding trna is among the highest in sensing shortage of that specific amino acid in e. coli as reported by  <cit> . the only exception was the t-box codon for ala . therefore, assuming the conclusions by elf et al. are also valid for gram-positive bacteria, our findings suggest that the codons that are sensitive to depletion are preferentially used in t-box regulation.

functionalities controlled by a t-box
as expected, the proposed regulatory role of the t-box elements appeared to be perfectly reflected by the genes under their control. the majority of the t-boxes  were found to precede genes encoding trna ligases, while most others were found upstream of genes encoding proteins involved in amino acid transport  or amino acid biosynthesis . the remaining t-boxes  were found upstream of genes encoding proteins with unknown function , or a function that lacks an apparent relation to amino acid metabolism . a complete and species-specific subdivision of t-boxes based on function prediction of the proteins encoded downstream and a list of genes with no apparent relation to amino acid metabolism is provided in the supplementary material, in additional files  <dig> and  <dig> 

ii) the use of regulator specificity to improve annotation of molecular function and biological role
we made two important observations: i) in all cases, the t-boxes identified upstream of the genes encoding a trna ligase contained a specifier codon that corresponded with the amino acid specificity of the ligase; and ii) in all other cases where the function of the protein encoded by the gene downstream of the t-box had experimentally been verified, the specifier-codon corresponded to the established functionality of the gene. these observations implied that the employed method for the identification of t-box specificity was reliable and, consequently, that predicted t-box specificities could be extrapolated to the molecular function of the protein encoded by the gene located downstream, as had occasionally been done before. many of the genes preceded by a t-box had not been specifically annotated to date in the sense that, although the functional category was often evident , a specific molecular function had not been attributed. in fact, more than two-third of the non-trna ligase genes preceded by a t-box lacked such a specific annotation of molecular function. as importantly, the functional annotation of the genes could be extended to a different level entirely by using the knowledge on t-box  specificity, as this knowledge discloses  under which conditions the regulated genes will play their biological role .

a) t-box regulation of amino acid transport
many of the genes encoding amino acid transporters were found to be preceded by a t-box, especially in the genomes of the lactobacilli and bacilli of the bacillus cereus-group. the transporters controlled by t-boxes belonged to no less than seven distinct transporter families . table  <dig> gives an overview of the distribution of the transport systems regulated by a t-box over the various firmicutes species.

at the bottom the total fraction of regulated transporters is shown per family. abc: atp-binding cassette superfamily, apc: amino acid-polyamine-organocation family, daacs: dicaboxylate/amino acid:cation symporter family, livcs: leucine/isoleucine/valine cation symporter family, mfs: major facilitator superfamily, nhac: na+:h+ antiporter family, nss: neurotransmitter:sodium family. classification adopted from saier  <cit> .

overall, for more than 85% of the t-box regulated transporters the functional annotation  could be improved as compared to the entries in the reference database of ncbi. a full list can be found in additional file  <dig>  we have limited the substrate specificity definition in our annotation to putatively dominant substrates based on the amino acid specificity of the t-box. however, broader substrate specificity is probably more common for transporters. especially transport systems consisting of only a permease are expected  to display broader substrate specificity , whereas systems that require prior substrate-binding  will be more specific. we discuss the t-box based functional annotation of some transport systems in more detail in the following paragraphs and in additional file  <dig> 

the abc family
t-box regulation of abc transport systems was found in most lineages of the firmicutes but not in the bacilli. the t-box regulated abc transporters could be sub-divided into four sub-families, based on the specificity of the substrate-binding protein and the permease. a striking use of extensive t-box regulation in abc transport was observed in l. plantarum. it appears that in the absence of methionine, l. plantarum uses a single mechanism to switch on not only transport of the amino acid itself, but also of the precursors and co-factors needed for its biosynthesis .

the apc family
a t-box was identified in front of an apc-family protein encoding gene in all the studied bacillus genomes. in b. subtilis and b. licheniformis the gene ybvw is preceded by a leu t-box, whereas such a box is lacking upstream of the orthologous genes, which are found in e. faecalis, g. kaustophilus and in l. lactis  . the leu t-box suggests that the ybvw protein is a leucine transporter, in line with the general functionality of transporters of the apc family . surprisingly, in the members of the bacillus cereus-group another apc family gene is preceded by a t-box, specific for threonine. although an orthologous gene is present in most of the firmicutes genomes, e.g. ykba in b. subtilis, it is regulated by a t-box only in the species of the bacillus cereus-group . the protein encoded by ykba in b. subtilis has recently been shown to be a ser/thr exchanger and was consequently renamed stet  <cit> . a similar functionality of the protein ortholog in the members of the bacillus cereus group is supported by the codon identification of the t-box.

the livcs family
the bacilli of the bacillus cereus group, the lactobacilli and the clostridia contain several branched-chain amino acid cation symporters of the livcs-family  <cit> , some of which are t-box regulated . since the three branched-chain amino acids share very similar molecular properties  we expect that these transporters are not highly specific despite their proposed amino acid specific control, but merely that expression of the "multi-specific" system has been brought under the control of the individual amino acids. indeed, the orthologous transporters that have been characterized in l. delbrueckii , c. glutamicum  and p. aeruginosa  displayed transport of all three branched-chain amino acids.

the nss family
finally, the livcs family branched-chain amino acid transporter braz of p. aeruginosa, was shown to have a clear preference for isoleucine and valine over leucine  <cit> . in this respect it is noteworthy that in the bacilli of the bacillus cereus group the expression of one of the homologs of the nss family  is controlled by a leu t-box, whereas such a box is lacking for the livcs homologs in those species . besides the leu t-box regulated nss transporter, the bacilli of the bacillus cereus group contain three other homologs of the same family, two of which are controlled by a trp and a phe t-box, respectively . these two amino acids agree well with the experimentally determined tryptophan transport functionality of the nss homolog tnat in s. thermophilum  <cit> . the presence of a regulatory t-box ranging from leu to trp, and phe suggest that the members of the nss transporter family may display a rather broad amino acid specificity.

b) hypothetical proteins controlled by a t-box
another class of proteins to which significant functional information could be added  using the specificity of the detected t-box is that of the so-called hypothetical proteins or unknown function proteins . obviously, when orthologous proteins in related species were also of unknown function, specifier codon information clearly improved the annotation. examples of new annotations related to amino acid biosynthesis or transport are enzymes , transporters , trna-ligase related functions, and regulation .

 <dig> listeria innocua clip <dig>  listeria monocytogenes egd-e, l. monocytogenes 4bf <dig>   <dig> staphylococcus aureus mw <dig>  s. aureus n <dig>   <dig> streptococcus agalactiae  <dig>  s. agalactiae a <dig>  s. agalactiae nem <dig>  streptococcus pneumoniae tigr <dig>  s. pneumoniae r <dig>   <dig> streptococcus thermophilus cnrz <dig>  s. thermophilus lmg <dig> 

iii) taxonomic variation and t-box evolution
the comprehensive list of t-boxes that was generated for all sequenced genomes  confirmed the previous attribution that t-boxes are predominantly encountered in species of the phylum firmicutes  <cit> . our analyses uncovered many previously unidentified t-boxes. in species of the class mollicutes two t-box elements were found, but only in the subclass endoplasmatales  <cit> , in proteobacteria  a typical t-box element was identified upstream of the leua gene  in both species. deinococcus radiodurans contained two t-boxes  whereas species of the phylum of chloroflexi  contained three t-box elements . earlier analysis of riboswitches in actinobacteria showed that some species belonging to this phylum contain a t-box upstream of iles  <cit> . however, symbiobacterium thermophilum contained not less than eighteen t-boxes, comparable to species of the firmicutes. this finding is in line with the conclusion of  <cit>  that s. thermophilum is probably more closely related to firmicutes than to actinobacteria.

to evaluate the phylogenetic distribution of t-boxes in more detail, the correlation between the presence of t-box regulatory elements and the regulated genes was analyzed for the firmicutes and will be described shortly in the next sections. furthermore, the scattered appearance of these regulatory boxes as observed for the various transporter families will be discussed.

t-box regulation of genes encoding trna ligases in the firmicutes
it appeared  that regulation by t-boxes is conserved in almost all  firmicutes for several trna ligases , whereas some trna ligases ) appeared to be controlled by a t-box in only a few species. the genes encoding the trna ligases for cysteine and asparagine were often found as the second gene in a putative operon that was t-box regulated. in several organisms, multiple copies of amino-acid specific trna-ligase encoding genes are found and in more than half of the cases  only one of them is subject to t-box regulation.

a clear phylogenetic effect is observed when the four major orders within the firmicutes  are compared. this is true for both the number and the type of trna-ligase encoding genes regulated by a t-box. most t-box regulated trna-ligase encoding genes are found in the bacillales and especially in species of the bacillus cereus group. within the lactobacillales, it appears that streptococci have far less trna- ligase encoding genes regulated by t-boxes than lactobacillus species. the lowest number of trna ligases regulated by t-boxes was found for s. thermophilus, s. pneumoniae and some strains of s. pyogenes. the relatively low amount of t-box regulation in these species could be the result of regressive evolution, a process that was suggested to be the underlying mechanism for the large loss of functionally active genes in s. thermophilus  <cit> .

t-box regulation of genes involved in amino acid biosynthesis in the firmicutes
t-box regulation of genes related to amino acid biosynthesis has been described previously for various amino acids  <cit> . like in the case of the t-rna ligases, t-box control of amino acid biosynthesis displayed clear phylogenetic patterns . for instance, the biosynthesis of branched chain amino acids  was found to be t-box regulated in bacillales and clostridia, whereas several families within the bacillales  as well as several streptococci consistently lack t-box control of bca biosynthesis. similarly, we found that the species of the b. cereus group contain a t-box in the upstream region of the tyrosine biosynthesis operon consistent with the experimental data that showed that tyrosine biosynthesis from shikimate is t-box regulated in b. anthracis  <cit> . the b. cereus group representatives are the only organisms in our study that encode a phenylalanine-4-hydroxylase ortholog . we found this gene also to be t-box regulated in all members of the b. cereus group.

the evolution and propagation of t-boxes
an important observation related to t-box evolution was made by grundy et al.  <cit> . they showed that a single nucleotide change in the specifier codon of the tyr t-box of tyrs in b. subtilis was enough to change the amino acid specificity. in addition, while analyzing the distribution of t-boxes over the various transporter families we were struck by the fact that although some of these families are very large, there was only one  family-member found to be regulated by a t-box and only in a restricted number of species . in our opinion, the only likely scenario to explain the phylogenetically limited occurrence of the transporter t-box associations that would not imply massive loss of the t-box regulation was that of acquisition of the regulatory element by the transporter encoding gene in a specific lineage. moreover, the results of grundy et al.  <cit>  imply that in principle the t-box can change specificity easily.

to analyze this further, the t-boxes preceding the genes that encode the t-rna-ligases for the branched-chain amino acids  were examined. these were chosen because t-box regulation of these genes is most wide-spread  and because the proximal genes themselves, iles, leus and vals form a separate trna-ligase sub-family with a very clear evolutionary lineage . in sharp contrast, the nj-tree of the aligned complete t-boxes  appeared extremely unreliable . this finding implies that amino acid specificity of a t-box is not prominent on the overall sequence level and that the apparent overall sequence variability in time of the t-box is relatively high. simultaneously, in case t-box sequences do cluster in reliable clusters  in a nj-tree they must therefore be closely related in time.

to limit possible obscuring effects of comparing sequences between species, we collected and compared the t-box sequences within species and for clarity restricted the comparison to the t-boxes that accompany transport systems and the related trna ligases. for all three analyzed species: b. anthracis, l. acidophilus and l. plantarum. similar phenomena were observed. the multiple sequence alignment of the analyzed t-box sequences and the associated nj-tree  are strongly suggestive of a close evolutionary relationship between several of the t-boxes. for example in b. anthracis, the thr t-boxes found in front of ba <dig>  and the thr-trna ligase  were highly similar and the same was observed for the ile t-boxes found in front of another livcs homolog and the ile-trna ligase. as the livcs homologs appear closely related in time , the data imply that the regulatory t-box was not inherited in a similar way but 'acquired' independently. in fact, this explanation fits the observed scattered appearance of the t-boxes for the various transporter families perfectly.

the results presented in figure  <dig> are also suggestive of another way in which the t-boxes have evolved. the nj-tree relates the phe t-box found in front of one of the nss family transporters to the tyr t-box associated with the tyr-trna ligase . it thus seems that the tyr t-box of the trna ligase was duplicated -as this t-box is present in various firmicutes species- and has diverged/adapted to control a phe transporter in the bacilli of the b. cereus group. in fact, the similarity between the t-box upstream of tyr-trna ligase and the phe t-box in front of the transporter is higher than between the tyr t-box and the tyr t-box preceding ba <dig> . this is consistent with the fact that: the tyr t-box acquisition of the nhac ortholog should have occurred earlier in history, as the tyr t-box control of the nhac ortholog is present in several firmicutes, and the sequences thus had more time to diverge.

CONCLUSIONS
the sequence signature of a t-box is very specific and as a result t-boxes can be readily identified. using specific t-box hmms, we identified a large number of the t-boxes and their amino acid specificity in sequenced prokaryote genomes.

an important aspect of this work is that we show that the prediction of the amino acid specificity of the various t-boxes can be used to improve the functional annotation of a large number of genes. in particular, the functional annotation of genes related to amino acid transport and genes with unknown substrate specificity, genes for which it is normally quite difficult to find functional attributes, could be improved significantly. in our opinion, the procedure of improving annotation through knowledge of the regulatory signals can be generalized and should be used on a much broader scale than currently is being done.

riboswitches have been argued to be among the oldest regulatory systems in bacteria because of their independence of regulatory proteins and widespread biological distribution  <cit> . one might therefore have expected that t-boxes are abundantly present among all different lineages of bacteria. this clearly can not be concluded from our results and those presented in other studies  <cit> . in fact, these regulatory elements can only be found in a few bacterial phyla and only abundantly in the phylum firmicutes. this implies that either firmicutes developed t-box regulation after their branching off from the other bacteria or that the other bacteria lost the system soon after the branching off of the firmicutes to evolve more complex regulatory systems. which of the two scenarios is most likely remains unclear.

nevertheless our data do allow some extrapolation of the propagation of t-boxes within the phylum firmicutes. we conclude on basis of our observations that the t-boxes have evolved in four clearly distinct ways: i) by co-evolution with the regulated gene or operon; ii) by co-evolution and divergence with the regulated gene or operon to adopt a new specificity; by iii) duplication and insertion of the regulatory element in front of a gene or operon that encodes functions related to the t-box-specified amino acid; and finally iv) by duplication and divergence toward a new amino acid specificity after duplication. in short, this means that every t-box regulatory element acts as a connected yet independent "functional module". the fact that the isoleucine specific t-box connected to the ile-trna ligase encoding gene is the only box present in all t-box containing bacteria suggests this box could very well compose the archetype t-box.

