BACKGROUND
dental plaque is a densely-packed microbial biofilm and the residents living inside lead a “famine and feast” life style due to the fluctuation of nutrients within the oral cavity  <cit> . in addition to many commonly studied environmental stimuli such as acidic and hyperthermic conditions to which dental plaque residents are frequently exposed, osmotic stress is also believed to have a great impact on dental plaque ecology and the development of dental caries  <cit> . acidogenic bacteria within dental plaque are able to metabolize carbohydrate to produce organic acids, which not only decrease the environmental ph, but also increase ionic strength of the plaque fluid due to tooth demineralization and consequent calcium and phosphate accumulation  <cit> . it has been reported that the ionic strength of plaque fluid is doubled after sugar challenges, increasing from roughly 150 mm to approximately 300 mm  <cit> . thus, persistent residents within dental plaque have likely evolved sophisticated molecular machineries to counter the detrimental effect of elevated osmolality on their growth.

s. mutans is normal resident in the dental plaque and has been considered as the primary causative agent of dental caries for decades. s. mutans is able to take advantage of low ph to emerge as numerically predominant resident in cariogenic plaque  <cit> . in addition, s. mutans has developed intricate machineries to counter those detrimental environmental challenges such as hyperosmotic stress, in order to persevere within the dental plaque  <cit> . many microorganisms respond to hyperosmotic challenges by increasing the intracellular levels of k+ and accumulating compatible solutes  <cit> . the complete genome sequence of s. mutans has revealed several genes sharing homology with k+ transporters and the opu family of abc transporters of escherichia coli <cit> . these findings suggest that s. mutans may rally a series of intricately regulated genes and pathways to internalize k+ and compatible solutes, and thus perseveres under hyperosmotic conditions. a previous study from burne’s group has identified a few candidates involved in the hyperosmotic stress response of s. mutans, and a possible cross-talk between osmotic and oxidative stress responses in s. mutans has also been suggested  <cit> . however, the traditional “hypothesis-driven approach” to investigating selected genes sharing homology with stress response related genes of model bacteria may not suffice to give a global knowledge about the strategies used by this caries pathogen to cope with hyperosmotic challenges.

although a number of studies have described transcriptional responses of s. mutans under various conditions  <cit> , the molecular response of this bacterium under physiologically relevant hyperosmotic condition has not been profiled at transcriptomic level. in this study, we used microarray to profile the transcriptome of s. mutans under hyperosmotic conditions. several genes and pathways were identified and further correlated with phenotypic changes of the organism observed under hyperosmotic challenges. the aim of this work is to provide a comprehensive insight into the sophisticated machineries adopted by s. mutans to better fit the physiologically relevant elevated osmolality, and thus perseveres within the oral cavity.

RESULTS
hyperosmotic conditions initiate biofilm dispersal
by constructing the growth curve of s. mutans under increasing concentrations of nacl, we found that  <dig>  m of nacl provided the sub-inhibitory level of osmolality that slightly retarded the growth rate of s. mutans . we thus chose this concentration of nacl for the rest of study. we investigated the short-term and long-term effects of  <dig>  m of nacl on the biofilm configuration of s. mutans. hyperosmotic conditions significantly inhibited the biomass of s. mutans biofilm, and this inhibitory effect was time and concentration-dependent . in addition, we performed live/dead fluorescence stain of biofilm and enumerated the biofilm colony forming unit , and we found that either the percentage or absolute number of viable cells after exposure to  <dig>  m nacl was comparable to that of non-treated control . these data indicate that the observed biomass reduction after hyperosmotic exposure was less likely caused by growth inhibition, but more likely attributed to the dispersal of biofilm under adversary conditions. the osmolality-provoked biofilm dispersal was further confirmed with fluorescence double-labeling and scanning electronic microscopy . exposure to sub-inhibitory level of hyperosmotic stimuli not only inhibited cellular components within the biofilm, but also reduced the extracellular polysaccharides  matrix synthesized.

to better understand the underlying molecular machineries, we performed whole-genome microarray analysis to profile the transcriptomic changes of s. mutans upon short term exposure  to  <dig>  m of nacl. we identified  <dig> genes with ≥  <dig> fold changes, among which  <dig> genes were up-regulated and  <dig> genes were down-regulated . specific genes were further quantified by quantitative rt-pcr, and the results showed acceptable consistency with the microarray data . in agreement with the observed biofilm dispersal phenotype, a significant down-regulation of glycosyltransferase b encoding gene  was identified . glycosyltransferase b is the major enzyme responsible for the eps synthesis, mediating the cellular adherence and biofilm formation of s. mutans <cit> . by down-regulating gtfb expression under hyperosmotic conditions, bacterial cells are more ready to “break their biofilm bonds”, leading to a less condensed microbial community with reduced biomass. in addition, we also found that a competence-stimulating peptide  encoding gene, comc was down-regulated upon 15 min exposure to  <dig>  m of nacl . the csp is a member of bacterial quorum sensing system. it has been reported to be involved in competence development, acid tolerance and biofilm formation of s. mutans <cit> . importantly, recent findings from lévesque’s group have demonstrated that high level of csp may act as an “alarmone”, triggering “guard cells” autolysis and release of edna necessary for the genetic diversity and survival of whole community  <cit> . the down-regulation of comc may promote the conversion of s. mutans cells from a static community-based lifestyle to a more motile planktonic lifestyle. therefore, the significant down-regulation of gtfb and comc further supports our phenotypic observation that hyperosmotic challenges initiated biofilm dispersal.

it’s noteworthy that a recent transcriptomic profiling of s. mutans in the presence of oxygen also showed significant down-regulation of gtfb and genes involved in comcde quorum sensing system  <cit> . this suggests that a motile lifestyle may be a common strategy employed by s. mutans to adapt adversary conditions.

s. mutans increases carbohydrates consumption in response to hyperosmotic challenge
most bacteria do not possess active water transport mechanisms to maintain cell turgor, which is essential for survival  <cit> . instead, bacteria usually pool “compatible solutes” to deal with hyperosmotic conditions. although some compatible solutes, such as glycine betaine and carnitine, can be synthesized and accumulated intracellularly during osmotic stress, bacteria also adopt efficient transport systems to internalize necessary compounds to counter hyperosmotic stress  <cit> . burne’s previous study has suggested that s. mutans may take up compatible solutes from the environment by up-regulating the abc transporter homologous genes  upon short-term exposure to hyperosmotic challenge  <cit> . although no significant up-regulation of compatible solutes internalization related genes was detected by our high throughput transcriptomic profiling at a differentiation power of ≥  <dig> fold changes, genes involved in the phosphotransferase system  and carbohydrate metabolism were significantly up-regulated upon short-term hyperosmotic challenge . we further categorized the majority of those differentially expressed genes into  <dig> kegg pathways. we found that pathways involved in carbohydrates consumption, including pts, galactose metabolism, fructose/mannose metabolism, and pyruvate metabolism were significantly up-regulated . based on these findings, we propose that in order to counter the detrimental effects of short-term hyperosmotic challenge, s. mutans needs to actively internalize compatible solutes to recover from hyperosmotic stress. in the meantime, the bacterial cells have to up-regulate genes involved in carbohydrates transportation and metabolism, so as to couple the increased demand for atp consumption. interestingly, most of these aforementioned carbohydrates metabolism related genes and pathways are also up-regulated during oxygen challenge  <cit> , further suggesting that s. mutans has developed sophisticated energy mobilization strategy to counter environmental adversity.

hyperosmotic challenge prepares s. mutans for better fitness under multiple environmental stimuli
as mentioned above, several genes involved in the carbohydrate metabolism of s. mutans were up-regulated. s. mutans may take full advantage of this increased energy generation to cope with multiple environmental stimuli. previously study from burne’s group has shown that two oxidative stress genes, soda and nox were induced during hyperosmotic stress, and certain up-regulated gene  upon hyperosmotic challenges was also involved in acid/oxidative stress responses  <cit> . these findings suggest a potential cross-talking between hyperosmotic stress responses and other environmental responses of s. mutans. in the current study, we found that lactoylglutathione lyase , and clpb  were significantly induced during hyperosmotic stress . lgl has been shown to play an essential role in the acid tolerance response of s. mutans by detoxifying cytotoxic metabolite methyglyoxal in the cytoplasm  <cit> . therefore, up-regulation of lgl under hyperosmotic conditions may enhance the aciduricity of s. mutans. clpb encodes a chaperone subunit with two atp-binding domains involved in heat shock response  <cit> . previous study from burne’s group has also shown a significant up-regulation of clpb in s. mutans during oxygen challenge  <cit> . the up-regulation of clpb upon hyperosmotic challenge may assist unfolding the denatured protein amassed during environment stimuli, thus promoting the fitness of s. mutans under other detrimental conditions such as oxidative and heat stresses.

on the other hand, it has been demonstrated that dispersal cells from bacterial biofilm can colonize different and/or more niches than the bacteria that initiated the original biofilm, leading to better fitness of those bacteria in the environment  <cit> . the induced dispersal of s. mutans biofilm under hyperosmotic stress may to an extent enhance the colonizing capacity of s. mutans cells, leading to a potential “niche expansion”, and thus benefit its fitness under the fluctuating environment within the oral cavity.

CONCLUSIONS
taken together, this study has investigated phenotypic and transcriptional effects of hyperosmotic stress on s. mutans, and revealed genes and pathways essential for the hyperosmotic tolerance in this caries associated bacterium. we believe that although hyperosmotic challenge may induce significant stress response on bacteria, s. mutans has evolved sophisticated molecular machineries to counter those elicited detrimental effects. additionally, s. mutans can mobilize genes and pathways to take full advantage of these environmental stimuli to better fit the fluctuating environments within the oral cavity, and thus emerge as the numeric-predominant bacteria under cariogenic conditions such as frequent sugar uptake.

