BACKGROUND
gene expression is controlled over a wide range at the transcript level through complex interplay between epigenetic modifications, dna regulatory proteins, and microrna molecules  <cit> . genome-wide screening of expression profiles has provided an expansive perspective on gene regulation in health and disease. for example, identification of constitutively expressed housekeeping genes has aided in the inference of sets of minimal processes required for basic cellular function  <cit> . similarly, we have identified and annotated genes with switch-like expression profiles in the mouse and human, using large microarray datasets of healthy tissue  <cit> . genes with switch-like expression profiles represent fifteen percent of the human gene population. classification of samples on the basis of bimodal or switch-like gene expression may give insight into temporally and spatially active mechanisms that contribute to phenotypic diversity. given the variable expression of switch-like genes, they may also provide a viable candidate gene set for the detection of clinically relevant expression signatures in a feature space with reduced dimensionality.

the high-dimensionality inherent in genome-wide quantification makes extracting meaningful biological information from gene expression datasets a difficult task. early attempts at genome-wide expression analysis used unsupervised clustering methods to identify groups of genes or conditions with similar expression profiles  <cit> . biological insight can be derived from the observation that functionally related or co-regulated genes often cluster together. supervised classification methods require datasets in which the class of the samples is known in advance. statistical hypothesis testing  <cit>  is used to identify groups of genes that exhibit changes in expression associated with class distinction. significant genes can be used to build decision rules to predict the class of unseen samples  <cit> . unsupervised classification is better suited for class discovery whereas supervised classification is tailored for class prediction. in both of these complimentary approaches, dimension reduction can lead to increased classification accuracy.

many simple unsupervised learning algorithms rely on distance metrics to either partition profiles into distinct groups  <cit>  or build clusters from pair-wise distances in a nested, hierarchical fashion  <cit> . the optimal number of clusters must be defined heuristically or in advance and confidence in cluster membership is difficult to determine. model-based clustering provides the necessary statistical framework to address these concerns while allowing for class discovery. in model-based clustering, it is assumed that similar expression profiles are generated as draws from a set of multivariate gaussian random variables. clusters are identified by fitting the parameters of the cluster-specific distributions to the data. expectation-maximization  <cit>  or bayesian methods  <cit>  are used for optimization. estimation of the number of clusters as well as the incorporation of confidence in cluster membership is implicit in this process.

methods such as unsupervised, supervised and model-based classification provide the means to evaluate switch-like gene expression patterns in high-dimensional datasets profiling diverse biological conditions. for this purpose, we compiled two large-scale gene expression microarray datasets from publicly available data repositories. the first dataset included samples spanning nineteen different tissue types from healthy donors. the second dataset included samples from donors with one of a number of infectious diseases including hiv- <dig> infection, hepatitis c, influenza, and malaria. our results demonstrate that switch-like genes exhibit tissue and disease-specific expression signatures. dimension reduction of genome-wide expression data through the identification of switch-like genes enabled highly accurate classification of samples into tissue-specific and disease-specific clusters. moreover, analysis of activated switch-like genes in various disease and tissue types revealed that these genes participate in specialized or temporally active mechanisms. further study of genes in the switch-like gene set may provide biologically significant information about the molecular basis of phenotype distinction.

RESULTS
three hundred bimodal genes classify nineteen tissue types with high accuracy in model-based classification
a model-based classification algorithm  <cit>  partitioned a set of  <dig> microarray samples into bins specific to  <dig> different tissue types . classification was based either on the expression of the complete list of  <dig> human switch-like genes  or a subset of this list containing  <dig> bimodal genes translated into extracellular matrix or plasma membrane proteins . additional file  <dig> lists the affymetrix probe set identifiers of the bimodal genes along with the full gene name and the dominant mode  of expression in four tissues . heat maps shown in figure  <dig> depict the posterior pairwise probability matrix for each pair of samples. the color of square elements of the heat maps indicate the number of partitions in which two samples are assigned to the same cluster, with yellow being the maximum and blue the minimum. rows and columns of the heat map are organized to group samples of the same tissue type together. the figure shows that model-based classification correctly grouped microarray samples into tissue-specific clusters, even for tissues with as few as five microarray samples. two distance-based clustering algorithms, kmeans and hierarchical clustering, identified brain-specific  and skeletal/cardiac muscle-specific clusters  but failed to differentiate between tissues with smaller number of samples . consistent with the heat maps shown in figure  <dig>  the adjusted rand index  values shown in table  <dig> shows that model-based clustering outperformed distance-based algorithms in unsupervised classification of tissue phenotypes. our results indicate that a set of  <dig> bimodal genes whose products localize to the cell membrane or extracellular matrix compartments are determinants of tissue type for the nineteen tissues listed in table  <dig>  cell-cell/ecm interactions activate downstream transcriptional programs that regulate a diverse set of processes including growth, proliferation, apoptosis, and cell motility  <cit>  and have often been associated with pathogenesis in muscular dystrophy, multiple sclerosis, and various cancers  <cit> . noting that the tissue-specific sample size in the microarray data ranged from  <dig> to  <dig> , results with model-based classification indicate the strength of tissue-specific signatures in global gene expression and the ability of bimodal genes to capture such signatures. results also indicate that a subset of bimodal genes whose products are positioned either in the extracellular matrix or cell membrane is sufficient to identify tissue-specificity in microarray data. given the importance of ecm and mem proteins in the regulation of cellular function, products of these genes may serve as candidate biomarkers or therapeutic targets in tissue-specific diseases.

enrichment analysis reveals tissue-specific functions of "on" genes in brain, skeletal muscle, cardiac muscle, and lung tissue
binomial tests were used to identify sets of bimodal genes biased toward the "on" mode in the tissues that are well-represented in our microarray dataset . a gene by sample heat map  shows the on-off modes of expression for all  <dig> bimodal genes in  <dig> samples of brain, skeletal muscle, cardiac muscle and lung tissue. a black/white element of the heat map indicates a gene expressed in the "on"/"off" mode in a sample. figure 2a shows that distinct clusters of "on" and "off" genes are observed in each of the four tissue types under consideration. we identified  <dig>   <dig>   <dig>  and  <dig> genes over-represented in the "on" mode and  <dig>   <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> genes over-represented in the "off" mode in brain, skeletal muscle, cardiac muscle and lung tissue respectively. overall, this figure indicates the abundance of switch genes with altered states in different tissues, resulting in accurate classification of tissue types using microarray data.

functional enrichment analysis identified gene sets related to tissue-specific function in sets of bimodal genes expressed in the "on" mode in brain, skeletal muscle, cardiac muscle and lung tissues. the go categories that are significantly enriched with bimodal genes that are "on" in brain tissue samples included neural tissue-specific processes including neural migration, adhesion, recognition and differentiation, nervous system development, and synaptic transmission . similarly, the list of enriched go terms associated with skeletal and cardiac muscle tissue samples included terms related to muscle development and organization, muscle contraction, calcium ion binding, cellular metabolism and muscle-specific structures such as the sarcoplasmic reticulum, myofibril, sarcomere and z disc. a number of kegg pathways are also enriched. the kegg diagram summarizing cell adhesion molecules is enriched with genes turned "on" in brain tissue and genes turned "off" in muscle tissue . several of these cell adhesion molecules, such as cdh <dig>  ncam, nrxn, and nlgn, are expressed at synaptic junctions  <cit> . another subset, including nfasc and cntnap <dig>  is integral to the formation of myelinated neurons  <cit> . these results indicate that genes with bimodal expression patterns in the human genome tend to be involved with essential functions and structures in major tissues such as cardiac and skeletal muscle and brain.

p-values < =  <dig>  indicates significance.

model-based classification of infectious disease and immune response signature
model-based clustering of bimodal gene expression led to accurate classification of disease phenotypes in an independent dataset of  <dig> microarray tissue samples profiling infectious diseases. note that only normal tissue microarray data and not infectious disease data was used in the original annotation of switch-like genes. the posterior pairwise probability matrix derived from model-based clustering partitioned expression profiles of peripheral blood mononuclear cells  into disease-specific clusters for hiv- <dig> infection, hepatitis c, influenza, and malaria . we focused on microarray data on pbmcs because these cells recognize pathogen-specific molecules in the circulation and lymphatic system and initiate the immune response  <cit> . in turn, pathogen recognition induces transcriptional activation of several host defense signaling pathways  <cit> . results presented here indicate the potential of switch-like genes in the classification of disease states using microarray data. furthermore, the use of switch genes along with model-based clustering leads to accurate classification of microarray data belonging to different tissue types that are infected by the same virus. model-based clustering differentiated between samples of hepatitis c infection in pbmcs and liver biopsies . thus, model-based clustering captures infectious disease signatures in microarray data in a tissue-specific manner.

next, we examined the switch states of bimodal genes in infectious disease associated microarray data. of the  <dig> bimodal genes analyzed,  <dig>   <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> genes were expressed in the "on" mode in the majority of samples from pbmcs in hepatitis c, influenza a, malaria, and hiv- <dig> infection, respectively. in liver biopsies from hepatitis c infected individuals,  <dig> bimodal genes are over-represented in the "on" mode. biological processes commonly enriched in the set of bimodal genes expressed in the "on" mode in these diseases include b cell receptor signalling and humoral immune response involving circulating immunoglobulins , processes that are central in the activation of the antigen-mediated, adaptive immune system  <cit> . gene ontology enrichment analysis for switch-like genes turned "on" in hiv- <dig> infection indicated significant enrichment of the biological processes of dna methylation, translational initiation, negative regulation of protein kinase activity, and response to calcium . the t-cell signaling pathway was also significantly enriched with bimodal genes expressed in the "on" mode in hiv- <dig> infection . the bimodal genes in this pathway code for the membrane receptor cd <dig>  <cit> , kinase activator slp- <dig>  <cit> , ras proteins rasgrp <dig> and rho cdc <dig>  calcium binding protein can, and the transcription factor ap <dig>  <cit> , all known to be crucial in immune defense system against viruses. taken together, our results suggest a significant role for a subset of bimodal genes in the host-response to pathogens.

p-values < =  <dig>  indicate significance in malaria, influenza a, hepatitis c-pbmcs and hepatitis c-liver. p-values < =  <dig>  indicate significance in hiv. 1malaria, 2influenza a, 3hiv, 4hepatitis c-pbmc, 5hepatitis c-liver

supervised classification with bimodal genes capture tissue specific and infectious disease specific signatures in microarray data
a multi-class supervised classification scheme was used to estimate whether bimodal gene expression signatures were conserved in smaller subsets of the microarray data used in our analysis of unsupervised classification and whether these signatures could be captured by a subset of just five features . each dataset was split into training and test sets in a class-proportional manner such that two-thirds of the samples in each class were used for training and one-third for testing. results over  <dig> independent iterations of training and testing with  <dig> most discriminative switch-like genes are shown in figures  <dig> and  <dig>  respectively, for tissue-specific separation and infectious disease classification. prediction of tissue-specificity was accurate in 85% of test samples for all tissues except colon , mammary , small intestine  and testis . microarray samples from small intestine tissue were predicted to be either muscle tissue or pancreatic tissue in 30% and 24% of test samples respectively, suggesting the persistence of cell-type-specific expression signatures in heterogeneous tissue samples. notably, 14% of testis samples were misclassified as ovary, indicating a subset of bimodal genes may be similarly expressed in reproductive organs of the male and female. in the case of infectious diseases, multi-class supervised classification separated microarray samples from hiv- <dig> infection, hepatitis c and malaria well but it has allocated 22% of the influenza microarray samples to the bin for hepatitis c . these results indicate that tissue-specific and disease-specific bimodal gene expression profile signatures are largely conserved in independent data and can be captured with as few as five features.

we used simulated microarray data in order to gain insights on which parameters of supervised classification are determinant of the classification accuracy in datasets considered in this study. supervised classification of simulated gene expression profiles illustrated the strong dependence of prediction accuracy on sample size, extent of separation between bimodal peaks and the number of informative genes. classification accuracy generally improved as expression profiles became more bimodal. increased sample size and decreased number of informative genes also resulted in more accurate classification.

discussion
development and subsequent commercialization of microarray platforms has led to extensive investigation of global gene expression profiles in health and disease. expression profiling of diverse healthy tissues provides a comprehensive perspective of the range of transcriptional regulation under physiologic conditions  <cit> . similarly, identification of gene expression signatures indicative of disease subtypes improves our understanding of the molecular basis of pathology  <cit> . small sample size and the large number of measurements for each sample are among the limiting factors that hinder the effectiveness of gene expression profiling and drive the development of new analytical methods.

unsupervised clustering of microarray data classifies samples in an unbiased manner according to similarity in gene expression profiles. adaptation of model-based clustering to low sample size, high dimensional datasets  <cit>  and formalization of statistical approaches for selecting the optimum number of clusters  <cit>  represent significant advances. in this study, we used these advanced methods to cluster and classify infectious disease and tissue phenotypes in large scale microarray data using a reduced set of  <dig> switch-like genes  <cit> . switch-like genes are identified through the detection of bimodal gene expression patterns across diverse biological conditions. switch-like genes are likely to be under strict transcriptional regulation and are statistically enriched for cell membrane and extracellular proteins  <cit> .

we demonstrated that model-based clustering of switch-like gene expression patterns differentiates between tissue phenotypes in a microarray dataset with tissue-specific sample sizes ranging from  <dig> to nearly  <dig>  because model-based clustering operates on the assumption that samples are drawn from multivariate gaussian distributions, the method is particularly well-suited for the analysis of bimodal gene expression profiles. distance-based unsupervised classification methods such as kmeans and hierarchical clustering also led to accurate classification for tissues with large sample sizes  but had little differentiation potential at small sample sizes. the decrease in classification accuracy observed with the use of distance-based clustering may be due to estimation of the number of clusters via the gap statistic  <cit> . incorporating optimization of the number of clusters into the model fitting process likely improves the performance of model-based clustering  <cit>  such that tissue types with smaller sample sizes are resolved into separate clusters.

a set of  <dig> bimodal genes expressed on the extracellular matrix or the plasma membrane is sufficient to accurately differentiate between nineteen different tissue types in model-based clustering even at  <dig> microarray samples for tissue type. this set of genes includes those that code for membrane-bound integrin proteins and ecm proteins belonging to collagen, laminin, and fibronectin families. genes expressed in the "on" mode in brain tissue and the "off" mode in muscle tissue largely coded for neural-specific cell adhesion molecules. supervised classification has the potential to further reduce the set of  <dig> bimodal genes to biomarker sets when considering biomarkers for tissue-specific diseases. accurate classification with the subset of bimodal genes presented in this article demonstrate the importance of cell/ecm interactions in tissue differentiation  <cit>  and will prove useful as a priori knowledge in the analysis of microarray data produced by different laboratories.

our study showed that the bimodal gene set identified using microarray data associated with healthy tissue is highly effective in differentiating between microarray data from tissues infected by various infectious diseases such as the hiv- <dig> infection, hepatitis c, influenza and malaria. the classification was unsupervised and the disease signature was conserved across laboratories. moreover, bimodal gene sets differentiated between liver and blood cell tissues infected with the same hepatitis virus. the identification of bimodal genes expressed in the activated state in various infectious diseases and subsequent enrichment analysis with kegg pathways provide biological context to the perturbation of various cell signaling networks induced by invading viruses. in the infectious disease states investigated here, bimodal genes expressed in the "on" mode were related to both innate and antigen-mediated immune responses.

it should be noted that other gene sets determined by feature selection may be even more discriminative of the phenotypes included in this analysis than the switch genes under consideration. our intent in this study was not to identify discriminative genes but rather to use unsupervised clustering to determine whether switch-like expression patterns are associated with phenotype and whether previously identified switch-like genes could be used a priori to reduce the feature space in microarray analysis. the large body of evidence presented in this work points to the success of switch-like gene sets in capturing biologically-relevant gene expression signatures from microarray data.

given the demonstrated biological relevance of bimodal expression patterns, it would be worthwhile to determine the clinical relevance of switch-like gene annotation. identification of bimodal genes expressed in the activated state in complex diseases such as autism, diabetes and cancer may provide a method for dimension reduction in the identification of disease-related single nucleotide polymorphisms   <cit>  and expression quantitative trait loci   <cit>  in genome-wide association studies. both gene sequences and promoter regions of bimodal genes expressed in the high mode identified from large scale microarray data could be searched for snps and eqtl linked to the onset of disease or disease progression. further studies are needed to investigate the full potential of clinically relevant classification using switch-like gene annotation from microarray data.

CONCLUSIONS
in this study, we showed that a priori knowledge gained from compilation of large-scale microarray datasets from multiple laboratories containing at least  <dig> samples for each gene in the array could be successfully used in reducing the dimension of features in microarray analysis. we reduced dimensionality by focusing on a set of genes with bimodal expression patterns, i.e. genes that adopt either an "on" or "off" mode of expression and are tightly regulated at the transcript level. detection of bimodality using expectation maximization revealed a list of  <dig> bimodal genes in the human genome. a subset of  <dig> bimodal genes was sufficient to differentiate between nineteen different tissue signatures even in small sample sizes. these genes code for proteins either on the cell membrane or at the extracellular matrix. such proteins can be identified in tissue using fluorescence, q dots and other methods and as such are candidate biomarkers for specific tissues.

the set of bimodal genes are capable of capturing infectious disease signatures from microarray data corresponding to hepatitis c, influenza, hiv- <dig> infection and malaria. disease-specific expression patterns of bimodal genes suggest that infection by different pathogens may initiate different host responses mediated by switch-like gene expression. determination of "on" and "off" states of switch-like genes in various tissues and diseases allowed for the identification of activated/deactivated pathways that are consistent with existing research data. classification accuracy was exceptional even with class-specific sample sizes between ten and twenty arrays. the use of a priori knowledge from public microarray datasets in the form of bimodal gene sets has clinical implications in disease subtype classification. genome-wide association studies for snp discovery linked to complex diseases such as autism and cancer could potentially benefit from dimension reduction by focusing on regions of dna that code for switch-like genes and their promoter regions.

