BACKGROUND
hierarchical trees are considered to be the predominant type of physical distribution network in biology  <cit> . examples include the ramifying networks found in plants or mammalian cardiovascular or bronchial networks  <cit> . however, not all biological networks are strictly hierarchical, and many networks exhibit both a hierarchical structure and loops that ostensibly allow for redundancy in the face of disturbance or perturbations, where redundancy is defined simply as the existence of multiple flow paths. this is perhaps most evident in the reticulate networks of the leaves of higher plants, notably most angiosperm lineages  , but reticulate structures are also found in animal lineages such as mammalian capillary beds or some gorgonian corals.figure  <dig> 
mean fraction of the network disconnected from the petiole vs. the fraction of the vein segments removed across all leaves  for both full reticulate networks  and msts . shading represents one standard deviation above and below each curve. these curves demonstrate how in reticulate networks a significantly larger fraction remains connected to the source/sink as network vein segments are sequentially removed. for example when 10% of the vein segments are removed in a hierarchical tree, essentially all nodes are disconnected from the petiole, while approximately 50% of the nodes in a reticulate network remain connected. robustness is defined as the difference between the two curves . figure  <dig> inset: the vein network in this quercus grisea liebm. leaf , demonstrates that a series of small breaks  in the network skeleton can yield a maximally spanning hierarchical tree  without loops . the mst largely preserves the vein hierarchy and bulk flow properties. the mst in this image was maximized for conductance.



it has been suggested that the reticulate patterns found in higher leaves allow them to maintain supply of water and nutrients to photosynthetically active chloroplasts even when flow through some channels is lost , as might be observed due to mechanical damage or herbivory. for example, recent work has shown that two broad classes of venation types, palmate and pinnate leaves, responded differently to network severing treatments  <cit> . palmate leaves suffer little loss in leaf hydraulic conductance, stomatal conductance, and photosynthetic rate, when compared to pinnate leaves, indicating that having multiple primary channels enables robustness to herbivory, embolism or other disturbance. similarly, simulation work has shown that smaller leaves, with a higher vein length per area  of minor veins, are less vulnerable to embolism that larger leaves  <cit> . recent theoretical work has demonstrated that a combination of damage and fluctuating load favors the formation of loops in optimal transport networks  <cit> , and loop formation in a fixed hierarchical tree necessarily increases vla. the high vla found in many reticulate angiosperm lineages are associated with high photosynthetic and transpiration rates and are thought to have facilitated the diversification and dominance of angiosperms  <cit> . while certain lineages have retained networks with low, or no reticulation, such as some fern or gymnosperm clades, the overwhelming majority of broad leafed angiosperms have evolved reticulation, with multiple independent origins, suggesting strong selective pressure for this network arrangement  <cit> . the continued dominance of some communities and ecosystems by taxa such as ferns or gymnosperms, with little or no reticulation, suggests that these network strategies remain viable.

thus while both empirical data and theoretical results support the idea that network redundancy and associated high vla are advantageous for leaves, we know very little about the relative costs to leaves of having redundant venation. the costs of redundancy may have multiple origins, e.g., regulatory constraints, hydraulic costs or energetic demands, which need not be mutually exclusive. for example, the regulation of hormones and other factors that give rise to a reticulate vs. a strictly hierarchical network may be more prone to error or may be energetically more costly  <cit> . similarly, reticulate leaves may have higher resistance than hierarchical networks under certain flow regimes  <cit> . finally, the cost of redundancy may be energetic in that:  if non-photosynthetic veins  displace photosynthetic tissue, reticulate networks may suffer from decreased total photosynthesis per unit area;  the amount of materials necessary in the development of a reticulate network may exceed that of an analogous hierarchical network. for example, with estimates of  <dig>  and  <dig>  mmol glucose per g of cellulose and lignin respectively, xylem tissue has higher carbon costs than surrounding lamina  <cit> . in addition, it has been demonstrated that the primary veins in leaves have lower nitrogen and carbon concentrations and higher density than surrounding lamina  <cit> .

while there are hydraulic or energetic costs involved in the creation and maintenance of redundant networks, there are also clearly benefits to redundancy, otherwise this network form would not be so prevalent in leaves. the primary benefit to redundancy is the existence of multiple flow paths that maintain flow of water and nutrients to mesophyll tissue under moderate levels of disturbance  <cit> . there may be additional benefits of redundancy, such as a higher vla, or a reduction in the distance from veins to stomates and/or chloroplasts, as we discuss.

in this manuscript, we propose a combined empirical and computational approach to quantify the costs of minor vein redundancy in terms of hydraulic and material properties, and benefits in terms of robustness to disturbance and proximity of lamina tissue to veins. the first step in our approach is to extract the spatial structure of individual leaf networks utilizing a recently developed image segmentation and leaf network extraction software   <cit> . using leaf gui, we quantify the vein dimensions and connectivity in  <dig> leaves from  <dig> species in  <dig> angiosperm families, representing semi-automated measurement of  <dig> , <dig> individual vein segments. we measure the level of redundancy of venation networks using established metrics of loopiness  <cit> , meshedness  <cit> , and vla  <cit> . next, for each leaf network, we find the maximum spanning tree , that is the network structure that most closely resembles the original leaf network, but that is strictly hierarchical . the determination of the mst is equivalent to pruning veins computationally in such a way that the resulting network is both strictly hierarchical and has functional properties  or material properties  that preserve network hierarchy, and are as close to the original network as possible .

we utilize the mst for inferring the cost of loops in networks based on the premise that bulk flow constraints necessitate a hierarchical tree  <cit>  and that chloroplasts and/or stomates within leaves cannot be further than a minimum distance from the nearest vein/node  <cit> . for example, open venation systems retain the characteristics of hierarchical trees, and thus any evolutionary transition to reticulate networks likely involved minor vein connections. we then evaluate the evidence that reticulate leaf networks can be pruned to become msts with minimal loss of  conductance or other material properties. lastly, to simulate damage to leaves we computationally prune both the reticulate nets and msts for each leaf which demonstrates that the overall loss of connectivity is expected to be greater in msts. to quantify this cost and evaluate it relative to the other measures we consider we introduce a new metric, “robustness” , which represents the capacity of a reticulate network to remain connected to its source/sink node  when subject to random removal of veins, relative to its mst counterpart. we close with a discussion the implications of such results for understanding the evolution and ecology of the reticulate leaf vein form.

RESULTS
we evaluated four metrics related to the reticulate structure and redundancy of leaves: vla, loopiness, meshedness and robustness. vla  varied from a minimum value of  <dig>  to a maximum of  <dig> , with a mean of  <dig>  . loopiness  varied from a minimum value of  <dig>  to a maximum of  <dig> , with a mean of  <dig>  . meshedness which ranges from  <dig>  to  <dig>  to a maximum value of  <dig>   with a mean of  <dig>  standard deviation of  <dig> . robustness, estimated based on the difference between reticulate nets and msts weighted for conductance, varied from a minimum of  <dig>  to a maximum of  <dig>  thus leaves varied in their robustness to disturbance . hence, whereas vla provides a measure of vein investment per unit area, loopiness is a better indicator of features like distance from non-photosynthetic tissue; meshedness provides a strong indicator of the shape of the network and its tendency to be redundant, and robustness provides a measure of a network’s ability to remain connected under perturbations that damage the network. note, our vla values are lower on average, but overlap those previously reported  <cit> . this is due to methodological differences, primarily the fact that our images were not magnified and of lower resolution .figure  <dig> 
positive correlations among the four network measures we quantified in this study; vla, loopiness, meshedness and robustness. as leaf networks become more like planar networks and less like trees, their loopiness, vla, and ability to buffer disturbance increases. note, in this and figure  <dig> a single vla value of  <dig>  is not shown for figure clarity.
correlations between the four network measures and redundancy.  density ,  loopiness,  meshedness and  robustness. each network measure is plotted against the relative cost of redundancy for the five network dimensions; length, width, area, volume and theoretical conductance . relative costs and benefits are measured with respect to a mst analogue. note, as loopiness, density , robustness or meshedness increases, so too does the cost of redundancy. however, a 20% increase in length results in just a 5% increase in volume because the redundant veins are usually highest order veins. what little variability that exists in the redundancy costs of theoretical conductance, are not explained by loopiness, vla, robustness or meshedness .



as seen in figure  <dig>  all four network measures are correlated with one another. robustness increases with increasing vla, loopiness and meshedness , with meshedness being the best predictor of robustness . thus as leaf networks increase their vla and become more like planar graphs, and less like trees, their ability to buffer perturbations increases.

we evaluated the total cost of redundancy by comparing the total length, width, surface area, volume and conductance on a per-leaf basis  to the same property of the mst. first, as vla, loopiness, meshedness or robustness increases, the fractional cost of redundancy for length, width and volume measures also increases .

we also find modest increases in network length , width , surface area , volume  or conductance  for each reticulate network compared to the corresponding mst, i.e. that minimized for length, width, surface area, volume and conductance, respectively . in other words, redundancy involves minimal investment in additional transport structures.figure  <dig> 
redundancy costs and network distance.  histogram of the fractional cost to be redundant for vein segment lengths, widths, surface area, volume and conductance for the  <dig> angiosperms leaves. mean % cost values  are the open symbols at the top of the panel and follow the legend for figure 4b.  mean distance to the network vs. mean distance to the mst . a two sample t-test indicated that the mean values for the two methods did not differ in any case . note, all data points are constrained to be below the 1: <dig> line.



the mean distance from non-vein tissue to the venation network were statistically indistinguishable  whether evaluated using the reticulate network or any of its mst counterparts . further, we found that the maximum distance from a non-vein component to the network increased by a mean value of  <dig> % with most leaves unchanged. hence, the distances from vein to non-vein regions in msts and reticulate networks are not significantly different from one another.

discussion
leaf vein networks display tremendous variety in their form  <cit> , and vein network traits have been shown to be correlated with whole leaf conductance  <cit>  photosynthetic rates  <cit> , species diversification rates  <cit> , and have been utilized as a proxy for climatic changes  <cit> . reticulate veined leaves first appear in the paleo-botanical record in the early carboniferous  <cit>  as simple cross linkages between semi-parallel veins. the subsequent divergence in reticulate form is vast and well documented with numerous morphological classes having been identified based primarily on the concept of vein order and arrangement  <cit> . the physiological and theoretical consequences of this transition have only recently been investigated in the context of redundancy .

we have examined the difference between reticulate nets and msts with respect to some of the costs and benefits of minor vein redundancy. however, given the demonstrated links between vla and photosynthetic rates  <cit> , it may be that there are benefits to the reticulate form over and above simple minor redundancy. as seen in figure 4a, the mean network increased in length  <dig> %. given a constant area, this corresponds to a mean increase of  <dig> % in vla, which based on previously published empirical relationships  <cit>  would lead to an increase in photosynthetic rate, all else being equal. of course photosynthesis and gas exchange are dependent on numerous physiological traits in addition to vla and a full understanding of the influence of vla on leaf physiological rates is an important target for future research.

while we observe no statistical difference between mst and reticulate nets in the distance to non-vein areas, msts are indeed marginally further away , thus the decrease in distance over which diffusion is the dominant flow regime that is enabled by reticulate nets may ultimately contribute to increased photosynthetic rate. thus the reticulate form likely has multiple benefits that have led to the increase in its prominence, with natural selection likely acting not only on increased robustness, but also perhaps photosynthetic rate. of course it is possible to increase vla without becoming reticulate, and it is likely that some lineages have taken this course. moreover, increasing the number of freely ending veinlets in leaves, as is found in many plant families, will also increase vla without increasing loopiness  <cit> , which may explain why our values for meshedness are not closer to those expected for fully planar networks.

we also find that the cost of redundancy increases with vla, loopiness, meshedness and robustness . these costs are relatively minor and approach 5% by volume for the loopiest/densest leaves. vessel bundles in leaves have a higher costs per unit mass due to the fraction of lignin and cellulose in their tissues  <cit> . thus, given the aforementioned relationship between vla and measures of leaf performance such as photosynthetic rate, our results suggest that selection on high photosynthetic rates may have the added cost of an increased mass investment in vein structure, over and above that of a strictly hierarchical tree.

similarly, the costs of redundancy for theoretical conductance are quite low, with a mean of  <dig> % of the total. this highlights the fact that theoretical conductance scales approximately with the fourth power of vein radius  <cit> . large veins contribute much more to total conductance than small veins. thus an increase in redundancy, by increasing the number and length of the minor most veins, does little to change the overall conductance or resistance  of the leaf network. detailed measurements of resistance in both xylem and mesophyll pathways indicate that the partitioning of resistance in leaves has both vein and mesophyll components which vary substantially between species, but are thought to be roughly equivalent on average  <cit> .

our estimates of conductance are based on the assumption that xylem conductance follows a hagen-poiseuille type scaling with conductance is proportional to radius to the 4th power and length to the 1st power, and further that there exists a consistent proportionality between vessel bundle dimensions and the dimensions of the xylem vessels they contain. while the use of the hagen-poiseuille relationship is well established in studies of plant hydraulics  <cit> , due to the difficulty associated with sectioning and imaging small leaf veins, it is not currently known if a constant proportionality exists between vein diameters and xylem diameters. the laplace-young law states that for a conduit to resist transmural forces due to capillary tension, its thickness should be directly proportional to its internal radius, suggestive of such a proportionality  <cit>  in veins that do not provide any additional biomechanical support to the leaf, which is likely true for the minor most veins we consider here. recent work on tree branches has shown that the ratio of non-conducting to conducting area, remains approximately constant across branches of varying size due to an inverse relationship between xylem size and number, a so called “packing rule” for xylem  <cit> . it is not known if this relationship holds in leaves, and an understanding of the relationship between vein diameter, the number and size of the xylem contained within veins, and their effect on vein conductance, is an important target for future research.

CONCLUSIONS
overall, our results suggest that the transition from strictly hierarchical trees like those found in early ferns and gymnosperms to the reticulate networks found in subsequent tracheophyte lineages is unlikely to have resulted in a substantial cost either in terms of network resistance, linear dimensions, volume, and presumably mass  <cit> . moreover, assuming leaf area is fixed, redundancy has with it the added benefit of increased vla which is known to increase photosynthetic rates. we suggest that the benefit of increased robustness in the face of disturbance and vla increase outweighed the rather minor costs of redundancy in terms of material investment. subsequent analyses will help to reveal how forms of redundancy differ between lineages or habitats, particularly those in which herbivory, high evaporative demand or other disturbances are prevalent.

