BACKGROUND
with cereals constituting more than 60% of the world's dietary intake, the bread wheat triticum aestivum is one of the most important crops in world agriculture  <cit> . despite the high yields achieved in europe there is still a real need to generate improved cultivars, as yield and flour quality can be dramatically affected by the environment. this need has become even greater in recent years with tightening world supplies and reduced stocks, resulting in record grain prices  <cit> . over the past decade, the advent of genomic technologies has played an increasingly important role in this process. the ability to perform studies on a genome-wide scale has allowed an understanding of entire biological pathways and the complex regulatory networks of the transcriptome and has generated information that has the potential to be exploited in breeding programmes.

there are currently many tools available to measure global gene expression, perhaps the most commonly used are microarrays or genechips  <cit> . however, due to the complicated nature of the bread wheat genome; consisting of three closely related genomes   <cit>  with approximately 25% of all genes represented by at least two paralogous loci  <cit>  and with 75% of the  <dig>  gigabases consisting of repetitive sequences  <cit> , current microarrays have their limitations. for example, previous studies using both spotted cdna microarrays and the affymetrix wheat genechip® have shown that while microarray-based platforms are capable of monitoring gene expression in polyploids, due to cross-hybridisation of related transcripts, they can be misleading as to which homoeolog/paralog-specific sequences are actually being quantified  <cit> .

serial analysis of gene expression , as described by velculescu et al.  <cit> , is now established as a powerful technique for the simultaneous, quantitative analysis of large numbers of transcripts. since  <dig> there have been numerous reports of the use of sage in the characterisation of the transcriptome of various plant species  <cit>  including a recent report on the analysis of the developing caryopsis of wheat  <cit> . sage has several advantages over microarrays; it has a greater potential to discriminate between homoeologous and paralogous transcripts, it reveals the absolute expression values of the transcriptome allowing direct comparisons between genes, it is not limited to previously identified genes and it has no theoretical transcript detection limit  <cit> . sage therefore holds the promise of being able to identify the presence and abundance of novel transcripts including alternative spliced and/or antisense transcripts, something only possible with very specifically designed microarrays  <cit> .

one of the major limitations of sage is that without a complete genome sequence from the species under investigation, tag annotations have to be performed using the limited sequence data available. this inevitably results in ambiguous or unassigned annotations and thus without further characterisation some data will be of limited use.

in this study we have used longsage  <cit>  to study gene expression in allohexaploid wheat at a developmental stage,  <dig> days post anthesis , when the cellular endosperm is undergoing large scale carbohydrate biosynthesis. in addition to collecting data from the transcriptome of grain derived from plants grown under standard conditions, we also obtained data from the transcriptome of grain from plants grown under relatively hot and dry conditions; conditions which are known to have a significant effect on the quantity and quality of the resulting flour  <cit> . to analyse the resulting tags we developed a novel approach to tag annotation, which makes best use of the publicly available sequence data. our results show that sage is an effective tool to examine the wheat allohexaploid transcriptome. in addition, our investigation has shown that both alternative and antisense transcripts are present in the wheat transcriptome, sometimes at surprisingly high frequencies. using the single copy puroindoline a and b genes  we have characterised the extent of these alternative and antisense transcripts and based upon these results we speculate that such sequences might play a role in grain development.

RESULTS
library production and sage tag annotation
several previous studies have examined the transcriptome of the developing cereal grain  <cit>  and more recently mcintosh et al.  <cit>  used longsage to study grain development in allohexaploid wheat.

grown under typical uk conditions, uk adapted wheat varieties begin the onset of large-scale carbohydrate synthesis around  <dig> dpa. however, numerous studies have demonstrated that grain development is heavily influenced by environmental factors such as heat and moisture  <cit> . to obtain a wide sample of the various transcripts present during this agronomically important phase of development, we generated six longsage libraries from two related commercial wheat varieties grown under two environmental conditions, as described in the methods section.

before analysis, duplicate ditags and sequences falling below the megabace quality threshold were removed. in addition, all tags were trimmed so that only the first  <dig> of the potential  <dig> bases, including the anchoring enzyme  site, were included for this analysis. the last base was removed as its presence caused a disproportionate increase in the number of distinct tags, indicating that this sequence position was unreliable. in total,  <dig>  tags were sequenced across all six libraries, with individual library counts ranging from  <dig>  to  <dig>  . a good correlation was observed between the replicate libraries , highlighting the reproducibility of the data. to our knowledge, no other study has generated such a large number of tags for a single developmental stage in wheat.

percentages displayed are of the total cumulative tag count.

the total tag count represents  <dig>   unique tags, of which  <dig>  , representing approximately 44% of all tags sequenced, were singletons, i.e. appear only once in the entire dataset. these values are slightly higher than those observed by mcintosh et al.  <cit> , who sampled wheat grains at the same developmental stage  and sequenced  <dig>  tags of which 40% were unique and 31% singletons. our plants were grown in generally cooler conditions than those in this previous study and this is likely to have resulted in slower grain development and the observed differences in tag frequency. in addition, as our data comprise two, albeit closely related, varieties and two environmental conditions, it is not surprising that we see proportionately more singletons and unique tags than the equivalent library described by mcintosh et al.  <cit> .

a critical step in the sage procedure is the annotation of the sequenced tags. due to the large number of tags generated this procedure requires automation. the first step towards the annotation of a tag requires matching it to a previously characterised sequence e.g. an expressed sequence tag  or genomic sequence. a typical approach is to match tags to clustered ests representing putative genes   <cit> , but often these clusters are imperfect, with some genes being split into multiple clusters, while other clusters represent several genes. such an approach could result in ambiguous tag-to-gene matches. on the other hand, one tag may match several closely related ests, making tag assignments to a specific est arbitrary and resulting in a loss of information.

once a tag has been assigned to a sequence it then has to be annotated with its gene name and putative function. although, some sequences are already fully annotated, this is often not the case and in these circumstances blastx  <cit>  searches can be employed. these problems are amplified further for an organism such as t. aestivum, an allohexaploid species, where a complete genome sequence is not available, often the sequence data available are poorly annotated and where few proteins have been characterised.

to overcome these challenges, we devised a novel approach to generate tag-to-gene matches, executed using custom perl  <cit>  scripts  and described in figure  <dig>  the first step in our annotation process was, where possible, to assign annotation to the ncbi unigene set build # <dig> . to do this, unigene sequences were used to search the non-redundant  protein database using blastx. as not all unigene sequences are of the sense strand, this has the added advantage of predicting the sequence orientation. in an attempt to exclude potentially spurious tags, generated as a result of sequencing errors, only tags that were observed more than once were included. additionally, low complexity tags  were removed and this resulted in a total of  <dig>  unique tags being processed. tags were subsequently assigned to a particular unigene using the following hierarchy; 1: perfect tag-to-sequence match in the forward orientation. 2: perfect tag-to-sequence match to the reverse orientation. 3: 'fuzzy' tag-to-sequence match  in the forward orientation. 4: fuzzy tag-to-sequence match in the reverse orientation. 5: no match to an est. initially, matches were performed against unigenes with blastx annotations, as having a gene annotation adds more value to the data. in total  <dig>  tags  were assigned to an annotated unigene. if no matches were identified for a particular tag the whole procedure was repeated for unigenes without annotations. a further  <dig> tags were assigned to a unigene in this way, resulting in a total of  <dig>  unique tags  assigned to a unigene in one of the four categories; forward perfect match, forward fuzzy match, reverse perfect match, reverse fuzzy match . the fully annotated dataset is available as additional file  <dig> 

the fuzzy matching procedure was included in our approach as it was predicted that many tags would otherwise remain un-annotated due to the incomplete nature of the sequence data available. this prediction was proved correct with only 20% of tags assigned to a unigene by a perfect match. fuzzy matching allows annotation assignment where sequence differences exist as a result of previously uncharacterised homoeologs, paralogs or sequencing errors within the unigene dataset. as sequencing errors are predicted to occur once in every  <dig> bases, this has the potential to affect a large proportion of tag-to-unigene assignments  <cit> . this effect will increase in frequency with increasing tag length  and so could affect approximately one fifth of the tags within our dataset. fuzzy matching also enables tags with no perfect match to be assigned to a closely related transcript, likely to have a similar function. this approach is of value where not all members of a multi-gene family have been sequenced, or where family members have been clustered and the gene sampled is not the same haplotype as the representative sequence. fuzzy matching is also of use when polymorphisms exist between the wheat variety being studied and the variety from which the representative unigene sequence was obtained. fuzzy matching is, of course, not without its problems with the possibility of tags being assigned to the wrong gene. for example homoeologs and/or paralogs could be all assigned to the same unigene making it impossible to investigate homoeolog/paralog-specific gene expression. this could lead to loss of information within the dataset, especially in cases where expression changes in closely related genes could cancel each other out when combined. in some cases tags may be assigned to a gene with a completely different function, but we expect these cases to be in the minority. despite all of this a less than perfect tag-to-unigene match is more desirable than a tag with no putative function if biological inferences are to be made from the data. coemans et al.  <cit>  also used a fuzzy matching procedure to annotate 19% of the sage tags generated in musa acuminata, whereas  <dig> % of our processed tags were annotated by fuzzy matching. this high proportion is to be expected given the lack of available sequence data and the highly complex nature of the hexaploid wheat genome.

sage tags should be derived from the 3' most catg within a transcript, hence if the use of fuzzy matching is not a valid approach, then it would be expected that tags assigned in this way would be randomly distributed along the transcript. to test this, once tags were assigned to a particular unigene their position within the sequence with respect to the 3' most catg was determined . as expected the majority of the forward perfect tags were canonical, i.e. positioned next to the most 3' catg within the available sequence. these data also revealed that the forward perfect and forward fuzzy tags have very similar distributions along the transcript length, with the vast majority of tags being derived from the canonical position. although this is discussed later, it is interesting to note here that there is a general trend for the reverse perfect and reverse fuzzy tags, to also be derived in the highest numbers at the 3' end of the sense transcript . these observations strongly indicate that the use of fuzzy matching for annotation is a valid approach.

interestingly, when the annotation procedure was applied to the singleton tags a similar distribution between the categories was revealed .

in cases where tags matched multiple unigenes, the tag was assigned to the unigene with the largest cumulative tag count, to reduce redundancy within the data. thus our  <dig>  processed tags are represented by  <dig>  unigenes.

once tags were assigned to specific unigenes it was then possible to combine all tag counts assigned to them and after normalization to a total library tag count of  <dig>   to investigate further the transcriptome of the wheat grain at this agronomically important phase of development.

gene expression at  <dig> dpa 
the grains used for this experiment were harvested at  <dig> dpa, a point in time which falls within the early  or 'medium milk' phase of grain filling  <cit> . grain development is extremely dynamic during this period, with the initiation of storage protein accumulation, the appearance of type 'a' starch granules, division of meristematic endosperm cells, wall thickening of the cells that will form the aleurone and growth of the embryo  <cit> . it might therefore be expected that this wide array of developmental processes will be reflected in the diversity of sage tags obtained and to a large extent this expectation was met.

forward  tag counts for each unigene were combined across all six libraries and functional annotations assigned, according to the categories described by mcintosh et al.  <cit> , to the most abundant. the distribution of our forward tags across the functional groups was similar to the results obtained by mcintosh et al.  <cit>  . therefore this aspect of our study will not be discussed any further here , instead we have focused the rest of this analysis on the tags that often receive little attention in plant-based sage studies; namely alternatively spliced/polyadenylated and antisense transcripts.

alternative splicing/polyadenylation
within the  <dig> unique tags assessed for their position,  <dig> were non-canonical. . such tags can arise by incomplete digestion with the anchoring enzyme, priming from an internal poly tract or by incorrect annotation. however, several sage studies have reported the presence of many non-artefactual, non-canonical tags and have postulated that these represent transcripts that have been alternatively spliced or alternatively polyadenylated  <cit> .

to investigate the presence of alternative transcripts within our forward orientation tags, we focused on the  <dig> most abundant unigenes  and removed those with internally repetitive sequences or that form part of known large multi-gene families , as we could not state with confidence that a tag assigned to a non-canonical position within one unigene was not actually a canonical tag from another family member. within the remaining subset of data  we could find no convincing evidence for the presence of alternatively spliced transcripts despite the presence of non-canonical tags . we did, however, see evidence of alternative polyadenylation within the 3' untranslated regions . this is best illustrated with the pina and pinb genes, selected as they are well characterised, single copy genes found only on the d genome   <cit> .

within pina, tags aligned to four of the five possible catg sites, with only the 5' most catg lacking a tag . all four tags appear to represent alternatively polyadenylated transcripts that would not result in a truncated protein as their predicted polyadenylation signals all occur in the 3' utr. this is consistent with gautier et al.  <cit> , who also observed pina transcripts with truncated 3' utrs.

the pinb tags also revealed evidence of alternative polyadenylation . comparison with the full length pinb gene  <cit>  allowed an additional tag  to be identified within our sage libraries that represented the canonical position of the full length transcript. for both pina and pinb, the canonical tag was not the most abundant, an observation used by others as evidence of non-canonical tag validity  <cit> .

ojopi et al.,  <cit>  also found evidence for 3' utr alternative polyadenylation events within their schistosoma mansoni sage libraries. they observed that truncations in the 3' utrs often resulted in the deletion of a significant portion of the adenosine and uridine-rich elements, which target mrnas for rapid degradation, suggesting that alternative polyadenylation plays a role in transcript stability. in addition, it has been shown that in plants, mrnas with long 3' utrs are more likely to be targeted for degradation by the nonsense-mediated decay pathway  <cit> .

both pina and pinb are among the most abundant sense transcripts within this data set. such high abundance can result from either high transcription rates, low transcript decay rates or a combination of both. thus it is plausible that the relatively low abundance of the full length mrnas, represented by the 3' most tags, for both pina and pinb results in increased transcript stability.

these observations of alternative polyadenylation raise the question of how the transcription mechanism chooses between the alternative sites. the atfca gene, for example, requires a 3' end-processing protein called fy  <cit> . it has also been observed that antisense transcripts can drive alternative splicing and may even regulate alternative polyadenylation  <cit> .

antisense transcripts
consistent with other sage experiments, we found tags  that align to the bottom  dna strand and thus represent putative antisense transcripts  <cit> . antisense transcripts are known to occur from approximately 25–30% of all plant genes  <cit>  and our data is consistent with this; of the  <dig>  unigenes assigned at least one sage tag,  <dig>  were represented by reverse tags. antisense transcription is typically associated with rna interference  mediated gene silencing, but antisense transcripts have been implicated in many other processes including occlusion of transcription and direction of dna methylation . all of these could result in a reduction of abundance of the corresponding sense transcript. however, antisense transcription has also been implicated in processes that may have little effect on sense transcript abundance such as directing alternative splicing and polyadenylation  <cit> .

tag counts for reverse tags  assigned to the same unigene were combined across all six libraries and a list of the  <dig> most abundant antisense unigenes compiled. within this list we were confident that  <dig> unigenes , representing  <dig> antisense tags, were correctly assigned to the 'antisense' category  . each one of these  <dig> unigenes was subsequently assigned to one of the nine functional groups as described by mcintosh et al.  <cit>  and compared to the unigene-based distribution of the forward  tags.

pm – unique perfect match tags.

fm – unique fuzzy matched tags

* – annotation obtained by manual search

the distribution of the sense and antisense unigenes across these nine functional groups was quite different.

perocchi et al.  <cit>  demonstrated that in microarray experiments, and indeed any transcriptome based study that includes a reverse transcription step , antisense artefacts are common place. they demonstrated that approximately half of all antisense transcripts arise as a result of spurious second strand cdna synthesis. the main cause of such spurious transcription is a hairpin loop at the 3' of the first-strand cdna, in which case it might be expected that the tag counts for the antisense transcripts would follow that of their sense counterparts. the differences in the functional distribution of the sense and antisense tags and complete lack of tag count correlation  between the sense and antisense tags suggest that in this experiment in the most part our antisense tags have not arisen as a result of spurious antisense transcription during cdna synthesis. another possible cause of spurious antisense transcription is re-priming from degraded rna fragments, this however would still be expected to result in a correlation between sense and antisense transcript abundances. a final possibility is that re-priming of the first-strand cdna can occur from the primers used for the first- strand synthesis. as an oligo dt was used for the priming of cdna synthesis in this experiment, it would be expected that unigenes with antisense tags assigned to them to have polyt tracts within their gene sequence, we saw no evidence for this.

the largest functional group within the antisense unigenes comprised  <dig> % of the total tag abundance and represented those with an unknown function. this was in stark contrast with the sense tag unigenes, where only  <dig> % had no assigned function. this is perhaps not surprising as the antisense tags generally have lower abundances than the sense tags and therefore the corresponding transcripts are less likely to have been characterised.

the second most abundant group within the antisense unigenes was the 'storage group', which in the case of the antisense data comprised only storage proteins whereas the sense data also included the grain softness  and pin genes. this group represented  <dig> % of cumulative antisense tag frequency, markedly different from the  <dig> %, seen with the sense transcripts. two of the nine storage proteins represented by antisense tags with cumulative abundances of  <dig> and  <dig> had low abundant sense partners with counts of  <dig> and  <dig> respectively, indicating the possibility that for these transcripts down-regulation is occurring via antisense transcription. however, six of the remaining seven transcripts within this list are also found in the  <dig> most abundant sense list; with the seventh appearing in the top  <dig>  as both members of these sense and antisense transcript pairs appear to be abundant it seems unlikely that their role is sense transcript down-regulation. therefore the antisense transcripts may serve some other purpose, such as mediating alternative polyadenylation.

the reproduction group is the third most abundant category within the antisense data. it is represented by five unigenes and accounts for  <dig> % of the total antisense transcript abundance. each of these genes encodes a protein involved in dna or rna processing. the most abundant antisense transcript of this group is complementary to an rrna homing endonuclease transcript, a protein capable of lateral transfer of introns or inteins to homologous alleles lacking the sequence . this group also contains an antisense transcript complementary to the argonaute gene. argonaute forms the catalytic component of the rna-induced silencing complex , which brings about the degradation of mrna targeted by small interfering rnas  and a reduction in gene expression. thus it appears that this mechanism of antisense gene regulation may itself be regulated by antisense transcription. a similar observation has been made for alternative splicing, where the genes involved in regulating conventional and alternative splicing are themselves heavily alternatively spliced  <cit> .

a further antisense unigene that may play some role in regulation of gene expression was similar to a protein with a methyl-cpg binding domain. in mammals, methyl-cpg binding proteins preferentially bind to methylated cpg dinucleotides and in doing so translate the patterns of cytosine dna methylation into changes in transcription activity. their role in plants is less clear-cut, as several arabidopsis proteins that carry the methyl-cpg binding motif have been identified but they do not appear to bind methylated dna  <cit> . of the five genes in this category only one  was also represented by a forward tag, but this was only sampled five times, suggesting that these antisense transcripts may down-regulate their complementary sequences.

the signalling group makes up  <dig> % of the most abundant antisense unigenes. within this group the most abundant antisense unigene, putative inositol  <dig> , <dig> trisphosphate 3-kinase p3k), has a count more than four times higher than the next most abundant. inositol phosphate kinases  are reasonably well understood in animals and have been demonstrated to be important for signal transduction, for example they play a critical role in calcium homeostasis . however, their precise roles in plants are only just coming to light. recently, an ip3k  from arabidopsis was shown to promote axillary shoot branching  <cit> . a dual function for this protein has been demonstrated as it also has the ability to phosphorylate the carbon in the 6th position, generating inositol  <dig> , <dig> , <dig> pentakisphosphate ip <dig> from ip <dig>  <cit> . xia et al.  <cit>  demonstrated that atipk2β complements a yeast mutant lacking a transcription complex involved in arginine-metabolism-related gene expression and thus postulated that in higher plants ip3ks may also play an important role in transcription regulation.

numata et al.  <cit> , found a subset of antisense transcripts from human, mouse, drosophila, arabidopsis and rice were enriched for a few ontological categories including the nucleotide binding group and suggested that "antisense-mediated regulation may occur at diverse junctions in the regulatory networks of cells". we too found nucleotide binding proteins amongst our most abundant antisense unigenes , which along with those in the signalling group have the potential to affect multiple biological phenomena. in combination these two groups account for nearly a quarter  of the most abundant antisense unigenes and thus have potentially far reaching effects. it could be argued that when large changes are required, it would be more efficient to generate one antisense transcript that can control multiple pathways than to generate multiple individual transcripts. at the time in development investigated for this study  there is a transition in grain processes from cell division, expansion and differentiation towards storage protein and starch accumulation and so a more general mechanism for the down regulation of non-vital processes might be appropriate.

so far the term 'antisense transcript' has been used in its broadest sense, referring to an rna molecule that is complementary to another mrna. however, there are many types of antisense transcripts; they can be generated in cis-  or trans , they can be long or short, they can be coding or non-coding and can have numerous patterns of sequence overlap, from being completely embedded within their partner gene to having only a short overlapping region in either of the utrs  <cit> .

antisense transcripts also vary in their level of sequence similarity with their target sequence, trans-encoded antisense transcripts, for example, tend to be only partially complementary in contrast to cis-encoded transcripts, which by their very nature are homologous in their overlapping range.

although the antisense sage tags appear to be distributed more evenly along the length of the unigenes than the sense , they are found in higher numbers at the 3' end of the sense strand . this distribution most probably reflects the diversity of the types of antisense transcripts present. for example, antisense tags that align to the 3' most catg can arise from trans-transcription or by convergent cis-transcription of an antisense molecule with a transcription start site 3' to the end of the target gene . to validate the observed antisense tags, we chose to perform a more detailed analysis of pin gene transcription as although they did not appear in the most abundant antisense list they are single copy genes and antisense tags were detected corresponding to pinb but not pina.

often strand specific rt-pcr is employed to assess both sense and antisense transcription. however, consistent with the findings of haddad et al.  <cit>  our extensive attempts to generate strand specific amplicons were unsuccessful , therefore a microarray approach was employed. initially, at least two 30-mer oligos for every predicted open reading frame  > <dig> bp and inter-orf region were designed along the entire length of the ha locus . hybridisation with probes derived from rna extracted from grain at  <dig>   <dig>   <dig>   <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> dpa, revealed this to be a valid approach with the array being accurate at predicting both genic regions and novel inter-genic regions of transcription .

to validate the presence of pin antisense transcripts, tiled sense and antisense oligos were designed to cover the entire pina and b genes and their surrounding genomic regions. hybridisation of this array with probes derived from rna extracted from grain at  <dig>   <dig>   <dig>   <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> dpa revealed evidence of antisense transcription for both the pinb and, in contrast with the sage data, pina transcripts. examination of the tiled oligos confirmed that expression was largely confined to the oligos covering the transcribed regions . in addition, it was apparent that while hybridisation of the sense oligos was uniform across the transcript length this was not the case with the antisense oligos . this suggests that the antisense transcripts being measured by the arrays are transcribed in trans and thus only share interrupted regions of homology with the sense transcript. this may also explain why no pina antisense sage tags were sampled, i.e. pina antisense sage tags were generated but were derived from regions that do not share homology with the sense transcript and so would not have been assigned to the pina unigene using our annotation procedure. to analyse this further we combined the data generated from all oligos that covered the transcribed regions in order to compare the expression profiles of the sense and antisense tags over time . this experiment confirmed that the sense pina and b transcripts accumulated during early development peaking at  <dig> dpa, and remained at high levels during the middle phase of development  and rapidly declined towards the end of development, a pattern similar to that observed by gautier et al.  <cit> . the pina and b antisense transcripts also accumulate during the early phase of development, again peaking at  <dig> dpa before declining in abundance. as both the sense and the antisense transcripts appear to accumulate at the same time, it seems likely that they are co-regulated. however, this pattern either means that the antisense transcripts are not down regulating the sense transcripts or that additional, as yet unknown, factors are involved in the interaction between the two. it is interesting to note that in our array experiment the antisense signal appears to decay before the sense signal, suggesting that the antisense transcript is not available to regulate the sense transcript during the later part of grain development. in this case it is difficult to interpret the role of the antisense transcript. it is plausible that the antisense pina and b transcripts are involved in directing the observed alternative polyadenylation, which could in turn be affecting transcript stability. however, whereas we do observe different frequencies of alternative polyadenylated transcripts for both pina and b in the different sage libraries the small numbers involved do not allow us to draw any statistically significant conclusions. hence, further work is required to test this hypothesis. in addition, it must be remembered that in our array-based experiments we have used rna derived from whole endosperm and so the possibility remains that the role of the antisense pina and b transcripts is determined by both spatial as well as temporal regulation. again further work using in situ hybridisation will be necessary to investigate this possibility.

CONCLUSIONS
our study has shown that detailed semi-automated analysis of sage-based transcriptome data can be used to extract useful information from those species for which no full genome sequence exists. our results have also shown that in the case of species with complex polyploid genomes, such as the majority of plants, the use of fuzzy data is valid and can be used to make an important contribution to the subsequent analysis. analysis of the dataset generated by this process has shown that for allohexaploid wheat there is no evidence for extensive alternative splicing. however, there is considerable evidence for alternative polyadenylation within the 3' utrs. our results also strongly suggest that the wheat transcriptome contains a large number of antisense transcripts which may have a role in gene regulation. examination of the developmental pattern of sense and antisense transcripts showing sequence similarity to the pina and pinb genes suggests that the factors controlling the expression of the two may be linked. however, our results clearly show that the relationships between sense and antisense pairs can be complex and that further work is now required to examine the role that antisense transcripts play in orchestrating the transcriptome of the developing wheat grain.

