BACKGROUND
the oral diseases  are a major public health problem and are amongst the most prevalent diseases of mankind  <cit> . the main cause of these diseases is the complex microbiota established as dental plaque, a complex microbial biofilm  <cit>  containing over  <dig> different bacterial species  <cit> .

dental plaque biofilms provide a resistant environment for bacteria due to their stable structures being uniquely accreted to non-shedding surfaces. bacterial biofilms show increased tolerance to antibiotics and antiseptics and resist phagocytosis as well as other components of host defense, which can ultimately lead to chronic infections  <cit> . regular oral hygiene is vital for oral health. brushing and flossing are considered the gold standard oral hygiene procedures to help control dental plaque. however, even though much emphasis is placed on the mechanical methods of oral hygiene, oral care products such as toothpastes and mouthwashes containing antimicrobial agents are actively promoted by manufacturers as a means to assist in the control of plaque and gingivitis . a range of antibacterial  agents such as chlorhexidine , triclosan, essential oils and metal salts snii, znii are used in commercial oral care products to help control dental plaque and halitosis  <cit> . chx exhibits broad spectrum activity against both gram-positive and gram-negative bacteria, yeast, dermatophytes and lipophilic viruses  <cit>  and is considered stable, safe and effective in helping to reduce plaque and gingivitis .

chx has been used as an antiseptic for many decades. although uncommon, some resistance has emerged in clinical isolates with reduced susceptibility to chx such as multiresistant staphylococcus aureus  <cit>  and other species  <cit> . the major factor for the progression of bacterial resistance to antiseptic agents has been suggested to be the selective pressure created by over-use of antibiotics  <cit> . however, the long term use of oral care  antimicrobials  may also be a contributing factor to the development of multidrug resistance  <cit> . the widespread, uncontrolled use of antibiotics and antiseptics may lead to the ultimate selection of multidrug resistance strains that can occupy a niche in dental plaque after competition with the susceptible normal flora. the niche can then act as a source for dissemination of the multidrug resistant strain and establishment of a life-threatening infection in a compromised host .

this study sought to identify bacteria less susceptible to chx in dental plaque and then to determine the antibiotic resistance characteristics of these chx-resistant plaque isolates.

RESULTS
identification of dental plaque isolates
dental plaque from  <dig> individuals was isolated, suspended in pbs, serially diluted and plated on nutrient agar . bacteria with variant morphology were selected and passaged on to na supplemented with chx at 2 μg/ml. six colonies with variant morphologies were selected for further analysis. genomic dna was extracted from the isolates and the 16s rrna gene sequenced. the sequences were used for species identification using blast similarity search at the national center for biotechnology information . maximum identities were found to chryseobacterium culicis, chryseobacterium indologenes, acinetobacter johnsonii, enterobacter ludwigii, pseudomonas stutzeri and streptococcus salivarius .table  <dig> name and accession number of dental plaque bacteria exhibiting chlorhexidine resistance


chryseobacterium culicis

chryseobacterium indologenes

acinetobacter johnsonii

enterobacter ludwigii

pseudomonas stutzeri

streptococcus salivarius


dental bacteria display variable antibiotic resistance profiles
the six isolates were tested for their susceptibility to antimicrobial compounds representing β-lactams , aminoglycosides , tetracyclines  and macrolides  plus chloramphenicol and the non-ribosomal peptide vancomycin using disc diffusion. the bacteria showed variation in their resistance profiles  with chryseobacterium species found to be the most resistant to the drugs including ampicillin, kanamycin, gentamicin, and tetracycline whereas they were susceptible to erythromycin and vancomycin with ≥18 mm zones of inhibition. s. salivarius was susceptible to vancomycin, ampicillin, and chloramphenicol but resistant to kanamycin and tetracycline. a. johnsonii was sensitive to kanamycin, tetracycline and chloramphenicol but was resistant to vancomycin, ampicillin and erythromycin. e. ludwigii was erythromycin sensitive  but gentamicin, kanamycin and tetracycline resistant. p. stutzeri had intermediate resistance against four different drugs, susceptibility to chloramphenicol and resistance to kanamycin and tetracycline . therefore, when chx resistance was identified the species were also resistant to a range of antibiotics.table  <dig> antibiotic profile of plaque microorganisms


c. culicis

c. indologenes

a. johnsonii

e. ludwigii

s. salivarius

p. stutzeri



vm vancomycin, ap ampicillin, km kanamycin, gm gentamicin, tc tetracycline, em erythromycin, cm chloramphenicol

susceptible: ≥17 mm; intermediate: 14–16 mm; resistant: ≤ 13 mm


e. coli, escherichia coli atcc 25922; s. aureus, staphylococcus aureus atcc 25923



isolates demonstrated biofilm formation in the presence of chx
the presence of bacteria in plaque requires the capacity to form biofilm. chx insult may affect this phenotype. we therefore tested the capacity of these species to form biofilm in vitro in the presence of chx. c. culicis and c. indologenes could form biofilms in the presence of 32 μg/ml of chx. a. johnsonii and e. ludwigii biofilms were produced when grown in up to  <dig>  μg/ml of chx, whilst biofilms of the other species did not form in chx above  <dig>  μg/ml concentration .fig.  <dig> the biofilm forming ability of dental isolates in the presence and absence of chlorhexidine. biofilms were stained with crystal violet, destained and released crystal violet measured



exhibition of increased mic by plaque microorganisms
to gauge how the resistance to chx supplied as a pure chemical related to the efficacy of chx when presented in commercial chx-containing antiseptic and mouthwash, cultures were also grown in media containing serial dilutions of a chx-containing disinfectant and mouthwash  . no species was able to grow in the presence of the disinfectant at any of the dilutions tested. chlorhexidine gluconate and the commercial mouthwash had activity against a. johnsonii and e. ludwigii at 4 μg/ml or 8 μg/ml effective chx respectively. the growth of s. salivarius and p. stutzeri were completely inhibited by chx at ≥2 μg/ml from all three sources. the mic for chryseobacterium sp. was 32 μg/ml effective chx from the commercial mouthwash, equivalent to chx as pure chlorhexidine gluconate .fig.  <dig> mic of chlorhexidine against oral isolates when presented as , chlorhexidine gluconate ; , disinfectant ; , mouthwash 



bacteria showed viability after exposure to chx mouthwash
to determine if an oral hygiene regime using a chx containing mouthwash would be effective against these species, with a reduced susceptibility to chx, the bacteria were grown as a biofilm in microtiter plates and exposed to the commercial mouthwash for different time intervals. the exposed biofilms in the wells were washed and surviving bacteria grown in fresh media overnight. the cells in the planktonic phase were aspirated to a fresh plate and the optical density determined. the bacteria biofilms exhibited different patterns of viability after exposure. c. culicis, c. indologenes, a. johnsonii and p. stutzeri showed some tolerance and could grow after 20 s exposure to the undiluted mouthwash whereas after 30 s their viability was diminished . e. ludwigii and s. salivarius could grow after 10 s exposure whilst the control, sensitive species e. coli only grew following the 5 s exposure interval.fig.  <dig> recovery of dental isolates following biofilm exposure to the commercial chx mouthwash  for different time intervals



mechanism of chx resistance in c. indologenes
c. indologenes is known to be a lethal opportunistic pathogen, with inherent antimicrobial resistances  <cit> . the determination that it is also resistant to antiseptics is of concern and determination of the mechanism warrants investigation. chx resistance, as with resistance to other antimicrobials can be mediated by efflux  <cit> . bioinformatic analysis of the c. indologenes nbrc  <dig> genome  indicated that it encodes numerous proteins predicted to be efflux pumps and transporters. wp_ <dig>  is a putative acrb/hlyd-like periplasmic adaptor protein component of a tripartite efflux pump complex. to test if this may be involved in chx efflux we exposed c. indologenes to 16 μg/ml chx and compared the gene expression to that in cells not exposed to chx. comparison of cq determined from real-time qpcr from four separate experiments consistently showed an approximately  <dig> cq difference between test and control samples. this indicated a  <dig>  ±  <dig> -fold up-regulation of this gene  following chx exposure.table  <dig> comparative cq for cin01s_rs <dig> transcription with and without chx exposure


awith standard error


bcalculated as 2




discussion
mouthwash and toothpaste containing antimicrobials  are used to help control the growth of dental plaque  <cit> . extensive use of antimicrobials  may result in the selection of resistance bacterial strains which may cause life-threatening infection or superinfection in compromised individuals  <cit> . in the current study dental supragingival plaque was isolated from  <dig> healthy individuals and  <dig> species were isolated that could grow in the presence of 2 μg/ml of chx. when examined further, these species also exhibited resistance to a variety of antibiotics. two isolates, c. culicis and c. indologenes, exhibited resistance to five of the different drugs tested: ampicillin, chloramphenicol, kanamycin, tetracycline and gentamicin, consistent with reports that constitutive multidrug resistance is common in chryseobacterium species  <cit> . the mic values for chx exhibited by the chryseobacterium species reported in this current paper are amongst the highest reported  <cit> . knowledge of c. culicis is scant, being limited to the phenotypic characteristics determined during its classification  <cit> . c. indologenes  on the other hand, is known to be distributed in the environment but is capable of being a lethal nosocomial pathogen, particularly of infants  <cit>  and persons who are immunocompromised or with underlying morbidities  <cit> . the e. ludwigii isolate had resistance against four drugs so it was the second most resistant bacterium. e. ludwigii is a recently recognized species  <cit>  and is a member of what is referred to as the enterobacter cloacae complex, which is six enterobacter species clustered due to their dna similarity   <cit> . the other cluster species are e. cloacae, enterobacter asburiae, enterobacter hormaechei, enterobacter kobei and enterobacter nimipressuralis. these species have emerged as nosocomial pathogens, however, unlike this dental isolate most isolates of the e. cloacae complex are susceptible to chloramphenicol, aminoglycosides and tetracyclines, while they are intrinsically resistant to ampicillin  <cit> . the a. johnsonii isolate showed resistance against vancomycin, ampicillin and erythromycin. a previous study has reported multidrug resistant acinetobacter species as emerging pathogens, most frequently in association with pulmonary infections  <cit> . a relationship between oral health and respiratory conditions has been noted  <cit> . also, correlation between oral care and reduction in pulmonary infections in the elderly and ventilator-associated pneumonia demonstrated  <cit> . furthermore, deep neck infections are more associated with species of dental origin than pharyngotonsillar species  <cit> .

the rate of integration of these species in the dental plaque of populations is at present unknown and it cannot be ruled out that they were transient components of the plaque microbiome of the individuals. transient or otherwise, a more in depth investigation of the prevalence of these species in plaque is particularly important considering that more than one of these species has potential association with harmful infections in vulnerable individuals. the presence of multidrug resistant species in the oral cavity may increase the risk of patients acquiring infections and superinfections that are difficult to control and also suggests that the oral sources of infectious agents should be a consideration in patient care.

our study indicated potential ineffectiveness of tetracycline and kanamycin for antimicrobial treatment of infections in the cohort as five of the dental isolates were resistant to these drugs. similarly, ampicillin was ineffective against the plaque bacteria except for s. salivarius and p. stutzeri which showed some sensitivity. our results are similar to maripandi et al., who found multi-resistance of dental bacteria to chloramphenicol, vancomycin, penicillin and streptomycin  <cit> . the selective nature of the chlorhexidine-containing media used here precluded determination of the total percentage of species the chlorhexidine resistant organisms represent. comparison of a total viability count could enable this to be estimated in future studies if desired.

co-exposure to antibiotics and antiseptics may contribute to the selection of multidrug resistant strains  <cit> . multidrug resistance phenotypes can be achieved by microorganisms by a variety of mechanisms, with a common mechanism being efflux of the drug from the cell. efflux removes those compounds that breach the membrane barriers via pumps located in the cytoplasmic membrane of both gram-positive and gram-negative bacteria. efflux pumps can utilize the energy of atp binding and hydrolysis, or transmembrane proton or na+ potentials to facilitate transport of antimicrobials out of the cytoplasm  <cit> . gram-negative species also have tripartite efflux pumps that span the inner and outer membranes to enable substrate efflux from the cytoplasm or periplasm to the extracellular environment  <cit> . these tripartite systems have an inner membrane pump, a periplasm adaptor protein and an outer membrane channel. the most well studied and most significant clinically are members of the rnd  family  <cit> .

efflux pumps can have specific substrates however the association of multidrug resistance with individual efflux pumps has been established. for example, the mexab-oprm system in p. aeruginosa confers intrinsic resistance to numerous classes of compounds, including β-lactams, macrolides, lincosamides, tetracyclines, quinolones, chloramphenicol, trimethoprim, sulfamethazole and nofloxacin  <cit> . the e. coli acrab-tolc system confers resistance to these compound as well as antiseptics  <cit> . multidrug resistant acinetobacter baumanii is also resistant to chlorhexidine, effluxing this compound via the adeab system which also exports numerous other compounds  <cit> . another example is the acei transporter of the newly recognized proteobacterial chlorhexidine efflux  protein family  <cit> .

we demonstrated a 19-fold up-regulation of the gene cin01s_rs <dig> encoding the hlyd-like periplasmic adaptor protein of a tripartite efflux pump of c. indologenes upon exposure to 16 μg/ml chx. this responsiveness to chx stress by c. indologenes suggests that tolerance to chx may be mediated by efflux involving this system. the promiscuity of efflux pumps with respect to substrates can mean that development of resistance to one antimicrobial can have a pleiotropic effect on the resistance profile of a species. chlorhexidine resistance may emerge as a co-effect due to over-exposure to other antimicrobials. however, it is also possible that longer term exposure to antimicrobials in oral care products has led to the development of resistance and this could have broad implications for development of resistance to other antimicrobials, including antibiotics.

the chx-containing antiseptic  had efficient growth inhibiting effect against all the oral isolates in contrast to the commercial mouthwash where chryseobacterium species were able to grow up to an mic value of 32 μg/ml and a. johnsonii showed resistance against chx with an mic 4 μg/ml. the greater effectiveness of dentalife is likely attributable to other additives in the disinfectant acting in synergy with the chlorhexidine. an oral formulation  is restricted by the need to be safe, a low irritant of the oral mucosa and palatable, restraints that do not apply to a surface antiseptic.

bacteria in biofilms such as dental plaque are more resistant to chx due to the poor penetration of the antimicrobial  <cit> . furthermore, plaque inhibition by a chx mouthwash is dependent upon the dose and time of exposure  <cit> . herein we show that dental plaque species resistant to multiple antimicrobials are also able to resist short term exposure to chx. previous studies have reported that in vivo dental plaque regrowth inhibition requires mouth rinsing twice daily for 60 s with 10 ml of a  <dig>  % solution of chx  <cit>  and that even after a 60 s exposure to  <dig>  % solution of chx, a considerable number of biofilm bacteria remained viable  <cit> . hence this suggests that the commercial chx mouthwash would not be able to eliminate the multidrug resistant dental plaque bacteria. it has been shown in the laboratory that streptococcus sanguis under chx pressure can develop reduced susceptibility to chx which is transmissible  <cit> . this may raise concerns about the long-term use of these products in terms of developing multidrug resistance in dental plaque bacteria. although studies involving use of chx-containing products have shown no long lasting effect on the prevalence of species with lowered susceptibility to chx post cessation of chx use  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
we have demonstrated the existence of dental plaque bacteria resistant to multiple drugs as well as the antiseptic chx. the study highlights the need for increased awareness of the presence of multidrug resistant bacteria in dental plaque and if long-term use of antimicrobial oral care products is contributing to the emergence of multidrug resistant dental plaque bacteria, then the risk/benefit of using these products may need to be re-evaluated.

