BACKGROUND
the development of new transcriptome techniques, coupled with the ability of creating and analysing huge databases, has paved the way for system biology’s “golden age”. the generation and processing of high-throughput data makes possible the investigation of the genome, transcriptome, proteome and metabolome of living organisms in an overall context. this is particularly useful for gaining a deeper understanding of pathogenic microorganisms  <cit> .

the above holds also true for aspergillus fumigatus, which can be regarded as the most important airborne fungal pathogen. this fungus can cause a life-threatening disease, invasive aspergillosis , in immuno-compromised patients. patients that suffer from ia still have a low life expectancy. this is due to the lack of reliable diagnostic tools and of efficient antifungal therapies  <cit> .

transcriptome analysis has just recently been applied to a. fumigatus. the first genome-sequencing project, applied to the isolate af <dig> and coupled with the first transcriptome data available, has been published  <cit>  and a second genome, from the a. fumigatus strain a <dig>  is now available  <cit> . in the last few years, various microarray platforms have been designed for global transcriptome analyses of a. fumigatus. these platforms have all been developed independently of each other using defined sets of primers and probes. however, developing microarray platforms for a. fumigatus has already been made outdated by the advent of new technologies based on cdna sequencing.

to show the potential possibilities of mrna-seq to accelerate aspergillus research and to deepen our knowledge about the regulatory function of mpka, we analysed a. fumigatus wild-type and the corresponding mutant lacking the mpka gene by cdna sequencing and 2d gel-based proteomics. the gene mpka codes for the mitogen activated protein kinase mpka which acts on the a. fumigatus cell wall integrity  signalling pathway  <cit> . the Δmpka mutant strain is sensitive to cell-wall active compounds, oxidative stress and heat shock. the function of this gene is also related to polyamine metabolism and to the iron depletion response  <cit> . moreover, it affects the expression of several secondary metabolite gene clusters. the Δmpka mutant strain produces less gliotoxin than the wild type and this is a potent immunosuppressant belonging to the epipolythiodioxopiperazine class of fungal toxins  <cit> . our transcriptomic and proteomics data also allowed us to compare different omics-techniques. analysis of the mrna sequences obtained revealed unexpected novelties in the a. fumigatus genome. we also found that 30% of the transcriptionally active a. fumigatus genome has not been annotated in the canonical genome databases   <cit> .

in addition, we addressed the question of how the data obtained with these new technologies differ from publically available microarray data. to do this we compared published transcriptome studies carried out by using either microarrays or by applying mrna-seq with the mrna-seq dataset we generated. this comparison demonstrated that the data varies more among the different microarray platforms than between mrna-seq experiments. additionally, all the collected transcriptome data were compared with proteome data. although the data obtained by mrna-seq was better correlated with the a. fumigatus proteome, there was still a relatively low correlation between the two different datasets.

RESULTS
mrna-seq data set summary
to gain a deeper insight into the regulatory circuits of the map-kinase mpka in a. fumigatus we extracted rna from a null mpka mutant and from the corresponding wild-type strain. we sequenced a total of six libraries, three biological replicates for the Δmpka strain and three for the wild-type strain. we obtained about  <dig> million paired end reads. of these,  <dig> million  were uniquely mapped against the a. fumigatus a <dig> genome. using a stringent rpkm cut-off of  <dig> reads per gene,  <dig> genes  were found to be transcribed in the wild-type strain we used. the coverage obtained was similar to that analysed in the dataset published by gibbons et al. <cit>  for a. fumigatus . it was also similar to an mrna-seq study in a. oryzae <cit> , where the majority  of the genome was covered by at least one read. requiring coverage of at least  <dig> overlapping paired-end reads per base-pair,  <dig> %  of the genome was found to be expressed. this is remarkable, considering the fact that according to the a. fumigatus cadre genome database, only ~50% of the genome is potentially transcribable. these findings indicated that the a. fumigatus transcriptome has been greatly underestimated.

utrs prediction and annotation of new genes
so far, most studies have used mrna-seq data to identify transcriptional islands, which are consecutive areas of overlapping reads  <cit> . we additionally checked these transcript active regions  for open reading frames. since this approach is error prone, we employed ab initio gene prediction combined with mrna-seq data to improve the quality of gene prediction . this evidence-based gene prediction has the advantage over the classic ab initio prediction of finding gene structures by making use of the mrna-seq expression profiles. this combination incorporates intron-junction information derived from intron-spanning reads and allows the prediction of not translated regions  in a systematic manner. 

gene prediction still requires manual work to find appropriate adjustments for integrating data within a classic gene-predicting framework. by using mrna-seq data, we identified  <dig> new transcripts coding for putative proteins . however, we could not exclude the possibility that the new transcripts are part of untranslated regions  or even part of genes that need to be re-annotated. among all the identified new transcripts,  <dig> of them have unknown functions, while  <dig> have orthologs in the genomes of other fungi.

incorporating mrna-seq data into gene prediction also allowed the identification of utrs . however, utr prediction remains a difficult task as only expressed regions provide evidence for utr length. the method can therefore result in vague length predictions, especially for genes with low expression, due to insufficient coverage. nevertheless, the identification of 5'utr can help to find upstream open reading frames  and led in our case to the identification of one potential uorf among the newly identified genes . however, knowledge of utr sequences in a. fumigatus remains poor. this is mainly due to the lack of available expressed sequence tag  libraries. our analysis highlighted the fact that some genes can have multiple or alternative transcriptional starting points. we found an average median length for 5'utr of  <dig> and for 3'utr of  <dig> nucleotides based on  <dig> utr sequences for each gene considered .

comparison of transcriptome technologies
to better evaluate the performance of microarrays and mrna-seq, differentially expressed transcripts were investigated. we compared transcript levels in both the wild-type strain and the Δmpka mutant strain by repeating the experiment performed by jain et al. <cit> .

transcriptome data obtained by mrna-seq identified  <dig> differentially regulated genes . for comparison, using the febit microarray platform,  <dig> differentially expressed genes were identified  . kegg analysis showed that common gene categories were enriched by the differentially expressed genes identified in the two datasets . the main difference between data sets was that mrna-seq gave a more detailed picture. the number of enriched genes for a specific category was substantially higher showing, for example, complete secondary metabolite gene clusters to be differentially regulated . it is noteworthy that genes enriched in the kegg category  <dig> . <dig> , i.e. genes involved in metabolic pathways, were differentially regulated in the mrna-seq data, but in contrast, were not enriched in the data set obtained using microarrays. the majority of these genes, in particular genes putatively involved in fatty acid metabolism, were down-regulated in the Δmpka mutant. this suggests that the rna deep sequencing technique is more sensitive in finding differentially expressed genes than the microarray technique. this might be explained by the greater dynamic range covered by the rna technique  <cit> . 

for a more detailed analysis, we computed log fold changes for the Δmpka mutant vs the wild-type of the differentially expressed genes based on both microarray and mrna-seq data, including two biological replicates for each . correlation of log fold changes of expressed genes was highest within the same technology. correlation within mrna-seq replicates  was higher than that between the two microarray replicates . this low correlation was mainly due to genes that only slightly changed their expression between conditions and are therefore more affected by the technological noise resulting from the technology used. a possible explanation is the low sensitivity of microarrays for low expressed genes that results in a smaller dynamic range compared to sequence data  <cit> . 

when comparing the global transcript fold changes between mrna-seq and microarrays the correlation amounted to  <dig> - <dig>  considering all expressed genes . this was not surprising because most genes are not expected to be differentially expressed, which consequently reduces the correlation. since these genes are usually not of interest, we selected genes having the highest absolute fold change in both studies . the correlation value for this subset resulted in a large increase of both the within-array correlation  and the cross-technology correlation . however, the  <dig>  correlation is still lower than those found in other studies .

with the purpose of having additional values for evaluating the transcriptome data from the two technical platforms, qrt-pcr was performed in order to quantify transcript levels of genes that showed different expression levels in both studies . among the  <dig> transcripts investigated,  <dig> confirmed the direction of expression change detected by both transcriptome analysis techniques . surprisingly, qrt-pcr did not reveal significant changes in some genes that showed opposite regulation in the analyses of the two techniques. for instance, qrt-pcr confirmed the mrna-seq results for the sidd gene, coding for a non-ribosomal peptide synthetase involved in siderophore production . microarray data showed that genes expressed during low iron stress response were down-regulated in the Δmpka mutant strain. previous experiments reversed microarray results, demonstrating that mpka negatively regulates genes involved in siderophore production, indicating that many genes involved in iron depletion response are up-regulated in the Δmpka mutant strain   <cit> . current mrna-seq data confirmed our experimental hypothesis, by showing that genes involved in the iron starvation response are, in fact, up-regulated. 

in order to study absolute transcript abundance relationships within and across various microarray and mrna-seq platforms, we performed a comprehensive comparison. analysis of transcriptome techniques included five microarray studies  and two different experiments performed using mrna-seq analysis  . in this comparison, we included one representative sample corresponding to wild type for each experiment. for the study of jain et al. <cit>  we also included two independent probe measurements in addition to the standard one  to assess within-platform expression. 

geo: gene expression omnibus ; omnifung ; arrayexpress . *cea <dig> strain is the uracile auxotroph derived from the cea <dig> strain.

in total, the dataset compiled consists of seven wild-type measurements that were compared in a pair-wise manner. a pair wise scatter plot was realised by computing the pearson and spearman correlations for all pairs . spearman is a rank correlation technique that can capture some non-linear relationships and is less prone to outliers produced by highly abundant genes. as for marioni et al.  <cit>  and feng et al.  <cit>  the correlation between replicates for the same experiment ranged from  <dig>  for the dataset of bruns et al. <cit>  to  <dig>  for the both mrna-seq studies, indicating high platform-reproducibility for microarrays as well as for sequencing data . therefore, it was sufficient to include only one representative replicate for each platform to obtain concise comparisons. 

the transcriptome data reported showed that expression values measured for transcripts were strongly scattered. cross platform correlation was quite low, ranging from  <dig>   to  <dig>  . correlation between the independent measurements  as calculated for the dataset of jain et al.  <cit>  was only  <dig> , although all probes were exposed to the same samples. this indicates a strong technological bias of microarray data due to variation in hybridisation. at the same time, the correlation between the two febit datasets for the combined probe measurements was quite high  pointing to a high conservation of technological bias in microarray platforms. in order to perform a general comparison between technologies, i.e., microarrays vs mrna-seq, the correlation of data within the same technology was used as a reference for the correlations between technologies. the highest correlation  among comparisons of mrna-seq data to microarray data was higher than the highest correlation between arrays . this points to the fact that rna sequencing data are less affected by technological bias, which is confirmed by the scatter plot comparing both mrna-seq datasets .

comparison between a. fumigatus transcriptome and proteome
in order to analyse a possible correlation between transcripts and protein abundances as well as fold-changes, mrna-seq data, microarray data and the proteome data of the a. fumigatus wild-type and Δmpka mutant strain were compared. looking at differential expression,  <dig> different proteins were identified by 2d-gel electrophoresis and subsequent maldi-tof / tof, which showed a significant fold change in abundance  in the Δmpka mutant compared to wild type. gene enrichment and pathway analysis revealed that abundance of many proteins involved in metabolic processes and in oxidation/reduction processes is affected by mpka .

the regulation of protein levels was also compared with transcriptome data obtained from microarrays developed by febit and used in the study of jain et al. <cit>  and our mrna-seq data. as in earlier results  the fold change correlation between microarrays and mrna-seq was low . the measurements for transcriptome fold change often display low reproducibility because of difficulties in capturing the “true” fold change. for this reason, a low correlation between proteome and transcriptome technologies was assumed. however, the correlation between data obtained by microarrays and the proteome data was significantly higher  than the correlation between mrna-seq data vs proteome . as in the comparative analysis of the transcriptome data, the low correlation applies to all genes with a low fold change resulting in a higher relative impact of technological noise. furthermore, it has already been shown by studies on human and mouse  <cit>  that the relationship between transcriptome and proteome data is quite complex and protein levels are greatly influenced by post-translational processing and inherent variations in stability. these factors result in low correlations.

in order to study absolute protein abundances, we reanalysed the a. fumigatus 2d proteome map generated by vödisch et al. <cit> , resulting in the identification of  <dig> unique proteins. these proteins were also present in the different transcriptome data mentioned above . in a. fumigatus, the relative abundances of the proteome map correlated surprisingly well with mrna-seq expression levels  as well as with most microarrays, in particular the febit arrays . it is also noteworthy that the genes on the scatter plots  are more equally distributed for mrna-seq vs proteome comparison  whereas, in particular for febit arrays, a bias was observed towards genes that are highly expressed on the arrays but with low expression on the proteome-map. this is most probably due to cross-hybridisation. by contrast, this sort of bias was not observed in the ngs data. 

to check for genes that are potentially subject to post-transcriptional regulation, we selected genes that were very abundant in the mrna-seq data and rare in the proteome-map  or the inverse . funcat-analysis using fungifun tools  <cit>  indicated that the “green” genes  were not significantly enriched within a functional category , whereas the red ones  were over-represented within the tricarboxylic-acid pathway and amino acid metabolism. these processes constantly require large amounts of proteins that are therefore less subjected to transcriptional regulation.

discussion
over recent years, it has become evident that the eukaryotic regulatory machinery linking cause  to effect  is very complex. it usually involves the interplay of several regulatory layers such as transcriptome, epigenome, and proteome that might be subject to independent regulatory mechanisms. to understand these interactions as a whole, integrated studies are required.

we found that about 30% of the a. fumigatus genome expressed is located in assigned intergenic and intronic regions. this is most likely due to the presence of untranslated regions  and transcripts that have not been classified so far. we investigated the potential of rna deep-sequencing data to identify these genes by combining gene prediction  and paired-end reads. this pioneer methodology helped us find almost  <dig> new transcripts with coding potential. blast analysis revealed that more than half of these new transcripts harbour at least one ortholog in other aspergillus species. this indicates the great potential of this methodology to find new genes and to improve gene annotations.

we tested rna deep-sequencing to further investigate the role of mpka in a. fumigatus. previous studies demonstrated that this kinase is decisive for cell wall integrity signalling pathway regulation . further studies revealed that mpka is also involved in the regulation of the oxidative stress response, secondary metabolite production and siderophore biosynthesis during iron starvation  <cit> . concerning the role of mpka in a. fumigatus, mrna-seq data confirmed previous findings. additionally, many genes involved in primary and secondary metabolism were affected by mpka. in particular, genes putatively involved in amino acid biosynthesis were differentially expressed in the Δmpka mutant strain. this finding explained the strong difference found in the soluble amino acid pool composition for this strain  <cit> . moreover, almost 10% of genes differentially expressed in the Δmpka mutant are putatively involved in primary metabolism . these results confirmed that one of the functions carried out by mpka is to fine-tune the balance between stress response and energy consuming cellular processes. considering the genes involved in the iron-deficiency stress response, it was found that different techniques gave opposite results. it was previously reported that mpka is important for regulating siderophore production by measuring an increased amount of siderophores in the Δmpka mutant strain during iron starvation  <cit> . this illustrates that mrna-seq is more reliable than other transcriptome techniques. however, the differences found between mrna-seq and qrt-pcr showed that it would be good practice if results obtained by sequencing were confirmed by applying ad hoc experiments.

microarray data showed that genes belonging to several a. fumigatus secondary metabolite biosynthesis gene clusters were differentially expressed in the Δmpka mutant . secondary metabolite biosynthesis gene clusters are normally characterised by the presence of polyketide synthases  or non-ribosomal peptide synthetases . analysis of the a. fumigatus a <dig> genome revealed the presence of  <dig> nrpss,  <dig> pkss and three hybrid nrps/pks enzymes  <cit> .

among them,  <dig> gene clusters have been found to be differentially regulated in the Δmpka mutant. furthermore, in comparison with the microarray studies, the higher sensitivity of the mrna-seq technique led to the identification of almost all genes of a cluster to be differentially regulated. the mrna-seq approach is therefore superior to microarrays for studies on the global regulation of secondary metabolite biosynthesis.

the second question that we addressed concerned the comparability of mrna-seq data with published transcriptome data. we compared different technologies to investigate the a. fumigatus transcriptome . information obtained by analysing these technologies were compared with a comprehensive set of proteome data obtained by 2d dige analysis followed by maldi-tof-ms / ms-based protein detection. the comprehensive dataset compiled in this study constitutes a basis for future studies with the aim of shedding light on the relationship between proteome and transcriptome data, in order, for example, to understand better post-transcriptional regulation on a global scale.

with regard to a. fumigatus, the results of whole genome transcriptome analyses based on microarrays were highly dependent on the platform used. low consistency of microarray gene expression data can have multiple reasons, such as platform effects  <cit> , different media, rna extraction protocols, or biological variability. however, hybridisation seems to have the most significant impact. hybridisation strongly depends on the probes, which were used to develop the microarrays. in the case of a. fumigatus, they have been designed independently from each other for the different platforms. the hybridisation bias seems to be highly conserved within the same platform, as shown by the high level of agreement between the studies of jain et al. <cit>  and gehrke et al. <cit> . when considering the comparison between jain et al. <cit>  microarray data with the mrna-seq data produced in this study, the correlation is relatively low . moreover, comparing the two datasets obtained with the same experimental proceeding by bruns et al. <cit>  using microarrays and by gibbons et al. <cit>  using mrna-seq, once again showed quite a low correlation . the global comparison demonstrated that a higher correlation was found between the two mrna-seq datasets. this finding demonstrates that mrna-seq gives the highest level of comparability in terms of gene expression levels in a. fumigatus.

comparative analysis of the a. fumigatus intracellular 2d proteome map from vödisch et al. <cit>  revealed that protein abundances correlated well with transcriptome abundances measured with both microarray  and mrna-seq techniques . these values were higher than the ones observed by albrecht et al. <cit> , who compared changes in a. fumigatus microarray and proteome data after heat shock induction. previously, foss et al. <cit>  calculated a correlation between proteome and transcriptome of r =  <dig>  in saccharomyces cerevisiae based on  <dig> proteins detected by lc-ms / ms analysis. another study performed by ghazalpour et al. <cit>  using lc-ms / ms-based quantifications of  <dig> mouse proteins, resulted in an average correlation of r =  <dig>  . however, although the results showed a better correlation between a. fumigatus proteome and transcriptome data, there was still a relatively low correlation between the two different datasets. this is most likely caused by a combination of several biases based on technological and biological effects.

CONCLUSIONS
the potential of next generation sequencing to investigate the regulation of the a. fumigatus transcriptome was demonstrated. we found that the transcriptional potential of a. fumigatus was underestimated. almost 70% of the genome was found to be actively transcribed. sequence information obtained by mrna-seq was also used for gene prediction. we showed that the incorporation of transcriptome-based assembly can be very helpful for improving or confirming gene annotation. this methodology allowed us to identify  <dig> new transcripts never reported in the a. fumigatus a <dig> strain. compared to microarray data, we identified three times more differentially regulated genes in the Δmpka mutant strain compared with the wild type. comparative transcriptome and proteome studies pointed out that mpka plays an important role not only in maintaining the cell wall structure under stress condition but also in affecting genes involved in primary and secondary metabolism.

we compared data obtained by mrna-seq with those obtained by established microarray-based technologies for expression profiling. mrna-seq was found to be less error-prone and more suitable for the realisation of extensive datasets that can be potentially created by different groups under different lab conditions. consequently, data produced so far using different microarray platforms, can only be considered by focusing on the highly differentially expressed genes.

