BACKGROUND
chiari-like malformation  is a malformation of the hindbrain and the surrounding caudal cranial fossa  reported in small breed dogs. the condition is named after its analagous human counterpart, chiari-type  <dig> malformation
 <cit> . in cavalier king charles spaniels  the condition has a complex oligogenic trait of moderately high heritability
 <cit> . cm is characterised by herniation of part of the cerebellar vermis through the foramen magnum
 <cit> . other reported abnormalities include occipital bone hypoplasia/dysplasia or a ‘shallow’ occipital bone
 <cit> , kinking of the medulla and malformations of the craniocervical junction
 <cit> , ventriculomegaly or hydrocephalus
 <cit>  and syringomyelia 
 <cit> . sm is a single or series of non-cerebrospinal fluid filled cavities within the spinal cord parenchyma, the formation of which is most likely associated with alteration of cerebrospinal fluid  flow
 <cit> . sm is responsible for clinical signs of neurological disease in dogs including pain, cervical scoliosis and ataxia
 <cit> . there is a high prevalence of sm in symptomatic ckcs with cm
 <cit> . the pathogenesis of cm/sm is therefore often investigated concurrently.

the relationship between cm and sm in ckcs is thought to be compression of subarachnoid csf pathways and alteration of csf flow at the level of the foramen magnum
 <cit> . in humans with chiari-type  <dig> malformation, this alteration is associated with hypoplasia of the bones of the posterior fossa  , with overcrowding of a normally developed hindbrain and consequential cerebellar tonsillar herniation
 <cit> . studies of ckcs cerebral and cranial morphology have revealed conflicting evidence regarding the association between sm and hypoplasia of the bones of the ccf, ccf volume and cerebellar herniation
 <cit> . a possible shared limitation of these studies is a failure to identify an appropriate control group given that sm may be progressive; the prevalence of sm in asymptomatic ckcs scanned for breeding puposes is 25% at  <dig> months and 70% in dogs aged  <dig> months or more
 <cit> . a subsequent study found an association between ccf volume and sm when comparing age-matched groups
 <cit> . changes in ccf volume with time may be an aetiological factor in cm/sm progression. a previous histological study of ccf bones from adult ckcs has found evidence of active remodelling of the supraoccipital bone, with replacement of bone with cartilage
 <cit> . there may be a connection between this active remodelling and ccf volume if it occurs such that the supraoccipital bone thickness is reduced from within, thus increasing the inner ccf volume without changing the outer ccf dimensions.

there is a need for better understanding of the progression of cm and sm in dogs. we hypothesised that syrinx width increases with time in ckcs. in addition, we hypothesised that ccf volume, foramen magnum height and cerebellar herniation would progressively increase with time in ckcs with cm. we conducted a retrospective morphometric study of magnetic resonance images  from ckcs with cm. analysis of craniocerebral morphometry from ckcs with cm for which two separate mri studies were compared. our findings suggested that when present, the radiological appearance of sm is progressive . in addition, foramen magnum height, length of cerebellar herniation and ccf volume were significantly increased. there was no significant difference for ccf parenchymal volume or ventricular system volume between the first and second scans. this suggests there may be dynamic changes to the bones of the ccf which has implications for the possible pathogenesis of cm and sm in ckcs.

RESULTS
twelve ckcs were included in the study, of which eight were male  and four were female . the mean age when first scanned was  <dig>  months ±  <dig>  months. the median scan interval was  <dig>  months . ten of twelve dogs presented for the first scan with at least one clinical sign that could be attributable to cm/sm . presenting clinical complaints and treatments are summarised in table
 <dig>  the majority of dogs  presenting for a second scan did so due to clinical complaints that were considered unrelated to the initial presenting condition and thus were suspected to represent a new condition. the difference in presenting complaints  between scans was significant . four dogs were re-scanned due to poor control of the original complaint and one the development of dysaesthetic behavior.

dysaesthetic behaviour included phantom scratching and facial rubbing.

clinical complaints considered not attributable to cm/sm included seizures, head tilt, facial paresis and migrating foreign bodies.

sm progression
two ckcs  had syringes at the time of the first scan, this increased to five  with syringes at the time of the second scan. three dogs initially had central canal dilation , which increased to four dogs  following the interval. three of five dogs re-presenting due to clinical signs attributable to cm/sm had increased sm lesion width in the scan interval . there was a statistically significant  increase in sm lesion width between the first  and second  scans .

foramen magnum height and cerebellar herniation progression
foramen magnum height increased in eleven  dogs in the scan interval. foramen magnum height increased significantly  between the first  and second  scans . cerebellar herniation length increased in eight  dogs in the scan interval. there was a statistically significant  increase in the length of cerebellar herniation between the first  and second  scans .

craniocerebral volumetric progression
there was a significant difference  in ccf volume between the first  and second  scans . there was no significant difference  in ccf parenchymal volume  or volume of the ventricluar system  between the first and second scans .

discussion
these results suggest that sm lesion width increases in ckcs with cm with time. further, the height of the foramen magnum, extent of cerebellar herniation and ccf volume significantly increased with time. these findings have important implications for our understanging of the pathogenesis and natural progression of medically managed cm/sm in ckcs.

sm lesion width increased significantly in the scan interval. the number of ckcs with syringes  increased from 2/ <dig> to 5/ <dig> in the scan interval. although not all ckcs developed lesions of this width, there was progressive central canal dilation, which is a precursor of syrinx formation
 <cit> . thus this is the first report of sm progressing radiologically in ckcs with cm with time. as maximal syrinx width is associated with pain
 <cit>  this increase may also be clinically significant. clinical progression was not determined in this study due to its retrospective nature and case selection criteria. progression of clinical signs in medically treated cm/sm has recently been reported elsewhere
 <cit> . severe progression of clinical signs in our study population may have biased our case selection; ckcs with a more severe clinical phenotype prompting repeat mri may have been more likely to have increased sm lesion width. in this study, significantly more ckcs presented for the second scan with clinical complaints considered not attributable to cm/sm.

several studies have suggested a link between craniocerebral volumes, cerebellar herniation and the development of sm in ckcs. reduced ccf volume as a result of impaired occipital bone development has been implicated as the cause of cerebellar herniation
 <cit> . the adult occipital bone develops from the basioccipital, exoccipital, and supraoccipital bones which are derived from distinct somatic mesodermal derived cartilages
 <cit> . a mesodermal insufficiency has therefore been proposed as a mechanism for mis-match between cerebral and cranial volumes and their association with sm
 <cit> , however, morphometric studies have not found this association in dogs
 <cit> . ckcs have similar ccf volume to other small breeds such as the pug
 <cit> . conversely, ckcs have similar volumes of parenchyma within the ccf to larger labrador retrievers
 <cit> . in ckcs, small but significant increases in parenchymal volume within the ccf are associated with more severe sm
 <cit> . furthermore, in contrast to other small breed dogs, ckcs exhibit correlation between increased cerebellar volume and cerebellar crowding within the caudal aspect of the ccf 
 <cit> . the findings of this study suggest that ccf volume increases significantly with time and therefore may play a role in progression of the disease.

the height of the foramen magnum was significantly increased in the scan interval. our study also suggests the length of cerebellar herniation is increased. a positive association has previously been found between foramen magnum size and cerebellar herniation in ckcs
 <cit> . this may represent a dynamic change occuring to the occipital bones that form the foramen magnum in response to the previously discussed parenchymal overcrowding of the ccf. this is supported by the previous finding that a large part of the supraoccipital bone of adult ckcs is cartilage, suggesting active remodelling
 <cit> . we hypothesise that the increased ccf volume may be a result of inner resorption of the overlying occipital bones rather than an increase in its dimensions. the occipital bones in adults and children show a resorbtive pattern of the bone around the cerebellar hemispheres
 <cit> . bone remodelling occurs as an adaptation to mechanical load according to wolff’s law. the pulsatile movements of the cerebellum occuring during systole could exert a mechanical pressure on the caudal aspect of the ccf leading to occipital bone resorption, hence increasing the height of the foramen magnum and possibly changes in the extent of cerebellar herniation. in support of this theory, intra-operative and post-mortem findings of ckcs with cm have revealed that the supraoccipital bone overlying the cerebellar vermis can be remarkably thin and sometimes eroded so that the foramen magnum is enlarged dorsally
 <cit> . a thick cartilagenous band is frequently found in surgery in place of the supraoccpital bone . importantly, the reduced cerebrospinal flow velocity as a result of ccf remodelling may alter the rate of progression of sm, which may explain the high prevalence of asymptomatic sm in ckcs and the variable response to medical treatment.

an alternate mechanism for the failure of adaptation of the ccf in ckcs previously proposed is early closure of bone sutures, similar to craniosynostosis in children
 <cit> . early suture closure may affect the jugular foramina enclosing the inferior petrosal and sigmoid sinus, resulting in increased intracranial pressure and/or reduced resorption of csf such as occurs in children
 <cit> . this is a proposed mechanism for the development of sm in the griffon bruxellois that do not display cerebellar herniation
 <cit> .

there are limitations to the measurements made in this study. firstly, it should be noted that variations in cerebellar herniation may occur throughout the cardiac cycle which were not accounted for. however, as noted in previous human studies, this limitation should be relatively minor and the variation is unlikely to significantly affect our measurements or 
CONCLUSIONS
 <cit> . secondly, cerebellar herniation is increased by flexion of the neck
 <cit> . the effect of positioning was minimised in this study. some medications used to treat cm/sm, including corticosteroids, may influence the progression of cm/sm on mri by altering cerebrospinal fluid production. none of the dogs in this study received corticosteroids in the scan interval . the medications prescribed were not considered likely to affect our measurements.

