BACKGROUND
the mental lexicon is usually considered to be a compilation of linguistic information, with each word having an entry. the precise structure of a lexical entry continues to be a topic of investigation and discussion. from a linguistic perspective, a lexical entry for a word should contain information about its pronunciation, its orthography, its syntactic properties, and its semantic information. in the present study, we explored the aspect of categories within semantic information. a sparrow for example, might belong to the category bird as well as to the category animal. how and where is such information encoded in the brain? is the category information represented within one brain compartment or in a distributed fashion?

these questions are of course not only restricted to the mental lexicon but also apply to the field of visual object recognition, for example. cognitive neuroscience has contributed to these questions by considering evidence on the representation of object categories in the brain : for visually presented exemplars of particular object categories the use of functional brain imaging disclosed activity in the ventral pathway of the visual system, with activity distinguishing different object categories  along the occipito-temporal pathway, which was thereupon labelled 'what-stream' .

evidence from brain responses distinguishing between sub- and super-ordinate category information is still limited. for instance, löw and colleagues  <cit>  examined the spatial distribution of sources of neuromagnetic activity elicited by pictures of super-  and sub-ordinate  object categories. significantly higher similarity  of evoked magnetic responses within than across super-ordinate categories indicated macroscopically distinct representation of defined semantic categories. activation of these representations was most prominent in the right parietal cortex around  <dig> ms and in the left parieto-temporal cortex around  <dig> ms after stimulus onset. this spatio-temporal sequence supports sequential perceptual dynamics of the categorization process, with initial activation of representation in the extrastriate areas of the right hemisphere followed by activity along the ventral processing stream primarily in the left temporal lobe.

this evidence served as the background for the present study, which aimed at clarifying the dynamics involved in the lexical access of words. representation and activation of semantic categories were probed by analyzing spatio-temporal brain activity that was induced by written words. they a) were related to different super- and sub-ordinate categories; b) came from the natural domain ; c) were of low to ultra-low frequency . magnetic source imaging  was used as an indication of cortical representation. in particular, we aimed at clarifying the following questions: a) whether visually presented words related to different super- and sub-ordinate natural categories would be represented in spatially separable areas along the occipital-to-temporal visual pathway, corresponding to the 'what stream' determined for visually presented object categories; b) whether distinct activity patterns primarily in the left hemisphere would indicate the representation of  linguistic features for semantic categories activated by words; c) whether spatio-temporal brain responses distinguish super- and sub-ordinate categories as an indication of feature-directed category representation and access of lexical entries.

RESULTS
highly similar activity patterns were elicited by all six sub-ordinate categories and we did not observe gross topographical differences in response to different categories. therefore, figure  <dig> illustrates the course of activity analyzed in the source space and averaged across the six categories. a left occipital focus of activity is prominent already for the first interval 100– <dig> ms after stimulus-onset and remains obvious throughout the recording period; starting around  <dig> and  <dig> ms, an additional left-temporal focus becomes evident ; as a third prominent focus, left-anterior activation starting around  <dig> ms can be taken form fig.  <dig> 

as is also obvious from figure  <dig>  activity was prominent in the left hemisphere and negligible in the right hemisphere. since effects of stimulus categories on activity patterns were statistically confirmed only for the left but not for the right hemisphere, the subsequent results refer to the left-hemisphere foci.

the time course of activity for the left temporal region  discloses differences between sub-ordinate categories between  <dig> and  <dig> ms after stimulus onset. interactions super × subcategory indicate significant differences between sub- and super-ordinate categories for the intervals 300– <dig> ms  =  <dig> , p < .05), 350– <dig> ms  =  <dig> ; p = .05), and 400– <dig> ms  =  <dig> , p < .05). for the last interval post-hoc tests verified significant differences between the sub-categories fruit vs flowers , fruit vs. trees  and fruit vs. fish  and marginally significant trends  for differences between birds vs fruit, birds vs trees, and mammals vs fruit. distinct category processing remained apparent until  <dig> ms after stimulus onset, with the difference for 450– <dig> ms approaching significance  and the difference between  <dig> and  <dig> ms  =  <dig> ; p < .05) being explained by significant post-hoc comparisons of fruit vs. flowers , fruit vs. trees  and fruit vs. fish , flowers vs birds  and flowers vs mammals , trees vs birds  and trees vs mammals , and fish vs mammals .

in sum, the activity near or at the left temporal pole differentiates between sub-categories. the sub-categories were selected to be semantic in nature. it is not clear whether the activity found resembles an n <dig> , which was also found to be elicited after single words  <cit> . also, source localisations of the n <dig> component do not give a clear picture where the n <dig> has its cortical origin.

for the left-anterior activity focus indicated in figure  <dig>  no significant effects of categories were found.

in sum, source analyses of neuromagnetic brain responses to words from different semantic categories, comprising super-ordinate  and sub-ordinate categorization  disclose specific spatio-temporal activation and a distinction in time and space for sub- versus super-ordinate category features: whereas super-ordinate features induced different activation already around 100– <dig> ms after stimulus onset in left-occipital areas, the processing of sub-ordinate category features led to differential activation only later, between  <dig> and  <dig> ms, in left-temporal areas. this is, to our knowledge, the first evidence of spatio-temporal separation of category-feature processing in the brain.

topography
"hebbian-type cell assemblies" are described as distributed networks of neurons that are functionally connected by reciprocal dynamic connections and whose strength is modulated based on correlation learning  <cit> . in pulvermüller's framework of the mental lexicon , the neuronal representation of a word may comprise neurons in the perisylvian cortex  and neurons in areas that process information about object features or associated actions. for nouns denominating objects these features comprise visual associations and, thus, the neuronal network activated by the noun will comprise neurons in the visual association areas in the occipital and inferior temporal lobe. during language acquisition, representations of objects are related to auditory or visual word forms. a cell assembly is established whenever a concept is activated repeatedly and simultaneously with the word form. this cell assembly will then comprise features that reflect parts of its word form representation and parts of the auditory or visual representation of the object the word refers to . from this point of view it makes sense that semantic features of object representations are also shared by the corresponding entries in the mental lexicon. thus, the same sub-assemblies  are activated either by the word or by the object itself.

pulvermüller's work also relates to the research field of the ventral "what-stream". ishai  <cit>  pointed out that the topological arrangement of visual features in the ventral "what"-stream remains to be clarified. if, as pulvermüller argues, category-features activated by words are part of category-features activated by corresponding objects, then the present results contribute to this clarification, in that features related to sub-ordinate concepts are processed in areas more anterior to features related to super-ordinate concepts. gauthier and colleagues  <cit>  pointed out that in visual object recognition the super-ordinate-level , at which familiar objects are first recognized, was distinguished from more sub-ordinate levels , which required additional perceptual processing. this additional processing related to the sub-ordinate level representation was associated with activation in the fusiform and inferior temporal gyri and the temporal poles. this is in line with the more anterior focus of activity distinguishing sub-ordinate categories in the present study.

in the present study, it is conceivable that the categories fauna and flora activated features related to the visual representations of the respective objects. these features would be part of the representations of the physical, visually perceivable objects and as such part of the ventral "what"-stream of the left occipito-temporal cortex. there are several studies that showed early activation due to referential semantic information .

while these considerations are supported by the present results of category-specific activity patterns along the left occipito-temporal axis, they should be validated by a direct comparison of cortical activity evoked by pictures and their corresponding words. chao and colleagues  <cit>  report an fmri study, where in fact there were similar activations for pictures and their corresponding names.

why should the representations of sub- and supercategory features be processed at different sites in the brain? there is ample evidence that during the individual development of the brain, maximum neural plasticity starts at primary sensory  and motor sites and over time progresses towards secondary areas, parietal areas and finally towards frontal areas  <cit> . using computer simulations, shrager and johnson  <cit>  showed that simple representations of input data can be acquired in early stages of development  whereas more abstract representations can only be acquired in sites that had high plasticity later on . these sites would use the information from the lower level representations together with the input to represent more abstract and/or invariant aspects of the stimulus. in the present case, this would mean that gross categories can be represented early on  whereas more fine grained sub-representations will only be acquired later on .

amplitude
we can only speculate how the amplitude difference in the present study relates to different categories or their features. generally, there are two reasons for a stronger amplitude in the meg. either there are slight topographic differences or the size of the neuronal network activated varies over conditions. cortical sources may be located on a part of a gyrus where the tangential part of the magnetic field is more or less prevalent than in a different condition. the magnetometers used in our 4d neuroimaging system only capture tangential fields and thus a stronger component in the radial field would mean a reduction in the field strength measured. thus, the amplitude difference may arise from a slight topographic shift. the other possible answer is that different features have different complexities in their representation. this may translate in different sizes of neuronal networks representing them. the activation of these networks will lead to greater amplitudes for larger networks. another reason for different network sizes may be the relation of the word to other words. if all words are represented in networks, then these networks may have overlapping parts to reflect the relatedness of words. we tried to capture the associations that subjects had after reading our stimuli and found no systematic variation in the number of associations over categories. thus, if networks of words  lead to different amplitudes due to a different degree of connectedness, then this is not a good explanation for the amplitude differences found in the present study. we therefore favour the interpretation of slightly different topographies resulting in different amplitudes.

timeline
the present study not only revealed that category related information is distributed spatially over the cortex, but it is also activated over time. the temporal sequence of cortical activation distinguished the processing super-ordinate  and sub-ordinate features . considering the results of gauthier and colleagues  <cit> , we may conclude that features of lexical entries are hierarchically processed, with steps of feature analyses  spreading across hundreds of ms.

CONCLUSIONS
the present results may help to speculate over the inner structure of entries in the mental lexicon: super- and sub-ordinate category features are parts of a word's representation; they activate distinct cortical areas in the left occipital-temporal axis at distinct points in time. lexical entries may thus be understood as structure of features, represented in distributed networks that are activated by words in a sequential, cascaded way.

