BACKGROUND
recent advances in genomics and associated high throughput technologies have resulted in the exponential growth of biological databases. these consist of annotated genomic databases such as those at ncbi genomic biology  <cit> , ensembl  <cit>  and ucsc genome bioinformatics  <cit> ; specialized primary databases of proteins including uniprot   <cit>  and the rcsb protein data bank   <cit> ; and derived databases such as embl-ebi interpro   <cit> . in parallel with structured data, the corpus of scientific literature  has been expanding rapidly. structured and textual data are fertile grounds in the bioinformatics community for the development of data mining tools to identify key entities  involved in biological processes and provide important biological insights. the combination of these two resources has resulted in knowledge bases that represent derived information on interactions among entities .

deriving biological insights from these unprecedented quantities of data is a challenge  <cit> . in recent years, tools for data mining retrieval of information have made considerable progress  <cit> . however, several problems persist:  incorrect, incomplete or several  descriptions of entities,  inefficient search engines associated with databases,  constant need for annotation updates and for query-tool improvements, and  inherent complexity of the biological phenomena and biological systems  <cit> . moreover, various databases and their associated tools provide information at different levels of reliability and accuracy  <cit> .

we present a systematic strategy for data mining that aims to address the above-mentioned problems . it is based on  use and combination of several resources ,  retrieval capabilities of text mining tools selected for this purpose,  search within the gene ontology   <cit>  and filtering of entities by go terms within knowledge bases, and  enlargement of the searched space by functionally-related entities. the strategy is conceived so that it can be used by any researcher for a particular problem. the intent is to develop a facile and reliable data mining approach that allows the identification of new targets.

to develop the appropriate strategy, we have explored and tested the performance of various data mining tools and databases to arrive at a protocol that is most appropriate for addressing our needs as well as those of users with other criteria. specifically, our sequence of procedures examined pubmed abstracts  <cit> , gene/protein databases – uniprot  <cit>  and ncbi entrez gene  <cit> , and state-of-the-art pathway knowledge bases – it.omics lsgraph®  <cit>  and ingenuity® systems, ingenuity pathway analysis  <cit> .

the method was applied to the identification of cancer-related enzymes with hydrolytic activities that are overexpressed in the extracellular space of solid tumor cells. the developed strategy was evaluated by determination of hydrolases suitable for our in-house emcit  technology  <cit> , which aims to precipitate water-soluble radioactive prodrugs within the extracellular spaces of solid human tumors for their diagnosis and/or therapy. in general, these proteins are attached to the membrane via glycopolyinositol  linkers or they are secreted in the extracellular space.

we have used the method to distinguish hydrolases that are overexpressed by human prostate, breast, lung, colon, ovarian, and pancreatic cancers. the approach has led to the recognition of a number of cancer-related putative targets for the emcit technology, including prostatic acid phosphatase , prostate-specific antigen , and sulfatase  <dig> . finally, the strategy and selected tools have helped us to determine several proteins that may be useful in other fields of cancer biology, specifically in the identification of biomarkers valuable in diagnosis, prognosis, and therapy  <cit> .

RESULTS
strategy setting
the basic idea is the development of a series of data mining steps of increasing stringency such that the huge number of entities  present in the literature and in various databases is reduced to a manageable size. at each step, the criteria, choice of tool, and databases are selected by the user to increase the list of identified hits. we employ lsgraph and ipa as suggested in this section; however, depending on the availability of tools or the focus of the user, other tools and databases can be "plugged in" to the proposed data mining strategy.

our method using lsgraph  <cit>  and ingenuity pathway analysis   <cit>  applications  is founded on the combination of selected tools and the comparison of the identified resulting hit list with that provided by independent searches of the literature , knowledge bases , gene/protein databases , and retrieval of information from the text by the reader  . the method provides overall the largest list of proteins with desired properties.

the function of a protein is described in most detail in the scientific publications. however, due to the condensed nature of abstracts, scarce annotations in gene/protein databases, and the complexity of biological systems, this information may be difficult to acquire and to integrate. therefore the first step in our strategy is based on the selection of the tool that, if possible, recognizes term variations within the text  and has the capability to retrieve entities from the text and export them to the list .

since we are mining for "unknown" proteins within a particular cellular location , the second step of the strategy uses gene ontology as a tool in the process . the inclusion of filtering by gene ontology organizing principles will allow any user to identify new targets for a particular problem. this can be applied to any search within the context of biological process, molecular function, or cellular component.

a protein may be implicated in a function or a disease because of its ability to interact with another protein that is already known in that function or disease. a straightforward search for proteins concerned with a specific function may not reveal all those involved. the third step of the present strategy includes the enlargement of the hit list to functionally related neighbors, which may compensate for the missing information and unmask the so-far-unrevealed protein function. in our particular case, this would ascertain the identification of entities involved in cancer. therefore, we have extended the search to functionally related genes and proteins .

selection of tools and databases
the performance of the combined searches is compared with that employing exclusively either a single literature or a database data mining method. the query of pubmed only , with subsequent retrieval and reading of full texts one-by-one  and the identification of desirable entities, is time- and labor-intensive. the search using thomson refviz™  <cit>  and quosa™  <cit>   leads to the clear interconnection of abstracts and limits the number of publications to be studied. these programs, however, cannot be used to extract the assignment of names, synonyms, and symbols to their appropriate entities  and to save them as a set; thus, the list of entities of interest cannot be easily and routinely generated. in contrast, lsgraph has literature and entity retrieval capabilities that make it a suitable tool.

method c also has its shortcomings. generally, databases provide their own query tools that may produce biased results. the problem consists of  incomplete or misleading protein annotations,  unsatisfactory query-engine capabilities of protein databases, and  unclear or incomplete functional description. retrieved results are often specific database limited: databases differ from each other and are not updated regularly or their updates are not synchronized. searching for functionally related proteins is sometimes not possible. in comparison with the combined data mining approach, protein-database search is inefficient . for example, the query for prostate extracellular protein results in only  <dig> to  <dig> hits , whereas our novel strategy produces  <dig> hits .

method b employs the lsgraph and ingenuity pathway analysis  pathway knowledge bases. we have combined the advantages of both of these applications in order to optimize the yield of the data mining process. moreover, they have the capability to import and visualize the expression-fold of genes from microarray experiments.

the essential power of lsgraph is its ability to identify all relevant entities in all pubmed abstract citations  and to cluster them subsequently into a set. lsgraph incorporates the system of functional and process-oriented annotations, based on the gene ontology , which allows selecting the entities associated with go terms «extracellular region» or «membrane». both gene ontology terms have been selected because they deliver the highest number of relevant hits. although the results include transmembrane- and mitochondrial-membrane-associated proteins, these can be removed later by limiting the search to a desired subcellular location in ipa.

ingenuity pathway analysis  <cit>  is an application built on one of the largest knowledge bases , acquired by manual curation of full texts of peer-reviewed scientific publications. it covers information on more than  <dig>  mammalian genes and thousands of corresponding proteins and their relations   <cit> . enlargement of the set of extracellular entities  by functional neighbors of the ipa knowledge base and subsequent focusing on entities discussed in the context of cancer have enabled us to select entities suitable as targets for emcit drug design . both lsgraph and ipa contain information about human, mouse and rat species. if the mining is required for other species, e.g. plants or yeast, it is possible to plug into the strategy discussed above the appropriate tools and databases. hence, the strategy will remain essentially identical and, within the scope of selected tools, is generic in nature; we can address various biological problems, for example, investigate the genes involved in aggregation of proteins in alzheimer disease or identify key players and novel targets in pathways involved in this disease.

cancer-related data mining case
the combined strategy using lsgraph and ipa   has led to the findings summarized as numbers of abstracts and proteins in table  <dig>  these being acquired in a period of a few weeks. the search for hydrolytic enzymes has been performed for six common tumor tissues . first, a pubmed query has yielded between  <dig>  to more than  <dig>  articles per specific cancer-tissue type. using the «filter» function in lsgraph reduces this number to between  <dig>  and  <dig>  abstracts containing sentences that describe entity-to-entity functional relations. the next step, which involves sifting for the keywords «extracellular» or «membrane», decreases these numbers to approximately  <dig>  to  <dig>  entities implicated in the extracellular environment, which corresponds to about  <dig>  to  <dig>  proteins. further filtering by the gene ontology database in lsgraph annotates  <dig> to  <dig>  proteins as extracellular or membrane-bound.

over  <dig> enzymes, receptor domains, growth factors and other proteins have been found in the context of the six tumor-tissue types linked to «cancer». using the ipa,  <dig> to  <dig> of these proteins are found to be within the «cancer» network . the majority of the identified extracellular proteins for all tumor types are growth factors, tumor necrosis factors  <cit> , and hydrolytic enzymes. the latter are placed within "enzymes," "peptidases," "phosphatases," and other ipa families . further reading of the cited articles, retrospectively tracked by ihop  <cit> , has enabled us to select those that are appropriate for our in-house emcit concept. the list of hits is enclosed with this article on-line, see additional file  <dig>  from this final dataset, we have identified several hydrolases, among them peptidases  and phosphatases  and several known cancer progression markers, matrix metalloproteinases   <cit>  and coagulation factors ii, iii, xii , located at the extracellular surface  <cit> . another potential target retrieved in all six cancer types is cathepsin b, a hydrolase expressed in brain tumors and suggested as an agent for the imaging of tumor progression  <cit> .

there are also apparent pitfalls/shortcomings in the knowledge bases. in ipa, for instance, the cellular component annotation is sometimes missing or incomplete due to the lack of information in protein databases to which ipa is ultimately linked . in the case of cellular location, this could mean that the set of extracellular entities may be an underestimate and that the  <dig> hits found, for example, in prostate cancer may be only a subset. links to curated databases are valuable; however, the major knowledge is still hidden in the full text of the scientific literature.

identification of promising targets
prostatic acid phosphatase
the success of our strategy can be demonstrated in the identification of pap . in uniprot, the prostatic acid phosphatase  is not found when three keywords are used: "prostate", "acid" and "phosphatase." this problem has a crucial impact when searching through databases. generally, restricting the scan to annotation fields of databases  is faster but doing so can provide an outcome that is limited by the ad hoc relationship of keywords to the research interests of whoever submitted the entry. analogically, we observe similar problems when using ncbi protein or nucleotide databases, interpro, pdb, omim™   <cit>  and pfam . moreover keeping annotations current is difficult as new information appears frequently and regularly in the literature. when searching for proteins with specific properties without the knowledge of their actual name, symbol, or database identifier, data mining has to be performed with care.

another issue with pap is its cellular localization. while this hydrolase possessing protein tyrosine phosphatase activity has been demonstrated in vitro to dephosphorylate the epidermal growth factor  receptor present at an intracellular site in prostate carcinoma cells, pap is also known to be secreted by epithelial cells in the prostate gland and found in seminal fluid . uniprot does not specify the location of pap; entrez gene provides the go term "extracellular region" associated to pap with a note that there is no record of it . it is safe to assume that since pap is secreted outside cells, it will be localized in the extracellular space. our recent in vitro cell analysis using noninternalizable pap substrates shows that phosphorolysis occurs in the extracellular region . the combined data mining strategy ensures that pap is not lost with the filtering of the results. it is identified as "acpp – acid phosphatase, prostate" in lsgraph and situated by ipa in the «cancer» network . both lsgraph and ipa document pap as extracellular and, therefore, pap has been identified and passed through the data mining step to the final list.

alkaline phosphatase
alkaline phosphatase  exemplifies another aspect of the annotation problem that is addressed uniquely by our strategy. this enzyme, known to be overexpressed at the surface of various solid tumors  <cit> , is one of the first proteins identified as being expressed on the surface of cancer cells  <cit> . many clinical observations have been made on the use of alp as a tumor marker  <cit> . searches for alkaline phosphatase in gene and protein databases have identified  <dig> protein sequences in humans, out of which only four are well-described: placental , placental-like , intestinal  and nonspecific tissue  . databases state that human alp is bound to the membrane by a gpi-anchor in contrast to mouse isoenzymes which are «extracellular». this illustrates, retrospectively, why we have not used the species specification in data mining. in the case of alpi, uniprot also registers the go term «membrane». for other alp, the subcellular location is not present in annotations . curiously, a similar situation occurs with entrez gene registrations of alpp, alpi and alpl . due to this fact, the description of proteins as "attached to the membrane by a gpi-anchor" does not access them if searched for with "extracellular."

specification of alp searches in databases by the keyword "cancer" or by other neoplasm-related terms does not identify any of the above isoenzymes. uniprot annotation states that the exact physiological function of the alkaline phosphatases is not known . surprisingly, neither uniprot nor entrez gene  states that these enzymes are related to cancer. in our data mining findings, alkaline phosphatase is listed in lsgraph under different isoenzymes  in all six tissue types studied. however, alp is subsequently lost within the ipa step of the data mining process due to missing annotation in the original gene/protein databases as well as its being placed within the ipa «cell-cell interactions» network and not the «cancer» network. therefore, unless entries are thoroughly investigated one by one, a search using simple keywords in gene or protein databases will not identify alkaline phosphatase as an extracellular cancer-related enzyme.

extracellular sulfatase 1
one of the new hits and a potential emcit target identified by the present strategy is a human enzyme, extracellular sulfatase  <dig>   <cit> . this enzyme is situated in the endoplasmatic reticulum and golgi stack and is also shown, by its similarity to homologous proteins, to be secreted outside the cell , protein databases do not track a traceable author statement or publication with reference to its being an extracellular enzyme. only entrez gene  states that it is extracellular, referring to morimoto-tomita et al.  <cit> . similar to the case with pap, we have recently also demonstrated the hydrolysis of a noninternalizable sulfatase substrate by human pancreatic tumor cells, thereby ascertaining the presence of sulf <dig> in the extracellular space . once more this demonstrates the idiosyncrasies of such searches since the use of database-only data mining  would not have identified this sulfatase whose recognition within our hit list is consequent to the utilization of a combination of programs and the search within the space of functionally-related proteins.

prostate-specific antigen
another emcit candidate that has been established is prostate-specific antigen , a well-known and clinically useful prostate cancer marker that has proteolytic activities. this molecule, also known as kallikrein  <dig> , is secreted in the extracellular space  by normal and malignant prostate cells  <cit> . since this enzymatically active molecule is inactivated by binding to several protease inhibitors once it enters the circulation  <cit> , we and others  <cit>  have recognized its potential for targeting psa-activated prodrug molecules to prostate cancer. psa  has passed through the data mining and was identified in all six cancer types .

as mentioned above, our interest in the identification of extracellular hydrolytic enzymes, such as prostatic acid phosphatase, alkaline phosphatase, sulfatase  <dig> and prostate-specific antigen, is driven by our focus on finding novel, radiolabeled molecules that are excellent substrates for such enzyme candidates, as these could be used to hydrolyze the radiolabeled prodrugs for our emcit approach. these enzymes can be further studied by in silico modeling simulations of their complexes with putative drugs. the prerequisite for molecular modeling of protein-ligand complexes is the availability of the three-dimensional  structure for the target in the protein data bank  or, in its absence, the building of a 3d-structure homology model. in our case, when these targets were checked for 3d-structure availability in the pdb, it was found that both pap and alp have already been crystallized  whereas the structures of human psa  and sulf <dig> have not yet been solved.

CONCLUSIONS
we have developed a new, rapid, data mining strategy that combines the literature, web-based gene-product databases, and complex knowledge pathway databases. the strategy, which is based on a combination of curated knowledge pathway bases with protein databases, has revealed the unique characteristics of several programs, including the entity retrieval capability and the gene ontology term-filtering specification of lsgraph and the full-text-based knowledge of ipa. the complementarity of content and functionalities of the query tools in the knowledge bases help to ascertain the identified hits as well as to discover other related neighbors of the known targets. we believe that this strategy overcomes many data mining drawbacks.

the application of this strategy to the search for extracellular hydrolases involved in human cancers has led to the discovery and identification of several previously "hidden" proteins that would not have been detected by a search using a single information source. our findings indicate that the approach benefits from the complementarity of the databases and query tools employed and can distinguish useful and previously uncharacterized cancer-related targets with additional characteristics  valuable in the noninvasive radiodiagnosis and treatment of cancer. alkaline phosphatase , prostatic acid phosphatase and prostate-specific antigen , and extracellular sulfatase  <dig>  are four interesting results. while these are being used in our laboratory as potential targets in the design of novel, radiolabeled diagnostic and therapeutic agents for cancer, the strategy for data mining is of a general nature and can be applied to other biological databases for understanding biological functions and diseases.

