BACKGROUND
colonial hydrozoans are composed of individual polyps connected through continuous epithelia and a shared gastrovascular cavity. hydrozoans are members of the phylum cnidaria, which are characterized by their diploblastic construction, comprising only two epithelial layers, the epidermis and gastrodermis. despite their simple epithelial construction, many hydrozoan species evolved complex colonies through functional specialization of genetically identical yet morphologically distinct polyp types, conferring a division of labor within the colony . this division of labor is known as polyp polymorphism .

the main labor divisions are between feeding, reproduction, and defense, where specialized polyp types are morphologically distinct, reflecting their particular functions. hydractinia symbiolongicarpus has four different polyp types . the feeding polyp  has a mouth and tentacles, which are absent in the reproductive polyp , defensive and food gathering polyp , and the less common defensive polyp . the dactylozooid has an elongated body column with an abundance of epithelial muscular cells and nematocytes . the gonozooid bears gonophores, which house the gametes. the gonozooid and dactylozooid are similar in their distal ends, with clusters of nematocysts and lacking a functional mouth and elongate tentacles. the tentaculozooid resembles a tentacle of the gastrozooid, but is the size of an individual polyp.figure  <dig> 
colony of
hydractinia symbiolongicarpus. illustration showing the different polymorphic polyps that comprise the h. symbiolongicarpus colony. modified from cartwright & nawrocki  <cit> .



it has long been hypothesized that these specialized polyps arose through evolutionary alterations in oral-aboral patterning in the ancestral gastrozooid . previous studies using candidate gene approaches have identified patterning genes specific to different polyp types. cartwright et al.  <cit>  focused on the involvement of cnox- <dig>  a parahox gene, in patterning these different polyp types of h. symbiolongicarpus. immunolocalization of the cnox- <dig> protein showed expression in body column tissue and down-regulation in oral structures of the gastrozooid. mokady et al.  <cit>  compared expression of cn-ems  between gastrozooids and gonozooids of h. symbiolongicarpus. whole mount in situ hybridization revealed no expression of cn-ems in the gonozooid, while mrnas were detected in the gastrodermal epithelia  of the gastrozooid.

more recently, siebert et al.  <cit>  used an rna-seq approach to examine differential expression between several polyp types of another hydrozoan, the siphonophore nanomia bijuga. although the focus of their paper was to evaluate next generation sequencing  platforms for differential expression , they confirmed, through whole mount in situ hybridization, that at least one gene identified through their de analyses  was expressed in a polyp specific manner.

with the advent of ngs technologies, an unbiased approach to identify genes involved in the differentiation of different tissues  and developmental stages , or as well as those that are differentially expressed between species  can be made without reference to particular candidate genes. we report a transcriptome assembly, annotations, and de analyses between three different polyp types in h. symbiolongicarpus. our results, confirmed, with whole mount in situ hybridization, that de analyses using rna-seq is a powerful approach for identifying genes and pathways involved in conferring a division of labor within this colonial organism.

RESULTS
transcriptome assembly and annotation
from the three normalized libraries,  <dig> ,  <dig> , and  <dig>  contigs were assembled for the gastrozooid, gonozooid, and dactylozooid, respectively. individual transcriptomes were merged into a single assembly of  <dig>  unique transcripts using cuffmerge . cuffmerge merges novel and common transcripts into a single assembly and removes artifact constructions, improving the overall quality of the assembly. this step allows for easy annotation and differential expression analyses of a single assembly, without concerns regarding orthology assignments between multiple assemblies. after filtering for transcripts less than 200 bp in length, our final assembly consisted of  <dig>  transcripts, with an n <dig> of  <dig>  bp .figure  <dig> 
workflow of transcriptome assembly through annotation and differential expression analyses. raw reads from three normalized libraries were filtered based on quality score and separately mapped to unpublished genomic scaffolds of h. symbiolongicarpus using tophat  <dig> . <dig>  assembled using cufflinks  <dig> . <dig>  merged into a single assembly using cuffmerge, and filtered by transcript size, removing assembled transcripts less than 200 bp in length. blast2go, cegma, hmmscan, and orthomcl were used to annotate the transcriptome. differential expression began with mapping  <dig> non-normalized libraries to the final transcriptome assembly with bowtie <dig>  de was then assessed with deseq and edger and polyp-specific des were compared to the annotated transcriptome.



approximately 54% of the transcriptome  was annotated using blast2go, cegma, orthomcl, and hmmscan , with these transcripts showing significant similarity to sequences in at least one database in our annotation pipeline . these include  <dig>  of the “core” and  <dig>  of the “ultra-conserved” eukaryotic genes identified using cegma . figure  <dig> shows the number of transcripts annotated by one or more of the annotation methods.figure  <dig> 
venn diagram displaying the number of transcripts annotated by each method. gene ontology terms were added with blast2go using the blastx algorithm against ncbi’s nr protein database and a threshold of  <dig> × 10- <dig>  a set of conserved eukaryotic genes was identified with cegma. hmm protein families from the pfam and tigr databases were assigned to the amino acid translation of the most likely reading frame for each transcript  using hmmscan under default settings. hmmscan annotations were constrained to a significance threshold of  <dig> . orthogroups were assigned to the same amino acid translations using the orthomcl web server.



differential expression analyses
statistically significant differences in expression between different polyp types were detected using two de packages, deseq and edger. figure 4c and d shows the effect of heterogametic adjustments on the euclidean distances  between libraries. both deseq and edger reveal that dactylozooids and gastrozooids share the fewest number of de transcripts and the smallest change in the number of des recovered after the heterogametic adjustments , while de analyses including gonozooids show a much larger increase in the number of de transcripts after those adjustments. this large increase can be explained by the huge amount of variability found when ignoring the sexual differences between gametic tissues in gonozooid samples. the de analysis between the male and female gonozooid libraries identified  <dig>   and  <dig>   transcripts significantly up- or down-regulated . removal of all male/female de transcripts clusters gonozooid samples by polyp type rather than sex and increases the distance between gastrozooids and dactylozooids , while treating male and female gonozooid libraries as different conditions reduces the average dispersion estimate for each transcript, essentially increasing the power of the de analyses . yet, even after the heterogametic adjustments, gonozooids still have the largest number of polyp-specific transcripts .figure  <dig> 
effects of heterogametic expression on library distances. a. heatmap of the euclidean distances between all twelve libraries prior to heterogametic adjustments. samples go <dig> and go <dig> correspond to female gonozooid libraries, while go <dig> and go <dig> correspond to male gonozooid libraries. b. ma plot of the de analysis between male and female gonozooid libraries in deseq. red dots indicate statistically significant de transcripts. log2foldchange >  <dig> corresponds to expression levels higher in the male gonozooid libraries, and log2foldchange <  <dig> corresponds to expression levels higher in the female gonozooid libraries. c. euclidean distances plotted in two dimensions prior to heterogametic adjustments. . d. euclidean distances plotted in two dimensions after all statistically significant heterogametic transcripts are removed. e. plot of the estimated dispersion values against the mean of normalized counts of each transcript when binning both male and female gonozooid libraries in a single condition. fitted dispersion values indicated by the red line. f. plot of the estimated dispersion values against the mean of normalized counts of each transcript when male and female gonozooid libraries treated as separate conditions.


number of de transcripts in different pairwise comparisons of the libraries



dact vs gast

dact vs gono

gast vs gono

male vs female
full dataset corresponds to the number of transcripts recovered from de analyses . adjusted dataset refers to counts following heterogametic adjustments.
venn diagram showing numbers of polyp-specific transcripts. transcripts significantly up- or down-regulated  in a particular polyp when compared to either of the other two polyp types from both edger and deseq were considered polyp-specific. the intersection of each circle is the number of transcripts down-regulated in the polyp type excluded from that intersection . down-regulation of a transcript in a particular polyp type equates to equivocal up-regulated expression in the other two polyp types.
number of transcripts identified as always up- or down-regulated in a specific polyp



gastrozooid

gonozooid

dactylozooid
transcripts that have support as polyp-specific  by both deseq and edger are what we refer to as polyp-specific in the text.

our de analyses revealed several polyp-specific genes that are consistent with previous studies using candidate gene approaches in cnidarians as discussed below. furthermore, our analyses revealed additional genes that were not previously considered to play specific developmental, functional and/or structural roles in cnidarians. below we summarize of few of these results and suggest areas of interest for further study.

gametogenic expression
while adjusting for differences in gene expression between males and females greatly reduced the effect of heterogametic expression on the de analyses, genes likely involved in non-sex specific gametogenesis were found up-regulated in the gonozooids. of the  <dig> polyp-specific de transcripts annotated with functional terms that include mitosis, cell cycle, and germline maintenance ,  <dig> are up-regulated in the gonozooids, including four de transcripts annotated as known hydrozoan stem cell markers nanos <cit> , vasa <cit> , and piwi <cit> . this is consistent with expression studies of nanos and vasa genes in a closely related species, hydractinia echinata <cit> .

homeobox genes
several homeobox transcripts are differentially expressed between different polyp types . homeobox genes up-regulated in the gastrozooid include members of the lim , sine oculus , empty spiracles , and prd classes, confirmed by molecular phylogenetic analysis of cnidarian homeodomains . the up-regulation of the empty spiracles homolog , cn-ems, is consistent with the findings of mokady et al.  <cit>  discussed previously. up-regulated gastrozooid expression of two lhx-like transcripts, one six-like and one orthopedia  transcript  is also consistent with expression studies in other cnidarians, including aurelia <cit> , nematostella, craspedacusta <cit> , cladonema <cit> , and podocoryna <cit> , where their expression was found in regions specific to feeding and/or digestion, including tentacles and gastric tissue.

one of the homeodomain-containing transcripts up-regulated in the gonozooid belongs to the pou class . expression of pou homeodomain transcription factors has also been categorized in other cnidarians, including aurelia <cit>  and h. echinata <cit> . in h. echinata, the pou gene, pln, is expressed around interstitial stem cell   <cit> . the h. symbiolongicarpus ortholog to pln  is up-regulated in the gonozooid, which is consistent with that of the other stem cell markers mentioned previously.

myosins
myosin genes are a superfamily of molecular motor proteins, primarily associated with muscular contraction and cell movement. here we find a complex pattern of differential expression of several different myosin transcripts up-regulated in each polyp type , spanning several myosin classes . of particular note is the up-regulation of a tropomyosin transcript in the gonozooids. in the hydrozoan podocoryna carnea, a tropomyosin, tpm <dig>  is expressed solely in the striated muscle of the developing and adult medusa life cycle stages and not in the polyp  <cit> , as opposed to tpm <dig>  which is ubiquitously expressed in both polyp and medusae stages  <cit> . in hydractinia, gonophore development is greatly truncated and never reaches the medusae stage. instead hydractinia forms sporosacs, which are believed to lack all medusae like features, including striated muscle necessary for medusae to swim . phylogenetic analysis of cnidarian myosins did not recover any well-supported orthologous relationship between this polyp-specific tropomyosin and other known cnidarian tropomyosins, although orthology assignments of several other polyp-specific myosins were revealed . further discovery of tropomyosin genes in additional cnidarian taxa are necessary to determine if different tropomyosin orthologs are specific to certain medusae features and/or reduced developmental forms.

toxins
while research into the characterization and properties of cnidarian toxins is on the rise, very little is known of their function and location of endogenous expression  <cit> . we identified  <dig> de transcripts annotated as some type of toxin . phylogenetic analysis of cnidarian toxins recovered a monophyletic cluster of six h. symbiolongicarpus ‘echotoxin’ transcripts as sister to a group of anthozoan toxin genes , and a strongly supported  sister relationship between a four h. symbiolongicarpus toxins and two scyphozoan toxins from aurelia . the remaining three polyp-specific toxins were not placed in any well-supported orthologous groups. further study is warranted to determine if these toxins each play a unique role in different functions, such as prey capture, defense, and/or digestion.

astacins
a large number of transcripts belonging to the astacin subfamily are up-regulated in the gastrozooid , consistent with one of their roles as digestive enzymes in other metazoans . expression studies of several astacin genes in hydrozoans also suggest a role in digestion. in p. carnea, pmp <dig> is expressed in both the mouth of the polyp and the manubrium of the medusa stage  <cit> . immunolocalization of the hmp <dig> protein found it expressed in the head and tentacle regions of hydra <cit> , while kumpfmüller et al.  <cit>  found farm <dig> expressed in both the epi and gastrodermal layers of gastric region of hydra.

its important to note that digestion is just one function of the astacin subfamily. another function is in regeneration, as shown in h. echinata, where möhrlen et al.  <cit>  found astacins hea <dig> and hea <dig> expressed throughout development and soon after the gastrozooid is subjected to tissue injury . hmp <dig> was also up-regulated during head regeneration in hydra <cit> . orthologs of hea <dig> and hea <dig> were among the  <dig> gastrozooid-specific astacins in our study . up-regulation of these transcripts may be a result of tissue damage response during dissections prior to rna extractions. however, it is interesting that they are specific to the gastrozooid, suggesting that gonozooids and dactylozooids may have different regenerative properties than gastrozooids  <cit> .

in situ hybridization
figure  <dig> shows whole mount in situ hybridization  results of several polyp-specific transcripts identified through the de analyses . de analyses reported several different toxin transcripts to be differentially expressed between the different polyps. polyp specificity of one of the three toxins identified as gastrozooid-specific by de analyses, referred to here as toxin_ <dig>  was confirmed by ish. this transcript was expressed solely in specific gastrodermal cells around the base of the hypostome/tentacle margin of the gastrozooids. three distinct cell types populate the gastrodermis of the hypostome in hydractinia: gastrodermal epithelia  and two glandular cell types  . toxin_ <dig> expression appears to be limited to the spherulous cells of the hypostome . de analyses found toxin_ <dig> to be dactylozooid-specific and ish found expression to be limited to nematocytes primarily found in the proximal portion of the body column of the dactylozooid .figure  <dig> 
images of whole mount in situ hybridization of polyp-specific transcripts. * = distal end of polyp; oc = oocytes; gz = germinal zone; sp = sperm; bg = non-specific staining.


polyp-specific de transcripts analyzed with whole mount in situ hybridization


a myosin gene, referred to here as myosin_ <dig>  was identified as a dactylozooid-specific gene by de analyses. ish confirmed this, recovering expression limited to the ectoderm of the body column of the extended side when the dactylozooid is curled in on itself . minor expression is also detected around the base of the gonophores and on the body column of some gonozooids .

the gene cerberus is also found to be dactylozooid-specific by de analysis. this gene is only expressed in the gastrodermis beneath the clusters of nematocysts at the distal end of the dactylozooid . expression studies of cerberus in other metazoans have shown it to act as an antagonist of tgf-ß and wnt signaling  <cit> . here, expression in the dactylozooids is consistent with its antagonist role in wnt signaling. h. symbiolongicarpus’ canonical wnt, hswnt <dig> , is expressed at the distal tip of the dactylozooid . cerberus is expressed at the proximal boundary of hswnt <dig> expression, potentially acting to maintain hswnt3’s expression boundary. this however appears to be specific to the dactylozooids, as h. symbiolongicarpus feeding polyps express wnt <dig> , similar to other hydrozoan feeding polyps including h. echinata, p. carnea , and hydra), but do not express cerberus .

ish also confirmed the specificity of several gonozooid-specific de transcripts. expression of the hedgehog homolog is restricted to the gastrodermis of both male and female gonophores . expression of a bmp receptor gene, tentatively called bmpr_ <dig>  and capicua are primarily limited to developing oocytes in females and the gastrodermis of male gonophores . ish expression patterns of these transcripts suggest their involvement in some stage of meiotic/mitotic division during gametogenesis. in hydractinia, oogenesis begins in the germinal zone  of female gonozooids and oocyte differentiation continues after moving into the gonophores  <cit> , while spermatogenesis takes place entirely in the gastrodermis of the male gonophores  <cit> .

for several of these transcripts, expression in the females might not only be associated with germline proliferation, but with maternal transcript generation as well. maternal expression of capicua and bmp receptors in early embryonic development has been reported in other metazoans  <cit> . expression corresponding to maternal transcript generation is consistent with strong expression around developing oocytes in the germinal zone. by contrast, ish of hedgehog in hydractinia recovered no expression in the germinal zone of female gonophores . instead, its expression was limited to the gastrodermal tissues surrounding maturing oocytes in female gonophores. this is consistent with hedgehog genes implicated in germline proliferation and differentiation in other metazoans  <cit>  and in nematostella, where one hedgehog appears to be involved in germline proliferation, but lacks maternal expression  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
our non-biased approach of characterizing differential expression in different polyp types enabled us to identify key genes potentially involved in the morphological and functional differences between these different polyps. however, in interpreting results from a de analysis, it is important to understand the distinction between biological relevance and statistical significance. we do not propose that every transcript in our list of putative polyp-specific genes is involved in the patterning or function of these different polyps, nor do we report to have captured all polyp-specific genes. one type of information not captured in this method would be those genes whose spatial or temporal expression  confers differences between polyp types. for example, the parahox gene cnox- <dig>  which was shown to be expressed in all polyps uniformly except for the oral region of the gastrozooid  <cit>  was not recovered in the de analysis. this is likely due to the fact that cnox- <dig> has different patterns of expression but not distinct differences in abundance between polyp types.

even given the potential limitations, this unbiased approach of rna-seq de analysis, validated through in situ hybridization, identified many potential patterning and functional/structural genes without limiting our investigations to particular candidate genes. while potentially originating through simple changes in patterning, polymorphic polyps in hydractinia are the result of differentially expressed functional, histological, and patterning genes. the de genes identified in our study provide a starting point for future investigations of the developmental patterning and functional differences that are displayed in the different polyp types that confer a division of labor within a colony of h. symbiolongicarpus.

