BACKGROUND
v. scophthalmi is the most abundant species among the marine aerobic or facultatively anaerobic bacteria present in the intestinal tract of cultured turbot  even though it is not the most abundant vibrio species in the surrounding water
 <cit> . however, the possible benefits of turbot colonization by this bacterium are not well understood.

bacteria communicate with members of their own species and even with bacteria outside of the species boundary to coordinate their behaviour in response to the density of the bacterial population, which is known as quorum-sensing
 <cit> . this communication relies on the production and sensing of one or more secreted low-molecular-mass signalling molecules, such as n-acylhomoserine lactones , the extracellular concentration of which is related to the population density of the producing organism. once the signalling molecule has reached a critical concentration, the quorum-sensing regulon is activated and the bacteria elicit a particular response as a population.

the first quorum-sensing system identified was shown to control bioluminescence in vibrio fischeri through the luxi-luxr system
 <cit> . luxi synthesizes a diffusible signal molecule, n--l-homoserine lactone , which increases in concentration as the cell density increases. luxr, the transcriptional activator of the bioluminescence lux operon, binds 3-oxo-c6-hsl, which increases its stability. this complex binds the promoter of the lux operon activating the production of light. the luxi-luxr quorum-sensing circuit is found in many gram-negative bacteria and has been shown to regulate a variety of genes; for instance, it has been shown to regulate virulence in pseudomonas aeruginosa <cit> . however, this quorum-sensing circuit initially described in v. fischeri is not present in all vibrio spp.

in vibrio harveyi three additional quorum-sensing circuits were characterized that respond to three different signal molecules . the first quorum-sensing system is composed of an ahl synthase, luxm, which is responsible for the synthesis of 3-hydroxy-c4-hsl, and the receptor luxn, a hybrid sensor kinase . the second is composed of luxs, luxp and luxq. luxs is responsible for the synthesis of the autoinducer  <dig> , a universal signaling molecule used both by gram-negative and gram-positive bacteria for interspecies communication
 <cit> , luxp is a periplasmic protein that binds ai- <dig> and luxq is a hybrid sensor kinase. the third system is composed of cqsa and cqss. cqsa is responsible for the synthesis of a different autoinducer, the cholerae autoinducer cai-i
 <cit> , and cqss is the hybrid sensor kinase. these three quorum-sensing systems converge via phosphorelay signal transduction to a single regulator luxo, which is activated upon phosphorylation at low cell density. luxr, a regulatory protein that shares no homology to the v. fischeri luxr, activates bioluminescence, biofilm formation, and metalloprotease and siderophore production at high cell density, is at the end of this cascade
 <cit> . this regulatory protein is repressed at low cell density and derepressed at high cell density in the presence of autoinducers which, after binding, activate the phosphatase activity of the sensor kinases. this more complex quorum-sensing system is found predominately in vibrio species and components of the network vary between species
 <cit> .

in a previous work, we demonstrated the presence of two quorum-sensing signal molecules in the supernatants of v. scophthalmi: n--l-homoserine lactone  and ai- <dig>  encoded by a luxs gene
 <cit> . however, there is still a lack of knowledge of the bacterial activities that are regulated by quorum-sensing in this bacterium. in this study, we identified a homologue of the v. harveyi luxr transcriptional regulator and analyzed the functions regulated by luxr and the previously identified quorum-sensing signaling molecules by constructing mutants for the coding genes.

RESULTS
detection and sequencing of luxr homologue
in a previous study we demonstrated the presence of two quorum sensing signals in the supernatants of v. scophthalmi, a 3-hydroxy-c12-hsl and the ai-2
 <cit> . this fact suggested that v. scophthalmi could have two quorum-sensing circuits homologous to those identified in v. harveyi that converge in the luxr transcriptional regulator. in the present study the genome of v. scophthalmi a <dig> and a <dig> strains was screened by pcr analysis for the presence of luxr homologues using the primers listed in table
 <dig>  for luxr, a 636-bp fragment was generated and sequence analysis showed that this fragment shared high similarity to the v. harveyi-like luxr transcriptional regulator, which belongs to the tetr subfamily of transcriptional regulators
 <cit> . the sequence of the complete luxr gene obtained by inverted pcr and showed a maximum nucleotide identity with v. parahaemolyticus  although the maximum amino acid identity and similarity was with v. vulnificus  . in addition, the 5’- and 3’-flanking dna sequence of the luxr gene was also determined. the upstream region showed 87% identity with an intergenic region of v. tubiashii located between the hypoxanthine phosphoribosyltransferase  gene and luxr <cit> . the downstream region of the v. scophthalmi luxr gene contained an orf that showed a maximum identity of 87% with the dihydrolipoamide dehydrogenase gene  of v. parahaemolyticus <cit> . this genetic organization has also been described in some other vibrios such as v. cholerae and v. vulnificus <cit> , suggesting that they have been acquired by vertical transmission from a common ancestor.

restriction sites for spei , bamhi , ecori , sali  and saci  are indicated in bold.

genbank accession number in brackets; nt, nucleotide; aa, amino acid; id, identity; sim, similarity.

functions regulated by luxr, luxs and ahls
in order to uncover the functions regulated by quorum-sensing in v. scophthalmi null mutants for luxr and luxs were constructed. additionally, a recombinant strain generated in a previous study that carries a gene coding for a lactonase from bacillus cereus  which was previously shown to hydrolyse ahls
 <cit>  was included in the assays to study the functions regulated by ahls.

no differences in growth rates were detected between the luxr and luxs mutants and the wild type strains. however, over-expression of luxr resulted in a decreased growth rate. the strains over-expressing luxr arrived to the stationary phase with a delay compared to the luxr mutant carrying the plasmid alone . similarly, although motility was not affected with statistical significance in luxr and luxs null mutants, over-expression of luxr caused about 50% decrease in motility in the swimming plate assay , which is likely due to the decrease in the growth rate and not to downregulation of the genes involved in motility. the recombinant strain carrying the lactonase aiia, had a much longer lag phase before reaching exponential growth which was then at a similar rate to that of the parent strain  and showed also a reduction about 50% of motility with respect to the control strain . in the case of luxs over-expression no differences in the growth rate was observed for any of the strains.

in contrast, quorum-sensing was shown to positively regulate biofilm formation in vitro since both luxr and luxs null mutants had altered biofilm formation . noticeably, biofilm was only formed when bacteria were grown in mb medium in either the mutant or the wild-type strains and abolished when bacteria were cultured in tsb <dig> . mb medium is used to culture heterotrophic marine bacteria and mimics the marine salt concentration and, although tsb also allowed growth of the bacterium, for some reason the differences in salt concentration or in nutrient or carbohydrate contents exerted an effect on biofilm formation. in order to investigate a possible effect of catabolite repression, we supplemented mb with glucose  <dig> % and 1% w/v which resulted in a decrease in biofilm formation. on the other hand, over-expression of luxr decreased the amount of biofilm, perhaps due to the decrease in the growth rate caused by the deregulation of luxr, as stated above. in the case of luxs overexpression no differences were found between the over-expressed luxs and the control strain carrying pmmb <dig> plasmid. complementation of the a <dig> null luxs mutant strain with the pacyc <dig> plasmid reverted the strain to the wild type phenotype.

positive and negative regulation of biofilm formation has been reported in other vibrio such as v. anguillarum and v. cholerae, respectively
 <cit> . interestingly, in a recent study on quorum-sensing in v. ichthyoenteri , its luxs homologue was sequenced and a mutant for this gene constructed, but no functions were reported to be regulated by this gene
 <cit> . it has to be noted that neither the v. ichthyoenteri wild type, nor the luxs mutant formed biofilms in the microwell plates. our results showed that luxs is involved in biofilm formation at least in vitro in v. scophthalmi. however, it is important to highlight that in our study the v. scophthalmi wild-type strain was only able to form significant biofilm when grown in mb, while tsb inhibited biofilm formation in vitro. therefore, it would be interesting to assess if v. ichthyoenteri and the luxs mutant behave similarly to v. scophthalmi since they are so closely related. in v. scophthalmi, these two quorum-sensing systems may play a role in the colonization and establishment of this bacterium in the fish intestine, since it is a normal inhabitant of the turbot intestine
 <cit> . in fact most vibrio species form biofilms on different structures, which is believed to be beneficial for the populations against different environmental stresses
 <cit> . work is currently being done to test these hypotheses.

a difference in the expression of membrane proteins, which may relate to differences in biofilm formation, was assessed by mass spectroscopy. in the case of the luxs mutant the intensity of m/z  <dig> was significantly lower than m/z  <dig> and m/z  <dig> was significantly higher than m/z  <dig>  while in the wild type strain these ratios were reversed  . similar results were obtained for the luxr mutant, suggesting that the expression of these proteins were affected by these mutations.

extracellular protease activity was not detected in either the wild-type strain or any of the luxr and/or luxs mutants as determined by a qualitative milk plate assay as well as a quantitative detection method using azocasein. on the other hand, siderophore production, which has been shown to be regulated by quorum-sensing in other vibrios was evaluated using the siderophore cas assay. in addition, the ability to grow in iron depleted medium  was assessed. a minor positive signal indicating the presence of siderophore activity was detected in all the mutants and wild type strains with the same intensity. however, neither the wild-type strain nor the mutants grew in the edda-supplemented medium suggesting that this species is not able to grow in iron-depleted medium, at least under the conditions used in the assay. extracellular proteases and siderophores are often produced by pathogenic vibrios
 <cit> , although some vibrios that are not pathogenic have been shown to produce siderophores in an iron-limited host environment, such as v. fischeri <cit> .

the vibrio harveyi-like luxr family of regulators is a diverse family with different associated functions depending on the vibrio species. for example, in v. harveyi, luxr is expressed at high cell densities and regulates different functions including siderophores, colony morphology, activates bioluminescence, activates metalloprotease production, represses the type iii secretion system
 <cit> . apart from this diversity, all the v. harveyi-like quorum-sensing systems converge to a phosphorelay circuit that regulates the expression of luxr. however, in v. anguillarum, contrary to other members of the luxr family, this gene is expressed at low densities. this gene represses exopolysaccharide production, and regulates biofilm formation, metalloprotease, pigment production and serine biosynthesis
 <cit> . in the case of v. scophthalmi, which is a non-pathogenic vibrio, no virulence factors are shown to be regulated by this transcriptional regulator. at this moment, genome sequencing of the two v. scophthalmi strains used in this study is under process in our laboratory. future work will involve transcriptome analysis of these mutants.

CONCLUSIONS
v. scophthalmi shares two quorum sensing circuits, including the main transcriptional regulator luxr, with some pathogenic vibrios such as v. harveyi and v. anguillarum. however, contrary to these pathogenic vibrios no virulence factors  were found to be quorum sensing regulated in this bacterium. noteworthy, biofilm formation was altered in luxs and luxr mutants. in these mutants a different expression profile of membrane proteins were observed with respect to the wild type strain suggesting that quorum sensing could play a role in the adhesion and subsequent colonization of the fish by this bacterium. further studies are needed in order to ascertain a similar behaviour of these mutants in vivo.

