BACKGROUND
the human placenta is a temporary organ that facilitates the exchange of nutrients, gas and waste between maternal and fetal circulations. in order to carry out these functions, it is comprised of heterogeneous cell types including several trophoblast cell populations , fibroblasts, mesenchymal cells, as well as fetal and maternal vascular tissue and blood cells. the extra-villous trophoblast cells must first invade the maternal decidua and remodel maternal arteries, to allow direct contact between maternal blood and the placental syncytiotrophoblast cell layer  <cit> . in addition to these traditional roles, the placenta is also important in shielding the developing fetus from the maternal immune system  <cit> .

the placenta also undergoes several physiological changes throughout gestation, with one of the most significant being the flooding of placenta villi by maternal blood at the end of the first trimester , resulting in a rise in oxygen concentration as well as a decrease in trophoblast invasion. it is believed that the inability of the placenta to respond to this change in oxygen concentration can lead to placental disease, such as preeclampsia  <cit> .

the molecular mechanisms behind these morphological and functional changes are now beginning to be understood at both the gene-specific and genome-wide level. wide-ranging genome-wide gene expression differences between placentas at different gestational ages were reported in two recent studies  <cit> . despite sampling from different locations within the placenta, many changes were found in common between the two studies, each of which reported changes in expression with increasing gestational age in genes involved in cell cycle and immune response. this suggests that gene expression changes are needed for physiological needs of the developing placenta, such as shielding the fetus from the maternal immune system  <cit> . genes involved in wnt signalling also showed expression changes over time  <cit>  that resulted in decreasing levels of β-catenin later in gestation, possibly linked to decreasing placental invasiveness  <cit> .

the importance of epigenetic factors in placental development and function has long been known through the study of imprinted genes  <cit>  and it is increasingly clear that the placenta displays a unique epigenetic profile. however, the extent to which epigenetic modifications, specifically dna methylation, contribute to placental function have only recently been widely examined  between placenta and maternal blood, as a means of detecting placental pathologies and fetal chromosomal trisomies using non-invasive methods  and full term placenta   <cit> .

the aim of the current study was to build on recent knowledge obtained through genome-scale gene expression  <cit>  and dna methylation analysis  <cit>  of the human placenta. in the current study, we used the illumina infinium humanmethylation <dig> beadchip platform to identify promoter regions subject to change throughout gestation. in addition we wanted to identify those that become increasingly variable between individual placentas over time, possibly in response to accumulated environmental exposures.

RESULTS
genome-scale dna methylation analysis of first, second, and third trimester placenta
genome-scale dna methylation analysis of  <dig> first trimester ,  <dig> second trimester  and  <dig> third trimester placenta  samples was performed using the illumina infinium humanmethylation <dig> beadchip . following normalisation and data cleaning , a total  <dig>   <dig> probes were available for subsequent analysis. correlations  of average methylation of probes between gestational ages ranged from  <dig>   to  <dig>  . unsupervised hierarchical clustering of all probes clearly delineates samples according to gestational age  with further evidence for a closer relationship between second and third trimester profile than with first trimester. validation of methylation levels at  <dig> infinium probes  in  <dig> placental samples  using the sequenom epityper platform confirmed the robust nature of the infinium data  . the probes used for validation were chosen due to their association with genes with known or predicted important roles in regulating placental function .

transition to normoxia is not associated with major changes in placental dna methylation profile
despite the overall interspersed pattern of clustering of first trimester samples of various gestations  , we tested to see whether any genomic regions undergo selective changes in methylation during the transition from early first trimester to late first/early second trimester. this is the period widely regarded as the time when placental intervillous space is flooded with oxygenated maternal blood. only limited dna methylation differences were observed between  <dig> and  <dig> week placentas . a total of only  <dig> probes  showed consistent methylation differences  of  <dig>  between the two gestational ages. this suggests that promoter dna methylation plays a limited role in any physiological changes in the placenta that occur in response to altered oxygen status.

gestational age is associated with promoter methylation levels
in order to gauge the effects of gestational age on the overall methylation level at gene promoter regions enriched on the infinium humanmethylation <dig> beadchip, the mean methylation across all probes  was calculated for each sample . the mean mi for first, second and third trimester placenta was  <dig> ,  <dig>  and  <dig> , respectively. thus, there is an overall increase in methylation between second and third trimesters . no significant differences were detected between first and second trimesters  . this is clearly apparent when the relative methylation levels for all probes are displayed in a scatterplot . all  <dig> trimesters have the same proportion of probes with β-values between  <dig> and  <dig>  . however, as gestation progresses, there is an increase  of highly methylated probes  .

absolute differences in mean methylation between first and second, first and third, and second and third trimesters were generally small, with only  <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> probes respectively, showing Δβ >  <dig>  . further analysis showed that the  <dig> probes that increased in methylation from first to third trimester were predominantly those with intermediate methylation levels  in the first trimester . figure  <dig> shows a heat map with unsupervised clustering of samples based on the  <dig> probes showing a Δβ >  <dig>  between 1st trimester and term. importantly, samples from all three trimesters showed distinct methylation patterns. more specifically, second trimester samples did not cluster with either the first trimester or term samples, suggesting a progressive change in methylation across gestation. interestingly, none of the probes showed a 'fluctuating' pattern of methylation across gestation  based on our criteria of Δβ >  <dig> , and only  <dig> probes showed this pattern with a Δβ >  <dig> . this further suggests that most methylation changes occur in a progressive manner.

↑: increase in methylation; ↓: decrease in methylation

changes in cell composition, primarily a decrease in cytotrophoblasts, from first to third trimester could be one the major factors contributing to methylation differences between the two gestational time points. in order to test this, methylation levels between purified first trimester cytotrophoblasts and first and third trimester placenta, were examined using both infinium and sequenom epityper analyses  . methylation levels in purified cytotrophoblasts were more similar to first trimester placental tissue  than third trimester  as calculated by infinium and sequenom epityper, respectively.

differentially methylated genes between first trimester, second trimester and term
probes that showed differences of Δβ >  <dig>   between each of the three gestational ages, , were analysed using ingenuity pathways analysis . enrichment of networks, pathways and gene functions was calculated using the ingenuity pathways software. top enriched canonical pathways for genes differentially methylated between first and second trimesters , first and third trimesters  and between second and third trimesters  are listed in table  <dig>  'communication between innate and adaptive immune cells' was the most significantly enriched pathway, with at least  <dig> of the top  <dig> pathways in each comparison being immune-related.

inter-placental methylation variation increases with gestational age
dna methylation may be modulated in part by environmental influences and may serve as a mediator between the environment and genome function . we previously investigated the inter-individual variability of dna methylation in the human placenta  <cit>  and proposed that the highly variable methylation found in the placenta may be a consequence of cumulative response to the intrauterine environmental exposures  <cit> . to test this further, we calculated the inter-placental variance of all probes within each of the first, second and third trimester time points. while the vast majority of probes  showed very little variation  at all time points, the number with an inter-placental variance of >  <dig>  was increased in the third trimester relative to the earlier time points . more specifically, the third trimester group was enriched for probes with the highest variance , with  <dig> such probes compared to  <dig>  and  <dig>  in first and second trimester placentas respectively . to facilitate the comparison of variation level between trimester groups, we defined sites with variance >  <dig>  as highly variable in methylation.

further analysis revealed that most of the gestational age associated variation was found in probes with intermediate methylation  rather than low  or high  methylation . this suggests that the increased variation observed between different full-term placentas is not necessarily a by-product of increasing methylation across gestation. in addition, the increasing methylation across gestation also suggests that the increasing variability was unlikely caused by a lack of maintenance of dna methylation by dnmts in the human placenta.

while inter-individual variation of dna methylation may in part reflect genetic polymorphisms  <cit> , this source of variation would be anticipated to be represented equally across all  <dig> gestational ages. to investigate the inter-placental variation of methylation in more detail, variance level of probes for the third trimester was plotted against the first trimester . this revealed that the majority of the highly variable sites "gain" variability in the later gestations  in figure 5). numerically, the probes with the highest variance are found exclusively in the third trimester , while far fewer probes show high variation across all three gestations  .

the top pathways for genes that show variable methylation at each gestastional age are listed in table  <dig>  the top  <dig> pathways in the third trimester include 'amino acid metabolism', while first and second trimester lists both include 'circadian rhythm signalling'. this supports our hypothesis of an increasing accumulation of epigenetic variation in response to cumulative environmental exposures.

cpg density and genomic context influence variability in placental methylation
in order to examine the relationship between cpg density and methylation status, probe locations were assigned to either cpg island  or non-cpg island  genomic regions, as annotated by illumina. using a chi square test, we found that probes showing increased methylation across gestation were enriched for non-cgi regions , while probes showing lower methylation in third compared to first trimester were not context dependent . we also examined the genomic context of the variable probes falling within the three categories shown in figure  <dig>  probes with high variation in both first and third trimester  are associated with cgis . variable probes in the first, but not the third trimester are slightly enrichmed for cgi regions , and those that were variable in third, but not first trimester show a strong association with cgis  . we also looked at the relationship between the distance from transcription start site and dna methylation. there was no association with distance from tss and differential or variable methylation .

dna methylation profile influences global gene expression in the placenta
in order to assess the overall effect of dna methylation on gene expression profile, methylation β-values levels for first, second and third trimester placental tissue were correlated with publicly available expression data for matched gestational age placenta  <cit> . infinium probes were quartiled according to methylation level, with β value ranges of  <dig> - <dig>  ,  <dig> - <dig>  ,  <dig> - <dig>   and  <dig> - <dig>  , and plotted against gene expression levels for linked genes data . a general decrease in median expression level with increasing methylation level was observed for all three gestational ages. in particular, there was a distinct down regulation in median gene expression between the second  to third quartiles  associated with a change in methylation range from β <  <dig>  to β >  <dig> . in addition the range of expression was reduced in the higher methylation quartiles . using the same expression data sets, we plotted methylation change from first to third trimester against changes in gene expression across the same time points . while methylation change of less than  <dig>  were generally not associated with changes in gene expression, several genes showed both higher methylation and lower expression in third trimester compared to first trimester. these included several immune-regulators ranked highly by ipa  and one with known function in placental development  . additional file  <dig> lists additional genes that showed concordant differences in methylation and expression between first and third trimesters.

discussion
in this study we performed genome-wide dna methylation analysis of gene promoter regions, using the illumina infinium humanmethylation <dig> beadchip, in placentas of different gestational ages ,  <dig> second trimester , and  <dig> third trimester samples ). we further validated the array data by targeting  <dig> cpg sites  using the sequenom epityper platform. the correlation of r <dig> =  <dig>  between the two platforms is comparable to that published for similar comparisons  <cit> . we found evidence for both a programmed change of methylation in gene promoters across gestation and an increase in variability of methylation as gestation progresses. we predict that this is directly related to the cumulative effect of intrauterine environmental exposure, however, the contribution of stochastic events to the observed variation cannot be discounted at this time. further investigation is warranted to determine the effects of specific environmental exposures on dna methylation patterns of the genes identified as variable in the present study.

unsupervised clustering based on all infinium probes  clearly separated all samples by gestational age, with first trimester samples clustering away from second and third trimester samples . this indicates that there are consistent, large scale changes in dna methylation across gestation. there are several possible explanations for these temporal differences, one of which is the change in cell composition and differentiation from first to third trimester, especially the relative loss of cytotrophoblasts throughout gestatation,   <cit> . in support of this playing at least a partial role in the observed change in methylation over time, we found a slightly higher correlation between the methylation profile of purified primary cytotrophoblasts with first trimester placental tissue  than with third trimester tissue . similar data have recently been reported for second trimester placenta tissue which has been shown to be more similar to cytotrophoblasts than mesenchyme in terms of methylation profile  <cit> . however, the greater part of trophoblast volume at full term is syncytiotrophoblast, arising from the fusion of cytotrophoblast cells into a multinucleated layer. thus, the observed trend of increasing methylation may equally be due to differentiation of the cytotrophoblast component, or alternatively, may even be due to other aspects of altered placental function known to occur as gestation progresses.

despite the interspersed clustering of first trimester samples based on the overall infinium methylation patterns, we were interested in assessing dna methylation changes occurring at the transition from the first to the second trimester. this period of placental development is characterised by the loosening of trophoblast plugs and the associated rise in oxygen concentration from 2-3%, to 7-8%  <cit> . the rapid increase in oxygen levels can lead to the accumulation of reactive oxygen species , which might be linked to the reduction in trophoblast invasion and migration observed at about this time. furthermore, it has been suggested that the inability of the placenta to adapt to this increase in oxygen concentration may lead to the development of preeclampsia  <cit> . in this study, we found only  <dig> cpg sites with Δβ >  <dig>  between these time points, suggesting that dna methylation changes are unlikely to play a major role in the physiological changes in placentation associated with transition from low oxygen to a normal oxygen environment. it must be noted however, that we do not have data on the level of vascularisation for our placental samples, so it is possible that flooding of the maternal blood may not have occurred at the time the  <dig> week tissue was collected.

the separation of the trophectoderm from the inner cell mass at the blastocyst stage occurs at a time when genome-wide dna methylation levels are at their lowest  <cit> . the subsequent re-establishment of methylation marks occurs at a slower rate, and to a lesser extent, in the extra-embryonic lineage compared to somatic tissues  <cit> . this accounts for the low global dna methylation in human placenta, which is more similar to human tumours, and is mostly due to hypomethylation of repetitive elements  <cit> . a recent study has reported a positive correlation between global dna methylation levels  and gestational age in the placenta  <cit> , supporting our data for an increasing level of promoter-associated dna methylation during gestation, particularly from second to third trimester . this accumulation of methylation was most apparent in genomic regions that showed an intermediate level of methylation in first trimester, suggesting that these genes are the most likely to be epigenetically regulated by dna methylation. furthermore, these cpg sites were more likely to be in lower cpg density regions   suggesting that methylation levels of cpg sites within cpg islands are more stable across gestation in this tissue. the higher promoter methylation at term could also reflect the end point of a continual process of re-methylation in the extra embryonic lineage from the blastocyst stage, at which point the genome is almost completely hypomethylated  <cit> .

ipa analysis of genes showing differential methylation between first and third trimesters indicated that the most affected pathways were 'communication between innate and adaptive immune cells' and other 'immune-related' pathways . genes in common between two or more of the top  <dig> immune-related pathways included immune regulators ccr <dig>  cd <dig>  csf <dig>  ifna <dig>  ifna <dig>  ifna <dig>  ifnb <dig>  il1f <dig>  il <dig>  il <dig>  il <dig>  lta, tlr <dig>  tlr <dig>  tnf, tnfrsf13b and tnfsf13b. this is in accordance with previous gene expression studies, which also showed substantial enrichment of immune regulators amongst the most differentially expressed genes in placenta at different gestational ages  <cit> . several immune-regulators showed a strong correlation between methylation and expression change from first to third trimester, including granulysin , which has previously been implicated in spontaneous abortions  <cit>  . given the critical role of the placenta in modulating the maternal immune response to the developing pregnancy, and mounting evidence for a role of environmental exposures in controlling both immune-system development and epigenetic profile, it is not surprising that immune regulators are amongst the most variably methylated gene groups.

in addition to identifying cpg sites that consistently change over gestation, we were also interested in cpg sites that show inter-individual variability within each gestational age. genes that show inter-individual differences in expression in placenta have previously been described by sood et al.  <cit> . we have previously reported a subset of cpg sites showing variable methylation in term placenta between unrelated individuals, and suggested that these cpg sites may be more susceptible to change under adverse conditions  <cit> . we have now extended these findings by demonstrating that although ~95% of all probes showed very little variation  between individuals, the number of highly variable probes  increased with gestational age. our data support a model whereby increasing variability in methylation profile between placentas arises in response to cumulative differences in environmental exposure rather than sequence polymorphisms . the most variable probes in the first trimester were associated with genes involved in, 'calcium signaling' and 'nitrogen metabolism', while 'circadian rhythm signalling' and 'arachidonic acid metabolism' were enriched in both first and second trimester placenta . the most enriched variable pathways at term included 'glutamate receptor signaling', 'valine, leucine and isoleucine degradation', and 'β-alanine', 'butanoate', and 'tyrosine' metabolism. the enrichment of pathways involved in metabolism further supports our hypothesis that the methylation variation is occurring in response to environmental influences, potentially as part of an 'adaptive' response of the developing pregnancy, thereby allowing changes in gene expression that may be more beneficial under altered environmental conditions  <cit> . the placental epigenome regulates placental gene expression and function, and any disruption in placental epigenetics  has the potential to affect the developing fetus. therefore it will be interesting in future to examine the potential for role of placental epigenome variation with the now widely accepted phenomenon of 'fetal programming' first described in the context of long term effects of intrauterine environment on offspring  <cit>  and subsequently developed by barker and colleagues in the early 1990s  <cit> .

finally, contrary to cpg sites that increase in methylation across gestation, variable cpg sites are more likely to be located within cpg islands . this coupled with the finding that hypermethylated probes  do not show higher variation compared to probes with low methylation levels   suggests that increased variation in late gestation is not a by-product of increasing methylation across gestation.

the direct role of dna methylation in controlling placental global gene expression levels was examined by comparing our dna methylation data with published gene expression data for placenta tissue of the same gestational age . a general trend of decreasing expression in response to increasing dna methylation was found as expected. further, the range of expression also decreased in the highly methylated probe group. these findings confirm that promoter dna methylation influences global gene expression levels at all three gestational time points. however, the large range in gene expression in all four methylation quartiles, and the lack of strong correlation between methylation and expression change across gestation , support previous data that promoter dna methylation is only one of the mechanisms controlling gene expression, with many other factors combining to regulate the expression of genes, including histone modifications, non-coding rnas, and transcription factors.

CONCLUSIONS
in the present study, we performed genome-scale dna methylation analysis of human placenta at three distinct gestational ages, using the infinium humanmethylation <dig> array. this platform targets over  <dig>   <dig> genes, however, is limited to the 5' promoter region. our findings support the hypothesis that dna methylation levels in the human placenta are dynamic and change over gestation, possibly in response to changing cellular composition and/or cumulative environmental influences. the identification of pathways that are likely to be affected by the latter  will provide valuable candidates for testing in studies examining placenta-associated adverse pregnancy outcomes.

