BACKGROUND
biological systems sense stimuli from their environment using cell-surface receptors, and process this information to make reliable decisions, e.g. where to move, or whether to divide or to express new enzymes. typically, intracellular signalling molecules are activated by modification, e.g. phosphorylation or methylation, and interact in complicated biochemical reaction networks. the biochemical reactions in such networks rely on probabilistic collisions of a limited number of molecules. hence, the number of signalling molecules fluctuates with time, making signal processing noisy. the abundance of noise sources in a cell is in stark contrast to the remarkable accuracy with which cells are known to respond to minute amounts of chemical concentration, including growing axons and immune cells  <cit> .

the high biological relevance of noise has widely been recognised and studied extensively in gene expression  <cit> . in contrast, noise in signal transduction is less well characterised, despite its importance for accurate sensing and cell-decision making. examples of eukaryotic systems, in which signalling noise has been considered include the ultrasensitive thresholding cascades  <cit> , pheromone sensing in yeast  <cit> , signal transduction in photoreceptors  <cit> , feedback loops for noise suppression  <cit> , and eukaryotic chemotaxis  <cit> . furthermore, signalling noise has been considered in parts of bacterial pathways  <cit> . however, such analyses have either been not comprehensive, or signal and noise transmission have not been compared in detail with experimental measurements along the pathway. an important class of signalling pathways are the bacterial two-component systems, including hundreds of pathways responsible for wide ranging functions such as sensing of and responding to nutrients, osmolarity, antibiotics, as well as quorum signals  <cit> . a particularly well characterised example is the chemotaxis pathway in e. coli , allowing cells to swim towards nutrients and away from toxins with high sensitivity over a wide range of ambient concentrations  <cit> . specifically, the kinase chea autophosphorylates when receptors are active and passes on phosphoryl groups to the response regulators chey and cheb. phosphorylated chey  modulates the probability of counterclockwise  or clockwise  rotation of the motor. the rotational directions of motors correspond to the two swimming modes of the bacterium, namely smooth swimming and tumbling, respectively. adaptation, i.e. the reversal of the effect of changes in the ligand concentration, is mediated by reversible receptor methylation and demethylation, catalysed by enzymes cher and phosphorylated cheb , respectively. using the e. coli chemotaxis pathway as an example, we are interested in the behaviour of the rotary motor, i.e. the cell's final output, and how its rotation is affected by signalling and noise.

to characterise signal propagation along the pathway, we use the so-called linear response function. this function characterises the response to a small time-varying input signal, such as impulse, sinusoidal and step stimuli. however, knowing the linear response function allows the calculation of system response to arbitrary input signals, provided they are sufficiently small . typically, any system is subject to various sources of noise, i.e. random fluctuations in the input, as well as from signal processing. this is true in particular for biological systems, which rely on biochemical reactions and conformational changes of signalling molecules, which are intrinsically probabilistic. here, we use the noise power spectrum to characterise fluctuations. the power spectrum captures the correlations between fluctuations in motor behaviour at different time points . in order to make the analysis easier, we typically consider the fourier transforms of the dynamical equations of our model. the fourier transform is an equivalent description of time-dependent data, and represents its decomposition into its frequency components. using this analysis, there are several fundamental questions we would like to address:

firstly, what types of signals are transmitted and what types are attenuated by the pathway? early work showed that the system responds to the time-derivative of the input signal  <cit> . a number of research groups have measured the averaged response of cells to chemotactic signals  <cit> , and found that slowly, as well as rapidly changing input signals are not transmitted by the pathway. the response to slowly changing signals is attenuated by adaptation, which reverses the activation by ligand binding  <cit> . rapidly changing signals were conjectured to be attenuated by a third-order filter  <cit> . while the phosphorylation dynamics of chey-p has been shown to contribute a first-order filter  <cit> , the exact filtering dynamics of the full pathway has not been addressed.

secondly, how is noise generated, amplified or filtered in the signalling pathway, and how do different sources of noise affect the motor behaviour? the power spectrum of the motor rotation was measured for wild-type cells and mutant cells lacking the chemotaxis signalling pathway  <cit> . the spectrum was found to have a large low-frequency component in the wild-type cells, indicating that there is a dominant noise source in the signalling pathway with long correlations. in simulations of the signalling pathway, the adaptation dynamics can play an important role in generating long correlations  <cit> . however, only signalling up to chey-p was considered. other studies include stochastic simulations of the noisy biochemical reactions of the pathway  <cit> , and addressed the mechanism of motor rotation  <cit> , including the thermodynamics of motor switching  <cit> . however, noise generation, filtering and amplification has not been addressed systematically for the various levels of the signalling pathway from chemoreceptors to motors.

finally, how reliably are concentration input signals transmitted through the pathway in the presence of noise? an important task for the cell is to generate an appropriate motor response to input signals in the presence of fluctuations in the input, as well as due to noise in the biochemical signalling pathway. furthermore, cell-to-cell variation in protein expression influences signal transmission and noise filtering. comparing these two aspects of the pathway dynamics, namely chemotactic signal transmission and noise filtering, in close comparison with experimental data along the pathway is a novel perspective in our present study.

in the following, we present a mathematical model for the chemotaxis signalling pathway. a simplified pathway is discussed in the text to provide intuitive understanding. however, results are shown for an extended model for the full pathway provided in the methods section. we discuss the average  response of the signalling pathway to concentration signals. we analyse the noise sources in the signalling pathway and their effects. finally, we vary pathway parameters and study how they affect signal and noise transmission. we also discuss briefly how our approach can be applied to other two-component systems and signalling pathways.

RESULTS
experimental measurements of response and noise spectrum
the signal propagation in the chemotaxis pathway has been characterised by the response to small concentration signals . specifically, the response has been measured at the level of chey-p using fluorescence resonance energy transfer  by shimizu et al.  <cit> . in that study the system was stimulated by a periodic variation of the concentration of attractant α-methyl-dl-aspartate . using a series of frequencies of the stimulation, the magnitude  and phase, i.e. the lag between signal and response, of the response was determined. in cell-tether experiments of motor rotation, the response to short impulses of attractants was measured at the level of the motor by block et al.  <cit>  and segall et al.  <cit> . such data determines the linear response function up to a constant factor. experimental results are shown in figure  <dig>  noise propagation in wild-type cells has only been studied at the level of the motor by korobkova et al.  <cit> . we use the experimental response functions to calibrate our model, and subsequently study the noise power spectrum and signal-to-noise ratio.

simplified model for the pathway
here we consider a simplified pathway to gain intuition of the key processes involved. the simplified pathway consists of chemoreceptor signalling in response to ligand binding and receptor methylation, as well as the rotary motor. specifically, we use stochastic differential equations in a langevin approach  <cit>  to describe the dynamics of each type of signalling protein. we assume throughout that fluctuations in concentration are small, allowing us to describe the average behaviour of a signalling molecule by a deterministic dynamics and the fluctuations around the mean by additive noise.

we assume n receptors form cooperative signalling complexes, which can switch between an active  and an inactive  state. their activity a is described by the monod-wyman-changeux  model  <cit> . the activity depends on the external ligand concentration c at the receptor complex, as well as the methylation level m of the complex as detailed in methods.

we consider nc receptor complexes in a cell, and assume that each complex signals independently of the others. the total activity ac of all receptors in a cell is determined by the sum over all signalling complexes j. the dynamics of the total activity is

  dacdt= ∑j=1nc∂a∂mdmjdt+∂a∂cdcjdt+ηaj, 

i.e. the dynamics of the complex activity is affected by changes in the receptor complex methylation level , changes in ligand concentration , as well as fluctuations due to the switching of the complex between its states . all noise terms η introduced in this section are discussed in methods.

changes in the concentration originate from time-varying input signals 〈c〉, as well as fluctuations due to ligand diffusion. the dynamics of the concentration at the jth receptor complex is given by

  dcjdt=d⟨c⟩dt+ηcj, 

where the first term captures average concentration changes , affecting all receptors, and the second term describes concentration fluctuations at each receptor complex, assumed to be uncorrelated between different receptor complexes.

adaptation is provided by reversible receptor methylation and demethylation, whose dynamics is described by the following equation  <cit> :

  dmjdt=γr-γbaj3+ηmj. 

the total methylation level mj of a receptor complex j is changed by methylation of receptors in the inactive state by cher  and demethylation . this latter rate is assumed to be strongly dependent on the receptor complex activity as only active receptors are demethylated by phosphorylated demethylation enzymes cheb-p. these may act cooperatively, in agreement with time course data of wild-type and a cheb adaptation mutant  <cit> . the last term represents fluctuations due to the noisy processivity of the methylation and demethylation enzymes.

the motor is described as a two-state system with cw and ccw rotating states, corresponding to running and tumbling modes, respectively. the dynamics of the motor bias x is derived from the master equation of an ensemble of two-state motors, and is given by

  dxdt=k+-k-x+ηx, 

with x the fraction of motors in the cw rotational state and applying the single-motor limit. in eq.  <dig>  the first term represents the switching from ccw to cw with the transition rate k+, the second term represents switching from cw to ccw with transition rate k-, and the third term describes temporal fluctuations in switching rates due to the stochastic nature of motor switching. note that the langevin equation for the two-state motor is exact  <cit> , see also additional file  <dig> 

here, transition rates are modulated by the receptor signalling activity ac, whereas in the full pathway model chey-p modulates motor switching. these rates have been experimentally measured using signalling mutants expressing varying amounts of constitutively active signalling molecule chey  <cit> . the switching rates, including a fit of the model we used  <cit>   to the data, are shown in figure 3c.

signal propagation
we consider the response to input concentration signals at various levels in the signalling pathway to study how signals are transmitted to the rotary motor . briefly, an input signal Δc is a concentration change relative to a constant background concentration c <dig>  affecting all receptors equally and representing a "meaningful" input to the chemotaxis signalling pathway. hence, the concentration is given by 〈c〉 = c <dig> + Δc. furthermore, cells are assumed to be adapted to the pre-stimulus concentration c <dig> with the various levels r of the signalling pathway adapted to their steady-state values r*.

analytical results for linear response functions
we can analytically calculate the fourier transformed linear response function from the dynamical equations eq. 1- <dig> without noise . we can analyse the filtering of the signal at each level of the pathway. the fourier transformed linear response function for the total activity of all receptors in a cell is

  χ^ac=-iωnc∂a∂cωm-iω. 

the receptor activity is a high-pass filter: the magnitude of the response function is small for frequencies ω below ωm = ∂a/∂m, which is the characteristic frequency due to adaptation. for frequencies above ωm the response function is a constant, given by the number of receptor complexes nc participating in the response, and their sensitivity ∂a/∂c to ligand, evaluated at steady-state. the sensitivity is proportional to the receptor complex size n, i.e. it describes the amplification of the response of a single receptor.

similarly, the fourier transformed response of the motor is given by

  χ^x=ω2ωx-iωχ^ac. 

the motor is a low-pass filter, i.e. its dynamics introduces a frequency-dependent response, which is constant below the characteristic frequency ωx=k+*+k-* of the motor due to the steady-state switching rates k+* and k-*. the parameter ω <dig> describes the sensitivity of motor switching with respect to changes in receptor activity . at frequencies above ωx the response is reduced. from eq.  <dig> it is obvious that receptors and motor are in a cascade: the motor response introduces a new filter proportional to - <dig> which simply multiplies the response function of the response of the receptor activity. the response functions of the full pathway including the phosphorylation reactions are shown in additional file  <dig> 

for further analysis, we can write the fourier transformed linear response function as

  χ^r=|χ^r|eiϕr, 

where |χ^r| is the magnitude and ϕr is the phase of the response function, which characterise the amplitude and lag of the response behind the input signal, respectively.

model calibration
signal filtering along the pathway
the receptor activity acts as a high-pass filter, i.e. it transmits high-frequency signals, but not low-frequency signals. as can be seen from our simple model , this property is due to adaptation, which introduces the time-derivative of the signal Δc up to the characteristic frequency ωm, eliminating the response to slowly changing attractant concentrations. the activity of chemoreceptors is the input to further levels in the pathway. the response of chea-p is fast, and shows no qualitative difference to the response of receptors in the frequency range shown. in contrast, due to the fast but finite rates of phosphorylation and dephosphorylation, preventing the chey-p concentration to respond to rapidly changing input signals, the response at the level of chey is reduced at high frequencies. similarly, the motor introduces another high-frequency filter due to slow switching between its two states. this additional filter can be deduced from eq.  <dig>  where the motor response function takes the response of chemoreceptors as input, and additionally introduces a characteristic cut-off frequency ωx due to slow motor switching rates. hence, the chemotaxis pathway acts as a band-pass filter  <cit> , which only transmits input signals within a selected frequency range, which is of the order of  <dig> to  <dig> s. this time scale corresponds to the average time between two tumbles, allowing sensing of concentration changes during periods of running. as shown in figure  <dig>  middle the phase tends towards π/ <dig>  i.e. a quarter period, at low frequencies. this has been analysed only for the receptor complex activity  <cit> . this phase difference is due to adaptation and represents the fact that the system takes the time derivative of the stimulus below the characteristic frequency ωm of adaptation. the phase shift of the receptor activity increases to π at high frequencies, indicating that the activity simply follows the output . the phase at high frequencies for the response of chea follows the phase of the receptor activity, except for a small increase of the phase shift. in contrast, the phase of chey and the motor increase significantly beyond π indicating that slow rates of modification and motor switching introduce a lag of the response behind the stimulus.

noise propagation
to understand the noise characteristics of the motor, we consider the noise sources and their transmission in the pathway. each step in the signalling pathway is essentially probabilistic, hence, noisy: ligand diffusion and binding, receptor switching between its functional on and off states, as well as receptor methylation and demethylation, phosphorylation and dephosphorylation of signalling proteins chea, chey and cheb, and switching of the rotary motor between its two states, cw and ccw rotation. to characterise fluctuations of the phosphorylated signalling protein δr around its mean value 〈r〉, we use the power spectrum sr and the variance 〈δr2〉 = 〈r2〉 - 〈r〉 <dig> .

analytical results for noise spectra
considering eq. 1- <dig> with noise, we can analytically calculate power spectra . the power spectrum of activity fluctuations is given by

  sac=ncω2sa+∂a∂c2sc+∂a∂m2qmωm2+ω <dig>  

in this equation we considered fluctuations from receptor switching , ligand diffusion , as well as the receptor methylation dynamics  at each of the nc receptor complexes per cell. we have assumed that fluctuations at different receptor complexes are independent. therefore, we obtain the sum of nc identical spectra for all complexes. the individual terms sa, sc and qm are given by eq.  <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> in methods. the frequency dependence of the ligand noise, as well as noise from receptor complex switching, indicates filtering of slowly varying fluctuations with frequencies below the characteristic frequency ωm due to adaptation. in contrast, only high-frequency fluctuations from the receptor methylation dynamics are filtered by the adaptation dynamics. this is due to finite rates of methylation and demethylation fluctuations introducing correlations in the receptor methylation level.

the power spectrum of fluctuations in the motor bias is obtained as

  sx=ω22sac+qxω2+ωx <dig>  

the first term represents transmitted noise from receptor complexes, including the noise power spectrum of the receptor activity and the sensitivity ω <dig> of motor switching rates to changes in activity. the second term is motor switching noise. both noises are filtered by the motor, as its finite rates of switching introduce correlations with characteristic frequency ωx. the noise spectra of the full pathway including the phosphorylation reactions are shown in additional file  <dig> 

noise filtering along the pathway
in figure  <dig>  right we show the power spectrum of fluctuations at the various levels of the signalling pathway, i.e. total receptor activity, chea-p, chey-p and the motor. we also plot the individual contributions from processes generating noise, namely ligand diffusion, receptor switching, methylation and demethylation of receptors, and phosphorylation and dephosphorylation of proteins, as well as motor switching. this allows us to follow how noise is generated and transmitted at the various levels of the pathway. the noise spectrum of the receptor activity has its largest contribution at low frequencies, which originates in the receptor methylation and phosphorylation dynamics. most of the fluctuations from phosphorylation stem from cheb . at high-frequencies, the activity noise spectrum is at. this is due to ligand and receptor switching noise, which is removed at low frequencies by adaptation, but not at high-frequencies. the general behaviour of the noise spectrum corresponds to the simplified model .

the noise spectrum of chea-p has generally the same shape as the activity spectrum with a large low-frequency component, mainly due to receptor methylation and cheb phosphorylation dynamics. this spectrum also has an almost flat high-frequency behaviour in the frequency range shown. apart from ligand and receptor switching noise, the flat part of the spectrum is largely determined by fluctuations from chea autophosphorylation, which has roughly the same shape as activity noise at high frequencies because autophosphorylation depends on the receptor activity.

the noise spectrum of chey-p is also largest at low frequencies. however, at high frequencies the spectrum falls off as noise is filtered due to the finite rates of chey phosphorylation and dephosphorylation, which introduce correlations in the fluctuations.

the motor introduces another layer of filtering of transmitted noise with the characteristic motor switching frequency ωx . hence, transmitted noise is reduced by two filters in the frequency range shown, namely due to the chey-p and motor dynamics. however, the main contribution to the spectrum is due to the motor switching itself, which is reduced only by a first-order filter with characteristic frequency ωx.

cell-to-cell variation of motor behaviour
how are the signal response, fluctuations and the signal-to-noise ratio  affected by changing parameters of the pathway such as size of receptor complexes, protein concentrations and reaction rate constants? in this section, we discuss the effect of cell-to-cell variation on the power spectrum of the motor. in the next section, we discuss the snr and its contributions, and how they depend on receptor complex size and adaptation rates.

according to our model parameters obtained from fitting the fourier transformed linear response to data, the main contribution to the power spectrum comes from the steady-state switching of the motor between ccw and cw state. however, cell-to-cell variation in protein content and motor switching rates can lead to modifications of the largely lorentzian-shaped spectrum. these modifications are caused by the transmitted noise from receptor methylation and phosphorylation dynamics . specifically, figure 5a shows the motor power spectrum for increased motor switching rates as well as reduced adaptation rates and number of chemoreceptors in a cell. in all cases the low-frequency component of the transmitted noise becomes more prominent.

an increased low-frequency component has been observed in the motor power spectrum for cells with low motor bias  <cit> . both, wild-type cells and mutants lacking the signalling pathway were measured. hence, the mutant's spectrum represents the component to the power spectrum from steady-state motor switching only. wild-type cells showed a large low-frequency component compared to the mutants. figure 5b shows that our model can reproduce these experimental data , provided we assume a low ccw to cw switching rate leading to small motor bias . specifically, the low-frequency component of our spectrum originates from noise in the methylation and phosphorylation dynamics in cells with low motor bias. furthermore, experiments show that the low-frequency component in the motor power spectrum is reduced by increasing the expression level of cher  <cit> . in figure 5c we show that our model reproduces this experimental finding . the low-frequency component due to noise from receptor methylation and demethylation is effectively reduced by increasing the methylation rate constant.

signal-to-noise ratio at the motor
to characterise how signals are transmitted in the presence of noise, we define the snr at the level of the motor as

  snr=Δx2⟨δx2⟩ 

with Δx <dig> and 〈δx2〉 defined in methods. for optimal signalling this ratio should be maximised. for simplicity, we only discuss the receptor activity in the text, while in the figures we additionally show the contribution from phosphorylation processes as transmitted to the motor in the full pathway model.

optimal receptor complex size
receptor complexes amplify small signals proportionally to their size n. however, also concentration fluctuations are expected to be amplified. hence, we hypothesise that the receptor complex size could be optimised to yield a balance of advantageous amplification of signals and detrimental amplification of input noise.

in figure 6a we show the integrated motor response Δx <dig>  to a step stimulus for varying background concentration and receptor complex size. we assume that the step stimulus size is a constant fraction of  <dig> percent of the background concentration. the integrated response has a characteristic variation with background concentration with the maximum in the sensitivity range of tar receptors . furthermore, the response increases with receptor complex size n. we calculated the integrated signal response of the receptor activity . this quantity scales linearly with receptor complex size, Δac2∝n, due to coherent addition of the signalling responses of different receptor complexes, amplification of concentration changes by receptor complexes, as well as filtering by adaptation.

in figure 6b and 6c, we show the variance  of the transmitted noise of the pathway at the level of the motor. only the contribution to the variance from ligand diffusion depends on the background concentration. compared to the signal response, the maximum of the variance is shifted to a slightly lower concentration. the contribution to the variance from switching of receptor complexes is relatively small compared to the other contributions and roughly constant with receptor complex size, whereas those from ligand diffusion, receptor methylation and phosphorylation dynamics increase with receptor complex size.

to understand these behaviours of the variance more intuitively, we analysed the receptor activity analytically . we find, the contribution to the variance of the receptor activity from receptor switching is indeed constant, independent of n. the contribution from ligand diffusion scales steeply as n <dig>  the difference between ligand noise and ligand signal amplification being due to  noise from different complexes is added up incoherently, and  the main contribution to the variance coming from high-frequency ligand noise, which is not filtered by adaptation. the contribution from receptor methylation grows approximately linearly with receptor complex size as a result of the incoherent addition of fluctuations at different receptor complexes and the sensitivity of the receptor complex activity with respect to changes in methylation level increasing proportionally with n. the contribution to the variance from phosphorylation processes grows with receptor complex size similar to the contribution from the methylation dynamics. overall, the total variance of transmitted noise at the level of the motor has contributions from receptor switching, the dynamics of receptor methylation, and phosphorylation. the latter is approximately constant or grows slower than the amplified signal response, whereas the component from ligand diffusion increases steeper than the signal response with growing receptor complex size.

the resulting snr, i.e. the ratio of integrated signal response and variance of the noise, is shown in figure 6d and 6e. the snr is largest at background concentrations in the sensitivity range of the tar receptor. furthermore, due to the different dependencies of the signal and the noise on the receptor complex size, the snr has a maximum at a particular receptor complex size . the snr grows below that complex size due to signal amplification, while the amplified ligand noise from ligand diffusion is still below the internal noise level from receptor switching and receptor methylation and phosphorylation dynamics. above the optimal receptor complex size, the snr decreases because the ligand noise is amplified more than the signal.

optimal adaptation rates
as shown above, adaptation filters slow input signals, with the adaptation speed determining what input frequencies are transmitted by the pathway. furthermore, the adaptation dynamics filters input noise. hence, adaptation rates may be expected to be optimised for signal and noise propagation.

the variance of fluctuations is shown in figure 7c and 7d. the individual contributions from transmitted noise at the level of the motor look qualitatively similar. for γr and γb such that the adapted receptor activity is in the steep region of dose-response curves, the variance of transmitted noise is largest. in contrast, for either vanishing γr or γb all contributions decrease, consistent with calculations for the variance of the receptor activity in methods. in these cases, the adapted receptor activity becomes saturated, hence, quenching fluctuations transmitted by receptors.

the resulting snr is shown in figure 7e. the snr increases for vanishing γr and decreases for vanishing γb. according to figure 7e, a large snr is obtained for small γr and large γb, corresponding to the parameters of our model.

fluctuation-response relationships
park et al.  <cit>  presented the idea that the signalling response to concentration signals and fluctuations in the chemotaxis pathway are not independent of each other, because they are produced by the same molecular interactions. specifically, based on measurements at the level of the motor these authors proposed a fluctuation-response theorem, namely an approximate linear relationship between the adaptation time to step stimuli and the variance of fluctuations in chey-p concentration.

using our model, we tested this hypothesis and varied the adaptation rates, as well as the total chey concentration in a cell, resulting in a shifted adapted chey-p concentration at steady state. we find that the variance of chey-p  decreases as the adapted chey-p value increases except for very small adapted chey-p concentrations , indicating that the relative strength of fluctuations decreases as expected. in figure 8b we show the adaptation time, approximated by the inverse of the characteristic frequency due to adaptation, plotted against the variance of chey-p. we find that at low adaptation times , the adaptation time increases with the variance of chey-p, indicating that cells with large fluctuations also respond longer to concentration signals. in contrast at long adaptation times, the adaptation time decreases with increasing variance of the pathway . this behaviour can be directly traced back to the non-monotonic variance shown in figure  <dig>  it is maximal when the adapted chey-p concentration is about  <dig> μm, i.e. when typically half of chey is phosphorylated. the exact relationship depends on what parameters varied, exemplified by the different curves in figure 8b. for each parameter and small adaptation times, we find an approximate linear relationship in line with park et al.  <cit> , see inset.

discussion
biological signalling pathways employ biochemical reaction networks and molecular state transitions to sense and process signals from the environment. fluctuations inherent in these processes determine the signals which can reliably be transmitted. here, we studied the signal and noise propagation in the e. coli chemotaxis signalling pathway, which controls the bacterial swimming behaviour in chemical gradients. specifically, we considered the dynamics of ligand diffusion, receptor methylation and demethylation, receptor complex switching between on and off, phosphorylation and dephosphorylation of the kinase chea, and response regulators chey and cheb, as well as from rotary motor switching between cw and ccw direction. we assume cooperative chemoreceptor signalling complexes, whose activities depend on ligand concentrations and receptor methylation level, described by the mwc model  <cit> .

we formulated a model which includes all processes in the signalling pathway. not included is the dynamics of gene expression and enzyme localisation to the chemoreceptor cluster, which is assumed to be much slower than the dynamics of signalling processes . to make results intuitive we also presented a simplified version of the model, which only includes the dynamics of the activity of chemoreceptors, ligand concentration and receptor methylation level, as well as the motor dynamics. to calibrate the model, we first collected experimental data sets for the signalling pathway and rotary motor  <cit> , and the motor switching behaviour  <cit> . using the fourier transformed linear response function, we subsequently fitted our model parameters. we found a range of parameters fitting different data sets, revealing a striking experimental variation, which may require further characterisation in the future.

despite the fitting, there is a discrepancy of our response function and the data at large frequencies. block et al.  <cit>  and segall et al.  <cit>  conjectured that the pathway is a third-order low-pass filter. in contrast, we find that the only relevant filters in that frequency range are due to chey-p and motor dynamics, leading to only a second-order filter. one explanation for the missing filter is that experimental concentration pulses were not short enough, leaving a signature from the input signal at large frequencies. alternatively, additional processes such as a slow release of chey-p from the chemosensory complexes as discussed in ref.  <cit>  could lead to an additional filter. however, chey-p/chez complex formation and potential oligomerisation of chey-p/chez complexes  <cit>  are not expected to contribute to high-frequency filtering .

the motor behaviour is the final cell output, which contains characteristic noise signatures of all upstream signalling components, including the receptors. we found that motor switching is the dominant contribution to the spectrum of the fluctuations in motor bias . this may be not surprising as motor switching enables e. coli to tumble and change its swimming direction, and is therefore crucial for its search strategy. however, low-frequency contributions from signalling and adaptation may become more significant for some cells or under certain conditions . specifically, we predict that due to cell-to-cell variation of protein contents or fast motor switching, these low-frequency components become comparable to motor switching noise. for instance, korobkova et al.  <cit>  measured power spectra in cells with low motor bias and found that the low-frequency component is increased compared to mutants lacking the signalling pathway, and that increasing the expression level of cher decreases the low-frequency component. our model is able to reproduce these spectra, demonstrating the general applicability of our approach. long correlations in motor bias may enable subpopulations of cells to swim further without tumbling or to tumble more frequently.

to test our predictions, adaptation rates can be varied using cells expressing different amounts of cher and cheb from an inducible plasmid. alternatively, the natural variability in protein expression between cells can be exploited. numerous wild-type cells could be monitored. by extracting the adaptation times for chemotactic stimuli, the adaptation rate constants for individual cells can be inferred. subsequently, the same cells can be used to measure long time traces of motor switching and noise spectra can be calculated. while we included a number of noise sources in our model, others have not been included. for instance the binding and unbinding of the adaptational enzymes to the c-termini of the receptors  <cit>  may introduce low-frequency fluctuations in the motor noise power spectrum. however, as shown for enzyme cher in figure 9a, this contribution is significantly smaller than the methylation and demethylation noise. in the same plot we also show the cher gene-expression noise, which only contributes at very low frequencies . furthermore, the ligand noise may be underestimated in our model since fluctuations of the ligand concentration at individual receptor complexes were treated as uncorrelated. if the fluctuations are treated as strongly correlated , the ligand noise becomes substantially larger as complexes coherently transmit the ligand noise . taken together, we believe that we included the main noise sources in our model although due to subtleties, the magnitude of noise contributions are much harder to pinpoint exactly. our full-pathway model allows us to connect to a large variety of data and literature. for instance, we also investigated how the response to concentration signals is related to fluctuations in the chemotaxis pathway , similar to ideas presented by park et al.  <cit> . we do not find one unifying fluctuation-response theorem, but a nonlinear trend for the relationship between adaptation times and variance in chey-p. for small adaptation times we find an approximate linear relationship in line with experiments  <cit> .

although chemotaxis is one of many capabilities a cell has and may not be optimised in isolation without the rest of the cell, we speculate the cell aims to maximise the snr for most efficient signalling and chemotaxis. we found that the snr is maximised at particular receptor complex sizes similar to values of receptor cooperativity extracted from fret dose-response curves  <cit> . in line with the data, the "optimal" complex size increases with external ligand concentration, and hence with receptor methylation level. while our complex sizes appear overestimated, noise from ligand molecules rebinding to the same receptor complex  <cit>  has not been considered here. this may well increase the noise level from external sources and hence decrease the predicted optimal receptor complex size. using our model, we also analysed the effect of varying the methylation and demethylation rate constants. we found that a large snr is obtained for small methylation and large demethylation rate constant, corresponding to our fitted model parameters from fret dose-response curves  <cit> .

to describe the noise, the langevin approximation is expected to work for the phosphorylation and dephosphorylation of the abundant protein chey. however, its applicability is less clear for receptor signalling due to both extrinsic ligand noise and intrinsic noise from receptor methylation. furthermore, the switching of the binary motor may constitute relatively large noise. as shown in additional file  <dig> the master equation and langevin approximation yield the same results for receptor signalling  <cit> . as for the motor, the langevin equation is exact  <cit> . however, we explicitly tested that the statistical properties of the time series obtained for two-state switching and langevin equation are the same. for constant rates, as well as for noisy rates due to fluctuations in chey-p concentration, the power spectra obtained for the two processes are the same . in additional file  <dig> we further show that noise terms are indeed sufficiently small that linearisation of the pathway equations is justified.

CONCLUSIONS
we presented a comprehensive analysis of signal and noise propagation in the chemotaxis pathway of e. coli. our full-pathway model allowed us to successfully explain a large variety of experimental data from the literature. however, our work goes beyond e. coli chemotaxis as similar methods can be applied to many other pathways.

the e. coli chemotaxis pathway is a member of the large class of two-component systems, containing hundreds of closely related pathways involved in stress response, virulence and inter-cell communication  <cit> . in these pathways, activation of a sensor histidine kinase results in its autophosphorylation, and subsequently in phosphorylation of a response regulator, which typically binds to dna and regulates gene expression. the final output, i.e. activation of gene expression, is again binary and hence similar to the bacterial chemotaxis pathway . there are particularly well-studied examples of two-component systems:  the vans /vanr  system conferring vancomycin resistance in gram positive bacteria  <cit> ,  quorum sensing in vibrio harveyi, where the three kinases luxn, luxq and cqss respond to different autoinducers and first phosphorylate the phosphotransferase luxo , which then phosphorylates the response regulator luxu  <cit> , and  the phosphorelay controlling sporulation in bacillus subtilis. the relay contains at least four kinases kina-kinb and the phosphotransferase spo0f, which phosphorylates the response regulator spo0a  <cit> .

our work may also be applicable to other bacterial chemotaxis pathways, which are often considerably more complex than e. coli's pathway and still need to be understood in detail. for instance, the photosynthetic bacterium rhodobacter sphaeroides has several homologues of each of the chemotaxis proteins in e. coli  <cit> . interestingly, rhodobacter has two chemotaxis receptor clusters, one polar cluster similar to e. coli and one cytoplasmic cluster, which is thought to sense the metabolic state of the cell. both clusters need to be present for chemotaxis  <cit> . the soil bacterium bacillus subtilis has three adaptation systems  <cit> : one based on methylation and demethylation of receptors similar to e. coli and two independent of receptor methylation, the chec/ched system and the chev system. furthermore, in b. subtilis, sensory adaptation is not determined by the level of receptor methylation but the location of methylation sites on the receptors. hence, our analysis presented here may also help elucidate the design of these pathways and clarify the computational problems these bacteria try to solve.

