BACKGROUND
many parasites have evolved the ability to manipulate host behavior. this can range from alterations of existing behavioral traits to the expression of novel behaviors not present in the normal repertoire . these changes in host behavior serve to promote completion of the parasite’s life cycle and are generally assumed to be the result of genes expressed by the parasite  <cit> . despite this, only a few studies have either demonstrated or implicated a genetic basis for manipulated behavior . one example is insect infection by baculovirus where the virus induces an enhanced locomotory activity  in the caterpillar host prior to death  <cit>  combined with the migration of infected individuals towards elevated positions. at this elevated position, the host dies and liquefies, leading to virus particle transmission onto leaves that are then consumed by new caterpillar hosts . ela is a normal behavior in un-infected caterpillars, facilitating the search for suitable sites to undergo metamorphosis  <cit> . the baculovirus protein tyrosine phosphatase-encoding gene ptp, however, induces ela upon infection  <cit> . a second mechanism involves expression of the baculovirus gene ecdysteroid uridine 5’-diphosphate -glucosyltransferase  that results in a disrupted climbing behavior  <cit> . healthy caterpillars climb at night for feeding purposes and return down during the day to avoid predation. upon infection, the retreat is disrupted due to egt expression. despite the identification of these genes, the host pathways through which behavior is manipulated are still unknown. the attraction of infected individuals by light, however, suggests a role for host pathways involved in phototaxis and light perception  <cit> .

the progress made in the baculovirus system does not necessarily provide us with answers that can be extrapolated to other systems. this is especially true in host-parasite systems where more complex manipulations are observed, which lead to manipulated hosts expressing wholly novel behaviors. one such example involves the fungal parasite ophiocordyceps unilateralis sensu latu  manipulating brains of carpenter ants . in this system, a set of stereotyped behaviors is induced once the fungal colony growing inside the host reaches a sufficient size. infection induced behaviors include leaving the nest at a different time of day compared to regular foraging, non-directed movements, convulsions and climbing up the vegetation  <cit> . subsequently, the host bites into the vegetation at an elevated position and dies  <cit> . this manipulated biting is not part of the ant’s normal behavior and assists the formation of the fruiting body and spore transmission post-mortem . the place of biting is again stereotyped and seemingly adapted to the ecosystem in which the infection takes place: infected ants bite the main veins or margins of leaves in rainforests  <cit>  while they bite twigs in temperate forests  <cit> . moreover, the transition from wandering to this death grip is synchronized to a certain time of day  <cit> .

here, we describe the gene expression in the complex manipulator o. unilateralis s.l., a fungal isolate collected from the temperate forests of south carolina  <cit> , and its camponotus ant host during the in vivo manipulated biting event. we performed a mixed transcriptomics study on the heads of experimentally infected individuals sampled during and after manipulated biting. we also sequenced and annotated the genome of o. unilateralis s.l. from north america. we found that during manipulated biting, the fungal parasite o. unilateralis s.l. up-regulates genes that putatively encode for proteins involved in oxidation-reduction processes and pathogenicity-related interactions, some of which may have medical or industrial applications. moreover, we have identified genes that are involved in the expression of putative proteins that might affect host behavior. in the ant host, we found the differential expression of genes seemingly involved in apoptosis, immune and stress responses, as well as possible targets of behavioral manipulation.

RESULTS
apparent synchronization of manipulated biting behavior
we used an o. unilateralis s.l. species from south carolina and its natural host camponotus castaneus to study behavioral manipulation of the host by the parasite. ants were experimentally infected through injection and kept under 24 h light: dark  and temperature cycles together with sham-treated  and untreated individuals . only infected ants that died between  <dig> and 24 days post infection were observed in the characteristic manipulated biting position, as illustrated with pictures and videos in  <cit> . manipulated biters were always found in this position during the first observational recording of the day at 09:00 h local time . the body and the legs would still be moving and twitching, an indication that the ant was alive. these ants would not react to any environmental stimuli . at 13:00 h, movements were reduced to occasional twitching of the legs. at 14:00 h no movement was detected, suggesting that the ant host had died. similar observations were made in independent experiments with this parasite and host species . the consistent observations of time of death imply that both, manipulated biting behavior and the subsequent death, are synchronized. similar synchronized manipulation and death was observed in another species of ant-manipulating ophiocordyceps from thailand. however, in that system the infected ants displayed manipulated biting behavior around solar noon, followed by death 6 h after the biting event had taken place  <cit> . the shift of synchronized timing of biting towards the early morning/late night in our experiments could be an effect of the set-up , or due to species-specific timing of manipulated behavior. future work to establish the timing of manipulation under field conditions in the temperate woods of south carolina would be helpful.

live ants displaying manipulated biting behavior were collected at 10:00 h. at 14:00 h, biting ants that showed no movement and thus appeared dead were harvested. this time point is referred to as “after manipulation”. to decrease within-sample variation possibly introduced by collecting manipulated ants across different days, three individuals that were found manipulated on the same day were used for each sample type. healthy control ants were also collected at 10:00 h and 14:00 h. as a baseline for o. unilateralis gene expression during and after manipulation, fungal cultures kept in insect cell culture media were harvested.

general genome features of o. unilateralis s.l. and c. floridanus
as a reference for the c. castaneus rna-seq reads, the published genome of a related camponotus species, camponotus floridanus, was used  <cit> . for the present study, we repeated the functional annotations for the gene predictions using the same methodology as for o. unilateralis s.l.. this resulted in statistics similar to the ones previously reported: a total genome size of  <dig>  mb encoding  <dig>  genes of which  <dig>  were predicted to encode proteins within  <dig>  unique pfam domains and of which  <dig>  % is putatively being secreted. the cegma completeness for this genome was  <dig>  %.

the genome of the o. unilateralis s.l. from south carolina  <cit> , was sequenced to 120-fold coverage. this genome served as a reference for the fungal rna-seq reads in our samples. contig assembly resulted in a genome size of  <dig>  megabases . gene prediction yielded  <dig>  putative genes. by using the core eukaryotic genes mapping approach  core genes dataset  <cit> , the o. unilateralis s.l. genome was estimated to be  <dig>  % complete. pfam domains were assigned to  <dig>   of these genes, and there were  <dig>  unique predicted pfam domains  <cit> . the proportion of genes encoding putatively secreted proteins was  <dig>  %. a gene ontology  annotation was assigned to  <dig>  % of the genes and  <dig>   received a kyoto encyclopedia of genes and genomes kegg) annotation . from these  <dig>  genes,  <dig>  % were found to be involved in various forms of metabolism and  <dig>  % in genetic information processing such as transcription, translation and protein folding .table  <dig> 
ophiocordyceps unilateralis s.l. genome assembly and annotation statistics



the genome and gene predictions of o. unilateralis s.l. were compared to that of  <dig> published ascomycota genomes. a phylogenetic reconstruction based on  <dig> single-copy genes that were conserved across the compared genomes is depicted in fig.  <dig>  the tree is congruent with a previously published phylogeny that contained a subset of the presently used organisms  <cit> . fungi with various lifestyles both within and outside the class sordariomycetes served as an outgroup to the order hypocreales in our phylogenomic analysis. the order hypocreales harbors a variety of insect parasites,  distributed across several fungal families, as well as taxa that infect plants and other fungi . we also assessed the conservation of the protein-encoding genes of o. unilateralis s.l.. this revealed that 13 % of all putative proteins within the genome are unique to o. unilateralis s.l., with 6 % conserved only in fungi within the order hypocreales, and 1 % shared only with ophiocordyceps sinensis. when we compared only those proteins that have a predicted secretion signal , 33 %  were found to be unique to the o. unilateralis s.l. genome. of these,  <dig> were predicted to be small secreted proteins . this is 49 % of all ssps found in the o. unilateralis s.l. genome, which suggests that half of the putatively bioactive ssps in this fungal parasite are unique to this species complex . both this set of unique ssps and ssps in general have a higher percentage of cysteine residues , compared to the full protein set . this is frequently observed for ssps in fungal genomes, and the cysteine residues likely play a role in disulphide bonds  <cit> .fig.  <dig> phylogenetic relationship of o. unilateralis s.l. with other ascomycetous fungi. phylogenetic reconstruction of ophiocordyceps unilateralis and an outgroup of ascomycota. the order hypocreales is highlighted in grey. the tree was rooted on candida albicans and this branch is not drawn to scale. bootstrap values were  <dig>  unless indicated otherwise. fungal lifestyles are indicated with different colors

fig.  <dig> conservation of o. unilateralis s.l. genes in other ascomycota. bar charts displaying the percentage of genes encoding all proteins, secreted proteins and small secreted proteins that were found to be conserved across taxonomic groups or to be unique to the o. unilateralis s.l. genome



we characterized the predicted secreted protein set further. an impressive number of  <dig> genes were found that contained one or more putative enterotoxin_a pfam domains. these are bacterial-like toxins of which  <dig> are homologs of cholera toxins and the rest are homologs of heat-labile enterotoxin_a. these toxins are not commonly found in fungal genomes  <cit> . of the  <dig> fungi analyzed here,  <dig> did not have any enterotoxin-encoding genes in their genomes. only the insect-infecting fungi and plant pathogen m. oryzae contained genes putatively encoding these bacterial-like toxins. the tolypocladium inflatum genome was found to have  <dig> enterotoxin-encoding genes, cordyceps militaris has  <dig>  magnaporthe oryzae has  <dig>  metarhizium acridium has  <dig>  ophiocordyceps sinensis has  <dig>  cordyceps bassiana has  <dig>  and metarhizium robertsii has  <dig>  the o. unilateralis s.l. genome contained at least twice as many toxins relative to the other fungi within the comparison. a phylogenetic analysis showed that these enterotoxins are diversely distributed displaying resemblance with enterotoxins from other species. this indicates that the high number of enterotoxins in the genome of o. unilateralis are not a result of a duplication of a small number of enterotoxins, but rather a general expansion of phylogenetically diverse enterotoxin genes . in weevils , it has been shown that bacterial enterotoxins reduced the production of chemosignaling molecules by affecting the alcohols in these compounds  <cit> . communication in social insects generally involves chemical signals. as such, ants have an exocrine apparatus that is mainly used for this purpose  <cit> . the expansion of genes putatively encoding for secreted enterotoxins in the o. unilateralis s.l. genome might be an indication that impairing host communication through chemosignaling is one of the mechanisms employed by this manipulative fungus.

general mixed transcriptome features of o. unilateralis s.l. and c. castaneus
gene expression profiles of o. unilateralis s.l. and c. castaneus during  and after manipulated biting  were generated through mixed transcriptomics on entire ant heads. we are therefore looking at the gene expression of interactions between the fungal parasite and the ant brain, as well as other tissues inside the head . gene expression studies on entire drosophila heads however demonstrate that a good resolution of the processes in the brain can still be had this way  <cit> . fungal cultures grown in insect cell culture media, and heads of healthy ants collected at the respective times of day for the mixed transcriptome samples, were used as controls. sequencing yielded an average of  <dig>  million paired reads per sample with an average mean quality score of  <dig> . these reads were mapped to the o. unilateralis s.l. and c. floridanus reference genomes to obtain expression profiles, which were normalized to fragments per kilobase of exon model per million fragments mapped  . of the o. unilateralis s.l. genes,  <dig> ,  <dig>  and  <dig>  % were considered transcriptionally active with an expression level of at least  <dig> fpkm in the fungal control culture, during manipulation, and after manipulation, respectively. of the c. floridanus homologs,  <dig>  and  <dig>  % were considered transcriptionally active in c. castaneus controls compared to  <dig>  and  <dig>  % in infected c. castaneus ant heads during and after manipulated biting behavior, respectively. pairwise analysis was used to determine which genes were significantly  and at least 2-fold up- or down-regulated between sample conditions .

for the ant host, an average of  <dig>  % of the reads from the healthy control samples,  <dig>  % of the mixed “manipulated biting behavior” reads and  <dig>  % of the mixed “after manipulation” reads mapped to the c. floridanus genome . the similarity/divergence of the c. castaneus and the c. floridanus genomes is unknown, which could be the reason for the lower percentage of reads mapping to the reference genome. despite this low mapping score for ant reads, we did find  <dig>  genes that were differentially expressed. this is considerably more compared to what has been found in previous work on gene expression of ant hosts challenged with pathogenic fungi   <cit> . for the fungal parasite, an average of  <dig>  % of the control sample reads,  <dig>  % of the mixed “manipulated biting behavior” reads and  <dig>  % of the mixed “after manipulation” reads mapped to the o. unilateralis s.l. genome. a relative comparison of the mixed transcriptome mapping scores to those of the single transcriptomes suggests that during manipulated biting behavior only about half of the tissue inside an infected ant head was made up by the ant host . the other half consisted of fungal cells . after manipulation had taken place, the fungal colony had grown to make up about 75 % of the biological material inside an infected ant’s head . an alternative explanation is that the expression levels considerably decreased in the dying ant, which causes the relative expression of the fungus to increase.

enrichment of functional annotations in o. unilateralis s.l. differential gene expression
to obtain insight into the biological processes that are different between samples, we performed an enrichment analysis of functional annotations among differentially expressed genes. we determined which functional annotation terms were significantly overrepresented among various subsets of differential expression  by performing the fisher exact test . within the  <dig>  genes that were up-regulated in o. unilateralis s.l. during the manipulated biting  compared to fungal control cultures, those involved in dna binding, dna replication and dna repair, and oxidation-reduction processes were overrepresented . genes involved in dna replication and dna repair were also overrepresented in the  <dig>  up-regulated fungal genes after manipulated biting had taken place  compared to control cultures .

genes involved in the metabolism of sugars were generally down-regulated during manipulation . however, a direct comparison between gene expression in o. unilateralis during  and after manipulation  indicated an overrepresented up-regulation of carbohydrate processing genes after manipulation had taken place . even when the data set was narrowed down to only those genes that were first down-regulated during manipulation before being up-regulated again afterwards, carbohydrate metabolic processes were still overrepresented . this suggests that the ants collected at 14:00 h indeed represent the situation after manipulation in which the host has presumably been killed and the fungus has transitioned to actively consuming the host . following death, rapid growth occurs as the fungus switches from growing within the host to growing externally, forming the stalk needed for reproduction  <cit> . coinciding with this, genes with a pathogenesis go annotation term were overrepresented in the down-regulated gene set after manipulation had taken place . all pathogenesis-related genes in this subset were annotated as protein exotoxins with either a functional enterotoxin_a domain  or a pertussis s <dig> subunit domain . as discussed above, such exotoxins are normally secreted by bacteria but have also been reported to be present in fungal genomes such as c. bassiana  <cit> .

our transcriptomics data thus indicate a shift from parasitic to saprophytic activity. this is supported by previous metabolomics analyses, which demonstrated that fungal parasites display vastly different secretomes during growth on live versus dead ant tissues  <cit> . related to this shift we found that after manipulation, o. unilateralis s.l. had down-regulated an overrepresented amount of genes involved in oxidation-reduction processes, such as cytochrome p450s  . one of the many roles cyps play involves the biosynthesis of secondary metabolites related to pathogenesis  <cit> . this result still holds when the subset of genes is reduced to only those that were first significantly up-regulated during manipulation . genes with a secondary metabolism annotation term were also down-regulated in overrepresented manner after manipulation, when compared to expression during biting. among them were genes putatively involved in the metabolism of neurotoxic compounds such as alkaloids and indole diterpene alkaloids , and genes involved in the production of fungal bioactive compounds such as nonribosomal peptide synthetases  and polyketide synthases  .

when examining the subsets for differential expression we found an overrepresentation of genes predicted to encode secreted proteins in almost all of them. when comparing gene expression during manipulation with that of the fungal control culture,  <dig>  and  <dig>  % from the total of the up- and down-regulated genes, respectively, were annotated to have a secretion signal. this is, respectively,  <dig>  and  <dig>  % of all genes predicted to encode secreted proteins . the fungus o. unilateralis s.l. thus likely secretes a different array of compounds inside the ant at the time of manipulated biting, compared to when it is grown in insect cell culture media. similarly, about 20 % of all secreted protein encoding genes was down-regulated after manipulation had taken place, both when compared to the fungal control culture and to gene expression during manipulation . this suggests that, again, after manipulation, the fungal parasite dynamically changes its secretion profile. our findings are in agreement with previous work using a metabolomics approach to determine the secretomes of fungal entomopathogens  in insect cell culture media with and without ant tissues  <cit> . about one third of the up- and down-regulated genes encoding secreted proteins were annotated as ssps . ssps are often highly species-specific, lacking similarity to known proteins, making functional predictions difficult. several ssps that have been experimentally characterized are involved in parasitic relationships of fungi with their hosts, affecting cellular processes inside the host  <cit> . this suggests that o. unilateralis s.l. not only has a specific secretion profile during behavioral manipulation, it also tailors its array of small secreted effector proteins.

since secreted proteins were generally overrepresented, we also investigated their conservation across the entomopathogenic  fungi within the order hypocreales. from all the genes that were annotated to have a secretion signal, about 42 % were conserved among the fungi with an insect parasitic lifestyle. a little over half of the secreted proteins was thus to be found only in the o. unilateralis s.l. genome. of this 58 %, about 12 % was up-regulated solely during manipulated biting behavior, while this was only  <dig>  % for the conserved putative secretion proteins. in fact, the majority  of the genes found up-regulated during manipulated biting behavior and down-regulated again after, were not conserved in other hypocrealean entomopathogens . this suggests that o. unilateralis s.l. might be using a rather unique set of genes to establish manipulated biting behavior, compared to other non-manipulating insect-infecting fungi.fig.  <dig> venn diagram of o. unilateralis s.l. genes that are putatively involved in insect pathogenesis and establishing manipulated biting behavior in the ant c. castaneus. such genes are likely to be specifically up-regulated during manipulated biting behavior, when compared to growth in pure culture and in ants after manipulation has taken place. this diagram shows the overlap between i) these up-regulated genes, ii) the o. unilateralis s.l. genes that putatively encode secreted proteins, and iii) genes that are conserved in other insect pathogens. a total of  <dig> genes have at least one of these characteristics. the area size is approximately congruent with the amount of genes that make up the overlapping and non-overlapping groups



up-regulation of alkaloid biosynthesis during manipulated biting behavior
in general, behavior-manipulating parasites are thought to change host behavior by means of secreting neuromodulatory agents near both the central and peripheral nervous systems of their hosts  <cit> . secondary metabolites, such as polyketides, nonribosomal peptides and alkaloids, have been suggested to play a role in this  <cit> . we hypothesized that genes encoding for secreted candidate neuromodulators, and proteins involved in the biosynthesis of neuromodulating secondary metabolites would be up-regulated during manipulated behavior, and likely down-regulated again afterwards . we indeed found pkss and nrpss with this expression pattern, as well as proteins involved in the production of various alkaloids . for example, two tryptophan dimethylallyltransferases within the o. unilateralis s.l. genome were highly expressed  during manipulated biting behavior while transcription was non-existent in the fungal baseline culture. their expression also significantly dropped again after manipulation had taken place and the ant host had died . tryptophan dimethyltransferases catalyze the first rate-limiting step of ergot alkaloid biosynthesis of which tryptophan is the biochemical precursor  <cit> . indeed, a gene putatively encoding for tryptophan synthase followed a similar expression pattern suggesting accumulation of the precursor during manipulation as well. moreover,  <dig> putative indoleamine  <dig> -dioxygenases, which degrade tryptophan, were significantly down-regulated at this time . ergot alkaloids are well-known to affect animal behavior. they are a class of indole alkaloids, which resemble neurotransmitters such as serotinin, noradrenaline and dopamine and can therefore act on the central and peripheral nervous systems as agonists of various receptors  <cit> . claviceps purpurea, a related fungus infecting rye grasses, produces these compounds  <cit> . the ergot in these infected grasses has been known to cause serotonergic overstimulation of the central nervous system in humans and livestock that consumed infected rye, which can lead to e.g., muscle spasms and hallucinations  <cit> . this suggests that the putative production of ergot-like alkaloids by o. unilateralis s.l., through the up-regulation of genes involved in their metabolism, could be affecting the brains of carpenter ants in similar fashion.table  <dig> candidate o. unilateralis s.l. neuromodulators



tryptophan synthesis in turn involves the precursors anthranilate and indole-3-glycerol-phosphate  <cit> . the latter can also function as an indole donor to synthesize indole diterpene alkaloids, such as the fungal compound paxilline  <cit> . several genes putatively encoding enzyme homologs of the pax pathway  were found to be highly expressed in o. unilateralis s.l. during the manipulated biting event, again followed by a significant down-regulation after manipulation had taken place . a putative geranyldiphosphate transferase  was found, which catalyzes the first step in this pathway. in addition, a flavin-dependent monooxygenase  and an integral membrane protein  were found, which are required for the following oxidative cyclization steps resulting in a wide variety of indole diterpenes and their precursors paspaline and emindole da  <cit> . these metabolites, also called penitrems, can have a variety of biological activities, including the modulation of insect and animal ion channels and insect feeding deterrence  <cit> . furthermore, they can inhibit big potassium  channels, which regulate processes such as passive smooth muscle contraction and neuron excitation causing tremors   <cit> . a continuous rhythmic moving of the legs of manipulated twig-biting individuals was observed , which indicates that the putative penitrem production by o. unialteralis s.l. might have a tremorgenic effect in ants as well.

since tryptophan can also function as the precursor for many other classes of alkaloids  we searched for more differentially expressed genes involved in tryptophan metabolism. among the genes involved in tryptophan metabolism that were significantly up-regulated both during and after manipulation we found a histidinol-phosphate aminotransferase . kegg orthology indicated that this enzyme could be involved in the biosynthesis of the tropane alkaloid scopolamine. this compound is an antagonist of the muscarinic acetylcholine receptor, which binds the neurotransmitter acetylcholine . similarly, the putative production of tropane alkaloids by o. unilateralis s.l. could have an antagonist effect on neurotransmitter receptors within the membranes of ant brain neurons.

differentially expressed o. unilateralis s.l. genes with secretome annotations
in almost all subsets for o. unilateralis s.l. genes that were differentially expressed during and after manipulated biting behavior, those that were annotated to have a secretion signal were overrepresented. as previously stressed, this indicates that this parasitic fungus dynamically changes a significant part of its secretome from the time of manipulation to host death a few hours after manipulation . during manipulated biting behavior,  <dig> genes encoding secreted proteins were up-regulated, of which  <dig> were ssps . from these ssps, about half was transcribed >10-fold more during manipulation compared to the baseline expression and  <dig> were significantly down-regulated again after the event had taken place . of these,  <dig> did not receive a functional annotation. our genome comparison analysis showed that  <dig> of these ssp genes were unique to the genome of o. unilateralis as well as one gene that contained an ankyrin repeat. among those that were functionally annotated were  <dig> putative hydrophobic surface binding proteins ,  <dig> hydrophobin domain-containing protein,  <dig> cysteine-rich secretory antigen,  <dig> pathogenesis-related  protein, and a toxic ricin b lectin. another ssp was go annotated to have hydrolase activity and to be involved in a metabolic process. this gene was >100-fold up-regulated during manipulation and significantly down-regulated 6-fold again after. a homology search against the ncbi database suggested that this ssp is a putative kynurenine formamidase . this hydrolase is involved in the kynurenine pathway of tryptophan metabolism  <cit> , which produces nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide . nad is involved in redox reactions by being an oxidizing agent. a putative up-regulation of its production through a high expression of kynurenine formamidase could therefore be involved in the overall up-regulation of oxidation-reduction processes seen during manipulation . quinolinic acid and kynurenic acid are also formed through the kynurenine pathway. their production could therefore also be increased through the high expression of this putative kynurenine formamidase. the formation of an excessive amount of quinolinic acid through the kynurenine pathway and failing to maintain physiological concentrations of kynurenic acid have been reported to have neuropathological effects . moreover, disturbance of the balance between the various pathways of tryptophan metabolism, such as the suggestive kynurenin pathway up-regulation in our data, could possibly result in serotonin depletion. in ants, serotonin depletion diminishes the likelihood that workers respond to the foraging trails, and when they do so, they walk shorter distances  <cit> . indeed, field observations reported that ants infected by o. unilateralis s.l. do not walk on the trails and stay within the nest vicinity  <cit> . taken together, the up-regulation during manipulation of this secreted hydrolase , of which its homolog is involved in pathways that can cause neurological disorders, suggests another candidate possibly involved in establishing manipulated behavior in o. unilateralis s.l –infected ants.fig.  <dig> infographic summarizing the putatively secreted o. unilateralis s.l. compounds and possible c. castaneus processes found in this study that are seemingly involved in manipulation



another candidate involved in manipulation is an ssp annotated to have a lipocalin- <dig> domain . a homology search suggested that this gene encodes for a d-like apolipoprotein , which is a close ortholog to invertebrate lazarillo-related proteins  <cit> . this ssp was not expressed in the fungal control culture, highly expressed during manipulation of ant behavior and 17-fold down-regulated again after manipulation . lipocalins are extracellular proteins found in bacteria, plants, vertebrates and invertebrates  <cit> , including the order hymenoptera in which the ants reside  <cit> . homologs have also been reported from two other fungal genomes  <cit> . our genome comparison analysis found homologs in m. oryzae , c. bassiana and c. militaris. lipocalins can be functionally diverse with roles ranging from the storage and transport of chemically sensitive or insoluble metabolic products  <cit> , to participating in olfaction and chemical communication  <cit> , and regulation of  stress and immune responses  <cit> . this makes lipocalin proteins interesting candidates in drug discovery. o. unilateralis could thus potentially secrete lipocalins as a way to regulate stress responses during manipulation of behavior, deliver secondary metabolites to the brain tissue, or alter chemical communication. future functional assays are however needed to determine this.

among the rest of the secreted proteins that were up-regulated during manipulated biting behavior and down-regulated again after manipulation, were  <dig> putative proteases:  <dig> serine proteases ,  <dig> aspartyl proteases, and  <dig> metallocarboxypeptidase . pathogenic fungi commonly secrete these protease families. though the function of fungal secreted proteases and their importance in infections may vary across species, these enzymes are largely considered important virulence factors  <cit> . another putatively secreted protein that was up-regulated > <dig> -fold during manipulation  was annotated as a sphingomyelin phosphodiesterase. in fact, kegg annotation indicated that this gene is a homolog of acid sphingomyelinase  smpd <dig>  an important enzyme in sphingolipid metabolism. biological membranes consist of sphingolipids, together with cholesterol and phospholipids. as such, sphingolipids are involved in all types of cell regulation through cell recognition and cell signaling  <cit> . neuronal cells are especially affected by defects in sphingolipid metabolism with defects in asm specifically resulting in the neurological disorder niemann-pick syndrome  <cit> . this suggests that o. unilateralis s.l. could change neuron cell regulation through the secretion of a putative asm in large amounts during manipulation, which is in line with the reported enrichment of the metabolite sphingosine in ex vivo o. unilateralis s.l. - c. castaneus ant brain interactions  <cit> . moreover, the muscular atrophy accompanying manipulation and vegetation biting has been hypothesized to be the result of altered nerve motor neuron innervation  <cit> . sphingomyelinase has, however, also been found to be an important factor for bacillus cereus pathogenicity through the induction of host epithelial cell death in concert with the secretion of enterotoxins  <cit> . the up-regulation of secreted asm could therefore also be complementing enterotoxin secretion, which suggests that this gene may be a virulence factor contributing to pathogenesis. the two effects manipulation and cell death may indeed be related as the biting behavior, which is the hallmark of o. unilateralis s.l. pathogenicity, does involve extensive atrophy  <cit> .

another secreted enzyme whose gene is being up-regulated during manipulation  and significantly down-regulated after , is a putative protein-tyrosine phosphatase  . in fact,  <dig> more genes putatively encoding for this enzyme are significantly higher expressed inside the ant’s head compared to growth in culture . for two baculoviruses, bombyx mori nucleopolyhedrovirus and autographa californica nucleopolyhedrovirus, the gene encoding for ptp was found to manipulate behavior of their respective insect hosts . in these cases ptp induced enhanced locomotion activity   <cit> . ela induced by baculoviruses occurs late in the infection during which infected caterpillars move to the upper plant foliage where they die. similarly, we find ophiocordyceps-infected ants biting at elevated positions. this suggests that o. unilateralis s.l. up-regulates putative secreted ptps possibly causing enhanced locomotion behavior in ant hosts to ensure manipulated biting will take place outside of the nest and at an elevated position .

differentially expressed o. unilateralis s.l. genes involved in oxidation-reduction processes
among the genes that were significantly up-regulated during manipulated biting behavior, and down-regulated after manipulation had taken place, those involved in oxidation-reduction processes were significantly enriched . this annotation is rather general since many essential cellular processes require the oxidation and/or reduction of molecules involved. interference in the balance between oxidants and reductants leads to oxidative- or reductive-stress conditions, which can result in inflammation, carcinogenesis, degenerative - and other diseases . moreover, parasite redox biology is unfolding to be an important aspect of parasite-host interactions. these recent studies have shown that host immune responses include oxidative attacks and the production of antioxidant enzymes by the parasite is considered vital for virulence, disease progression and outcome  <cit> . during manipulation,  <dig> genes that were go annotated to encode for proteins with an oxidation-reduction function were up-regulated . after manipulated biting,  <dig> were significantly down-regulated again . from this subgroup of differentially expressed genes,  <dig> were annotated to encode the cytochrome p <dig> proteins  discussed above. these monooxygenases contribute to processes such as the biosynthesis of secondary metabolites, the assimilation of carbon sources, carcinogenesis, detoxification and degradation of xenobiotics  <cit> . of these cyps, two were involved in secondary metabolism clusters through catalyzing the modification of intermediate products as “decorating” enzymes . both were actively transcribed during manipulated biting while transcription was basically absent during baseline expression and after manipulation had taken place. another differentially expressed secretion signal-containing cyp was predicted to be involved in arachidonic acid metabolism working as a thromboxane-a synthase . arachidonic acid is released from cell membranes by inflammatory stimuli and oxidized into compounds such as thromboxanes. these have been implicated as critical mediators in inflammatory diseases in vertebrates  <cit> . however, little or nothing is known about thromboxanes in insects at present. this suggests again that the fungal parasite might be regulating inflammation levels inside the ant’s head at the time of manipulated biting . one cyp was predicted to be involved in phenylalanine metabolism and xenobiotics biodegradation working as a phenylacetate 2-hydroxylase. a fifth cyp with a predicted metabolism function was indicated as a cyp3a ortholog involved in steroid hormone biosynthesis, linoleic acid metabolism and retinol metabolism. this cyp was also kegg annotated to have carcinogenic activities . cyp3a members have largely been studied because of their dramatic accumulation induced by a diverse array of xenobiotics  <cit> , which suggests that its up-regulation in o. unilateralis s.l. is due to the interactions with a live host and the stressors involved in such a process.

in addition to these cyps, four other oxidation-reduction related secondary metabolite cluster genes were found to be up-regulated only during manipulated biting. one of these was annotated to encode for an nrps-like enzyme and therefore suggested to be involved in the production of bioactive non-ribosomal peptides. the other three were “decorating” dehydrogenases predicted to be involved in i) steroid biosynthetic processes, ii) metabolism of bioactive terpenoids and polyketides that are widely used as therapeutic drugs and pharmaceutical agents  <cit> , and iii) the biosynthesis of streptomycin, a compound that can have both antibiotic and toxic effects . this kegg ortholog for streptomycin biosynthesis is also homologous to a cyp within the fusarin c cluster. fusarin c is a mycotoxin with carcinogenic effects produced by several plant pathogenic fusarium species  <cit>  as well as insect pathogen metarhizium  <cit> . this suggests that this up-regulated oxidoreductase might be involved in the biosynthesis of a fungal secondary metabolite with similar pathogenic effects for the host.

of the secreted oxidoreductase activity containing proteins that were found to be up-regulated during manipulated biting behavior, four were annotated to function as tyrosinases . of those, two were significantly down-regulated again after manipulation had taken place . tyrosinases are type- <dig> copper proteins involved in melanin synthesis from tyrosine. they catalyze the hydroxylation of monophenols into diphenols and facilitate the oxidation of those into reactive quinones. as such, tyrosinases are especially responsible for the first steps resulting in the formation of dopaquinone  <cit>  but have also been shown to play a role in other parts of dopamine synthesis and metabolism in the brain  <cit> . in fungi, tyrosinase is mainly associated with melanin production . the functions of these melanins range from mechanisms of defense and resistance to environmental stresses  <cit>  to virulence mechanisms  <cit> . moreover, in insects, melanin plays a major role in the innate immune system by damaging and encasing invading microbes  <cit> . however, when dissecting o. unilateralis s.l. infected ants, no browning of the mycelium is observed  <cit>  while browning of both the mycelium and the medium is seen in ophiocordyceps cultures grown in culture  <cit> . the expression of tyrosinase was 2– <dig> -fold higher during manipulated biting behavior when compared to expression during growth in culture. this suggests that tyrosinase might be up-regulated not merely to produce melanin. research indeed shows that the quinones generated from dopamine and dopa by tyrosinase are cytotoxic both in and beside dopaminergic neurons through the interaction with a variety of bioactive molecules  <cit> . moreover, quinone formation has been related to pathogenesis in parkinson’s disease  <cit> , mitochondrial dysfunction in the brain  <cit> , inflammation leading to degeneration of dopamine neurons as seen in methamphetamine neurotoxicity  <cit>  and proteasome impairment  <cit> . the specific up-regulation of fungal tyrosinases during the behavioral manipulation of the ant host might therefore exert more than a mere virulence or environmental stress response function .

differentially expressed pathogenicity-related o. unilateralis s.l. genes
since this mixed transcriptomics study aims to reveal the gene expression at a particular time point during a parasite-host interaction, an up-regulation of pathogenicity-related genes in the parasite is to be expected. we indeed found putative pathogenesis-related genes from different classes, some of which have already been discussed above. during manipulated biting behavior we also found  <dig> ricin-type lectins,  <dig> fucose specific lectin and  <dig> lectin-like flocculation protein to be significantly higher expressed compared to both expression in the baseline culture and heads of ants after manipulation had taken place . lectins bind carbohydrates and mediate recognition in parasite-host interactions. they are highly sought after because of their great therapeutic and biotechnological potential. the roles of many fungal lectins remain elusive, however functions such as host recognition and yeast flocculation have been proposed  <cit> . furthermore, a ricin-type lectin from rhizoctonia solani was found to induce significant toxicity in insect pests  <cit> . another protein with interesting biotechnological potential that was found to be up-regulated during manipulation was a putative aegerolysin. fungal aegerolysins are said to have anti-tumoral, anti-proliferative, and anti-bacterial activities as well as being involved in the early stages of fructification  <cit> . a homology search for this gene revealed that this o. unilateralis s.l. aegerolysin shares 63 % similarity with asp-hemolysin of a. fumigatus, which is a lethal and cardiotoxic component of this pathogenic fungus  <cit> . this suggests that o. unilateralis s.l. up-regulates an array of possible virulence factors when growing inside its ant host. these are essential to understand the parasite-host interactions taking place, as well as of potential biotechnological interest for the fields of medical drug discovery and biological pest control.

the genome comparison  showed that o. unilateralis s.l. has far more genes encoding secreted putative bacterial-like enterotoxins compared to other fungi studied so far. of the  <dig> putative enterotoxins in the o. unilateralis s.l. genome,  <dig> were not transcriptionally active under the conditions used in this study. of the transcriptionally active ones, only two were constitutively expressed across the conditions tested leaving a total of  <dig> differentially expressed enterotoxins. during manipulated biting behavior, six enterotoxins were up-regulated compared to expression during growth in culture. two of these were significantly down-regulated again after manipulation had taken place. nine were down-regulated during manipulated biting behavior, of which three were significantly up-regulated again afterwards. this highly dynamic expression of the majority of enterotoxins indicates that their expression is tailored towards the environmental conditions that o. unilateralis s.l. encounters and different life cycle stages.

pathology-related changes in c. castaneus: immune reaction and apoptosis
so far we have discussed changes in the gene expression of the fungal parasite during and after manipulated biting behavior . the mixed transcriptomics approach, allows us to also investigate gene expression of the ant host at these time points . because this is a host-parasite system it might be expected that immune-related gene expression in the host is altered because of parasitism. previous studies on gene expression in ants have shown an up-regulation of immune-related genes upon infection by bacteria  <cit>  and the generalist fungus metarhizium brunneum  <cit> . these studies sampled the ants in the early stages of the infection,  <dig> and 48 h after the entry of the pathogen respectively. in our study we sampled more than two weeks after the entry of the parasite as this amount of time is needed to establish manipulation  <cit> . we found that many of these immune-related genes were down-regulated in ant heads at time of manipulated biting compared to heads of healthy ants. this included genes involved in pathogen recognition , signaling  and immune response effectors, such as prophenoloxidase and antimicrobial peptides   . other genes important in insect immune and stress responses, such as the homologs of malvolio and punch  <cit> , were constitutively expressed across the controls and infected samples. moreover, our enrichment analysis revealed that among the  <dig> down-regulated genes in the head of the live host during manipulated biting, those related to oxidoreductase activity were overrepresented . this suggests that o. unilateralis s.l. might be able to suppress host immune responses in the head during the event of manipulated biting behavior. similarly, stress-related genes were also differentially expressed in infected ants. again, the ophiocordyceps infection resulted in down-regulation of most common stress-related genes in insects, such as the homolog of the insect lipocalin lazarillo  <cit> . however, at the same time, a secreted fungal lipocalin was up-regulated  implying that the parasite might be regulating the host’s neuronal stress response.

although parasites suppressing the expression of ants’ immune responses have not been previously documented, it has been shown for other hymenopterans . the ectoparasitic mite varroa destructor suppresses the innate immune system of honeybees  by reducing the expression of amps and immunity-related enzymes  <cit> . the bumblebee bombus terrestris has its immune response affected by the trypanosome gut parasite crithidia bombi through the down-regulation of amps  <cit> . furthermore, other trypanosome parasites that cause vector borne diseases, such as trypanosoma brucei  and leishimania , also repress immune reaction related expression in their insect vectors   <cit> . all three of these parasites are co-evolved specialists unlike the generalist pathogens used in  <cit> . we suggest that o. unilateralis s.l., like other specialist parasites, might suppress the immune response in heads of the ants it infects.

at the moment of manipulation, the fungal cells occupy the head of the ant host, causing severe atrophy and a reduction in organelles of muscle cells, but leaving the brain preserved  <cit> . however, 48 h post-mortem, brain tissue was virtually indistinguishable from the fungal cells  <cit> . in line with this previous evidence of tissue breakdown, we found the differential expression of a number of apoptosis-related genes during the manipulation, compared to the healthy controls. overall, pro-apoptotic genes were found to be up-regulated during the manipulated biting event . these included proteins annotated as feminization- <dig>  homolog b-like and specificity protein- <dig> transcription factor . fem1b plays a role in sex determination in caenorhabditis elegans regulating cell elimination through apoptosis  <cit> . in humans, the up-regulation of its homologue  induces apoptosis via the caspase pathway  <cit> . the zinc finger transcription factor sp <dig> is important for the regulation of genes implicated in cell cycles and programed cell death  <cit> . its overexpression results in apoptosis of cancer cells  and cortical neuron cells in culture  <cit> . sp <dig> was also found to be accumulated in the post-mortem brain tissue of patients with alzheimer disease, and has been suggested to play a role in the neurodegenerative progression characteristic of alzheimer, which in humans results in cognitive loss  <cit> . we suggest that preserving the brain during colonization of the head may be necessary for o. unilateralis s.l. to successfully manipulate behavior. however, after the ant host is successfully attached to a substrate , the fungus appears to either induce neural apoptosis or release hydrolytic enzymes that cause host tissue degradation to be able to complete its development.

possible ant host targets of behavioral manipulation
prior to manipulated biting, infected ant hosts display a stereotypical walking pattern, followed by constant climbing and falling from the vegetation due to whole body convulsions  <cit> . this suggests neuronal activity is affected. in line with this, in the head of the ant sampled at 10:00 h during the manipulated biting, we found the differential expression of putative biogenic amine precursors and receptors. biogenic amines are known to influence behavior of both vertebrates  <cit>  and invertebrates , including ants . we for instance found the up-regulation of a putative beta-3r-like octopamine receptor gene and a tyrosine 3-monooxygenase gene . tyrosine 3-monooxygenase is the rate-limiting enzyme for the biosynthesis of dopamine  <cit> . although dopamine is a precursor for the melanin pathway in the immune response of insects , it was demonstrated in drosophila melanogaster that dopamine also functions as a neurotransmitter in the fly nervous system. furthermore, the expression of tyrosine 3-monooxygenase appears to oscillate in a circadian manner in d. melanogaster, regulating motor neuron activity and neuromuscular functions through the biosynthesis of dopamine  <cit> . this results in the circadian regulation of locomotion behavior  <cit> . the up-regulation of this enzyme could therefore be involved in establishing the aberrant walking behavior that is observed in o. unilateralis s.l. infected ants  <cit> . moreover, increases in the dopamine levels in formica polyctena ants  were found to stimulate the opening of mandibles and biting  <cit> ; behaviors that were both observed in manipulated ants moments before the biting event. this could indicate that the up-regulation of tyrosine 3-monooxygenase plays a role in the behavioral changes observed in o. unilateralis s.l.-infected ants.

in addition to walking aberrantly, manipulated ants do not follow trails like their healthy nest mates  <cit> . one possible explanation is that the manipulated ants receive limited stimuli from the environment. we indeed found genes putatively encoding for receptors and binding proteins involved in odorant and gustatory perception  were down-regulated during manipulated biting behavior relative to gene expression in healthy ant heads . making the host latch on in the optimal microenvironment for fungal growth and spore dispersion is crucial to the life cycle of this parasite  <cit> . the erratic walking has been observed in nature to last at least three hours  <cit> . suppressing the sensorial perception could therefore be a strategy to keep the ant engaged in this process. however, mosquitoes infected with the generalist fungal pathogen c. bassiana, which does not manipulate host behavior as a way to achieve transmission, were found to be less responsive to feeding stimuli, as well  <cit> . the lack of response to stimuli could therefore also be a general pathology-related host reaction or an ancient characteristic of entomopathogenic fungi in general.

another characteristic feature of the manipulation of c. castaneus behavior by o. unilateralis s.l. is the switch to diurnality. uninfected c. castaneus are primarily nocturnal . moreover, the manipulated biting behavior and subsequent death appears to be synchronized to a certain time of day, both in the laboratory and in nature . this has led to the hypothesis that the fungus might affect the circadian clock of the host  <cit> . the circadian clock is a temporal program that anticipates the highly predictable daily changes of the environment. the molecular mechanism of the biological clock is conserved across different groups of organisms  <cit> , exemplified by positive and negative transcriptional feedback loops on one hand, and the redox state of peroxiredoxin on the other hand  <cit> . in insects, two of these clock genes are period and cycle. fire ant  period and cycle oscillate in anti-phase in their transcript levels  <cit> . in manipulated ants , period and cycle homologs were expressed with a  <dig>  and  <dig> -fold increase, respectively, compared to uninfected controls sampled at 10:00 h . this may affect the expression of clock-controlled genes regulating certain behaviors such as the above-mentioned oscillating tyrosine 3-monooxygenase in drosophila  <cit> . the circadian clock in some organisms regulates cell cycle control, proliferation and apoptosis  <cit> . for instance, the over- and under-expression of homologous clock genes per <dig>  <cit>  and bmal <dig>  <cit>  in human cells correlates with the rapid proliferation of aggressive tumor cells and to tumor cell control through apoptosis  <cit> , respectively. this is consistent with our apoptosis-related findings discussed above and previously reported morphological data  <cit> .

o. unilateralis s.l.-infected ants display increased and constant activity before the manipulated biting takes place  <cit> . this is suggestive of the increased locomotor activity in caterpillars infected with baculovirus  <cit> . in caterpillars, this behavior is related to the expression of ptp. we also found a significant up-regulation of ptp-encoding genes during manipulation, both in the ant , as well as in the fungal transcriptome . the observed enhanced locomotion in behaviorally manipulated ants could be a result of this up-regulated ptp expression. ultimately, the manipulation of ant host behavior results in biting the vegetation at an elevated position, which fixes the ant to a substrate and is crucial for fungal development and transmission  <cit> . the deep penetration of the mandibles into the plant tissue and the atrophy of the mandibular muscles cause the “lock-jaw”, ensuring the lasting attachment of the ant even once it has been killed by the fungus. the muscle atrophy is characterized by muscle fiber detachment from the head capsule, with broken z-lines  and less dense sarcoplasmic reticula and mitochondria  <cit> . in our transcriptomics study, we found that two genes encoding for collagen, homologues of col4a <dig> and col4a <dig>  the major protein of the muscle fibers  <cit> , and a muscle lim protein mlp84b homolog, which is a component of the z-lines and important for maintaining the muscles integrity  <cit> , were down-regulated during manipulated biting . these suggest a mechanism by which the fungus establishes the host muscle atrophy that is important for the lock-jaw and, consequently, long term fixation of the dead ant to a plant substrate. these genes, together with the others mentioned above, which are involved in host pathways that are possible hallmarks for o. unilateralis s.l. to establish the different aspects of behavioral manipulation, are summarized in table  <dig> and fig.  <dig> table  <dig> candidate c. castaneus targets of behavioral manipulation



CONCLUSIONS
given the novelty and precise nature of the behavioral changes observed, unraveling the genetic basis of fungal control of ant behavior is of great interest to the field studying parasitic manipulation of host behavior, as well as disciplines ranging from parasitology and animal behavior to parasite-host co-evolution and fungal genetics. moreover, the long track record of fungi producing a wealth of industrially interesting bioactive compounds and the expectation that brain-manipulating species produce novel neuromodulators  <cit> , make genetic studies into this system important from an applied perspective . here, we used a novel o. unilateralis s.l. genome and the published c. floridanus genome as references to assess the gene expression in the heads of infected carpenter ants during manipulated biting behavior.

comparing the novel o. unilateralis s.l. genome to other currently available fungal genomes revealed that this manipulative fungus putatively secretes an array of novel compounds that might have interesting biological properties. moreover, 80 % of the o. unilateralis s.l. genes that were uniquely up-regulated during manipulated biting behavior were found not to be conserved among other non-manipulating insect pathogens of the order hypocreales. this indicates that, in order to establish manipulated biting, o. unilateralis s.l. employs a set of genes that is not present in the genomes of non-manipulating fungi. however, o. unilateralis s.l. seemingly has a mechanism to change behavior in common with a viral manipulator . future comparisons with other closely related  and non-related manipulating parasites will therefore be interesting to investigate if the ability to manipulate host behavior has either convergently or divergently evolved.

our study also shows that o. unilateralis s.l. has an abundance of genes encoding for bacterial-like enterotoxins, which are dynamically up- and down-regulated in the situations tested in this study. these compounds could negatively affect the production of chemosignaling molecules in insects  <cit> , which would impair communication in infected individuals. in agreement with this, infected ants are generally observed to be unresponsive to external stimuli  <cit>  and host genes putatively encoding for receptors and binding proteins involved in odorant and gustatory perception were found to be down-regulated. however, the dynamic expression of putative o. unilateralis s.l. enterotoxins could also be contributing to the up-regulated apoptotic features found in manipulated c. castaneus ants and the severe atrophy of muscle cells observed in histology studies  <cit> .

genes putatively involved in immune- and stress responses were found to be generally down-regulated in infected ant heads during the manipulated biting event. in fact, oxidoreductase activity-related genes were enriched in the subset of down-regulated ant genes. oxidation-reduction reactions are vital mechanisms in parasite-host interactions for both parasite and host  <cit> . as such, in the fungal parasite, we indeed found genes involved in these processes being up-regulated during manipulation and down-regulated again after the host was presumably killed. while o. unilateralis s.l. ultimately kills its host, premature death will not lead to manipulation  <cit>  thus impairing transmission and completion of the life cycle. as suggested for other insect-parasite interactions  <cit> , suppression of host responses might therefore be crucial to create conditions in the host that favor parasite development. in addition to causing apoptosis and impairing chemosensory communication, o. unilateralis s.l. might therefore be regulating the host’s immune- and neuronal stress responses as a mechanism to establish manipulated behavior.

other links between the fungal parasite and ant host transcriptomes during manipulated biting behavior are the up-regulation of genes encoding for enzymes involved in dopamine metabolism and protein-tyrosine phosphatases. both pathways have reported effects on behavioral outputs such as locomotion and mandible movement, which are hallmarks of ant infections by o. unilateralis s.l. fungi. moreover, homologs of clock genes per and cycle were up-regulated in manipulated ants, which would affect processes in the host, ranging from the cellular to the behavioral output level. in addition, we found the up-regulation of various fungal genes involved in different types of alkaloid metabolism that lead to compounds that can both work as agonists and antagonists of a range of receptors in the central and peripheral nervous system. together with the up-regulation of a putatively secreted sphingomyelinase that changes neuron cell membranes, a possible shift in tryptophan metabolism from the serotonin pathway towards the kynurenine pathway and the production of nrpss, pkss and small secreted proteins with unknown functions, this represents an array of mechanisms and compounds through which the ant host brain could be manipulated.

in conclusion, we found various candidate manipulators and possible host pathways through which manipulated biting behavior as seen in o. unilateralis s.l.-infected carpenter ants could be established. while some of these candidates could be essential to the process, we expect these to work in concert since the manipulated behavior in this system is complex and precise. future functional gene expression studies are necessary to determine this. furthermore, this study only assesses the ultimate time points in this parasite-host interaction: manipulated biting and killing of the host afterwards. this leaves the mechanisms underlying the reactions and more subtle behavioral changes leading up to this still unresolved. that said, our study demonstrates that experimental infections combined with behavioral studies to determine sampling points followed by mixed transcriptomics analyses will be a good approach to study the parasite-host interactions at these earlier stages as well.

