BACKGROUND
since the clinical demonstration of varied hormonal and metabolic responses in infants undergoing surgery, which were attenuated by general anaesthesia, clinicians have suggested that marked nociceptive activity in premature or full-term neonates constitutes a physiological, and perhaps even a psychological, form of stress <cit> . an increased focus on the neurobiology of developing pain pathways attests the awareness of the importance of pain in infancy <cit> . previous studies demonstrated clearly that peripheral inflammation experienced during the neonatal period has long-standing consequences on spinal nociceptive neuronal circuits <cit> . in our recent studies, we have demonstrated that, during the process of neonatal neuronal development of the primary afferents following neonatal peripheral inflammation, there is not only a dynamic change in the pattern and distribution of calcitonin gene-related peptides  containing terminals in various regions of the dorsal horn, <cit>  but also a molecular change in neurotrophic factors, particularly the nerve growth factor , and brain-derived neurotrophic factor   <cit> . furthermore, as behavioural, <cit>  electrophysiological  <cit>  and immunohistochemistry  <cit>  studies have shown, these changes induce a subsequent hypersensitization in response to later sensory stimulation and noxious stimulation.

thus, it is well established that the central nervous system is active during prenatal development, and that detrimental and developmental changes resulting from inflammatory insults lead to central excitability alterations, which modify later pain-stimulated behaviour patterns <cit> . however, little is known about the mechanism that underlies, and the developmental nature of, these alterations. in this study, we assessed the variation in the levels of the prodyn mrna during the long-term modulation of nociceptive neuronal circuits after neonatal complete freund' adjuvant  -induced peripheral inflammation.

dynorphin is a class of endogenous opioid peptides that are produced by many different populations of neurons in the hypothalamus, hippocampus and spinal cord <cit> . although this peptide is classified as an endogenous opioid peptide that binds to the opioid kappa receptors, numerous studies indicate that much of the pharmacology of this peptide is dependent on its interaction with nmda receptors, rather than with opioid receptors <cit> . several groups reported that the increase in spinal dynorphin expression after peripheral noxious stimulation  <cit>  was mediated by the mitogen-activated protein kinases /extracellular signal-regulated kinases  pathway  <cit>  via a positive-feedback mechanism, which results in neuropathic and other chronic  pain states <cit> . moreover, the intrathecal administration of dynorphin induces behavioural signs of hyperalgesia similar to those observed in central hypersensitization induced by peripheral inflammation or nerve-injury-induced pain <cit> . these experiments support the previous hypothesis that pathological or upregulated levels of spinal dynorphin play a pro-nociceptive role by maintaining "central sensitization" in the post-nerve injury state <cit> . in this study, we examined the role of the mapk/erk pathway in the upregulation of dynorphin in the reinflammation-associated hyperalgesia observed in adult rats that experienced neonatal inflammatory insults. behaviour profiles, gene expression and in situ hybridization studies were performed to substantiate our postulation.

RESULTS
behavioural responses to noxious heat stimuli at different time points after reinflammation
pwl was evaluated in the neonatal cfa and saline groups  <dig> h after reinflammation via cfa injection into the left hind paw at postnatal age of 6- <dig> weeks. no difference in the baseline pwl was found in the neonatal cfa group  compared with the neonatal saline group  . the mean pwl was  <dig>  ±  <dig>  s for the left hind paw in the neonatal cfa group and  <dig>  ±  <dig>  s for the left hind paw in the neonatal saline group. twenty-four hours after reinflammation via cfa injection in the left hind paw, the neonatal cfa group showed a significant decrease in pwl in the left hind paws compared with the neonatal saline-injected left hind paws. the mean pwl was  <dig>  ±  <dig>  s and  <dig>  ±  <dig>  s, respectively.

comparison of prodyn mrna expression using real-time rt-pcr
real-time rt-pcr was performed to compare the relative prodyn mrna expression levels in the left side of the spinal cord  in each group  <dig> hours after cfa injection into the left hind paw at postnatal age of 6- <dig> weeks, with standardization to the naive rats . the ct relative quantification method was used with the level of the prodyn mrna expression presented as the value of 2-Δct, as described in the method section. a significant increase in prodyn mrna expression was detected in the neonatal cfa group  compared with its expression levels in the neonatal saline group , the neonatal non-treated group  and the naive group . the 2-Δct ×  <dig> values were  <dig>  ±  <dig> ,  <dig>  ±  <dig>  and  <dig>  ±  <dig>  and  <dig>  ±  <dig> , respectively. since the naïve group did not receive any cfa injection during the neonatal and the adult period, little or no prodyn mrna expression was noted. in contrast, no significant difference in prodyn mrna expression was found between the neonatal non-treated group and the neonatal saline group.

in situ hybridization labelling of prodyn mrna in the lumbar dorsal horn
in situ hybridization studies were performed to determine the levels of expression and the localization of the prodyn mrnas in the dorsal horn of rats in the neonatal cfa group. twenty-four hours after reinflammation with cfa in both hind paws of the neonatal cfa group at postnatal age of 6- <dig> weeks, there was a significant increase in the number of cells that expressed prodyn mrna in the left dorsal horn, ipsilateral to the afferents of the neonatally cfa-treated left hind paw, compared to the right dorsal horn. the prodyn gene is primarily expressed in the superficial laminae  and the deeper laminae  of the dorsal horn . a higher magnification of the superficial laminae revealed that the prodyn mrna-positive cells were mainly distributed in laminae i and ii, with a higher intensity of labelling in the left dorsal horn  compared with the right dorsal horn . the comparison of the number of prodyn-positive cells between the left and right superficial dorsal horns revealed that the mean spinal cord laminae i- and ii-positive ganglia on the left side was  <dig>  ±  <dig> , vs.  <dig>  ±  <dig>  on the right side. the difference was significant . the mean l4/l <dig> laminae iii to v positive cells on the left side was  <dig>  ±  <dig> , vs.  <dig>  ±  <dig>  on the right side. the difference was not significant .

perk activation after cfa-induced peripheral inflammation
to investigate whether the cellular mapk/erk signal pathway was involved in spinal pain signal transduction, the levels of perk and total erk proteins extracted from the spinal cord of animals in the neonatal cfa and saline groups  <dig> min after peripheral reinflammation were examined using western blotting. staining of the different isomers of the perk protein revealed an increase in density in the neonatal cfa group  compared with that observed in the neonatal saline  and the naive groups  . the intensity of the total erk proteins was the same in all groups. the western blots supports figure 5b, which shows that,  <dig> min after reinflammation with cfa at postnatal age of 6- <dig> weeks, the ratio of perk to total erk  in the neonatal cfa group was significantly higher compared with the ratio observed in the neonatal saline group and in the naïve group . this suggests an increased perk protein concentration in the neonatal cfa group.

discussion
advances in medical technology led to a substantial improvement in the chances of survival of medically compromised newborns via the development of therapies, which often inflict tissue injury and pain. the existence of background pain in these children not only influences their acute pain experience but often also leads to a significantly lower pain threshold compared with their healthy peers, which is independent of various psychological factors <cit> . studies showed that early injury in the first postnatal weeks leads to the development of neural circuits that permanently alter pain perception <cit> . furthermore, it was also demonstrated that short-lasting inflammatory insults during the neonatal period generate hypoalgesia in adults <cit> . this is compatible with the present behaviour studies, which revealed a generalized reduction in baseline sensitivity in response to a noxious heat stimulus. in contrast, neonatal injury can also have the opposite effect. long-term hyperalgesia, although masked at the segmental level, <cit>  was uncovered after a much greater stimulus  was applied. this reinflammation-associated hyperalgesia reflected an inflammatory challenge, which strengthens the nociceptive signal transduction pathway  <cit>  and leads to a reduction in hypoalgesia <cit> . although the signalling system that underlies the adult hyperalgesia observed after neonatal peripheral inflammation is poorly understood, it is now known that neural plasticity is fully functional at birth and the somatosensory nervous system, though immature, is fully capable of transmitting sensory information <cit> . in the present study, a decrease in pwl was found  <dig> h after cfa-induced reinflammation in the neonatal cfa group compared with the neonatal saline group. this observation was consistent with our previous results  <cit>  and with results from other studies <cit> . these studies all point to the conclusion that increased pain sensitivity in adults may develop in rats that experienced peripheral inflammatory insults during the neonatal period.

numerous factors have been implicated in hyperalgesia as outcomes of early peripheral noxious experience, including substance p, the nmda receptor, perk, dynorphin, and c-fos <cit> . however, studies that looked into the mechanism that underlies the hyperalgesia induced by reinflammation in rats that received neonatal noxious stimuli are scarce. in the present study, the assessment of the expression of the prodyn gene using quantitative real-time rt-pcr revealed the upregulation of this gene after reinflammation in the spinal cord in the neonatal cfa group compared with the neonatal saline group,  <dig> hours after reinflammation via cfa injection. the in situ hybridization analysis showed that this increased expression of prodyn after reinflammation was primarily localized to the superficial laminae i and ii of the dorsal horn ipsilateral to the site of the neonatal insult, in the area where nociceptive afferent projections, such as a-delta and c fibres, terminate. no significant difference was noted in the expression of prodyn in the neck of the dorsal horn  between the two sides of the spinal cord of the neonatal cfa group after the bilateral induction of reinflammation.

prodyn, which has both nociceptive and anti-nociceptive properties, <cit>  plays an important role in promoting and maintaining neuropathic pain. although dynorphin at submicromolar concentrations may activate opioid receptors to reduce calcium influx, thus leading to hypoalgesia, <cit>  at higher concentrations  dynorphin is pro-nociceptive in some pathological pain states via interaction with the nmda receptor, which leads to allodynia <cit> . in our real-time rt-pcr experiments, we observed a significant increase in prodyn expression after reinflammation in adult rats that experienced inflammatory insults during the neonatal period  compared with rats that received a saline injection during the neonatal period . concomitantly, the neonatal cfa group also exhibited behaviours of hyperalgesia, which manifested via a significant decrease in pwl compared with the neonatal saline group. this peripheral-inflammation-associated hyperalgesia was previously discussed in a study by dubner and ruda <cit> . these authors found that an increase in neuronal activity in response to tissue injury may lead to changes in gene expression and prolonged changes in the nervous system, which may contribute to hyperalgesia. this increase was most evident  <dig> h after the inflammation insult. this activity-dependent plasticity may involve nociceptive processing neuropeptides, such as dynorphin, substance p and the calcitonin gene-related peptide. in fact, previous papers have shown that spinal dynorphin may promote pain, in part, by enhancing the evoked release of excitatory transmitters such as cgrp from primary afferents in the dorsal root ganglia <cit> . neurons exhibiting prodyn upregulation in the superficial and deep laminae of dorsal horn were projection neurons that convey nociceptive information. our previous studies revealed that a neonatal inflammatory stimulus resulted in an increase in the expression of the neurotrophin receptor gene in dorsal root ganglia during the early postnatal period <cit> . release of growth factors, such as ngf, has been implicated with an increase in the terminal density of nociceptors both in the spinal dorsal horn  <cit>  and in the injured region, which alters the development of the nociceptors <cit> . similarly, the upregulation of prodyn secondary to a peripheral inflammatory insult during the neonatal period can also be associated with the increase in the density of neuronal terminals, which may occur during the period of the neonatal insults.

in this study, we also investigated the role of the mapk/erk pathway in the modulation of nociceptive neuronal circuits in rats that received cfa-induced peripheral insults during the neonatal period. we detected the upregulation of perk in the spinal cord of rats in the neonatal cfa group compared with the neonatal saline group, after reinflammation. erk plays a pivotal role in functional nociceptive plasticity, which in turn contributes to altered sensibility <cit> . previous studies pointed out that erk activation is likely to regulate the expression of prodyn via transactivators, such as pcreb and c-fos <cit> . the link between the erk activation and prodyn expression was investigated in a study by woolf et al. in which they used a mek inhibitor u <dig>  which is a chemically synthesized organic compound that inhibits the kinase activity of map kinase, to block erk activation and subsequently found a decrease in the cfa-induced prodyn mrna expression <cit> . our results were compatible with the findings of other studies, in that an increased perk level was associated with an increase in the expression of the prodyn mrna, which may contribute to the development of reinflammation-induced pain hypersensitivity  after neonatal peripheral inflammation.

CONCLUSIONS
this study explored the molecular mechanisms that underlie adult pain hypersensitivity after neonatal peripheral inflammatory insults. the spinal upregulation of endogenous prodyn observed in our model may participate in the development of reinflammation-associated pain hypersensitivity in adults after neonatal peripheral inflammatory insults. the study of the development of the nociceptive showed that pain in newborns involves functional signalling pathways that are not found in the mature nervous system of adults <cit> . the results of our studies suggest that peripheral inflammation in neonates could result in lasting alterations in nociceptive pathways. we postulate that the activation of dynorphin via the mapk/erk pathway contributes to the reinflammation-associated hyperalgesia observed in adult rats that experienced neonatal peripheral inflammatory insults.

