BACKGROUND
interhemispheric interactions associated with performance of unimanual actions have been the object of much study in recent years. for instance, functional neuroimaging studies have provided evidence that both task complexity and advancing age are critical factors in leading to extra cortical activation in sensori-motor areas ipsilateral to the task hand when participants executed actions with one hand . further evidence for the involvement of ipsilateral motor cortex during unilateral hand actions has come from transcranial magnetic stimulation  studies in young adults. however, tms reports in this regard have produced mixed results with evidence of both facilitation and suppression in the ipsilateral "resting hemisphere" while the opposite hemisphere was engaged during unilateral performance of the contralateral hand [e.g.,  <cit> . whether the "resting" hemisphere is facilitated or inhibited appears to depend on factors such as the nature of the unimanual task, particularly the task demands , which are known to affect interactions between hemispheres at the sensori-motor level. in view of these findings in young adults, there is a need to better characterize how task demands influence corticomotor facilitation in both the active and resting hemisphere during unimanual actions, especially in the context of human aging.

in a recent series of experiments, we have investigated with tms the neurophysiological correlates of motor cortical activation associated with unimanual performance using various forms of haptic sensing tasks  <cit> . haptic sensing with the fingers represents a unique class of manipulative actions, engaging motor, somatosensory and associative areas of the cortex while requiring only minimal forces and relatively simple movement patterns  <cit> . for instance, pattern recognition at the fingertip typically leads to unilateral small amplitude movements to extract spatial information from contour exploration  <cit> . while such task requires only minimal effort at the motor execution level, pattern recognition is nevertheless cognitively demanding for contour exploration is a slow serial process relying on tactile working memory to integrate spatial information to allow for recognition  <cit> .

such a class of actions thus provide a unique window to investigate the influence of task demands on motor facilitation associated with unimanual actions. indeed, our observations showed that robust corticomotor facilitation could be elicited in hemisphere controlling the task hand when participants sensed pattern with the index finger. the fact that this haptic-related enhancement could be abolished by disengaging tactile attention  <cit>  during finger movements pointed to a centrally mediated top-down effect rather than a simple bottom-up afferent mediated increase in corticospinal excitability. indeed, attending to tactile inputs in the context of haptic sensing engages several cortical regions in the parietal and frontal lobes, including premotor areas  <cit> , and the recruitment of this cortical network was likely critical in leading to enhanced corticomotor excitability in the working hemisphere. such facilitation could be important in finely modulating the corticospinal drive to allow for optimal detection of tactile features as the finger moves. similar experiments performed in older adults showed that haptic-related enhancement in excitability was still present but depended upon the individual's capacity to perform fine discrimination at the fingertip  <cit> .

in the present report, we extend our previous observations on haptic-related corticomotor facilitation in two series of related experiments destined to further characterize the influence of task demands associated with pattern recognition in young and older adults. in experiment i, we asked whether haptic-related enhancement in motor excitability in the working hemisphere would be similar between young and older adults, when task difficulty is adjusted to accommodate for age-related changes in tactile perception. in experiment ii, we asked the same question but with regard to the "resting hemisphere", that is whether engaging one hemisphere and one hand in haptic sensing would influence the excitability of the opposite hemisphere and the resting hand to the same extent in young and older adults. we also asked if such crossed modulation would be different depending on whether the right or left hemisphere is engaged in haptic sensing.

RESULTS
experiment i. corticospinal excitability in the working hemisphere
task performance
in terms of muscle activation, grating and smooth trials elicited a very similar pattern of activity in the fdi muscle, characterized by a sustained increase in activity as the index finger pressed down against the dome. this pattern of emg activity was similar for both young and senior adults when normalized as a percent of the individual's maximum voluntary contraction , as shown in figure 1a and 1b. the average level of activation corresponded to ~10% of the mvc in the two blocks of trials . paired comparison revealed no significant difference between the two blocks of trials on mean rectified emg activity in the  <dig> ms period preceding the tms pulse .

task-specific corticospinal facilitation
in general, participants in both age groups exhibited very reliable discrimination in the grating trials with accuracy > 90%, on average. while young participants made slightly more errors  than their senior counterparts , the difference was not statistically significant . as shown in figure  <dig>  younger and senior participants showed facilitation of mep amplitudes during the grating discrimination trials. the main effect of trial type on mep amplitude was highly significant . age had a main effect on mep amplitude  because seniors generally exhibited smaller mep sizes than their younger counterparts, irrespective of trial type. no interaction was detected, however, between age and trial type , as the two age groups exhibited comparable levels of mep enhancement in the grating trials . variations in mep latency  and sp duration  were not influenced by trial type , age , or interactions between trial type and age .

experiment ii. corticospinal excitability in the resting hemisphere
task performance
observations with regard to background emg level elicited in the task hand were similar to experiment i, with no significant difference in average levels being detected between smooth and grating trials for both the right hand  and the left hand . in the resting hand, mean emg activity in the resting hand was equivalent to background noise  for all trials for both the right and left sides in young  and older  adults.

task-specific corticospinal facilitation
as in experiment i, participants of both age groups exhibited very reliable and comparable discrimination performance  in the grating trials . as shown in figure  <dig>  younger and senior participants showed large mep facilitation in the resting hand when the other hand was discriminating the grating orientation . meps in the resting hand were, on average,  <dig>  times larger during grating discrimination trials than either during smooth trials or at baseline . in fact, meps elicited during smooth trials were equivalent in size to those measured at baseline in the resting state . as for experiment i, there was a main effect of age on mep amplitude in the resting hand , owing to the age-related difference in mep size. there was no interaction between trial type and age in the resting hand , seniors showing as much grating facilitation on average  as young adults . hemispheric side  had no influence on mep amplitude and showed no interactions with trial type or age . variations in mep latency were not influenced by trial type , age , hand , or interactions between any of these factors .

discussion
in the present study, we examined variations in corticomotor excitability associated with unimanual pattern recognition at the fingertip in young and older adults. in experiment i, we showed that haptic enhancement in corticomotor excitability in the working hemisphere was similar in magnitude in young and older adults, when task difficulty was adjusted for age difference. in experiment ii, we showed that haptic enhancement in corticomotor excitability could also be reliably detected in the "resting" hemisphere opposite to the working hemisphere and that this cross-modulation was similar in magnitude between the two age groups and regardless of which hemisphere  was engaged in haptic sensing. we will first address the significance of the haptic enhancement observed in experiment i in the context of aging. then, we will examine issues pertaining to bilateral corticomotor facilitation as assessed by tms, in the context of aging with an emphasis on the importance of task demands, in line with the haptic enhancement observed in experiment ii in the "resting" hemisphere.

experiment i. corticospinal excitability in the working hemisphere
in our previous investigation into task-related corticomotor facilitation  <cit> , we found that mep enhancement with haptic sensing was highly variable in seniors, a variability that linked with the participant's ability to reliably perform haptic discriminations when the task consisted of identifying raised patterns by active stroking of the index finger at a prescribed speed. in this previous study, the inherent difficulty associated with pattern recognition was further complicated by the fact that participants had to externally pace their stroking movement to an auditory tone; hence the possibility of interference with the primary tactile task. in the present study, we show that haptic-related enhancement in corticomotor excitability can be easily elicited in healthy seniors when task demands associated with haptic sensing are reduced both at the kinematics level  and at the perceptual level . in fact, senior exhibited as much task-related facilitation as young adults when performing grating orientation discriminations. simplifying task demands in the context of inherently difficult pattern recognition tasks was likely critical in allowing seniors to allocate attentional resources towards tactile inputs coming from the fingertip during grating trials. this observation in seniors, along with the fact that the mep enhancement was specific for grating trials, reinforces our previous suggestion  <cit>  that the likely source of this corticomotor facilitation resides in the activation of the parieto-frontal network subserving tactile attention and tactile processing during haptic sensing. these observations, altogether, indicate that controlling for task difficulty and demand represents a crucial issue when working with older adults in interventions destined to improve fine dexterity.

experiment ii. corticospinal excitability in the resting hemisphere
as stressed before, increases in ipsilateral sensorimotor activity have been observed at different levels in the motor system  during a variety of unimanual tasks  <cit> . in the present study, we observed that engaging one hemisphere and one hand in haptic sensing was associated with enhanced excitability of the opposite hemisphere associated with the resting hand. in addition, this enhancement was comparable in magnitude between young and old participants, regardless of which hemisphere was engaged in the task. in this regard, our observations are consistent with many tms reports in young adults, wherein enhanced corticomotor excitability on the "resting" hemisphere has been described when the other was engaged in various unimanual tasks  <cit> . the present findings may also be interpreted in light of neuroimaging data showing increases in the activity of the ipsilateral sensorimotor cortex during various unimanual tasks, particularly more complex tasks  <cit> . this raises the question as to why smooth trials, which produced similar pattern of background emg as that seen with grating trials in the task hand, failed to elicit any detectable changes in mep amplitude in the resting hand; even when compared to baseline values in the resting state. one possible reason for this may reside in the nature of the finger movement, which required only minimal effort on the part of the participant and was simple and highly predictable from trial to trial. in line with this, tinazzi and zanette  <cit>  observed a gradual decrease in corticomotor facilitation in the resting hand when the task performed with the opposite hand became more automatic after sequential training. evidently, grating trials were not susceptible to such training effects with repetitions, because participants were required to deploy tactile attention and use cognitive resources at each trial to discriminate the grating orientation.

concerning the neural mechanism for the observed haptic enhancement in the "resting" hemisphere, as indicated before, the selectivity of the effect for grating trials points to the parietal-frontal network recruited during tactile attention associated with haptic sensing  <cit>  as the primary source of facilitatory influences. in principle, such central facilitation could be exerted at two sites, i.e. either indirectly through the active hemisphere or directly through the "resting" hemisphere. with regard to the first possibility, one possible source is descending ipsilateral facilitation coming from the activated motor cortex through uncrossed corticospinal projections reaching spinal motoneurons. such a possibility is very unlikely, however, given that ipsilateral corticospinal projections destined to distal hand muscles are rare in primates  <cit> , and were shown recently to have only very weak effects in modulating ipsilateral motoneuronal activity during hand movements  <cit> . another related source is irradiation of facilitatory influences or a release from inhibition from the activated primary motor cortex to the homologous cortex through transcallosal projections. such a possibility is also unlikely, however, for three major reasons. first, most tms studies looking at interhemispheric influences between motor cortices have emphasized the inhibitory nature of these interactions  such that conditioning stimuli applied to one hemisphere lead to suppression of meps elicited from the opposite hemisphere over a wide range of inter-stimulus intervals. interhemispheric facilitation can also be elicited but the phenomena has been described as less reliable and remains highly susceptible to variations in experimental paradigm [e.g.,  <cit> . second, the fact that no mirror activity was detected in the resting fdi homologous to the one engaged in haptic sensing, and that smooth trials elicited no sign of mep facilitation, argue against the notion of a simple spread of excitation from one motor cortex to the other as the primary source for the observed corticomotor facilitation. finally, both anatomical tracer work in non-human primates  <cit>  and tractography analyses of diffusion tensor imaging in humans  <cit>  converge to show that primary motor and somatosensory cortices have relatively scant callosal connections when compared to secondary motor or somatosensory areas. this leaves the "resting" hemisphere ipsilateral to the task hand as the most probable site of origin for the observed mep facilitation in the resting hand. in this respect, a likely source of ipsilateral facilitation during trials with grating discrimination is the recruitment of secondary motor areas, such as the pre-sma, sma proper and ventral premotor cortex; which all have been shown to be activated to some degree in tasks involving haptic sensing with the finger  <cit> . as stressed earlier, these secondary motor areas have dense callosal connections and are also densely interconnected with m <dig> intra-cortically  <cit> . in addition, both sma and premotor neurons are known to exhibit pre-movement activity during ipsilateral unimanual movement, which contrasts to mi neurons where such premovement activity is seldom found  <cit> . therefore, bilateral recruitment of secondary motor areas associated with cognitive demand and tactile attention in the context of unilateral haptic sensing seems the most likely source of facilitation to raise motor excitability in the "resting" hemisphere. yet, one can ask as to why a large increase in corticomotor excitability in the resting hemisphere was not accompanied by overt motor overflow in the resting hand. in this respect, it is possible that interhemispheric inhibitory influences from the active hemisphere to the "resting" hemisphere likely balanced out the facilitation mediated by the secondary motor areas recruited during haptic sensing, reducing it to a sub-threshold level so as to prevent overt mirror movements of the non task hand  <cit> . to summarize, although we cannot totally rule out the possibility that irradiation from the active hemisphere contributed to the observed ispsilateral mep enhancement, both anatomical and physiological evidence point to the "resting" hemisphere as the most likely site for the facilitation in link with the recruitment of secondary motor areas in the context of haptic processing.

in line with a previous tms study comparing right-left differences in the excitability of corticomotor projections to the resting hand when the other hand performed simple movements of varying intensities  <cit> , no difference was found between the two hemispheres with regard to task-related enhancement in corticomotor excitability. however, ipsilateral cortical activity during unimanual performance has often been reported to be more pronounced in the left hemisphere and more important for left hand task performance, particularly for complex tasks [e.g.,  <cit> . the present observation that haptic-related corticomotor facilitation in the resting hemisphere was unaffected by hand could be related to the nature of our task, as we have argued before. the fact that our finger task consisted of a simple action requiring minimal effort at the muscular level could have contributed to accentuate differences arising from central influences at the motor cortical level between smooth and grating trials; leading to similar facilitation irrespective of the hand performing the task. similar to observation between hemispheres, no differences was also observed between young and old participants in the level of mep facilitation elicited in the "resting" hemisphere when the opposite one was engaged in haptic sensing. this is somewhat in contrast to previous neuroimaging and behavioural studies reporting age-dependant increase in bilateral sensorimotor activation and in peripheral muscle activity during simple unimanual tasks  <cit> . seniors also exhibited less interhemispheric motor inhibition than young adults during performance of unimanual tasks, suggesting that attending to a task may affect inhibitory modulation of ipsilateral motor cortical activity with aging  <cit> . however, in the present study, the possibility of motor overflow affecting the status of the "resting" hand was greatly reduced by asking participants to refrain from contracting their muscles in the relaxed state and by constant monitoring of emg level. such active strategy has been shown to be highly effective in suppressing mirror movements in the non-task hand when complex movements were performed with the other hand in both young and old adults  <cit> . thus, any age-dependant increases in motor overflow might have been mitigated by our active control over spreading muscle activity in the resting hand as senior and young participants performed the finger task. another factor that might have contributed to attenuate age differences is the fact that we controlled for the level of task difficulty. in general, older adults tend to exhibit more widespread cortical activation than younger subjects when motor task demands are increased in terms of complexity [e.g.,  <cit> . on this basis, one could have predicted greater haptic-related motor facilitation in the older group owing to the recruitment of a more extensive bilateral frontal and parietal network associated with discrimination of the grating orientation; but this was not the case. as suggested before, such compensatory over-recruitment might have been largely cancelled out in this study by the combined effect of using a simple finger action task and adjusting the level of perceptual difficulty for age for the haptic component. overall, these observations with regard to the effect of age would be compatible with the compensation-related utilization of neural circuits hypothesis  theory  <cit> . this theory suggests that aging results in a loss of hemispheric specialization only in situations in which performance deterioration is evident, to increase compensatory recruitment of available cognitive resources and help improve task performance in seniors  <cit> . indeed, poorer unimanual motor task performance in seniors was associated with greater recruitment of ipsilateral m <dig>  decreased callosal size, and integrity, indicating a shift towards excitation in the balance of excitatory and inhibitory interhemispheric interactions  <cit> . in the present study, given the careful design of task demands and stimuli to facilitate good performance in seniors in the haptic sensing trials, there would be no reason to expect a compensatory over-recruitment of ipsilateral or contralateral motor areas.

CONCLUSIONS
finger movements performed in the context of haptic sensing produced a task-specific facilitation in the corticospinal projections destined to intrinsic hand muscles in both senior and young adults, when task demands are adjusted for age. this task-specific facilitation is not only detectable in the working hemisphere controlling the task hand but also in the opposite hemisphere associated with the resting hand. such results highlight the importance of cognitive factors and task demands in modulating corticospinal output during performance of unimanual actions. these results might have implications in the design of rehabilitative interventions in aging populations. for instance, one could conceive interventions in stroke patients, where haptic sensing is incorporated into hand retraining to facilitate corticospinal drive to the paretic hand. along the same line, interventions could be directed also at the less affected hand using more demanding haptic sensing tasks to elicited bilateral corticomotor facilitation aiming at promoting recovery of the affected hand. future work is required to test various haptic sensing tasks in the context of rehabilitation in stroke patients.

