BACKGROUND
the rhesus monkey  has been one of the most valuable experimental model species for biomedical studies in various research fields including microbiology, neuroscience, and biochemistry. recently, the genome sequence of the rhesus monkey was determined by the rhesus macaque genome sequencing and analysis consortium  <cit> . the consortium revealed that the average sequence similarity between humans and rhesus monkeys is 93%. approximately twenty thousand genes were annotated or predicted by the human-based comparative analysis. in order to conduct biomedical research in areas such as infectious disease, cancer research, and drug development using various monkey tissues, quantitative gene expression analysis is essential.

quantitative real-time pcr  is a recently developed and popularized molecular technique that can be used for gene expression studies that require highly sensitive and accurate quantification of mrna levels from various samples  <cit> . these pcr-based analyses allow investigators to analyze a limited amount of material of interest while guaranteeing accurate quantification of target mrnas. however, to achieve optimal results in qrt-pcr analysis, certain steps are indispensable including:  quality control of the material of interest and the primer sets,  determination of the pcr efficiency, and  selection of suitable internal control genes for normalization  <cit> . the availability of advanced biomaterials including sophisticated pcr instrumentation, kits for rna isolation from various materials, and highly purified taq polymerase, has overcome many of these difficult steps with the exception of identifying appropriate internal control genes  <cit> . different expression profiling results from the same target genes can be obtained by using different hkgs as internal references  <cit> . therefore, selection of proper hkgs is important for the accurate analysis and normalization of data generated by real-time qrt-pcr  <cit> .

before the systematic selection of reference genes, researchers interested in quantitative expression analysis have used empirically determined housekeeping genes such as actb and gapdh. however, recent studies have provided solid evidence that transcription levels of housekeeping genes vary between cell types  <cit> , developmental stages  <cit> , and experimental conditions  <cit> , individuals  <cit> . therefore, stable reference gene selection procedures have to be undertaken before quantitative mrna expression analysis can be conducted.

in this study, three different specific tools  that can be used for the validation of the stability of selected hkgs  were investigated in rhesus monkey and human tissues  using real-time qrt-pcr with sybr green.

RESULTS
reference gene and qrt-pcr primer selection
for the selection of suitable reference genes from the human and rhesus monkey genomes, the eight most commonly used and available hkgs were selected: hydroxymethylbilane synthase , beta-actin , glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase , ribosomal protein  <dig> , ribosomal protein  <dig> , tyrosine 3-monooxygenase , hypoxanthine phosphoribosyltransferase  <dig>  and tata box-binding protein . rhesus monkey hkgs are identified by comparison of orthologous loci of the human hkgs. summarized sequence information for the human and rhesus monkey genes is shown in table  <dig>  this gene information was also used to design qrt-pcr primers .

amplification efficiency
the expression levels of hkgs were analyzed using the relative quantification   <cit> . the amplification efficiencies and correlation coefficients  of the eight hkgs were generated using the slopes of the standard curves obtained by serial dilutions. standard curves with a ten-fold dilution series were used to calculate the amplification efficiency . similar amplification efficiencies for the corresponding human and rhesus monkey reference genes are a prerequisite for accurate real-time rt-pcr quantification. the amplification efficiency was calculated by the formula: efficiency  =  -1)* <dig>  the efficiency range of the qrt-pcr amplifications for all of the genes tested was between 80% and 115%. overall, similar efficiency levels were observed between human and rhesus samples . the amplification specificity for each qrt-pcr analysis was confirmed by melting curve analysis .

data analysis
we analyzed eight housekeeping genes for the selection of stable hkgs using three authorized programs   <cit> .

genorm
the normalization step must be conducted very carefully for accurate gene expression level analysis. however, the selection of stable hkgs for normalization is very complicated. genorm is a useful tool for the selection of the most stable internal control genes using the principle that the expression ratio of two ideal internal control genes is identical in all tested samples  <cit> .

using the genorm program, the eight hkgs selected for normalization were ranked according to their m values. the m value is the average pair-wise variation of a particular gene with all other control genes. the m values for rpl13a, rpl <dig>  tbp, hmbs, actb, ywhaz, hprt <dig>  and gapdh in rhesus were lower than  <dig> .rpl <dig> and rpl13a displayed the most stability of all eight genes according to genorm analysis. both genes encode components of the 60s ribosomal subunit that is involved in protein biosynthesis . in contrast to rhesus monkeys, human tissue analysis indicated that gapdh and hmbs were the most stable genes . the m values of all tested human genes except for hprt <dig> were lower than  <dig> . to investigate the optimal number of reference genes, it was determined whether the stepwise inclusion of less stable genes significantly affected the normalization factors, considering the term v .

as the most stable reference genes, rpl <dig> and rpl13a yielded a v value of  <dig>  in the rhesus monkey . that value indicated that it would not be necessary to include additional reference genes in qrt-pcr of rhesus monkey tissues. however, in the case of humans, the addition of a third and fourth gene significantly affected the reliability of the selected hkgs .

the results of the genorm tool indicated different results between humans and rhesus monkeys. rpl <dig> and rpl13a in the rhesus monkey and gapdh, hmbs, actb and rpl <dig> in humans are the most stable hkgs for the accurate calculation of normalization factors.

normfinder
normfinder is another reference tool for identifying the ideal normalization genes among various candidate hkgs  <cit> . normfinder ranks the various candidate reference genes according to their expression variation between inter and intra groups. this analysis identified hmbs and rpl <dig> as the most stable genes in rhesus monkeys and humans, respectively . these rankings appear to be generally different from the results of genorm. however, rpl <dig>  gapdh and actb in humans and hmbs and rpl <dig> in rhesus monkeys are still ranked as the most stable reference genes. although genorm and normfinder did not identify the exact same reference genes, gapdh in humans and hmbs in rhesus monkeys are still considered candidate reference genes.

intriguingly, human hmbs showed opposite results between genorm and normfinder program. in the genorm software, the most important factor is gene expression stability . the principle of genorm is that the expression ratio of two ideal internal control genes is identical in all tested samples  <cit> . thus, the genorm program did not consider the other hkgs. however, normfinder program focuses on the two genes with the least intra-and inter-group expression variation. in other words, the normfinder program considered other hkgs for the selection of good hkgs. for example, high rate of expression variation of hmbs among hkgs could result in the discordance between normfinder and genorm .

bestkeeper
the bestkeeper program index was created using the geometric mean of each candidate gene's ct values  <cit> . initial analysis of the data, based on the inspection of raw ct values, calculated variations for all the housekeeping genes in the six samples , and showed an overall stability in gene expression. genes with sd values higher than  <dig> were considered inconsistent. actb, hmbs, rpl13a, rpl <dig>  tbp, ywhaz showed a sd value lower than  <dig> in the rhesus monkey. among them, rpl13a  had the lowest ct value variation. gapdh had the highest ct value variation. in human, hmbs and rpl <dig> exhibit sd values lower than  <dig>  rpl <dig> had the lowest ct value variation and hprt <dig> had the highest ct value variation . in the case of hmbs and rpl <dig>  bestkeeper also showed a different result compared to normfinder and genorm program, respectively. because the variation of ct value of hmbs and rpl <dig> is ranked very low, the bestkeeper program indicated hmbs and rpl <dig> as good candidate hkgs. however, compared to bestkeeper, genorm is considered a pair-wise variation between the gens as the most important factor. thus genorm did not indicate one gene as a best reference gene but indicated a gene pair.

based on the bestkeeper program, the rpl13a gene in the rhesus monkey and the rpl <dig> gene in the human were selected as the best reference genes.

validation
to validate our results from the rhesus monkey, one unknown rhesus monkey was tested using same reference genes. and results were analyzed for the selection of stable hkgs using three authorized programs  . although, slight differences were observed, overall patterns were coincided with our results of rpl13a and rpl <dig> as ideal reference genes in rhesus monkeys.

CONCLUSIONS
in this study, we investigated for the first time the most reliable hkgs for the normalization of real-time qrt-pcr data in rhesus monkey tissues  using three programs . the results from the rhesus monkey were compared to those of humans.

our results indicated that the two most stable genes, rpl13a and rpl <dig>  covering a broad expression range, could be used as reference genes for relative gene quantification and normalization purposes in gene profiling studies of the rhesus monkey as determined by three reference gene identification programs.

in humans, rpl <dig>  hmbs and gapdh were found to be suitable reference genes. in the case of rpl <dig>  two programs  identified this gene as a reliable reference gene. however, genorm indicated that rpl <dig> was an unsuitable reference gene by virtue of having a high m value. likewise, the gapdh gene was rejected by the bestkeeper program as a result of having a high sd  value. finally, hmbs was ranked as the sixth best gene by the normfinder program.

intriguingly, the gapdh and actb genes are the most widely used reference genes in human studies. however, gapdh and actb are ranked as the least stable genes in the rhesus monkey. genomic and environmental differences between humans and rhesus monkeys might result in the selection of different suitable hkgs in the six different tissues tested. thus, different reference genes  should be used for the analysis of rhesus monkey tissue than those used for human tissue analysis

materials and methods
rna samples
total rna from rhesus macaque tissues  and human total rna  were purchased from clontech and ambion, respectively. for the validation of our results for reference gene selection, corresponding unknown rhesus macaque tissues  were provided by the national primate research center  of korea. total rna was quantified using a nanodrop® nd- <dig> uv-vis spectrophotometer.

rhesus macaque and human tissue cdna synthesis
to eliminate dna contamination from the total rna samples, turbo dna-freetm  was used. a no-rt control was also amplified to confirm the absence of dna contamination. m-mlv  reverse transcriptase with an annealing temperature of 42°c was used for the reverse transcription reaction with rnase inhibiter .

candidate reference genes and primers for real-time quantitative rt-pcr
rhesus monkey reference genes were identified by comparison with human hkgs using the ncbi  database and the ucsc  genome browser . their sequences were used to design primers design using primer <dig> software  <cit> . blast searches were performed to confirm the total gene specificity of the primer sequences, and the results showed the absence of multi-locus matching at the primer site. all primers except for rpl <dig> spanned at least one intron to avoid inaccuracy due to genomic dna contamination in rna samples.

real-time quantitative rt-pcr
sybr green qrt-pcr was performed on a rotor gene  <dig> . in each run,  <dig> ul of cdna was used as template for amplification per reaction. the sample was added to  <dig> ul of reaction mixture containing  <dig> ul h2o,  <dig> ul quantitect® sybr® green pcr master mix  and  <dig> ul forward and reverse primers . real-time qrt-pcr amplification of the hkgs was carried out for  <dig> cycles of 94°c for  <dig> sec, 58°c for  <dig> sec, and 72°c for  <dig> sec. the temperature range for the analysis of melting curves was 55°c to 99°c over  <dig> sec. three independent experiments were performed.

characterization of analysis programs
the genorm  <cit>  program provides a measure of gene expression stability , which is the mean pair-wise variation between an individual gene and all other tested control genes. this method differs from model-based approaches by comparing genes based on the similarity of their expression profiles. ct values were converted to scale expression quantities using the delta-ct method and entered into genorm, which then ranks the genes based on m values where the gene with the most stable expression has the lowest value. normfinder  <cit>  focuses on finding the two genes with the least intra- and inter-group expression variation. a bestkeeper  <cit>  index was created using the geometric mean of each candidate gene's ct values. this index was then compared to each individual candidate housekeeping gene by pair-wise correlation analyses, with each combination assigned a value for the pearson correlation coefficient  and the probability .

supplementary material
additional file 1
standard curves for calculation of pcr efficiency and quantification according to reference genes in the rhesus monkey. amplification of 10-fold serial dilutions of the plasmid standard ranging from  <dig> to  <dig> copies per reaction was carried out in duplicate.

click here for file

 additional file 2
standard curves for calculation of pcr efficiency and quantification according to reference genes in humans. amplification of 10-fold serial dilutions of the plasmid standard ranging from  <dig> to  <dig> copies per reaction was carried out in duplicate.

click here for file

 additional file 3
efficiencies calculated from the slopes of dilution curves.

click here for file

 additional file 4
melting curve analysis. melting curve analysis of  <dig> different primer sets for reference genes in the rhesus monkey.

click here for file

 additional file 5
melting curve analysis. melting curve analysis of  <dig> different primer sets for reference genes in humans.

click here for file

 additional file 6
selection of the most suitable reference genes for normalization using genorm analysis using the unknown rhesus monkey samples for validation.

click here for file

 additional file 7
candidate reference genes for normalization and the best combination of two genes listed according to their expression stability calculated by the normfinder program using the unknown rhesus monkey samples for validation.

click here for file

 additional file 8
results from bestkeeper descriptive statistical analysis using the unknown rhesus monkey samples for validation.

click here for file

 acknowledgements
this work was supported by the korea science and engineering foundation  grant funded by the korea government  .
