BACKGROUND
coordination between cell growth and division is often carried out by ‘size control’ mechanisms, where the cell size has to reach a certain threshold to trigger some event of the cell cycle, such as dna replication or cell division  <cit> . as an example, the fission yeast schizosaccharomyces pombe exhibits a size threshold at mitosis  <cit> . the budding yeast saccharomyces cerevisiae also uses a size control mechanism that acts at the g1-s transition  <cit> . in contrast, in some cells such as those of early frog embryos, progression in the cell cycle is size independent and relies on a ‘timer’ mechanism  <cit> .

bacterial division is often assumed to be under size control but conclusive experimental evidence is still lacking and the wealth of accumulated data presents a complex picture. in  <dig>  building on the seminal work of schaechter et al. and helmstetter and cooper, donachie suggested that initiation of dna replication is triggered when the bacterium reaches a critical size  <cit> . this provided the basis for a long-standing model of size control where cell size triggers replication initiation, which in turn determines the timing of division . however, the coupling of replication initiation to cell mass has been repeatedly challenged  <cit> . in particular, on the basis of recent single-cell analysis, the team headed by n kleckner proposed that replication initiation is more tightly linked to the time elapsed since birth than to cell mass  <cit> . in addition, the extent to which initiation timing affects division timing is unclear. in particular, variations in initiation timing are known to lead to compensatory changes in the duration of chromosome replication . these studies argue against a size control model based on replication initiation. another model postulates that size control acts directly on septum formation  <cit> . nevertheless, the nature of the signals triggering the formation of the septal ring and its subsequent constriction are still unknown  <cit>  and no molecular mechanism is known to sense cell size and transmit the information to the division machinery in bacteria.

besides the work of donachie, the assumption of size control in bacteria originates from a theoretical argument stating that such a control is necessary in exponentially growing cells to ensure cell size homeostasis, i.e. to maintain a constant size distribution through successive cycles. the growth of bacterial populations has long been mathematically described using partial differential equation  models. these models rely on hypotheses on division control: the division rate of a cell, i.e. the instantaneous probability of its dividing, can be assumed to depend either on cell age  or cell size. in the classical ‘sizer’ model, the division rate depends on size and not on age whereas in the ‘timer’ model it depends on age and not on size. mathematical analysis of these models sheds light on the role of size control in cell size homeostasis. in particular, it has been suggested that for exponentially growing cells, a timer mechanism cannot ensure a stable size distribution  <cit> . nevertheless, this unrealistic behavior of the timer mechanism is based on a biologically meaningless assumption, namely the exponential growth of cells of infinitely small or large size  <cit> . cells of size zero or infinity do not exist and particularly small or large cells are likely to exhibit abnormal growth behavior. in conclusion, the mathematical arguments that were previously developed are insufficient to rule out a size-independent, timer model of bacterial division: quantitative comparisons between models and data are needed.

in the present study, we test whether age  or size is a determinant of cell division in e. coli. to do so, we analyzed two datasets derived from two major single-cell experimental studies on e. coli growth, performed by stewart et al. <cit>  and wang et al. <cit> . our analysis is based on division rate estimation by state-of-the-art nonparametric inference methods that we recently developed  <cit> . the two datasets correspond to different experimental setups and image analysis methods but lead to similar conclusions. we show that even though a model with a simple timer triggering division is sufficient to maintain cell size homeostasis, such a model is not compatible with the data. in addition, our analysis of the timer model shows that this model is very sensitive to hypotheses regarding the growth law of rare cells of very small or large size. this lack of robustness argues against a timer mechanism for division control in e. coli as well as in other exponentially growing organisms. in contrast, a model where cell size determines the probability of division is in good agreement with experimental data. unlike the timer model, this sizer model is robust to slight modifications of the growth law of individual cells. in addition, our analysis reveals that the sizer model is very robust to phenotypic variability in individual growth rates or noise in septum positioning.

RESULTS
description of the data
age and size distribution of the bacterial population
the results reported in this study were obtained from the analysis of two different datasets, obtained through microscopic time-lapse imaging of single e. coli cells growing in a rich medium, by stewart et al.  <cit>  and wang et al. <cit> . stewart et al. followed single e. coli cells growing into microcolonies on lb-agarose pads at 30°c. the length of each cell in the microcolony was measured every  <dig> min. wang et al. grew cells in lb: luria bertani medium at 37°c in a microfluidic setup  <cit>  and the length of the cells was measured every minute. due to the microfluidic device structure, at each division only one daughter cell could be followed , in contrast to the experiment of stewart et al. where all the individuals of a genealogical tree were followed . it is worth noting that the different structures of the data fi and si lead to different pde models, and the statistical analysis was adapted to each situation . from each dataset  we extracted the results of three experiments . each experiment fi corresponds to the growth of approximately six microcolonies of up to approximately  <dig> cells and each experiment si to the growth of bacteria in  <dig> microchannels for approximately  <dig> generations.

given the accuracy of image analysis, we do not take into account variations of cell width within the population, which are negligible compared to cell-cycle-induced length variations. thus, in the present study we do not distinguish between length, volume and mass and use the term cell size as a catch-all descriptor. cell age and cell size distributions of a representative experiment from each dataset are shown in figure  <dig>  these distributions are estimated from the age and size measurements of every cell at every time step of a given experiment fi or si, by using a simple kernel density estimation method . as expected for the different data structures  and different experimental conditions, the distributions for the two datasets are not identical. the age distribution is decreasing with a maximum for age zero and the size distribution is wide and positively skewed, in agreement with previous results using various bacterial models  <cit> . 

testing the timer versus sizer models of division
age-structured  and size-structured  models
the timer and sizer hypotheses are easily expressed in mathematical terms: two different pde models are commonly used to describe bacterial growth, using a division rate  depending either on cell age or cell size. in the age-structured model  the division rate ba is a function only of the age a of the cell. the density n of cells of age a at time t is given as a solution to the mckendrick–von foerster equation :

  ∂∂tn+∂∂an=−ban 

with the boundary condition

 n=2∫0∞banda 

in this model, a cell of age a at time t has the probability badt of dividing between time t and t+dt.

in the size-structured model , the division rate bs is a function only of the size x of the cell. assuming that the size of a single cell grows with a rate v, the density n of cells of size x at time t is given as a solution to the size-structured cell division equation:  <cit> 

  ∂∂tn+∂∂xvn=−bsn+4bsn 

in the size model, a cell of size x at time t has the probability bsdt of dividing between time t and t+dt. this model is related to the so-called sloppy size control model  <cit>  describing division in s. pombe.

for simplicity, we focused here on a population evolving along a full genealogical tree, accounting for fi data. for data si observed along a single line of descendants, an appropriate modification is made to equations  and  .

testing the age model  and the size model  with experimental data
in this study we tested the hypothesis of an age-dependent versus size-dependent division rate by comparing the ability of the age model and size model to describe experimental data. the pde given by equations  and  can be embedded into a two-dimensional age-and-size-structured equation , describing the temporal evolution of the density n of cells of age a and size x at time t, with a division rate ba,sa priori depending on both age and size:

  ∂∂t+∂∂an+∂∂xvn=−ba,sn 

with the boundary condition

 n=4∫0∞ba,snda 

in this augmented setting, the age model governed by the pde  and the size model governed by  are restrictions to the hypotheses of an age-dependent or size-dependent division rate, respectively .

the density n of cells having age a and size x at a large time t can be approximated as n≈eλtn, where the coefficient λ> <dig> is called the malthus coefficient and n is the stable age-size distribution. this regime is rapidly reached and time can then be eliminated from equations ,  and , which are thus transformed into equations governing the stable distribution n. importantly, in the timer model , the existence of this stable distribution requires that growth is sub-exponential around zero and infinity  <cit> .

we estimate the division rate ba of the age model using the age measurements of every cell at every time step. likewise, we estimate the division rate bs of the size model using the size measurements of every cell at every time step. our estimation procedure is based on mathematical methods we recently developed. importantly, our estimation procedure does not impose any particular restrictions on the form of the division rate function b, so that any biologically realistic function can be estimated . in additional file 1: figures s <dig> and s <dig>  we show the size-dependent and age-dependent division rates bs and ba estimated from the experimental data. once the division rate has been estimated, the stable age and size distribution n can be reconstructed through simulation of the age & size model .

we measure the goodness-of-fit of a model  by estimating the distance  between two distributions: the age-size distribution obtained through simulations of the model with the estimated division rate , and the experimental age-size distribution. therefore, a small distance  indicates a good fit of the model to the experimental data. to estimate this distance we use a classical metric, which measures the average of the squared difference between the two distributions. as an example, the distance between two bivariate gaussian distributions with the same mean and a standard deviation difference of 10% is 17%, and a 25% difference in standard deviation leads to a 50% distance between the distributions. the experimental age-size distribution is estimated from the age and size measurements of every cell at every time step of a given experiment fi or si, thanks to a simple kernel density estimation method.

analysis of single-cell growth
as mentioned above, to avoid unrealistic asymptotic behavior of the age model and ensure the existence of a stable size distribution, assumptions have to be made on the growth of very small and large cells, which cannot be exactly exponential. to set realistic assumptions, we first studied the growth of individual cells. as expected, we found that during growth, a cell diameter is roughly constant . figure 2a shows cell length as a function of time for a representative cell, suggesting that growth is exponential rather than linear, in agreement with previous studies  <cit> . to test this hypothesis further, we performed linear and exponential fits of cell length for each single cell. we then calculated in each case the r <dig> coefficient of determination, which is classically used to measure how well a regression curve approximates the data . the inset of figure 2b shows the distribution of the r <dig> coefficient for all single cells for exponential  and linear  regressions, demonstrating that the exponential growth model fits the data very well and outperforms the linear growth model. we then investigated whether the growth of cells of particularly small or large size is exponential. if growth is exponential, the increase in length between each measurement should be proportional to the length. therefore, we averaged the length increase of cells of similar size and tested whether the proportionality was respected for all sizes. as shown in figure 2b, growth is exponential around the mean cell size but the behavior of very small or large cells may deviate from exponential growth. we therefore determined two size thresholds xmin and xmax below and over which the growth law may not be exponential .

the age-size joint distribution of e. coli corresponds to a size-dependent division rate
we used both the age model and size model to fit the experimental age-size distributions, following the approach described above. the growth law below xmin and above xmax is unknown. therefore, to test the age model, growth was assumed to be exponential between xmin and xmax and we tested several growth functions v for x<xmin and x>xmax, such as constant  and polynomial functions. figure  <dig> shows the best fit we could obtain. comparing the experimental data f <dig> shown in figure 3a  with the reconstructed distribution shown in figure 3c  we can see that the age model fails to reconstruct the experimental age-size distribution and produces a distribution with a different shape. in particular, its localization along the y-axis is very different. for instance, for f <dig> data , the red area corresponding to the maximum of the experimental distribution is around  <dig>  on the y-axis whereas the maximum of the fitted distribution is around  <dig> . the y-axis corresponds to cell size. the size distribution produced by the age model is thus very different from the size distribution of the experimental data . 

as an additional analysis to strengthen our conclusion, we calculated the correlation between the age at division and the size at birth using the experimental data. if division is triggered by a timer mechanism, these two variables should not be correlated, whereas we found a significant correlation of − <dig>  both for si and fi data .

we used various growth functions for x<xmin and x>xmax but a satisfying fit could not be obtained with the age model. in addition, we found that the results of the age model are very sensitive to the assumptions made for the growth law of rare cells of very small and large size . this ultra-sensitivity to hypotheses regarding rare cells makes the timer model unrealistic generally for any exponentially growing organisms.

in contrast, the size model is in good agreement with the data  and allows a satisfactory reconstruction of the age-size structure of the population. the shape of the experimental and fitted distributions as well as their localization along the y-axis and x-axis are similar .

the quantitative measure of goodness-of-fit defined above is coherent with the curves’ visual aspects: for the size model the distance  between the model and the data ranges from 17% to 20% for fi data  whereas for the age model it ranges from 51% to 93% for fi data .

the experimental data has a limited precision. in particular, the division time is difficult to determine precisely by image analysis and the resolution is limited by the time step of image acquisition . by performing stochastic simulations of the size model , we evaluated the effect of measurement noise on the goodness of fit of the size model. we found that noise of 10% in the determination of the division time leads to a distance  around 14%, which is of the order of the value obtained with our experimental data. we conclude that the size model fits the experimental data well. moreover, we found that in contrast to the age model, the size model is robust with respect to the mathematical assumptions for the growth law for small and large sizes: the distance  changes by less than 5%.

size control is robust to phenotypic noise
noise in the biochemical processes underlying growth and division, such as that created by stochastic gene expression, may perturb the control of size and affect the distribution of cell size. we therefore investigated the robustness of size control to such phenotypic noise. the size model describes the growth of a population of cells with variable age and size at division. nevertheless, it does not take into account potential variability in individual growth rate or the difference in size at birth between two sister cells, i.e. the variability in septum positioning. to do so, we derived two pde models, which are revised size models with either growth rate or septum positioning variability  and ran these models with different levels of variability.

variability in individual growth rate has a negligible effect on the size distribution
for each single cell, a growth rate can be defined as the rate of the exponential increase of cell length with time  <cit> . by doing so, we obtained the distribution of the growth rate for the bacterial population . in our dataset this distribution is statistically compatible with a gaussian distribution with a coefficient of variation of approximately 8% .

we recently extended the size model to describe the growth of a population with single-cell growth rate variability   <cit> . we simulated this extended size model using the growth rate distribution of fi data. the resulting size distribution is virtually identical to the one obtained without growth rate variability . therefore, the naturally occurring variability in individual growth rate does not significantly perturb the size control. to investigate the effect of growth rate variability further, we simulated the model with various levels of noise, using truncated gaussian growth rate distributions with coefficients of variation from  <dig> to 60%. we found that to obtain a 10% change in size distribution, a 30% coefficient of variation is necessary, which would represent an extremely high level of noise .

variability in septum positioning has a negligible effect on size distribution
the cells divide into two daughter cells of almost identical length. nevertheless, a slight asymmetry can arise as an effect of noise during septum positioning. we found a 4% variation in the position of the septum , which is in agreement with previous measurements  <cit> . to test the robustness of size control to noise in septum positioning, we extended the size model to allow for different sizes of the two sister cells at birth . we ran this model using the empirical variability in septum positioning  and compared the resulting size distribution to the one obtained by simulations without variability. as shown in figure 4b , the effect of natural noise in septum positioning is negligible. we also ran the model with higher levels of noise in septum positioning and found that a three times higher  coefficient of variation is necessary to obtain a 10% change in size distribution .

CONCLUSIONS
in the present study, we present statistical evidence to support the hypothesis that a size-dependent division rate can be used to reconstruct the experimental age-size distribution of e. coli. in contrast, this distribution cannot be generated by a timer model where the division rate depends solely on age. even though the timer model can maintain cell size homeostasis, it is quantitatively incompatible with the observed size distribution. our analysis of two different datasets shows the robustness of our conclusions to changes in experimental setup and image analysis methods. our results therefore confirm the hypothesis of size control of division in e. coli. in addition, our analysis of the timer model shows that it is very sensitive to mathematical assumptions for the growth law of very rare cells of abnormal size, suggesting that this model is unrealistic for any exponentially growing organisms.

noise in biochemical processes, in particular gene expression, can have a significant effect on the precision of biological circuits. in particular, it can generate a substantial variability in the cell cycle  <cit> . therefore we investigated in bacteria the robustness of size control to noise in the single-cell growth rate and septum positioning, using appropriate extensions of the size model. we found that variability of the order of what we estimated from e. coli data does not significantly perturb the distribution of cell size. therefore, in a natural population exhibiting phenotypic noise, the control of cell size is robust to fluctuations in septum positioning and individual growth rates. from a modeling perspective, this demonstrates that the simple size model is appropriate for describing a natural bacterial population showing phenotypic diversity.

our approach is based on comparisons between pde models and single-cell data for the cell cycle. such comparisons were attempted a few decades ago using data from yeasts . nevertheless, these interesting studies were hampered by the scarcity and poor quality of single-cell data as well as the lack of appropriate statistical procedures to estimate the division rate within the models. in contrast, we used high-precision measurements of tens of thousands cells in combination with modern statistical inference methods, which allowed us to assess quantitatively the adequacy of different models. we think this approach could prove successful in studying other aspects of the cell cycle, such as the coordination between replication and division or the molecular mechanisms underlying size control of division. several different mechanisms involved in division control in bacteria have already been unraveled, in particular mincd inhibition and nucleoid occlusion  <cit> . we believe that a better understanding of the relative roles played by mincd inhibition and nucleoid occlusion in division control can be gained by analyzing the age-size distributions of mincd and nucleoid occlusion mutants. we are therefore currently performing time-lapse microscopy experiments to record the growth of such mutants.

