BACKGROUND
antibodies are essential tools for the identification and study of proteins involved in normal and pathological functions. our need for specific antibodies will further increase in the post-genomic era  <cit> . recombinant antibodies like single chain fv  represent an attractive alternative to natural antibodies. in particular, they can be selected using synthetic in vitro approaches like phage or ribosome display allowing fast, specific, animal-experiment independent and rather inexpensive selection of antibody  <cit> . these antibodies can then be used, in principle, in any approach where natural antibodies are usually employed.

nevertheless, this method of antibody generation has not imposed itself within academic use and almost no such recombinant antibodies are distributed commercially as laboratory or diagnosis reagents. this is rather surprising as currently available libraries are of large enough diversity to provide a high success rate with a very low technological investment. some large scale approaches are currently developed partly based on recombinant antibodies  and we and others even showed that this approach allows the selection of antibodies that would be hard/impossible to obtain by other means . one of the main reasons for this lack of popularity is probably the general feeling that the sensitivity of recombinant antibodies is lower than that of natural antibodies. the apparent reduced affinity is mostly due to the fact that scfv are monovalent molecules that lack the avidity binding obtained through dimerization. another limitation is that the end product is not exactly an antibody, but only an antibody fragment, which is more complicated to use than its natural counterpart.

to solve these limitations, we developed a series of expression vectors based on the pfuse expression system  that allow expression of scfv in fusion with natural fc regions. this approach strongly improved antibody sensitivity and ease of use, and additionally provided so far unavailable versatility since scfv can be fused to human, mouse and rabbit fc in an easy one step cloning procedure. we further showed that this method can be applied to natural antibodies re-cloned as scfv. thus, we fused the monoclonal anti-myc antibody 9e <dig> to human and rabbit fc and showed that, as for recombinant antibodies, it provides extended multiplexing possibilities. we believe that the described method will be decisive in allowing the recombinant antibody approach to impose itself as a robust and powerful alternative option for antibody isolation and usage.

RESULTS
plasmids construction and antibody production
our plasmids are based on the pfuse-fc2™ series from invivogen  that contains the interleukin- <dig>  signal sequence and allows the secretion of fc-fusion proteins by mammalian cells. they are selectable using zeocin™  both in prokaryotic and eukaryotic cells. these plasmids were modified by site directed mutagenesis and adaptor insertion  to allow the easy one step cassette cloning of recombinant antibodies extracted from a large collection of common recombinant antibody selection and expression plasmids . three plasmids were constructed enabling fusion of scfv at their c-terminus with either human igg <dig> , mouse igg2a  or the rabbit igg  fc domain .

we sub-cloned the f2c antibody directed against alpha-tubulin  <cit>  in fusion with the human, mouse or rabbit fc domains generating antibodies hf2c, mf2c and rf2c, respectively. three days after transient transfection of cho cells with these expression plasmids, secreted antibodies were purified from cell supernatants using proteina-affarose and loaded on sds-page. western blotting analysis showed that each cho supernatant expressed the expected  <dig> kda antibody that can be specifically detected using anti-igg antibodies directed against the respective species . because the scfvs were fused to the hinge domain of iggs, the fc domains were expected to form di-sulfide bridges. we confirmed using sds-page analysis that, in non-reducing conditions, the scfv-fc behave as dimeric proteins while they migrate as monomers upon reduction .

scfv versus scfv-hfc as tools for western blotting and immunofluorescence
we tested whether scfv-fc could be efficiently used in western blotting experiments. np <dig> solubilised lysates of hela cells were separated by sds-page and transferred to nitrocellulose membrane. the membrane was cut and incubated with either f2c or sf <dig>  fused to either human, mouse or rabbit fc domains. the membrane strips were then incubated with species-specific hrp-labeled secondary antibodies and subsequently developed. as shown in figure 1d, we found that a specific band was detected in each condition indicating that direct dilution of unpurified culture medium from transfected cho cells transiently expressing scfv-xfc  can be used for western blot experiments.

we then assessed the fc-fused scfvs for detection of antigens by immunofluorescence. after fixation and permeabilization, hela cells were incubated with  <dig> different scfv or with their  <dig> scfv-hfc counterparts . for each antibody, the detection was at least as good and in general better after fc fusion, and its usability improved. for example, while the anti-rab6-gtp scfv scaa <dig> only gave good labeling when used in conjunction with very short washes  <cit> , human haa <dig> produced contrasted labeling using classical immunofluorescence protocols. similarly, while the scfv ta <dig> can only detect giantin when cells are fixed in methanol, the fusion antibody hta <dig> can detect giantin even when cells are fixed by paraformaldehyde . more generally, we systematically saw an increase in the sensitivity of scfv-fc fusions compared to simple scfvs.

multi-species antibodies
by fusing scfv to fc domains, not only are we endowing recombinant antibodies with the same power as natural antibodies for classical immunological methods, but we also generate new and unique tools. natural antibodies are derived from a single host and thus linked to one species definitively, which complicates multiplexing in many cases. here, since we developed a series of vectors that allow not only fusion of scfv to human fc but also to mouse or rabbit iggs in a single sub-cloning step , there no longer exists a species barrier in co-immunolabeling applications. aa <dig>  f2c, sf <dig> and ta <dig> were introduced in the  <dig> versions of the pfuse-fc modified plasmids and, after transient transfection in cho cells, scfv-xfc fusion antibodies were recovered in supernatants and used for immunofluorescence assay on hela cells . we observed that human, rabbit or mouse versions of each scfv-fc detected their respective target proteins with similar efficiency . this thus allows one to carry out multicolor immunofluorescence labeling using any combination of recombinant antibodies  or of recombinant and natural antibodies .

finally, we showed that multi-species antibody technology can also be adapted to natural antibodies, widening their use. the 9e <dig> scfv  has been isolated from myc1-9e <dig> hybridoma cells before  <cit> . we sub-cloned it into our  <dig> versions of pfuse-fc and produced h9e <dig>  r9e <dig> and m9e <dig> in cho cells. the resulting multispecies 9e <dig> were then tested by immunofluorescence using hela cells transiently expressing myc-tagged gfp-clip- <dig>  <cit>  . this experiment showed that human and rabbit 9e <dig> were as efficient as the original mouse 9e <dig> in their ability to detect the overexpressed protein.

discussion
with the increasing power of large-sale projects in genomics, transcriptomics and proteomics and the rise of reverse genetics, the need for specific antibodies has dramatically increased . the recombinant approach is certainly a powerful alternative to classical, animal based approaches, in terms of price, speed and ethics. we and others have demonstrated that a large diversity of antibodies can be obtained this way . however, and despite the identification of high quality recombinant antibodies, their use is still limited, with very few fee-for service recombinant antibody companies on the market and almost no recombinant antibodies in the catalog of antibody providers. this may be due to the fact that, in general, the lack of avidity of monomeric recombinant antibodies strongly limits their sensitivity and that dedicated protocols have to be followed to efficiently use these antibodies. different approaches have been developed to improve recombinant antibody avidity . the expression system we developed here helps to solve some of the above cited limitations while bringing unique versatility to recombinant antibodies. it additionally allows production of endotoxin-free recombinant antibodies. we have used it so far for more than  <dig> recombinant antibodies with comparable success . furthermore, we show that this strategy can be applied not only to synthetic recombinant antibodies but also to natural ones. this may be interesting not only for changing antibody isotype or species but also to save valuable monoclonal antibodies from hybridomas that grow poorly or do not produce anymore. a limitation of our approach however is that some natural antibodies cannot be adapted to the scfv format without a strong loss in affinity.

by fusing scfv to an fc region, we observed as suggested before  <cit> , that the antibodies keep their specificity and gain in sensitivity. scfv-xfc can be used like any natural antibody, without the user actually needing to know that the antibody is a recombinant one. for general use a simple, non purified, cell culture supernatant from cho cells expressing the antibodies can be diluted between twenty and a thousand times. importantly, we believe that it is more important to estimate recombinant antibodies "usability" or "effectiveness" instead of their "affinity". this is what is actually done for natural antibodies where the user selects the antibody giving the best signal to noise ratio while the affinity is rarely measured.

a key feature of our strategy is to free the antibody from its species-specificity restriction with the immediate ability, in one single sub-cloning step, to fuse the scfv to different fc regions belonging to various species. the same antibody and therefore epitope recognized, can thus be used as a human, mouse or rabbit version. this opens up previously unattainable multiplexing possibilities since the antibody species is no longer a factor limiting combinations.

CONCLUSIONS
we developed here a comprehensive and integrated system for multi-species antibody production. it will simplify and strengthen the use of recombinant antibodies for daily laboratory applications and permit a flexibility and choice in multiplexing, previously not feasible. this simple and fully in vitro system, with no animal use, will ensure constant and endless production of antibodies belonging to any species and to any isotype. this may represent a breakthrough not only for their general laboratory use but also for diagnosis where multiplexing and constant quality are essential.

