BACKGROUND
evolutionary conflicts of interest between the sexes have been convincingly demonstrated in species with separate sexes  <cit> . these sexual conflicts often give rise to traits that are advantageous for one sex but harmful to the other. if these detrimental effects are counteracted, a co-evolutionary arms race may ensue in which harmful traits and corresponding counter-adaptations arise repeatedly  <cit> . such antagonistic interactions can bring about major changes in the mating behaviour, genital morphology, gametes and seminal products, potentially leading to speciation  <cit> . similar arms races seem to occur in hermaphrodites, contrary to darwin's conviction  <cit>  that sexual selection cannot act in hermaphroditic organisms. in fact, theoretical modeling indicates that these processes can become even more extreme in hermaphroditic species , mainly because within one mating simultaneous hermaphrodites gain paternity  which can outweigh the loss in female fitness. here we investigate the evolution of a most peculiar reproductive behaviour that occurs in simultaneously hermaphroditic land snails , the "shooting" of a so-called love-dart into the mating partner.

several explanations have been offered for the evolution of the enigmatic dart shooting behaviour. the dart is made of calcium carbonate and has therefore been proposed to serve as a nuptial gift of calcium for the production of eggs  <cit> . however, in cantareus aspersus  the dart does not contain enough calcium to significantly contribute to egg production and darts are only rarely incorporated by the recipient  <cit> . likewise, in other investigated species darts are even retained by shooters to be reused on the next mate [ <cit> , j.m. koene and s. chiba, unpublished data). therefore two other hypotheses have been put forward. in the female choice hypothesis the dart represents a sexual signal and recipients select on dart shooting effectiveness  <cit> . the important prediction of this hypothesis is that this can only be beneficial for the recipient if the dart is shot consistently by individuals . tests in c. aspersus do not support this, because dart shooting of individually-identified animals in consecutive matings is unpredictable . besides, in arianta arbustorum dart shooting seems to be an optional component of courtship  <cit> .

in the last hypothesis, the dart is used to manipulate the mating partner and can thus cause a sexual conflict  <cit> . this latter hypothesis seems most consistent with findings in the common garden snail c. aspersus, the species in which dart shooting and copulatory behaviour has been extensively studied. during courtship, the stylophore  is everted and the single calcareous dart is pierced into the partner. both mating partners normally shoot a dart before their penises are simultaneously intromitted. during intromission, spermatophores are exchanged and transferred into the partner's receiving organ, either directly into the bursa copulatrix or in an associated diverticulum . to avoid digestion in the spermatophore receiving organ , sperm have to actively swim out via the spermatophore's tail  into the vaginal duct to reach the sperm storage site   <cit> . previous work on c. aspersus has demonstrated that the shooting of the love-dart serves to introduce an allohormone  <cit> , produced by associated glands, into the blood of the partner  <cit> . this allohormone inhibits digestion of sperm  <cit> , which results in more of the donated sperm reaching the spermathecae  <cit>  and fertilizing eggs  <cit> . this manipulation of the sperm storage process caused by darts can have a negative effect on the recipient's  fitness because of interference with cryptic female choice.

interestingly, love-darts display an astonishing diversity between species, both in number and shape, ranging from several simple cone-shapes to one elaborately bladed structures  <cit> . the most elaborate darts show surface enlargement with blades that is likely to enhance the transfer of gland product. we therefore predict that dart elaboration should covary with allohormone production, which should be mirrored in the gland morphology as surface enlargement. moreover, the dart specializations that enhance gland product transfer are potentially more successful at manipulating fertilization. if so, adaptations to counteract this effect are expected, which could give rise to a co-evolutionary arms race. these predictions are tested here using a comparative analysis of dart-possessing land snail species. note that we are only focussing on the helicoidea superfamily; we do not include species with non-homologous dart-like structures . because the phylogeny of land snails is heavily based on reproductive morphology  <cit> , we first reconstructed an independent phylogeny based on part of the 28s ribosomal rna  gene  <cit> . our findings represent the first comprehensive comparative analysis of reproductive organ characteristics in simultaneously hermaphroditic animals and are consistent with co-evolution and counter-adaptation predicted by sexual conflict theory.

RESULTS
reproductive organ morphologies
within the land snails that possess love-darts, there is a large diversity in reproductive structures and the darts themselves provide an impressive range of shapes. there are species with one dart, while others have several or none. darts of some species have a simple cone-shape, whereas others show surface enlargement with blades. additionally, darts vary from straight to curved and contorted. this variety in dart shapes is illustrated in the electron microscopic photographs in figure  <dig> and the line drawings in figure  <dig>  we found similar levels of variation between species in the other reproductive organs. these differences include the number, relative size and placement of both functional and vestigial stylophores; the number, relative size, type of branching, and placement of the glands; the presence, relative length and placement of the diverticulum in the sro; and the presence and relative length of the flagellum.

phylogenetic analysis
both ml and bi yielded a single optimal phylogenetic tree . these two trees had almost identical topologies. the only differences consisted of the exact position of fruticicola fruticum within the bradybaenidae, of leptaxis erubescens within the hygromiidae, the relationship of the four major lineages of the helicidae, and the position of cernuella cisalpina, c. hydruntina, c. virgata, and xerosecta cespitum in relation to each other. moreover, although bi produced high support values for a much larger number of clades than ml bootstrapping, the clades with high ml bootstrap scores also always had high bi posterior probabilities . furthermore, the four main families were all correctly identified . the only exception being that polymita picta was not grouped with the other species of the helminthoglyptidae. however, this taxon is found at the end of a comparatively long branch. hence, its position at the base of the superfamily helicoidea could be due to long branch attraction to the outgroup and may therefore be unreliable.

both the sh test and bi posterior probabilities indicate a multiple origin of most reproductive organ characteristics . namely, a single origin was always rejected by bi posterior probabilities except for the presence of the diverticulum when monophyly was assumed within each of the four main families . the sh test did not confirm a single origin of the number of blades on the darts, the number of stylophores and glands, and the shape of glands if monophyly was assumed across all land snails. however, when monophyly was only hypothesized to occur within the four main families, then the sh test only rejected it for the stylophore number and the shape of the glands.

the following ancestral states were assumed: zero darts, no blades on the dart, no perpendicular blades on the blades, two functional and two vestigial stylophores, many tubular glands, a simple gland shape, and absence of the flagellum of the penis and diverticulum of the spermatophore-receiving organs. abbreviations: -ln l, negative natural logarithmic likelihood value for the hypothesis, as calculated from a constrained tree using ml in paup*. Δ, difference from the optimal tree; prell, probability according to the shimodaira-hasegawa test; pbi, bayesian posterior probability; *, significance after bonferroni correction.

principal component and correlation analysis
the overall pca  that was performed on the bi dataset revealed that most pics loaded positively and significantly on the first pc axis ) and explained  <dig> % of the total variance. this result suggests that the traits all covary. to examine this correlated evolutionary pattern in more detail we performed separate pcas on the data for darts, stylophores, glands, and spermatophore receiving organs  followed by a correlation analysis. these pcas permitted for successful reduction of the variable number per trait to two pcs. for each organ the first two pcs explained over 70% of the variation for each trait, regardless of the tree used for pic calculation . the interpretation of the pcs can be deduced from the inferred eigenvectors  and is mentioned between brackets in the following description of the results from the correlation analyses.

the independent contrasts are based on the trees reconstructed with bi without consideration of five cases of phylogenetic uncertainty. the table shows the loadings for each variable in the different principal components . collectively the principal components explain over 70% of the total variance in the data set . tests of significance of variable loadings represent frequency of loadings different in sign to the ones observed, among  <dig> bootstrap replicate analyses corrected for axis reversals .

the correlation analyses in table  <dig> shows the relationships between the pcs for the different traits based on the bi tree without phylogenetic uncertainty. significant correlations indicate co-evolution between organs. the correlations in figure  <dig> are also based on the bi tree without phylogenetic uncertainty, but essentially identical results were obtained for the pics calculated from the other phylogenetic trees as well as the raw data . additionally, we only show results for the pcas based on all the variables; the results were essentially identical when only the significantly loading variables were included . most importantly, there are significantly positive correlations between dart pc <dig>  and gland pc <dig>  ; dart pc <dig>  and stylo. pc <dig> ; gland pc <dig>  and stylo. pc <dig> as well as stylo. pc <dig>  . additionally, there is a significantly negative correlation between gland pc <dig>  and stylo pc <dig> . furthermore, the sro pc <dig>  shows significant positive correlations with dart pc <dig>  and gland pc <dig>  . finally, we also found that the length of the flagellum of the penis  positively correlates with sro pc <dig>  as well as with gland pc <dig> .

results are shown for the analysis based on pics calculated from the bi without phylogenetic uncertainty. *, significance after bonferroni correction.

one potential problem of this detailed analysis is that our character coding may produce a bias in the data when organs are absent, because then the organ itself as well as all related traits are scored as zero. however, this does not have a strong effect on the analysis of darts, stylophores, glands and flagellum, where there are only very few taxa in which the respective organ is absent. the diverticulum is not always present in the sro, but in a correlation analysis of the data only including presence/absence of this organ  the same combinations were significant.

discussion
sexual conflict can cause counter-adaptive co-evolution between male and female reproductive organs. although such conflicts may become costly, when looking at only one species these costs usually remain hidden because the mating partners are well adapted to each other  <cit> . therefore, an inter-species comparison is required to reliably reveal patterns of counter-adaptive co-evolution driven by sexual conflict  <cit> . the results from our detailed comparative analysis are indeed most consistent with the presence of a co-evolutionary arms race in simultaneous hermaphrodites, which has generated a diversity of dart shapes and reproductive organ morphologies. this finding corroborates the theoretical prediction that sexual conflict and counter-adaptation can play a major role in the evolution of hermaphroditic mating systems and reproductive morphologies  <cit> .

in detail, our findings provide evidence for both repeated and correlated evolution between traits associated with dart shooting and spermatophore receipt. the occurrence of both is considered convincing evidence for a co-evolutionary arms race. the reconstructed phylogenies that we used to test this, were estimated from the 28s rrna gene with different tree reconstruction methods . in agreement with previous studies  <cit> , ml bootstrap values for the inferred clades are generally smaller than the bi posterior probabilities. hence, bi support for the inferred clades may be overestimated. although bi is considered to provide a highly consistent framework for phylogenetic inference, its reliability under different evolutionary scenarios and the interpretation of clade posterior probabilities is still under debate  <cit> . nevertheless, in our study ml and bi produced highly similar trees. in addition, the results are consistent with morphology-based trees, for example all families form monophyletic groups except for the helminthoglyptidae  <cit> . hence, the consistency of results obtained with different methods and between molecular and morphology-based phylogenies suggests that the inferred phylogeny is generally robust.

even though small discrepancies existed between the inferred phylogenies, they did not seem to have a large effect on the subsequent analyses . these analyses produced consistent results regardless of the underlying topology or the consideration of phylogenetic uncertainty . furthermore, a comprehensive analysis of computer simulated data highlighted that in comparative analyses the consideration of phylogenies with a limited number of uncertainties still yields considerably more reliable results than no consideration of phylogenetic relationships  <cit> .

both the sh test and bi posterior probabilities reject a single origin of most reproductive structures when monophyly is assumed across all land snails, as was already suggested for the dart by tompa  <cit> . when monophyly is assumed within each of the well-supported families  monophyly is still rejected in some cases but with less significance . because bi tends to overestimate reliability of inferred clades , it automatically underestimates support for clades, which are not represented in the inferred tree. in this case, hypotheses of their monophyly would be often incorrectly rejected. this could be the reason for our finding that bi posterior probabilities for the specific hypotheses of monophyly were almost always highly significant, even when the sh test statistics were clearly insignificant. nonetheless, taken together the results strongly indicate that we are dealing with repeated evolution of most characteristics of the reproductive system.

using phylogenetically independent contrasts , to account for phylogenetic affiliation of the taxa  <cit> , we found clear evidence for correlated evolution. namely, the overall principal component analysis demonstrates that correlated evolution across the pics occurs on one co-evolutionary axis, meaning that the traits covary  <cit> . examination of this pattern in more detail revealed that when darts become more elaborate the number of stylophores  decreases and the complexity of the glands increases . these co-evolutionary patterns lead us to conclude that the changes enhance the transfer of gland product and possibly improve sperm storage, provided that the gland products of the investigated species have similar effects as those seen in c. aspersus  <cit> .

if inhibition of sperm digestion occurs, it will ultimately influence sperm storage and thus fertilization success  <cit> , which is beneficial for the shooter and hence favoured by sexual selection. however, the receiver's fertilization processes are manipulated by the mucus while the dart itself causes damage and may increase infection risk. consequently, counter-measures can be expected. behavioural counter-adaptations to prevent dart receipt seem unlikely because the tactile information from contact with the partner's skin, which cannot be avoided during mating, is essential for dart shooting to occur  <cit> . conversely, physiological or morphological counter-adaptations are possible, e.g. changes in allohormone receptor sensitivity, skin thickness, or female reproductive morphology. here, we report morphological counter-adaptations in the spermatophore receiving organs . the adaptations primarily entail the appearance and subsequent lengthening of a diverticulum. these changes increase the distance sperm need to travel to the spermathecae, presumably this hampering of sperm storage occurs to offset the increased sperm survival caused by the more elaborate darts and glands.

the latter change poses an additional complication because sperm are most successful at reaching the storage site when the spermatophore's tail is protruding into the vaginal duct  <cit> . the tail of the spermatophore is formed by the flagellum of the penis, which we used as a measure of the tail's length. the significant correlations of the flagellum  with both the sro and gland complexity can therefore also be interpreted as an indication of counter-adaptation.

the presented study provides a first step into understanding the diversity of love-darts in land snails and clearly raises several questions for future studies. for example, the previously available experimental data strongly suggest that dart shooting serves to manipulate the partner , whereas alternative hypotheses are not supported . although the manipulation hypothesis is entirely consistent with the results of the current study, it implies that dart shooting benefits the shooter, as previously demonstrated  <cit> , and that it also negatively affects the receiver, for which no direct evidence is available yet. hence, an important challenge for the future is to evaluate the possible costs of receiving a dart. in this context, our results also allow to choose closely related species with pronounced differences in dart morphology  for a more detailed experimental study addressing the causes and consequences of reproductive organ diversity. the examination of variation among closely related species pairs and/or within species may additionally provide novel insights into the dynamics of the co-evolutionary adaptations. finally, evidence is accumulating that not all species use their dart in the same way. hence, additional behavioural data are pivotal for a full understanding of the evolution of these darts.

CONCLUSIONS
we found support for both repeated and correlated evolution, which we consider compelling evidence for a co-evolutionary arms race. furthermore, because empirical findings are most consistent with the manipulation hypothesis, we conclude that the observed co-evolutionary patterns result from a sexual conflict. this comparative study is the first of its kind in simultaneous hermaphrodites. the results strongly suggest that sexually antagonistic co-evolutionary interactions can play an equally important role in hermaphrodites as they do in organisms with separate sexes  <cit> . as such, sexually antagonistic co-evolution may provide an important driving force for the evolution of hermaphroditic mating systems and possibly even speciation. moreover, it may also account for some of the other bizarre reproductive structures and behaviours found in hermaphrodites like gigantic penises  <cit>  and penis biting  <cit>  in land slugs, hypodermic insemination in tropical flatworms  <cit> , and body piercing in earthworms  <cit> .

