BACKGROUND
dna methylation is a central epigenetic modification that occurs in most eukaryotic organisms and plays a crucial role in transcriptional regulation. this epigenetic mark is involved in many cellular processes, including embryogenesis, transposon silencing, genomic imprinting, x chromosome inactivation, and tumorigenesis .

of the many approaches to profile genome-wide dna methylation patterns, methylc-seq is considered the current “gold standard”  <cit> . compared with other methods, this approach achieves higher resolution and more precise methylation levels at the single-base resolution. due to the significant role of dna methylation on biological processes, recent studies have focused on genome-wide dna methylation pattern in different eukaryotic genomes. to date, single-base resolution dna cytosine methylome maps for arabidopsis, human, silkworm, and chicken have been generated by methylc-seq .

the chicken , as a representative of extant avian species, is a model organism  <cit>  for studying embryology, immunology, behavior, and reproduction  <cit> . furthermore, avian species are reservoirs of many zoonotic pathogens and, therefore, studies of their genomes provide new insights into how the host responds to pathogens of biomedical importance  <cit> . although the chicken genome has been sequenced, one-dimensional sequencing information can only address a fraction of the relevant biological questions  <cit> . the chicken genome has an active dna methylation system  <cit> ; therefore, it is of interest to decipher the methylation-determined epigenetic landscape of the chicken. whole-genome dna methylation profiling of the chicken was previously conducted using medip and methyl-maps . because of the technical limitations inherent in these techniques, such as low resolution and/or complexity, only a reduced landscape of the dna methylome was generated. recently, single-base resolution dna methylome sequencing of chicken sperm cells was accomplished  <cit> . because of the unique nature of high methylation levels in sperm cells, however, single-base high-resolution methylome information on other tissues in the chicken is needed to enhance our understanding of genome-wide profiles of dna methylation in this species.

disease resistance has been one of most challenging traits to enhance in the poultry breeding industry. during domestication and genetic selection, different chicken breeds have displayed a variety of resistance levels to pathogens. for example, the fayoumi chicken, which originated in egypt, has been demonstrated to resist viral, bacterial and parasitic infections including marek’s disease virus, avian influenza virus , salmonella enteritidis and eimeria coccidiosis . the leghorn line used in the current study, which was derived from egg-laying stock in the u.s., is relatively susceptible to pathogen infection compared to the fayoumi  <cit> .

previous studies have suggested that abnormal dna methylation contributes to cancer and infectious disease  <cit> . to explore potential regulatory roles of dna methylation related to disease resistance, we generated whole genome single-base dna methylation profiles of two highly inbred fayoumi and leghorn lines . these two chicken lines have been studied for many facets of disease resistance and immune response . their high inbreeding level minimizes within-line genetic variation and their distinct pathogen responses between lines provide an opportunity to identify dna methylation differences between disease resistant and susceptible chicken lines and to explore the potential biological role of dna methylation on immune response. in addition, transcription profiling of the same tissues used in the dna methylation analysis was performed to interrogate the relationship between dna methylation and transcriptional regulation on a genome-wide scale.

RESULTS
single-base resolution dna methylome of chicken lungs
because the lung is one of major tissues where avian influenza virus  replicates in the chicken, we characterized whole-genome single-base dna methylation profiles of chicken lung tissues from fayoumi and leghorn by the methylc-seq. the same tissue samples were used in a previous study  <cit> ).

a total of  <dig>  gigabases  of sequence were generated from two biological replicates of each of two genetic lines. after filtering,  <dig>  and  <dig>  billion reads from fayoumi and leghorn lines, respectively, were uniquely mapped to the galgal <dig> reference sequence. reads including more than three cytosines in non-cg contexts were considered as non-converted and removed. then, we obtained  <dig>  and  <dig>  billion reads with an average read depth of  <dig> × and  <dig>  × per strand for fayoumi and leghorn, respectively . the bisulfite conversion rates for all samples were  <dig>  to  <dig>  %. we used a binomial distribution to identify the methylcytosines, and 1 % of false discovery rate  was used to correct it. to validate the accuracy and repeatability of the methylation profiles, we compared the mcs identified independently in the two biological replicates, and found that nearly 90 % mcg sites were identical in the two individuals within each line, but only half of the mcs at non-cg sites were shared between lines . to ensure the accuracy of our results, the intersection of methylcytosines in replicate  <dig> and replicate  <dig> were defined as mcs in each line. finally, we detected approximately  <dig>  and  <dig>  million methylcytosines in fayoumi and leghorn, respectively, which represented about 3 % of all cytosines obtained by sequencing. more than half of the cytosines in cg contexts were methylated, whereas the methylation rates of the cytosines in chg and chh contexts  were only  <dig>  and  <dig>  %, respectively . a total of  <dig>  % of all methylcytosines occurred in the cg context,  <dig>  % in the chg context, and  <dig>  % in the chh context . to validate methylc-seq results, we randomly examined methylation level of  <dig> mcgs,  <dig> mchhs and  <dig> mchgs using bisulphite pcr sequencing . of all the validated  <dig> mcgs, 96 % confirmed the sequencing results. however, none of the non-cg mcs were validated by the bs-pcr .table  <dig> sequencing results and read alignment

the chicken reference genome was downloaded from ucsc database  nov.  <dig> 

fig.  <dig> global profile of the chicken dna methylome. a the percentage of methylcytosines identified in chicken lungs. b distribution of dna methylation level in the cg context. the y axis means the fraction of all mcs that display each methylation level , where the methylation level is the mc/c ratio at each cytosine. c blue dots indicate methylcytosine density in leghorn lungs in 10-kb windows throughout the chromosome  <dig>  the positive and negative value of y axis is the methylation density of the sense and antisense strand respectively. d-f logo plots of the sequences proximal to sites of cg, chg and chh dna methylation in each sequence context



we defined the proportion of reads covering each methylcytosine relative to the total number of reads covering the sites as the methylation level given a specific cytosine. in the chicken lung, 62 % of mcg sites were 70–100 % methylated . we used chromosome  <dig> as an example to demonstrate the chromosome-wide dna methylation density, and the cg methylation level revealed large variations across the chromosome  <dig>  which was the same as other chromosomes . the strand-specific mcgs were analyzed, where two strands showed a symmetrical methylation pattern. we also analyzed the genome sequence preference proximal to the sites of methylated cg and non-cg contexts. no sequence preference was found in the mcg-flanking regions or upstream of non-cg methylation; however, the base following a non-cg methylcytosine was almost always an adenine, while thymine was observed less often .

gene methylation profile
methylation of cpg islands plays an important role in gene regulation during development, and it is altered in disease states . the cpg islands have been extensively studied since their identification more than 20 years ago  <cit> . in the present study, we characterized the cpg island methylation pattern in the chicken genome. to be characterized as a cpg island, a sequence must meet the following criteria: 1)  content above 55 %; 2) observed cpg/expected cpg of 65 % or greater; 3) more than 500 bp in length   <cit> ; and 4) for methylated cpg island, the methylated cpg/ total cpg dinucleotide of 70 % or greater. by this definition, we identified  <dig> methylated cpg islands. among the  <dig>  cpg islands, more than 80 % were un-methylated. of all the methylated cpg islands, most  were in the intergenic regions. only  <dig>  % were in the gene upstream region and  <dig>  % were in the downstream region, indicating that cpg islands at the 5' and 3' ends of genes were generally un-methylated. cpg islands in the gene-body regions  were more methylated than those in the 5’ and 3’ utr regions .fig.  <dig> distribution of methylated cytosines in different genome regions. a proportion of methylated cpg islands in different genomic regions. b relative methylation level in gene regions 



to characterize methylation of chicken genes, we calculated the relative methylation levels  in the context of gene regions and of their upstream and downstream regions. we further divided the gene-body region into the first exon, first intron, internal exons, internal introns, and last exon. in general, the relative methylation level was higher in the gene-body regions than in the 5’ upstream and 3’ downstream regions. for the gene body, the relative methylation level was relatively low in the first exon and higher in the first intron. it reached the highest level in the internal exons and remained at a high level until the transcription termination site. interestingly, there was always a sharp decrease of methylation across the exon-intron boundaries  .

we next investigated the promoter methylation levels of different gene categories. a promoter region was defined as − <dig>  kb to  <dig>  kb relative to the tss. compared with protein-encoding genes, microrna   and small nucleolar   were more highly methylated, and the trna  genes were less methylated, whereas miscellaneous rna  , rrna  and snrna  did not show significant variance  . our results confirmed that mirna genes were typically highly methylated  <cit> , suggesting that this phenomenon is highly conserved among species.fig.  <dig> promoter relative methylation level of different gene categories in the chicken genome. box plots showed the methylation level of each gene category. each category was compared with coding protein. mirna , misc_rna , rrna , snorna , snrna  and trna 



dna methylation and gene evolution in the chicken genome
to characterize evolutionary changes in gene methylation, we further classified chicken genes into four temporal groups based on a nucleotide sequence similarity search using blast against several clades in the evolutionary tree   <cit> . we used the gene sequence to construct temporal groups. after that, we investigated the promoter and gene body methylation level of different temporal groups. promoter methylation of the evolutionarily oldest genes had a significantly lower level , while the methylation level tended to increase with the evolution of genes . gene body methylation level of different temporal groups was also performed and showed that gene body methylation of newly evolved genes was higher than early evolved groups .table  <dig> 
p-value between every two temporal gene groups

fig.  <dig> 
a promoter relative methylation level of different temporal groups. the species used for each temporal group were: tg <dig> , tg <dig> , tg <dig> , tg <dig> . b gene body relative methylation level of different temporal groups



the go annotation analysis was conducted for hyper-methylated genes  and hypo-methylated genes  using wego . promoter and gene-body regions were separately analyzed. the gene list of each group is shown in additional file  <dig>  for the promoter region, most of the go groups have more hypo-methylated genes, especially in cellular development, biological regulation and metabolic process. however, the molecular function with transducer and receptor activity, which is related to cellular responding to stimuli, establishment of localization, signaling and immune system processes, tend to have more hyper-methylated genes . for the gene-body regions, almost all genes are hyper-methylated , while hypo-methylated genes, which are rare, did not show any enrichment.

in addition, we also utilized david functional annotation tool to perform the enrichment analysis . the results were consistent with wego analysis, which showed that promoter hyper-methylated genes were significantly enriched in biological processes of stimuli, such as cognition, sensory perception and defense response. in the meanwhile, promoter hypo-methylated genes were clustered in transcription regulator activity .

dna methylation distribution in the repeat elements and pseudogenes
dna methylation is essential for silencing transposable elements and other repetitive elements in eukaryotes. to investigate the effect on the regulation of repeat elements caused by dna methylation in the chicken, we first confirmed the methylation level of repeat elements and its flanking regions. the absolute methylation level  in repetitive elements displayed a lower level than their flanking regions. with regard to the relative methylation level , the methylation density was lower in overall repetitive elements regions with the exception of a sharp increase in the boundary regions .fig.  <dig> dna methylation distribution in the repeat sequences and pseudogenes. a absolute methylation level  and relative methylation level  in repeat elements regions. b promoter relative methylation level of pseudogenes and corresponding genuine genes



we then further compared the relative methylation level of different types of repeat elements  and genome-wide randomly selected regions. for randomly selected regions, we excluded repeat sequences and genic regions  to avoid the bias of sequence feature. in addition, the length and the number of repeat elements were also considered in the randomly selected regions. we observed that in chickens, all repeat elements had a lower relative methylation level than the randomly selected regions, except for mariner dna repeats .

we next compared the methylation level of pseudogenes with their corresponding genuine genes. the pseudogene information of chicken was downloaded from the pseudogene database   <cit> , and the sequence information of pseudogenes and genuine genes were downloaded from the ucsc database. the pseudogenes’ promoter methylation levels were significantly higher than genuine genes  .

correlation between dna methylation and gene expression
to analyze the correlation between average methylation degree  and expression of gene at mrna level in these two genetic lines, rna-seq profiles of chicken lungs from the same individuals that were used for methylc-seq were generated. we divided the genes into five groups according to the mrna expression level, from the bottom 20 % to the top 20 %, corresponding to the 1st to 5th quintiles. in general, the methylation degree across the five groups began to decrease from 1 kb upstream of the transcriptional start site  of the genes, and it increased after tss . box plotting showed that dna methylation in the promoter region was negatively correlated with mrna expression, especially at 500 bp around tss . in contrast, the correlation between gene-body methylation and mrna expression was more complex. in general, the expression level of the moderately expressed groups  was positively correlated with the gene methylation. however, the methylation degree in the 5th quintile  was lower than the 3rd and 4th quintiles . methylation of the 1st quintile was much lower than other groups.fig.  <dig> relationship between dna methylation and expression levels of genes in the chicken. a-b average methylation degree across gene promoters and gene bodies. genes were classified into five quintiles according to mrna expression level: 1st quintile was the lowest and 5th was the highest. the promoter was defined as the region spanning from  <dig>  kb upstream to  <dig>  kb downstream of the transcript start site. c-d box plots showed average methylation degree of promoters and gene bodies in each gene expression quintile



dna methylation differences between two genetic lines
we characterized the methylation differences between the two genetic lines and explored how these methylation differences affected gene expression differences. to identify dna methylation differences between the two genetic lines, we applied a sliding window method to identify the differentially methylated regions  between fayoumi and leghorn chickens . one-kilobase windows that contained at least four differential mcgs were identified, and adjacent windows were merged . a total of  <dig> dmrs were identified, among which  <dig> dmrs were located within refseq genes . based on these dmrs, we obtained  <dig> dmr-associated genes . combined with rna-seq results of the two lines  <cit> , the dmrs were associated with  <dig> and  <dig> genes more highly expressed in fayoumi and leghorn, respectively  . and,  <dig> differentially methylated genes had more than two-fold differences in mrna expression .

we randomly selected hck  to represent the dna methylation and gene expression difference between the two chicken lines. methylc-seq and bs-pcr validation results of ensgalg <dig>  were performed , and differentially methylated region was highlighted by light gray . we found that in the dmr, the methylation level of fayoumi was higher than leghorn and the bs-pcr validation result displayed an even more pronounced difference. in contrast, rna-seq results showed that the expression of hck was three times higher in leghorn than in fayoumi .

the differentially methylated genes were further analyzed by gene ontology enrichment analysis using david. several immune-related go terms including immunoglobulin domain, immune effector process and leukocyte mediated immunity were significantly enriched . of particular interest, several immune-related genes such as tlr  <dig> and pik3cd were both differentially methylated and differentially expressed between fayoumi and leghorn lines .table  <dig> go enrichment of dmr-associate genes

promoter and gene body methylation level were calculated separately



to evaluate the genome-wide gene expression and dna methylation differences between fayoumi and leghorn, we obtained p-values of each gene between the two lines for transcription and dna methylation by χ <dig> test and generated the distribution diagram. the results showed that the degree of dna methylation variation between the two lines across the genome was greater than gene expression variation . furthermore, we analyzed the correlation between the whole genome promoter dna methylation differences and gene expression differences but found no significant correlation .fig.  <dig> genome wide gene expression and dna methylation variation degree between fayoumi and leghorn. the transcription and dna methylation p-value of each gene between two lines were calculated by χ
 <dig> test



discussion
the stability of dna methylation plays an important role in preventing tumorigenesis and disease progression  <cit> . these results suggest that mediating gene regulation by dna methylation may be associated with disease resistance. to improve our understanding of the relationship between dna methylation and breed-specific disease resistance, we analyzed whole-genome single-base resolution dna methylomes of fayoumi and leghorn chicken lungs. in this study, we report the single base dna methylomes of chicken lungs and interrogate the potential role of dna methylation on immune response.

chicken methylomes have been previously characterized using medip and methyl-maps, which are techniques based on antibody binding affinity and restriction enzyme digestion . although both methods perform well for cpg-rich regions, they generate much lower resolution and coverage. the cpg coverage was only 32 % from the study in chickens using methyl-maps  <cit> . in the current study, a total of  <dig>  gb sequencing data were generated, and the cpg coverage for each biological replicate ranges from  <dig>  to  <dig>  % , which is comparable to both the human  and silkworm  methylomes  <cit> .

in the chicken, the general dna methylation pattern is consistent with other species. for example, cytosine methylation occurs almost exclusively in the cg contexts; gene-body exhibits higher methylation than the 5’ and 3’ flanking regions ; promoter methylation negatively correlates with gene expression. these results suggest that the transcriptional regulatory role of dna methylation is conserved among species  <cit> . for the gene body regions, we found that internal exons show the highest methylation level, which is consistent with the study using methyl-maps  <cit> . in addition, there was a great fluctuation of methylation across the exon-intron boundaries, which implies a potential link between dna methylation and splicing  <cit> . in contrast with promoters, gene body methylation is positively correlated with gene expression except for the highest expressed group. it is in agreement with previous studies that both lowly and highly expressed genes have a low level of gene body methylation  <cit> . a study in arabidopsis thaliana suggests that this phenomenon was associated with formation of pre-initiation complexes and was directed by the sirna pathway  <cit> .

the results also revealed that the chicken dna methylome has some different features than other species. previous studies showed that one of primary functions of dna methylation is host genome defense and targeting the endogenous transposable elements . further studies have proved that dna methylation is a key regulator of transposon silencing in plants, some animals, and fungi, but not in invertebrates  <cit> . in the chicken genome, the density of interspersed repeat elements is clearly lower than that in mammalian genomes  <cit> . our study showed that the methylation level of repeat elements was lower than both their flanking regions and genome randomly selected regions. these results suggest that the phenomenon of dna hyper-methylation in repeat elements existing in other vertebrates  <cit>  may not exist in chickens. the chicken genome has relatively low transposable element activity  <cit> ; therefore, we speculate that there may be no need to silence transposable elements through dna methylation in the chicken.

in this study, we compared the promoter methylation levels in different gene categories. the results confirmed that the promoter regions of mirnas in the chicken were highly methylated. furthermore, analysis of the promoter methylation level of genuine genes and their corresponding pseudogenes showed that the methylation of pseudogenes was higher than that of genuine ones. our results suggest that promoter hyper-methylation of mirna and pseudogenes may suppress the expression of these genes, which is important to maintain the stability of chicken genome. in addition, we analyzed the methylation level changes related to gene evolution in chickens. the results suggest that the extent of gene methylation level was altered in different evolutionary stages. the newer gene group had higher methylation levels in the promoter regions, while the conserved ones had lower methylation levels. this result may arise from the phenomenon that ancient genes tend to be constitutively expressed  <cit>  and promoter methylation may be dispensable for that process. in contrast, the newest genes group is more likely to be tissue-specifically expressed  <cit>  and, therefore, they may be more dependent on methylation regulation. furthermore, we found that the gene body methylation level of the evolutionarily conserved genes was higher than that of the newest set of genes. this agrees with previous studies that demonstrated that gene body hyper-methylated genes were conserved and were functionally important  <cit> .

to expand our knowledge on the potential relationship between dna methylation and disease resistance in chickens, the differentially methylated regions between two chicken lines that differ for disease resistance were identified. the many immune-related go terms significantly enriched from dmr-associated genes between the two genetic lines suggest that dna methylation may serve as one of the regulatory mechanisms that modulates immune response. of particular note, some of the immune-related genes within dmrs also had significant mrna expression differences between the two lines, including pik3cd and tlr <dig>  pik3cd has been reported to play important roles in both innate and adaptive immunity; pik3cd mutant mice showed decreased immune responses and impaired b/t cell development and function  <cit> . tlr <dig>  is a member of the tlr family and plays a major role in pathogen recognition and activation of innate immunity  <cit> . moreover, susceptible chickens have been reported to have an increased methylation level of the tlr <dig> gene after salmonella infection  <cit> . the results collectively suggest that dna methylation may regulate host immune response via modulating expression of certain immune-related genes.

of  <dig> dmr-associated genes between the two lines, only  <dig> genes had significant expression differences . this finding is similar to previous studies in which only 6 % of differentially methylated genes had significant expression differences in arabidopsis thaliana ecotypes, and  <dig>  % in cultivated and wild rice  <cit> . however, no significant correlation existed between genome wide-gene expression differences and promoter dna methylation differences of the two lines, likely because dna methylation is only one of many factors regulating transcription. finally, a large number of genes showed significant differences in dna methylation between the genetic lines, while a limited number of genes had significant differences in mrna expression . this suggests that dna methylation may contribute more genetic differences between the two lines than transcription.

CONCLUSIONS
this study provides the first report of single-base resolution methylation profiles in chicken tissues, which may serve as chicken reference epigenomes. we illustrate the regulatory role of dna methylation in controlling gene expression and maintaining genome transcription stability. by profiling dna methylomes of two unique highly inbred lines, our results also suggest the potential role of dna methylation in regulating disease resistance in chickens.

