BACKGROUND
the functions of both low and high frequency oscillations in the brain are the subject of considerable speculation  <cit> . low frequency theta oscillations  have been observed to increase in terms of power during working memory tasks  <cit>  and in power and phase-locked discharge of single neurons in a visual memory task  <cit> . in hippocampus the phase of theta functions as the clock signal for timing of pyramidal neurons and long-term potentiation  and depotentiation   <cit> . these findings may reflect the patterns of synaptic plasticity and maintenance of the memory for a stimulus. fast frequency gamma oscillations  can provide tighter control and coordination than lower frequency ones  <cit>  and are hypothesised to be responsible for higher cognitive functions such as perceptual binding of visual features  <cit> . human electroencephalographic  recordings show event-related gamma activity indicating gamma as a signature of cortical networks underlying object representations <cit> . modulation of oscillatory synchronization can also increase synaptic gain at postsynaptic target sites thereby potentiating responses to learned stimuli  <cit> .

coupling between gamma amplitude and theta phase  has been reported in both cortex and hippocampus  <cit>  and provides an effective combination for neuronal populations to communicate and integrate information during visual processing and learning. it may also provide a process of temporal segmentation that can maintain multiple working memory items  <cit> . altered coupling has been reported both in the context of human cognitive and perceptual tasks in the cortex  <cit>  and in the rat hippocampus during item-context association learning  <cit> , although how this might act to modulate neuronal activity has yet to be established.

there is still debate as to whether functionally important changes in theta or gamma involve amplitude or phase parameters, or both. some studies report that theta phase rather than amplitude is correlated with cognitive processes, the so-called phase reset model  <cit> , while others place more importance on coupling between theta amplitude and gamma frequency  <cit> . the magnitude of both theta and gamma oscillations during encoding also appears to predict the efficacy of subsequent recall  <cit>  and theta can both modulate gamma amplitude  <cit>  and the firing of single neurons  <cit> . the ratio of theta to gamma power has also recently been shown to be correlated with memory function in humans  <cit> . it is clearly important therefore that changes in different theta and gamma parameters are investigated in a number of different learning contexts to help establish some general principles and also to aid development of neural network models which can further inform our interpretation of the outcome of these changes on neural encoding.

face recognition learning is known to involve the inferotemporal cortex in humans, monkeys and sheep  <cit>  and there is phase locking between neuronal activity and theta in this region in humans  <cit> . we have therefore investigated the effects of face and object discrimination learning on theta and gamma oscillations and coupling and neuronal activity in sheep it using 64-electrode recording arrays. our results have identified learning-related changes in the amplitude of theta, the theta/gamma ratio and the coupling between theta phase and gamma amplitude. we have therefore also developed a neural network model which can effectively reproduce our electrophysiological findings. this model predicted that a consequence of these learning evoked changes in theta amplitude and theta-gamma coupling would be a potentiation of the firing of downstream neurons by desynchronizing the firing of excitatory neurons projecting to them. the presence of this predicted desynchronization effect following learning was then confirmed in multiunit activity recordings from the it.

RESULTS
visual discrimination performance during recordings
overall local field potential and mua data were collected from  <dig> separate blocks  of visual discrimination trials . during these trials the sheep were each presented with a total of  <dig> to  <dig> different face pairs and in addition two sheep were each presented with a non-face object pair . successful learning was defined as the first block of  <dig> trials during which the animal achieved > 80% and then continued subsequently to perform at or above this criterion. to compare different electrophysiological parameters as a function of learning blocks of trials for each animal were sub-divided on the basis of whether the > 80% correct learning criterion for a particular face or object pair had been achieved or not. respective mean ± sem discrimination performances on trial blocks during and after learning were: sheep a:  <dig>  ±  <dig> % vs  <dig>  ±  <dig> %; sheep b:  <dig>  ±  <dig> % vs  <dig>  ±  <dig> %; sheep c:  <dig>  ±  <dig> % vs  <dig>  ±  <dig> %. there were no significant differences in response times made by the three animals during trials with errors as opposed to correct choices. after learning, while there was a slight tendency for response times to be shortened this was not significant in any animal. respective mean ± sem response times for both correct and error choices on trial blocks during and after learning were: sheep a:  <dig>  ±  <dig> s  and  <dig>  ±  <dig> s  vs  <dig>  ±  <dig> s  and  <dig>  ±  <dig>  ; sheep b:  <dig>  ±  <dig>   and  <dig>  ±  <dig> s  vs  <dig>  ±  <dig> s  and  <dig>  ±  <dig> s ; sheep c:  <dig>  ±  <dig> s  and  <dig>  ±  <dig> s  vs  <dig>  ±  <dig> s  and  <dig>  ±  <dig> s  - p >  <dig>  in all cases). this also indicates that in general the animals were equally motivated to perform the task during and after learning.

following training, sheep generally learned to discriminate between new pairs of faces at > 80% correct in 20- <dig> trials although this was highly variable and learning could occur over time-periods of anything from 5- <dig> minutes to several days or more. in three cases  the > 80% criterion for novel face pairs was not reached even after 80- <dig> trials conducted across several days of recording sessions.

theta and gamma oscillations in inferotemporal cortex
a wavelet transform applied to each individual lfp showed substantial theta band activity across the 4- <dig> hz range, and synchronized across it electrodes, before and during stimulus presentation . there was a much smaller contribution from gamma band activity  and across the recording sessions significant  coupling occurred between theta phase and gamma amplitude both before  and during  visual stimulus presentation . while we were able to detect significant power in the high gamma range  in some recording sessions it was extremely low  and we therefore focussed our analyses on the low gamma range. where high gamma power was significantly above noise we found that its amplitude showed a similar degree of coupling with theta phase across the 70- <dig> hz range as for low frequency gamma .

effects of learning on theta and gamma oscillations
in all cases effects of learning were tested using anova tests but in a number of cases data for did not show a normal distribution and so p values from an additional permutation test  are also given where these were significant or close to significance. an analysis of theta wave activity across the three animals revealed a significant increase following learning in theta amplitude  during the first  <dig> ms after stimulus onset compared with the  <dig> ms prior to it. a  <dig> ms time window was chosen throughout for the analysis of learning effects since animals were capable of making an operant response in 1s in some cases and could only be guaranteed to be looking at the stimulus pictures for ~ <dig> ms. we wanted to limit our analyses to the perceptual processing component of the task rather than to the response phase. the observed changes in theta amplitude during this period represented an increase of 20-50% in each animal following learning . the proportion of recording electrodes showing a significant  during-stimulus rise in theta amplitude increased in all animals after learning and in both left and right it . during learning the proportion of electrodes showing increased theta amplitude during stimulus presentation did not differ significantly from chance . there were no overall significant changes in gamma amplitude  as a result of learning, and no individual electrodes showed a significant increase in gamma amplitude. the net result was a significant 25-55% increase in the ratio of theta to gamma amplitude  during stimulus presentation after learning .

in addition, coupling between theta and gamma was also strengthened after learning in terms of a greater coherence  between the two frequencies . a significant effect of learning was also seen using the mean vector length method  <cit>   and modulation index method  <cit>   for quantifying coupling strength. there was also significantly increased tightening of theta phase across electrodes after learning in the right it  where z-scores were ~3-fold higher in the right it than in the left it . a 3-way anova adding hemisphere as a factor showed that while there was no overall effect of side  or learning  there was a small significant interaction between learning and hemisphere  indicating that learning was affecting phase tightening differentially in the left and right it.

we found no evidence for extensive theta-phase resetting in response to stimulus presentation with <  <dig> % of recording electrodes showing a significant  effect. there was also no significant increase in the associated phase reset z-score following learning in the left it , although in the right it significance was just achieved with the anova but not the permutation analysis . however, these mean z-scores for theta phase reset were generally very low  .

overall, levels of theta synchronization across recording electrodes were higher in the right it  than in the left   but with no effect of learning in either hemisphere  .

correlations between altered theta and gamma oscillations and behavior
with only a relatively small number of blocks of trials being recorded in each animal for the main analysis both overall correlations across the three sheep and individual correlations were performed. table  <dig> shows that in both left and right it there was a significant positive correlation between behavioral discrimination performance in each block of trials and the theta and gamma parameters influenced by learning  both across the  <dig> sheep and in the majority of cases in each individual a similar correlation with behavioral performance was also found when strength of theta-gamma coupling was quantified using the mean vector length method  <cit>  or modulation index method  <cit> . there was a trend toward a positive correlation with theta phase tightening in the right it but this just failed to achieve significance either overall  or in any individual animal.

*p =/<  <dig> , ** p <  <dig>  - pearson correlation test

in the majority of cases we were unable to make recordings where an animal learned to discriminate between a specific face-pair over successive blocks of trials during the same recording session, although we were able to do this on one occasion for both sheep a and b. figure  <dig> shows data for sheep b which clearly illustrate that increased theta amplitude, theta/gamma ratio and theta/gamma coherence occurred immediately in the first block of  <dig> trials where the > 80% correct criterion was reached. thus changes in these parameters could take place in 5- <dig> min of trials although in most cases they were observed over trials conducted across several days. we also confirmed that in four other cases , where 80- <dig> successive trials were given with the same face pair but the learning criterion was not achieved, there was no corresponding change in these same theta and gamma parameters. this showed that the observed learning effects were not simply due to stimulus repetition .

finally, for the two learned face-pairs where we ran additional blocks of trials in sheep a and b with the face images inverted, this resulted in a complete inability to discriminate between the two faces . as expected, the patterns of theta/gamma changes in both cases were similar to those seen in the face pairs prior to the learning criterion being achieved .

interdependence of theta amplitude and theta-gamma coupling changes
since it was possible that theta-gamma coupling changes might be totally dependent upon those of theta amplitude, and both had a similar positive correlation with discrimination performance, we carried out a number of further analyses to test whether theta amplitude changes were always predictive of those in theta-gamma coupling. firstly, we found no evidence for a significant positive correlation between theta amplitude and the strength of theta-gamma coherence across the  <dig> animals . next, we carried out an additional analysis looking at changes in these two parameters across different individual theta frequencies. while learning significantly increased theta amplitude at all  <dig> hz intervals across the 4- <dig> hz theta range in both left and right it , theta-gamma coherence was only significantly increased at  <dig> hz in the left it and  <dig> hz in the right it . there were also no significant positive correlations between them at any individual theta frequency . this restricted involvement of higher theta frequencies in increased coupling with gamma following learning can also be seen in figure  <dig>  interestingly, equivalent significant stimulus-evoked increases in theta-gamma coherence occurred at  <dig> hz both during and after learning , thus, visual stimuli routinely increase coupling between the phase of low frequency theta and gamma amplitude but learning is specifically associated with increased coupling of gamma amplitude and theta phase at higher theta frequencies. analysis of correlations between behavior and theta amplitude within the three animals showed a consistent pattern between them . however, with theta-gamma coupling sheep a in the right it had the strongest positive correlations with behavior only at  <dig>  and 7hz. sheep b had strongest positive correlations in both hemispheres at  <dig>  and  <dig> hz while sheep c a strong correlation in both hemispheres only at  <dig> hz .

visual evoked potentials and mua responses
following stimulus onset there were similar peak response latencies for the vep, mua and peak theta amplitude  . however, as would be predicted from the lack of evidence for theta phase resetting in response to stimulus presentation, there was no significant correlation between the latency of peak theta amplitude and that of the mua  or the n <dig>  although there was with the p <dig> in the left  but not the right it . the patterns of the veps were visibly different between face and object pairs where the magnitude of the p <dig> component was consistently greater for face pairs than for non-face objects and face inversion also reduced its size compared to when upright faces were presented . neither the response latencies nor the magnitudes of the p <dig> and n <dig> components of veps were influenced by learning .

a number of mua recording channels showed significant  phase locking with theta in each block of visual discrimination trials . the slight increase after learning was significant in the left  but not in the right it . phase locking occurred in each  <dig> hz bandwidth from 4- <dig> hz frequencies both during and after learning .

for analysis of mua firing rate changes electrode channels were subdivided into those that either increased or decreased their mean firing frequency during a block of trials. as can be seen from the example mua response profile given in figure 2b in most cases the duration of altered firing rates in response to stimuli did not extend beyond the  <dig> ms sampling period chosen for analysis. overall, there was no significant effect of learning on the number of recording channels showing increased or decreased firing rates  and no effect on the magnitude of the changes in firing rate shown in response to visual stimuli . this absence of learning-associated firing rate changes is consistent with the similar absence of changes in gamma amplitude.

theta-nested gamma generated by a neuronal network
we next generated a neural network model of a similar size to the typical number of single neurons sampled by our 64-channel arrays . the model has  <dig> excitatory  and n-methyl-d-aspartic acid  receptors) output neurons modulated by  <dig> fast and  <dig> slow inhibitory  neurons and projecting to a single downstream neuron . by adjusting the coupling strength between these neurons we found they could indeed produce theta-nested gamma oscillations . the generation of theta nested gamma required only a weak, but present, coupling coefficient between the fast inhibitory gabaa receptor type neurons and the excitatory neurons and a strong coupling between the latter and the slow inhibitory type ones. there also had to be recurrent coupling between the fast inhibitory and excitatory cells. increasing the fast inhibitory coupling strength tended to amplify gamma activity whereas increasing that of the slow inhibitory coupling amplified theta. so the two types of connections appear competitive in this context.

effects of altering nmda receptor sensitivity in the model
we first established that the model was able to reproduce patterns of theta and gamma activities observed in the it. simulations revealed similar changes in theta power during stimulus application and at the same latency . theta activity was also strongly synchronised across the network and there was phase tightening during stimulus presentation .

having validated the model's utility we next used it to investigate potential functional consequences of altering the ratio of theta to gamma to produce shallow nested gamma  on communication between excitatory and downstream neurons in comparison with deeper nested gamma  or where gamma activity was minimal. figure 7b shows that the downstream neuron response during the stimulus is strongest when there is shallow nested gamma and there is increased theta amplitude and strong coupling between the two frequencies. with deeper nested gamma, excitatory neuron responses appear more highly synchronized and there is reduced theta/gamma coherence and a weaker downstream neuron response. when gamma is minimised to produce a very high ratio of theta to gamma there is reduced excitatory output and downstream neuron activity and theta/gamma coherence . thus for optimal coupling between gamma and theta, and to evoke maximal responses in the downstream neuron, gamma should be shallow nested on theta, producing a slightly increased theta-gamma ratio, as seen after learning.

we then used the model to investigate if nmda receptor changes alone in the network could reproduce learning-induced changes in it theta/gamma activity. it was found that increased nmda receptor sensitivity on and between the excitatory neurons  and between them and the slow inhibitory ones  could account for the enhanced theta amplitude without changing gamma . it was possible to achieve the same outcome by combining nmda receptor changes with increased gabaa receptor sensitivity between the slow inhibitory and excitatory neurons . if the connection with the fast inhibitory neurons  was also altered this increased gamma amplitude and therefore did not replicate it findings. changes in the theta gamma ratio and theta/gamma coherence seen in it recordings were also confirmed . figure 8d shows that firing rates of the excitatory neurons are unchanged following the nmda receptor changes mimicking learning but there is nevertheless a highly significant overall increase in the firing rate of the downstream neuron  and this is positively correlated with the size of the theta/gamma ratio .

finally we also used the model to confirm findings in the it that theta-gamma coupling changes were not necessarily dependent upon those of theta amplitude. to achieve this we systematically varied the strength of the connections between the slow and fast inhibitory neurons  and within the slow inhibitory neurons . simulations at different stimulus strengths showed that under these circumstances increased coupling strength could occur without any increase in theta amplitude .

temporal desynchronization of neuronal firing
the potentiation of downstream neuron responses predicted by the model, even in the absence of excitatory output neuron firing rate changes, suggested a temporal re-organisation of the latter might be enhancing their impact. we therefore investigated whether temporal synchronization in excitatory neuron firing was significantly altered as a result of simulated learning changes. repeated simulations  using the model confirmed that learning produced a significantly greater desynchronization of the excitatory neuron output across a range of stimulus strengths . synchronization levels were negatively correlated with the size of the theta/gamma amplitude ratio . an analysis of the distribution of spikes from excitatory neurons in the network revealed that activity occurred primarily during the peak and subsequent fall of each theta wave and that on average significantly more time bins contained spikes after changes associated with learning .

since our model predicted that learning-induced changes in theta and its relationship to gamma should increase the impact of the firing of excitatory neurons on those downstream by desynchronizing their output we hypothesized that such desynchronization should also occur in mua recordings from it neurons. despite the contribution of both inhibitory interneurons and output neurons to the mua, figure 6c shows that after learning there was indeed a significant overall desynchronization change across the  <dig> animals during the period of the first theta wave after stimulus onset . the proportionate change in the synchronization index between during and after learning was significant . as in the model, levels of synchronization across the two hemispheres were also negatively correlated with the theta/gamma ratio  and after learning there were significantly more  <dig> ms bins with spike activity across each electrode during stimulus period theta waves in the left it ; using only electrodes showing stimulus-evoked increased firing rates in the recording arrays). this almost achieved significance in the right it with the anova test but did so with the permutation test . there was also a significant negative correlation between the number of bins with spike activity per theta wave and the magnitude of the synchronization index across both hemispheres . finally, actual visual discrimination performance across the three animals was significantly negatively correlated with the change in synchronization during the stimulus .

discussion
overall, our results provide the first demonstration that both theta amplitude and theta-gamma coupling in it are strongly and independently influenced by learning and may act to amplify and improve discriminability of inputs converging onto downstream neurons through a temporal desynchronization of neuronal firing. the magnitude of observed changes also correlates strongly with behavioral discrimination performance. the novel neural network model we have developed demonstrates that competitive and reciprocal coupling between fast and slow inhibitory interneurons and excitatory output neurons is important for generating theta-nested gamma and that learning-evoked changes in it can be simulated by increasing nmda receptor sensitivity, as in many other learning situations  <cit> .

the time-course required for changes in theta and gamma correlates precisely with achievement of the > 80% learning criterion and since this time course was highly variable it effectively rules out any simple explanation of our findings in terms of elapsed time or stimulus repetition. indeed, no changes were observed when animals failed to learn even after large numbers of trials. it is unlikely that there was differential attention to the visual stimuli presented following learning since animals were extensively trained to view the fixation stimulus before each trial was initiated, and latencies and magnitudes of veps as well as behavioral response times were unchanged. sheep also have very limited eye movements and the receptive fields of it neurons responding to faces and other visual stimuli are very large  <cit> . while we cannot completely rule out some contribution of the p <dig> or n <dig> components of the vep to increased theta amplitude during stimulus presentations the fact that neither of their latencies not their magnitudes were significantly influenced by learning make it unlikely that they were contributing to the large increase in theta amplitude found. indeed, even the small number of recording electrodes showing increases in theta amplitude seen during stimulus presentation before the learning criterion had been reached did not achieve significance across the three animals.

to the best of our knowledge this is the first demonstration of extensive theta-nested gamma in it and we confirmed both the presence of coupling and learning-evoked changes as well as correlations with behavioral performance using a coherence method as well as mean vector length  <cit>  and modulation index  <cit>  methods. our model shows that it can be generated by a simple network of excitatory glutamatergic pyramidal neurons and slow and fast inhibitory gabaa receptor interneurons that are likely to be present in this as in other brain regions  <cit> . in the model each module of one excitatory neuron and its two inhibitory neurons is capable of generating theta-nested gamma, so our findings are not dependent upon model size. that both slow and fast inhibitory interneurons are required for the generation of theta-nested gamma confirms a previous prediction  <cit> , although differs from another study in the hippocampus suggesting that h-currents generated in oriens-lacunosum interneurons are important  <cit> .

although theta amplitude changes can enhance the strength of theta-gamma coupling by making theta phase more detectable  <cit>  we have shown that learning effects on theta amplitude and theta gamma coupling in it can be dissociated in terms of which theta frequencies are involved. thus, whereas behaviorally correlated changes in theta amplitude occurred across the 4- <dig> hz range, those in coupling with gamma only occurred at  <dig> hz  or  <dig> hz . there were also no positive correlations between changes in theta amplitude and in theta-gamma coherence. interestingly, in comparison with lower theta frequencies , higher ones  are resistant to cholinergic drugs  <cit> . this might suggest a non-cholinergic mechanism for theta-nested gamma. in any event, learning evoked changes in theta amplitude and theta-gamma coupling in the it clearly exhibit a degree of independence and may have separate functional significance. this is supported by a recent study reporting increased theta-gamma coupling in the hippocampus following item-context association learning in rats, but without changes in theta amplitude  <cit> .

learning evoked increases in the theta-gamma ratio in the present study were strongly correlated with both behavioural performance and also with desynchronization in both our network model and the it. this appears contradictory with recent human findings that an increased theta-gamma ratio is found in individuals with significant cognitive impairment  <cit> . however, our network model shows that when large increases in this ratio are generated , similar to those reported in humans with cognitive impairment, then this results in reduced theta amplitude changes, weaker coupling between theta and gamma and also reduced firing in both excitatory output and downstream neurons in response to stimuli. it therefore seems probable that while small increases in the theta-gamma ratio are indicative of successful learning, very large increases are more likely to reflect learning impairment.

we have found no evidence to support a key role for resetting of theta phase in cortical information processing contrary to some previous studies  <cit> . the virtual absence of phase resetting supports the notion that event-related potentials are not generated by the phase resetting of oscillatory activity as has been proposed  <cit> . a previous study has also failed to find evidence for phase-resetting by visual stimuli  <cit> . an obvious role for phase resetting by an external stimulus is to synchronize oscillations across a wide network; however in our it recordings we always found very high levels of synchronization in ongoing theta activity, so there would have been no real advantage in this respect if learning had resulted in stronger phase resetting.

the lack of any alteration in the amplitude of gamma oscillations following learning is in-line with our failure to find any change in stimulus-evoked neuronal firing rates in the it following learning. indeed, previous research in monkeys has also failed to find evidence for reward-associated learning changes in firing rates of individual it neurons  <cit>  and there is evidence in both sheep  <cit>  and monkey  <cit>  it for population-based encoding. there was also no evidence for learning effects on latencies or magnitudes of the p <dig> and n <dig> components of the vep in it so vep changes are unlikely to have contributed to any learning effects on phase locking  <cit> . there was some indication that the magnitude of the p <dig> was increased in response to upright face pairs compared to inverted face pairs or upright non-face objects. this latter observation is similar to the face sensitive p <dig> in humans  <cit>  and the n <dig> component in monkeys  <cit>  and humans  <cit> . some studies have reported increased magnitude of various vep components as a function of face familiarity  <cit> , and in response to visual tetanic stimulation  <cit> , although not in the context of learning visual discrimination between pairs of objects used in the current study.

no differential learning effects were observed between the two brain hemispheres in the mua and lfp parameters measured in current study. however, we have also analysed our lfp data using novel causality algorithm approaches and shown that learning reduces the strength of causal connections from the left to the right it and increases the frequency of causal connections within the right it  <cit> . this increased connectivity may partly explain our observation here that only the right it shows significant strengthening of the regularity of theta phase following learning. it is notable in this context too that in general the right it showed significantly higher levels of theta synchronization than the left.

the presence of phase-locking between theta and mua in the it is in agreement with a recent study in humans  <cit>  and phase locking has been reported in other neocortical areas in monkeys  <cit> . there was also a tendency for this to increase in it following learning and a recent study has reported increased phase locking of neuronal activity with theta in human temporal lobe neurons after learning  <cit> . the presence of extensive phase locking between theta and neuronal spiking activity in the it provides a potential mechanism whereby altered theta activity following learning could modulate neuronal firing to produce the desynchronization effects we have observed.

although increased theta amplitude and theta gamma coupling might have been expected to lead to tighter control and greater synchronization in neuronal firing our model shows this is not the case. indeed, a recent study on visual cortex neurons has also reported visual stimulus-evoked decorrelation  <cit> . the large changes in theta activity observed would act to modulate the firing thresholds of the output neurons cells across the network. this would inevitably increase the variability in theta activity across the network leading to a wider range of firing thresholds and neurons being less likely to fire synchronously. this is supported by our model and it findings showing that neural spike activity is more spread out in time during theta waves in the stimulus period following learning.

the prediction from our model that increased desynchronization in it output neurons would enhance responses by downstream target neurons might also seem counter-intuitive. however, the more synchronized are the outputs from excitatory neurons converging onto a downstream neuron, the more information can potentially be lost as more excitatory post synaptic potentials  are generated than are necessary to cause the downstream neuron to fire. where epsps generated are more separated in time they are less likely to be rendered impotent by refractory period limitations and contribute more efficiently towards eliciting responses by the downstream neuron. spreading the temporal pattern of inputs reaching the downstream neuron would also enhance the information content of the inputs it is required to decode

it would clearly be difficult to test the above model prediction directly in vivo without being able to make simultaneous recordings from multiple connected neurons in say it and the frontal cortex. however, our combined in vivo and model simulation findings do provide a mechanism for how learning induced changes in theta amplitude and theta-nested gamma could modulate temporal aspects of neuronal firing in neocortical networks such that downstream networks exhibit potentiated responses even in the absence of altered firing frequencies arriving from neuronal inputs.

CONCLUSIONS
face discrimination learning produces significant increases in the magnitude of theta amplitude and the theta-gamma ratio and the strength of theta-gamma coupling in the inferotemporal cortex. importantly these changes are all significantly correlated with actual behavioral performance and theta amplitude and theta-gamma coupling changes appear to occur independently. interestingly, learning did not produce significant changes in it neuronal firing frequencies although neuronal firing was often coupled to theta-phase. the network model which we have developed to reproduce these changes suggests that a key function of such learning-evoked changes in theta amplitude, the theta-gamma ratio and theta-gamma coupling may be to increase temporal desynchronization in neuronal firing leading to optimal timing of inputs to downstream neural networks and thereby potentiating their responses. the model's efficacy was supported by the fact that this temporal desynchronization was confirmed in our it recordings following learning. an important functional consequence of the learning evoked changes in theta and gamma we have found in may therefore be to potentiate responses by neurons in it projection regions to learned visual stimuli through a slight temporal desynchronization of firing by it output neurons.

