BACKGROUND
the study of mammalian transcription based on high throughput gene expression data has primarily focused on the identification of individual differentially expressed genes, co-regulated gene sets and genes with inferred functional similarity based on co-expression under various conditions. investigators have identified functional modules from gene expression data using a reverse-engineering approach to reveal regulatory subunits, based on probabilistic graphical models  <cit> , singular value decomposition  <cit>  and network component analysis  <cit> , as well as various other methods. methodologies for reconstructing and inferring elements of genetic and metabolic networks  <cit> , identifying new gene modules  <cit>  and statistically characterizing topological network features are the focus of much research  <cit> , especially for model organisms. recent advances in network analysis have focused on topological changes and static and dynamical network properties in yeast and e coli  <cit> .

there has been extensive study of expression patterns of genes which can discriminate between normal and cancer specimens, separate different tumor types or predict clinical outcome , including in the context of networks  <cit> . the study of transcriptional networks has been facilitated by the incorporation of both dna-protein binding data  <cit>  as well as the computational prediction of binding sites, based primarily on methods using position weighted matrices   <cit> .

in the present work we constructed human transcriptional regulatory networks of the whole genome by combining evidence of co-expression in microarray datasets with transcription factor-gene regulatory relationships based on sequence predictions and literature based evidence. in these studies we revealed condition specific  networks in order to discover network features that can shed light on unique transcriptional processes associated with a particular phenotype. we studied the extent to which networks vary between different phenotypes. specifically, we explored network features in different cell types such as normal versus cancer specimens, and in specimens from patients whose disease recurs versus those remaining disease free.

RESULTS
network construction
we constructed regulatory networks by intersecting a connectivity network  with co-expression networks . construction of these networks is depicted in fig.  <dig>  the connectivity network was derived by a) matching known tf binding sites to the promoter regions of genes , and b) literature-based known tf-target gene interactions which are included in the transfac database. in addition, we note that limited chlp-on-chip data have recently been included in transfac. for data derived from each microarray , we constructed a co-expression network, such that each tf-gene pair was assigned a co-expression value; - <dig> if the tf is up-regulated while the target gene is down-regulated, + <dig> if they are both up-regulated and  <dig> otherwise. condition specific  transcriptional regulatory networks are derived from the intersection between the connectivity and individual co-expression networks. details of construction of the networks are described in the methods section below.

the cs networks we studied were drawn from six gene expression studies using three types of datasets; data derived from normal cell lineages  <cit> , tumors versus normal tissues  <cit> , and disease-specific tumors associated with variable clinical outcomes  <cit> . the sizes of the networks were dependent on the number of known genes in the particular microarray platform, and ranged from  <dig> genes and  <dig> tfs on the earliest affymetrix array to  <dig> genes and  <dig> tfs on the affymetrix u133a and b arrays. different microarray platforms contain different sets of genes. to construct each of these cs networks, we used a subset  of the connectivity network that only contains the genes and tfs that are present in a particular microarray platform. the total "density" of these connectivity sub-networks  was very similar for all platforms, ranging between  <dig> % and  <dig> %. with the expression thresholds we chose for the cs network construction, the fraction of connections ranged from  <dig> % to 1% in the cs networks.

we examined the robustness of our general results by studying a range of values for the parameters used in constructing the connectivity networks, including the extent of upstream promoter region sequences , different tf binding profiles  as well as transfac thresholds for determining a protein-dna binding site . all results reported here were generated by using sequences  <dig> bp upstream of refseq identified transcription start sites and using a standard profile provided by transfac intended to minimize false positives.

classification based on regulatory network features
we hypothesized that each individual sample from a cohort of heterogeneous cancer patients has a distinct regulatory network, i.e., a pattern of activated links that gives rise to its gene expression profile. based on this hypothesis, we explored how different aspects of network structure characterize different phenotypes.

link-based classification
we introduced a network based classification approach that examines differences between patient samples by analyzing the activity status of regulatory links between genes. we constructed networks unique to individual patients, e.g. for individual patients with disease recurrence and for patients with no recurrence. this enables us to identify specific parts of the networks, which are differentially regulated between these conditions. the added value of this network-based classification is our ability to identify coordinated co-regulation of tf-gene pairs that are present only in survivors or only in non-survivors.

in the link-based approach, we attempted to discriminate between samples using differential tf-gene activity instead of using standard discrimination by gene expression profiling. a network is comprised of links and nodes. in our link-based approach, the activities of a network's links, which represent a tf regulating a gene, are used for classification, instead of using properties of the individual nodes.

degree-based classification
we further classified our samples by using another topological property of the networks, the "centrality" of individual genes in the networks. several measures of centrality have been defined  <cit> ; here we report results using a centrality measure defined by the degree of nodes in the regulatory networks, the number of tfs activating or suppressing a particular gene  or number of genes regulated by a single tf . specifically, instead of characterizing a sample by a gene expression profile, we use a sample's genome wide degree profile. we surmise that identifying the nodes with the largest changes in gene centrality  will assist us in detecting hotspots associated with deregulation, leading to understanding disease processes at a transcriptional level.

sample classification
for each of the datasets described we created regulatory networks for every sample and applied a meta-classifier  that in the first step ranks the features  to identify the set of tf-gene links that collectively separate between classes . our purpose was to find network features that classify different phenotypes, rather than to derive a classifier that is superior to commonly used classifiers based solely on gene profiling. we reasoned that the discriminating network features would be useful to explore changes in regulatory mechanisms. nevertheless, our link-based classifiers compared favorably with gene profiling classifiers.

using the training sets, we performed feature selection to rank the links, genes and degree of the nodes that undergo the most substantial change between two phenotypes such as distinct blood cell types, different categories of leukemia, normal kidney versus renal carcinoma and breast cancer patients whose disease recurs versus those remaining disease free. specifically, we studied three groups of datasets. in the first group we studied the following two-class datasets: a) acute lymphoblastic leukemia versus acute myeloid leukemia  <cit> , b) two different myeloid leukemia types defined by the presence of two oncogeneic fusion proteins  versus rar-pml, t)  <cit> . in the second group, we analyzed several breast cancer datasets involving heterogeneous populations of patients with different outcomes   <cit> . the third group includes different matched cell types .

to perform the link-based classification, we then passed the top links  to train a base classifier  using the training data only. to estimate the cross validation error rate of the classifier in the reduced feature space, we performed ten-fold cross validation ten times using ten different seeds. we note that for error estimation, cross-validation is performed with features selected from the training set only at each step in the cross-validation procedure, to avoid an optimistic bias in the accuracy estimates  <cit> . to compare the performance of the link-based classification an expression based analysis for identification of differentially expressed genes has been implemented using equivalent feature selection and machine learning procedures. similarly, we formed a genome-wide profile indicating the in-degree  for all genes or out-degree for all tfs in each individual network, and searched for the subset of genes or tfs whose centrality measure is altered significantly between the two classes. the results using the same procedures for these three types of input data  are presented in tables  <dig>   <dig> 

for the leukemia datasets, linked-based sample separation of different lineages , and of two types of myeloid leukemia, was quite effective, with estimated classification error rates of 9% and 6%, respectively. likewise, we were able to partition these data based on the genome-wide in degree profile of all the nodes in the regulatory networks with cross validated classification errors of 4% and 0% respectively, similar to error rate estimates obtained using gene expression levels of individual genes.

for the breast cancer datasets, the classification performance based on links, expression profiles or gene centralities was much weaker with error rates ranging from 17%-25% in the duke dataset to 39%-43% in the dutch dataset, reflecting the increased tumor heterogeneity in these populations. due to the fact that many links in the connectivity network are inferred by using in silico matching between pwms and promoter regions and the additional discretization  steps involved in the construction of the cs regulatory networks, we may add some noise to the data, and expect some information loss respectively. indeed, in some datasets the observed error rates obtained when using the link-based classifiers are slightly higher than those obtained by gene profiling, but are still in the same ballpark. however, when we classified the datasets using the in-degree profiles  we observed that in some datasets the error rates are slightly lower than those obtained by gene profiling. the degree of a gene is defined by the number of links associated with it, and therefore the collective information about the condition specific activity of multiple links associated with a gene may compensate the potential sources of noise and loss of information mentioned above.

for the datasets composed of distinctly different cell types, the network-wide status of link activities enabled us to cleanly discriminate between these cells with 0% cross validation error rates. equivalent error rates with ten fold cross-validation were also obtained using the cs gene degree profiles or gene expression profiles.

we display the differences between the regulatory network structures by drawing a graph which includes the top differentially activated links that discriminated between the two classes, e.g. the aml and all. we note that the network structures in each of these states contain many more regulatory links , which makes them inscrutable upon visual display, whereas a graph as the one shown in fig.  <dig> highlights the links that undergo changes between the networks that correspond to the two phenotypes.

for example, this graph suggests that the regulation of rag <dig>  by runx1/cbfb  is a crucial link differentiating aml and all. rag <dig> is known to be expressed in a stage-specific manner in various types of all   <cit> . yannoutsos et al recently demonstrated that an intergenic silencer which suppresses expression of rag <dig> in developing lymphocytes is dependent on occupation of the runx binding sites  <cit> . the regulation by rara  of a set of genes involved in myeloid maturation is also identified . rara is known to be up-regulated in some types of aml  <cit> .

using a separate leukemia dataset we examined the differences in regulatory network structures which best discriminated a set of leukemia samples identified by translocations involving the aml1-eto fusion gene versus those with translocations involving the pml-rar fusion gene. key links, which differentiated these two types of leukemia, included the regulation of the fusion protein runx1t <dig>  we note that our algorithm would not be able to distinguish whether abnormal regulation of a gene in one class was due to mutations or epigenetic modifications of the target gene, as opposed to a change in cis-regulatory transcriptional control.

in analogy to standard microarray analyses in which the genes that separate two populations are presented in heatmaps, we identify and display tf-gene pairs that are predominantly linked in networks associated with one of the classes, but not in the networks of the other class. table  <dig> shows examples of these differentially active links. fig.  <dig> shows the separation of aml samples using the combined tf-gene pair activities. for example the regulatory tf-gene pair myc→hla-dma is more active in aml involving the fusion protein aml/eto than in aml involving the fusion protein rar/pml. the binding of myc to hla-dma has been demonstrated in a study of the regulatory role for c-myc in burkitt's lymphoma cells  <cit> . fig.  <dig> shows the separation of the same aml populations using a classification scheme based on the changes  of the in-degree of all genes. we note that the in/out degree measure of a given node is obtained by summing the relevant row/column of the regulatory network, and therefore it can be positive or negative. this is determined by whether the regulators that control the target gene  are mostly stimulatory or inhibitory.

our analysis suggests that a direct link from nfkb <dig> to f <dig>  is among the top links that discriminate between the two types of myeloid leukemia. constitutive expression of f <dig> by acute promyelocytic leukemia  cells is thought to contribute to the common coagulation complications of this disorder. the expression of the apl specific pml/raralpha fusion oncoprotein results in induction of f <dig> mrna and promoter activity. djordjevic et al  <cit>  have recently drawn attention to the role of nfkb binding sites in the promoter region of f <dig>  using human smooth muscle cells. they demonstrated that f <dig> mrna and protein expression and surface procoagulant activity were increased in response to thrombin, primarily involving a sequence between - <dig> and - <dig> bp containing a distal, nuclear factor-kappab -dependent element. these findings raise the possibility that this direct link of nfkb→f <dig> could also be highly relevant to the f <dig> mrna and protein expression and procoagulant activity involved in the clinically important coagulopathy in apl. the link between egr1→f <dig> also was noted to be important in our analysis. the regulation of tg by egr- <dig> has been well documented  <cit> , although its relevance in leukemia has yet to be determined.

in fig.  <dig> we show only links with an information gain score >  <dig> . another regulatory link identified as an important discriminator between the two types of leukemia, with a score just below this cutoff, involves the c/ebp alpha  regulating ppar-gamma . cebpa is a transcription factor known to be involved in regulating granulocytic differentiation and proliferation of myeloid progenitors . it is downregulated by the aml1-eto fusion transcript in t leukemia. furthermore, its role in regulating pparg  is well documented in adipocyte development and bone marrow stromal cells. although the relationship is highly complex and involves other c/ebp factors, there is strong evidence of direct regulation of pparg  <cit> . our findings suggest that the role of this direct link may deserve further evaluation in leukemia.

parameter selection
we examined the robustness of our results by studying a range of values for the parameters used in constructing the connectivity networks and performing classification based on network features.

the parameters we used to determine up- or down-regulation in the co-expression networks in this work were at the 80th and 20th percentile of expression levels respectively or, for affymetrix data, at absolute expression intensities of  <dig> and  <dig>  to demonstrate the effect of these cutoffs on the classification performance we studied the leukemia dataset. table  <dig> shows how the classification error rates depend on these parameters. in cases in which we use a ranking procedure to select the most discriminative features , we show that networks generated using more extreme cutoffs  are associated with larger error rates. networks generated using less extreme values than the 80th and 20th percentile  have similar error rates. we opted to use the 80th and 20th percentile cutoffs, as the frequency of false positive links in these less dense networks is lower. for the purposes of classification and localization analyses described below, we also studied cs networks using continuous co-expression and binding data. nominal and continuous variables yielded similar results, as shown in table  <dig>  our continuous co-expression matrix was constructed by preprocessing the gene expression data g by the following transformation: g = tanh, where μ is the average of the expression level of all genes across all experiments and δ is the corresponding inter-quartile range.

in table  <dig> we show how variations in the parameters for connectivity network construction affect classification performance. the genomic region searched for tf binding sites was either  <dig> bp or  <dig> bp upstream of known genes. two different collections of pwms were used: 1) all the matrices provided by transfac relevant to mammalian genes, or 2) the selection of pwms identified by transfac as 'high quality'.

cross-platform analysis
we examined whether the differentiating features found in networks constructed using one microarray study also differentiate between the networks constructed using another independent microarray study performed on another microarray platform  <cit> . we studied two acute myeloid leukemia datasets  <cit> . although one of the datasets was small , they both contained samples from untreated patients at initial diagnosis with well-defined subtypes based on the presence of well-documented fusion genes. in addition they used closely related platforms , for which most of the genes represented in the probe-sets for the older generation array are also represented in the newer u133a chip that was used in the larger dataset. we trained a classifier on the larger dataset by constructing networks using the subset of genes that was present on both the u <dig> and u133a platforms and used the top separating features to test its performance on the smaller leukemia dataset using u <dig> microarray gene profiles. we found that the cross- platform error rate was 11%, which is only 2% more than within platform cross validation. we note that many probesets, which allowed perfect separation of subtypes on the larger dataset, are missing on the older array, and therefore the performance of the classifier based on the subset of u <dig> genes is a bit inferior to the classifier that utilizes all the genes on the u <dig> chip. interestingly, the network features actually performed somewhat better than gene expression profiles alone in the cross-platform evaluation. although the sample size is small and we do not claim that network features are superior to gene expression levels, this adds additional support for the conclusion that there is useful information in the network features.

network proximity of gene sets
we subsequently explored whether differentially expressed genes are close neighbors in these transcriptional regulatory networks. we studied the dispersion or localization of differentially expressed gene sets in the network, as illustrated in the schema of fig.  <dig>  our rationale was that concentration of these genes in focal regions, rather than delocalization over the entire network, might suggest strategies for interventions or further experimentation, not apparent from a perspective outside of the network context. although prior functional relationships among genes may not be annotated in existing databases, they may share common regulators that affect them directly or indirectly via short regulatory paths within the condition specific  network. we note that for the cs networks we used a binary version of the adjacency matrices, which only takes into account the presence or absence of a regulatory relationship between a tf and its target gene. to measure distances we did not differentiate between stimulatory and inhibitory relationships.

we first constructed a "class collective" cs network for each phenotype by aggregating individual networks derived from samples of the same type and retaining links that appear to be active in at least 25% of the samples. for instance, for the dataset of all and aml patients we derived two class collective cs networks, one representing the all patients and the other the aml patients. subsequently, we extracted a subset of genes whose collective expression patterns differentiate between the classes  for each microarray dataset. we then computed the geodesic distances between each pair of genes in the subset of differentially expressed genes  in the class collective cs networks, e.g., in the all cs network and in the aml cs network. to examine whether the subset of differentially expressed genes share common regulators in one or both of the class collective cs networks we compared their distance distribution to the distance distributions of many random, same-size subsets of genes in these networks. interestingly, the subset of differentially expressed genes tended to localize closely on the aml network , when compared to the gene-gene distances of random sets of genes on the same class specific network. when constructing class collective networks for more heterogeneous datasets such as breast cancer patients with or without disease recurrence using the duke dataset, we also found that the many of the differentially expressed genes were concentrated in neighborhoods on the network  .

similar results were obtained for the  <dig> breast cancer samples from the dutch dataset  <cit>  and for  <dig> breast cancer samples analyzed recently  <cit> , where genes are more tightly localized in the cs network constructed from patients with recurrence . in a recent study employing rt-pcr technology, a set of  <dig> genes was found to be valuable in predicting recurrence in node-negative, estrogen receptor positive, tamoxifen-treated breast cancer patients  <cit> . since the samples in the dutch study also consisted of node-negative patients with breast cancer, it is reasonable to examine the regulatory distance distribution of this independent set of genes in the class collective network constructed from the dutch dataset for patients with recurrence, as well as the network constructed from patients that were disease free. we found that genes from this set, including bcl- <dig>  erbb <dig>  grb- <dig>  ki- <dig> and scube- <dig>  tend to localize on the dutch class collective recurrence network , but not on the disease free network. the close proximity of these genes in the recurrence network reveals "hot spots" of deregulation in cancer, not found in the non-recurrence network, and may suggest sub-networks which could be suitable targets for intervention or for further focused study.

one of the limitations in our definition of connectivity is that putative links between tfs and regulated genes are determined primarily by curated literature references or sequence similarity searches for potential dna binding sites. the binding connectivity network does not include, for instance, high throughput binding data, which to date remain relatively limited for human cells. we explored the extent to which experimental validation of binding sites might alter our results by replacing connectivity data for the breast cancer subsets with chlp-on-chip data for three tfs , for which chlp-on-chip data were available  <cit> . although these studies were not performed using breast cancer samples, several predicted links between genes and regulators were substantiated by these experimental data . the few predicted links that were not matched by these non-breast cancer experimental data are shown with dotted arrows in fig.  <dig>  use of chip-on-chip data from burkitt's lymphoma experiments leads to a noticeable rewiring of the network, although the list of tfs that link between this set of  <dig> genes did not change when including the experimental chlp-on-chip data. this rewiring could result from a) false positive predictions obtained by the match program, b) the promoter regions printed on the chip do not completely overlap with the refseqs representing the gene, and therefore binding was not observed experimentally in the chlp-on-chip studies, c) the binding targets of the factors investigated in the burkitt's lymphoma cells might be somewhat different from the targets of these factors in the breast cancer samples.

discussion
there is an extensive body of literature proposing methods for classification of phenotypes based on genome-wide gene expression datasets, and many of these have potential for addressing clinical or biological questions in cancer research. in the present study we explored a novel alternative classification paradigm, using regulatory networks. the intersection of gene profiling analysis with an experimentally and computationally derived connectivity network of binding between tfs and their gene targets offers a pragmatic approach that enables us to get beyond identification of differentially expressed genes and decipher the alterations in transcriptional control associated with these genes.

distinct cell types are typically separated by the collective expression profiles of genes identified using supervised learning. to gain new biological insights in microarray analysis several groups have proposed algorithms for integration of pathway databases with gene expression profiles  <cit> . in our earlier work  <cit>  we concluded that differences between the distinct cell types are so pervasive that it is hard to implicate a small number of characteristic biological processes. in fact we attempted to classify the samples by using the gene expression profiles of one pathway at a time  and observed that numerous pathways have differential expression behavior between the cell types. however, cohorts of heterogeneous cancer patients are much more difficult to separate than distinct cell types, even if one uses a subset of genes selected using supervised learning in a manner that attempts to minimize the classification error. in cohorts of cancer patients with different clinical outcome, pathway based classification leads to poorer performance  than using standard supervised learning based on gene expression, and does not provide clear insights into disease dysregulation. instead of combining pathway data with gene expression profiles, here we have attempted to integrate dna binding databases, with a similar goal of gaining biological insight by inferring the specific conditions of activity of regulatory links and rewiring of transcriptional control of each node in the regulatory network.

in the current study, we hypothesized that each individual sample from a cohort of cancer patients has a distinct regulatory network, i.e., set of activated links, and that this regulatory network structure can be used for separating conditions. it is expected that network structures of patients from different phenotypes will differ more substantially than network structure within the same phenotype. the differences between these networks are reflected in their topological properties, e.g., the centrality of each gene in the network, the activity status of each link in the network, the hamming distance between networks, to name just a few.

other papers have demonstrated that network properties can vary between cancer and normal cells  <cit> . these networks were based on protein-protein interactions  <cit>  or gene expression only  <cit> , whereas in the current study we construct directed regulatory transcriptional networks with information on suppression versus stimulation. here we constructed condition-specific networks for each individual patient, which we use for classification of patients within a disease population.

classification based on topological changes in the networks allows us to implicate links that seem to be more active in one population than in the other populations. these putative links allow us to infer causal relationships between the tfs and their potential target genes, and therefore can provide us with hypotheses that are not apparent in straightforward or pathway assisted analysis of microarray experiments. furthermore, by comparing the centrality of each gene across the regulatory networks of all patients pooled from two sub-populations , we can focus our attention on genes whose regulatory control  is changing in the most substantial way between the sub-populations analyzed. we note that in the datasets we studied, the genes that undergo the largest rewiring are not the central genes . central genes were studied in yeast and e. coli regulatory networks and, as expected, many of them were found to be essential, as shown in a number of knockout experiments  <cit> . however, we found that the combined expression profile of the top central genes of either of the sub-population networks is not a good proxy for the transcriptome-wide gene profile. specifically, we compared the performance of a classifier based on the expression data of the ten top central genes with a classifier derived by utilizing the genome-wide expression profiles . in most datasets, the classification error obtained using the classifier based on the top central genes is substantially higher. this might be attributed to the fact that samples of very similar cells from the sub-populations have similar regulatory networks. this implies that their central genes do not change their expression levels noticeably.

our results suggest that genes whose collective expression profiles best differentiate between relevant disease conditions in cancer tend to localize on the transcriptional regulatory network. in other words, many of these differentially expressed genes have short gene-gene distances that can be depicted by relationships such as a "sibling relationship" , a "cousin relationship" , or genes that are closely localized in an "uncle-nephew relationship". identification of these types of "families" or sub-networks gives us insight into the regulatory control that differentiates between normal and cancer cells or between good and poor prognosis patients. for instance, figure  <dig> suggests an "uncle-nephew relationship" between erbb <dig> and bcl- <dig> via myc or e2f <dig> through cutl <dig>  in addition, we can identify key regulators that impact the expression of large sets of genes implicated in cancer. for instance the cs networks for all patients reveal the close regulatory relationship of retinoic acid receptor with at least  <dig> of the genes that collectively separate all from aml .

the classification schemes introduced here utilize the topological properties of the network and facilitate the identification of key transcription factors that may be involved in gene dysregulation. typically, these tfs do not appear in the short list of differentially expressed genes obtained in standard microarray analyses, but they are still linked to many of the genes in the short list. therefore, these tfs may be good candidates for future proteomic biomarker screening tests, because a relatively small number of these tf markers  may be effective for differentiating the samples due to differences in their protein expression levels, localization or phosphorylation status.

although specific predictions about transcription factor-gene links can only be fully confirmed by further experimental studies, the success of using the networks to classify phenotypes using a wide range of cutoff parameters for binding and co-expression suggests that substantial parts of the putative networks we derived contain biologically relevant information. as a next step we plan to derive a more accurate tf-target gene binding connectivity network by integration of future chlp-chip data and complex protein-dna prediction algorithms .

CONCLUSIONS
in this work we introduced a novel approach of separating cell types by analyzing changes in the functionality of tf-target gene pairs  rather than changes in expression levels of individual genes . moreover, we showed that other topological characteristics of the cs regulatory networks allow us to effectively classify cell types and patient samples. this approach enables us to identify key transcriptional circuitry alterations by finding pairs of regulating-regulated genes, whose coordinated expression activities undergo the most substantial modification from one class of patients to another. inspection of the regulatory networks we constructed for cancer cells shows that genes that differentiate between states tend to localize on these networks. despite the limitations of the currently available data from human dna localization studies compared to that for model organisms, the network drafts we derived by intersecting expression data with a mix of predicted and experimental binding input already enable us to find key regulators and foci of deregulation within the cancer regulatory network.

