BACKGROUND
class iis restriction endonucleases  are widely applied in recombinant dna technology. in a series of pioneer studies, szybalski et al.  <cit>  showed that class-iis reases offer novel possibilities for dna manipulation, for example, a "universal restriction endonuclease", cleaving a pre-determined sequence in single-stranded dna with the assistance, inter alia, of hairpin oligodeoxyribonucleotides   <cit> , achilles' heel cleavage of dna  <cit> , a dna fragment amplification vector  <cit> , and chimeric repressor-rease enzymes  <cit> . here we use class iis enzymes to precisely incorporate modified nucleobases into dna in order to enhance its photo- and radiosensitivity.

substituting a hydrogen atom of a nucleic base  with a halogen atom leads to a minor change in the nb structure. as a result, dna containing halogen-substituted nucleobases  possesses the same structural features as the native biopolymer. owing to the photo- and radiosensitivity of hal-nb, however, such modified dna becomes more susceptible to damage by ionizing radiation and more sensitive to uv light. therefore, halogen-substituted uracils  have been used in the past as structural probes of the nucleic acid structure  <cit>  and for mapping protein-nucleic acid interactions  <cit> . 5-bromouracil  has also been employed in studies of long-distance electron transfer in dna  <cit> . the attachment of an electron to 5-bru triggers the quantitative release of bromide anions and uracil, a process that is easily evaluated. since the number of 5-bru/electron reactions can be monitored, the maximum average electron migration distance along the helix can be estimated  <cit> . recently, cecchini et al.  <cit>  demonstrated that the irradiation of double-stranded dna containing 5-bru with ionizing radiation leads to interstrand cross-links, one of the most toxic types of dna damage. the toxicity of dna cross-links is probably the result of two mechanisms: one prevents strand separation, thus inhibiting both transcription and replication, the other can induce mutations and dna rearrangements as a result of the repair process  <cit> . it has also been shown that irradiation of 5-bromocytosine   <cit>  labeled dna with near-uv light brings about intrastrand photo-cross-linking: adducts are formed photochemically between 5-brc and adjacent nucleobases.

incorporation of 5-bru in dna increases the biopolymer's susceptibility to single- and double-strand breakage induced by ionizing radiation  <cit>  and influences the rate of dna repair of potentially lethal damage  <cit> . among the main products of water radiolysis are low-energy electrons that can attach to bromouracil  <cit> . the unstable bromouracil anion is stabilized when the bromine anion is detached, which causes the very reactive uracil-5-yl radical to form. this species can attack the c2' and c1' centers of the adjacent 2-deoxyribose, thereby inducing dna strand cleavage. it is also assumed that the same uridyl radical forms as a result of interaction between uv-radiation and dna labeled with 5-bromouracil  <cit> . the preliminary steps of the photochemical process are probably related to photo-induced electron transfer between electronically excited 5-bromouracil and the adjacent nucleobase  <cit> . this conclusion was suggested by the experimentally observed strong dependence of the extent of damage on the base sequence  <cit> .

since the structural changes associated with the incorporation of a halogen atom into a nucleic acid base are only minor, nucleotides containing hal-nbs can be used by a cell for dna biosynthesis   <cit> . furthermore, the incorporation of hal-nbs in dna sensitizes the biopolymer to uv and ionizing radiation. it seems, therefore, that hal-nbs could be employed in the therapy of cancer diseases. it has already been reported that 5-bru increases the likelihood of cells being damaged by ionizing radiation  <cit> . the enhanced response of non-hypoxic tumor cells to radiation in the presence of bromodeoxyuridine, iododeoxyuridine and fluorodeoxyuridine has been recognized in several clinical trials  <cit> . some clinical studies have also reported the radiosensitization of malignant brain tumors by bromodeoxyuridine  <cit> .

with such properties, hal-nbs are potentially potent anticancer drugs in radio- and phototherapy. however, without an understanding of the molecular mechanisms leading to dna breakage their rational use is not possible. hence, before these substances can be implemented in clinical practice, comprehensive, multidisciplinary studies need to be carried out in order to elucidate the consecutive stages of the process leading to dna damage induced by uv light or an excess electron.

if the photo- and radiochemical studies aiming at the understanding and optimization of dna degradation process are to yield reliable results, we need access to dna fragments of pre-defined sequences labeled with hal-nbs at precisely determined positions. furthermore, relatively short double-stranded dna  is known to behave more like a "rigid rod"  <cit> . on the other hand, dna molecules in vivo achieve lengths of from several thousand to hundreds of millions of base pairs. hence, short synthetic dna fragments seem to be quite a crude model of natural dna, since the effects due to folding  could profoundly affect the susceptibility to damage of the biopolymer's chemical bonds. so far, all studies of damage to hal-nb-labeled dna have focused on short oligo fragments - 30- <dig> base-pairs  at the most. in this work we describe a new technique of dna labeling for synthesizing dna fragments of up to several hundred base pairs. this target has been achieved by employing the site-directed introduction of nucleotide derivatives into dsdna molecules with the use of a multi-enzymatic complex. such long dna duplexes behave in a manner similar to that of natural dna and are beyond the range of efficient chemical synthesis. moreover, bacterial thermostable polymerases are employed in dna synthesis; consequently, the conditions of dna synthesis closely resemble the natural ones, and artifacts accompanying chemical synthesis  are thus eliminated. although the nature of these trace contaminants has not been evaluated, gene cloning scientists are well aware that synthetic dna tends to cause far greater problems in enzymatic manipulation than dna obtained from a native source or in a pcr reaction. this also applies to ligation efficiency.

in the following we present details of the method specially designed to prepare long dna duplexes labeled with hal-nbs.

RESULTS
general idea
the incorporation of one or two molecules of 5-brdu per molecule of synthetic duplex taking place in the above-mentioned process is illustrated schematically in figure  <dig>  let us assume that two double-stranded dna fragments  possessing 3-nt complementary sticky ends are available. one of these fragments  contains 5-brdu instead of thymidine in the base pair preceding the cohesive end. after the ligation of i-br with iii-t, the final product is synthesized, i.e. double-stranded dna internally labeled with 5-brdu. i-t and iii-br can be obtained from fragments i and iii  using a dna polymerase and dttp or brdutp, respectively. the first base of the initially non-complementary 4-nt cohesive ends of fragments i and iii has to be adenine if a dna fragment labeled with 5-brdu is to be synthesized. the filling of the non-complementary strand with thymidine or 5-bromouridine  produces two complementary, 3-nt sticky ends. if, for instance, the 5'-yyy sequence  appears at the cohesive end of iii-br, the 5'-xxx sequence  has to be generated in i-t, where x and y are the complementary bases. thus, the 4-nt cohesive ends generated by a class-iis rease cannot be cross-ligated between duplexes i and iii unless the first base of the 4-nt cohesive end is filled with dttp  .

so, in order to obtain a dna fragment with 5-brdu incorporated into it, two double stranded duplexes  have to be synthesized with appropriately located terminal sites sensitive to class-iis reases. these duplexes are then used to generate sub-duplexes by bsai digestion, yielding four fragments: i, ii, iii, and iv. filling duplexes i and iii with brdutp  yields an internally double labeled dna molecule containing two brdu residues separated by  <dig> bp.

in principle, the same or different class-iis reases, producing 5' protruding 4-nt cohesive ends, could be used for the cleavage of pcr <dig> and pcr <dig>  after minor modification, also other class-iis reases producing 5' protruding cohesive ends of the length 2-nt or longer can be used. the choice of class-iis rease used will also be dictated by the preferred absence of its cognate site within the dna segment to be amplified as well as by its desired enzymatic parameters. however, the presence of the same class-iis site within the dna molecule does not preclude application of the method. statistically only  <dig> in  <dig> 4-nt cohesive ends in the cleavage site will be identical. because of the uniqueness of cohesive ends generated by class-iis reases, only intended hybrid molecules should be assembled. however, if the cohesive ends have consecutive adenines  and ninth  position) resulting ends will not be able to ligate after filing them with brdutp. in case of a singly labeled dna, on average  <dig> in  <dig> of 4-bp cleavage sites sequences will block the assembly reaction. hence, for the 6-bp class iis rease recognition site , flanked by 4-bp cleavage site, the maximum length of the final labeled molecule is limited to the assembly of  <dig> permissive combinations . thus the maximum length of the labeled dna molecule amounts to  <dig> ×  <dig> =  <dig>  <dig> bp. in order to overcome limitation imposed by the presence of the internal recognition sites one may select those reases, which recognize longer dna sequences. for example, sapi rease recognizes 7-bp sequence: gctcttc, thus cleaving on average every  <dig>  <dig> bp  <cit> . another solution of the problem could be the 2-step methylation method for extension of a recognition site of a class-iis reases  <cit> .

there are two alternative modes of assembling hybrid dna molecules. in the first mode, native sequence hybrid dna molecules are generated when class-iis sites are oriented toward the 3' ends of the primers used and are adjacent to the beginning of the original, native sequence to be re-joined. 5' portions of the primers along with the class-iis sites are cut off during the procedure, leaving only 4-nt cohesive ends, which are part of the original dna template . when the natural sequences are to be labeled, they must be in the form of 5'-txxxn-3', where the first x cannot be t and n cannot be identical to the last x  or the sequence must be in the form of 5'-txxxa-3', where the first x cannot be t and the last x cannot be a . the bases in the 7- <dig> positions  do not have to be identical . it is important to remember during primers design, that incorporated class-iis rease sites need to be properly positioned, e.g. offset by one base in the two primers to give 5'-xxxa  and 5'-yyya overhangs, to avoid incorporation of an additional base into the native sequence .

the second mode is based on either the 5'- or the 3'- orientation of the class-iis rease sites, where additional sequences are incorporated from the primers used  . should additional sequences be incorporated, the procedure will result in internally labeled mutant hybrid molecules. the potential applicability extends beyond an incorporation of hal-nbs for dna damage studies, but can be used to study protein-dna interaction by, for example, the precise incorporation of modified bases into the dna-interacting protein recognition sites present on long dna molecules.

design of hybrid, brdu-labeled dna molecules with the use of bsai rease
a specific class-iis enzyme bsai recognizes 5'-ggtctc-3' dna sequence and cleaves downstream at  <dig> nt  and  <dig> nt  at any sequence, leaving complementary "sticky" ends. bsai was selected for this study as it recognizes dna relatively infrequently - on average every  <dig> bp, cleaves dna to completion and is a robust thermophilic enzyme. processing duplexes with the enzyme generates two fragments, i and ii, for the first duplex , and two fragments, iii and iv, for the second one  . since both double-stranded duplexes possess the class-iis rease  site, the tetranucleotide "sticky" ends produced by bsai cleavage can be pre-programmed to have any sequence. the sequence of the cohesive ends has been devised in such a way that the first base, immediately adjacent to the double stranded portion of the dna fragment , is the same for both the first and the second duplex , whereas the following 3-nt are reverse complements: 5'-ggg and 5'-ccc. thus, the cohesive ends generated by bsai are 5'-ggga and 5'-tccc for duplex  <dig>  and 5'-ccca and 5'-tggg for duplex  <dig>  hence, the cohesive ends generated cannot be cross-ligated between duplexes  <dig> and  <dig> unless the first base of the 4-nt cohesive end is filled with dttp , generating complementary 5'-ccc and 5'-ggg single stranded dna sequences . cleaved pcr fragments not filled with bru are effectively excluded from the ligation reaction, as no compatible cohesive ends are produced. thus, to activate the final step, the missing thymidine in fragment iii needs to be complemented with brdu and the missing thymidine  in fragment i. ligation of fragments i and iii produces the new double stranded duplex, containing one or two precisely incorporated internal brdu residues . in general, the procedure can be extended, so that in one production cycle duplexes can be prepared with several different specific sequences cleaved by different enzymes, incorporating a label at more than one pre-defined location or incorporating different labels in the same dna molecule. we chose 5'-ccc/5'-ggg cohesive ends to increase annealing, and therefore to achieve more efficient ligation. nevertheless, the method is universally applicable to any asymmetric cohesive ends, as long as complementarity is generated upon partial filling. the mutations accumulating in the pcr step of preparing dna to be modified may constitute a limitation to the method if an excessive number of cycles is being used. it would therefore be beneficial to optimize every labeling reaction at the initial pcr stage as well, in order to minimize the effective number of cycles needed. the polymerase used imposes a limitation on a modified nucleotide incorporated into dna. every polymerase/label combination therefore needs to be verified experimentally.

assessing various dna polymerases and assembly reaction conditions for the ability to incorporate brdu
the method described here was used as a model for further anti-cancer therapy studies; it was not limited to the use of brdutp as a cytotoxic compound when incorporated into dna. it is expected that the different labels present in modified dntps will be utilized with various affinities by dna polymerases, thus resulting in incorporation into dna with greatly varying efficiency. reaction limitations may also arise from the substrate requirements of dna ligase. figure  <dig> shows labeling reactions performed under demanding conditions - double brdu residues incorporated in close proximity using various dna polymerases. the conditions of double labeling were chosen to determine whether dna ligase is capable of joining separate dna molecules, containing unnatural bases within strand nicks, just  <dig> bp apart. clearly, dna ligase can utilize such unusual substrates. moreover, we explored the possibility of increasing label density in dna for the purpose of future studies of the enhanced sensitization of dna and stimulation of double strand breakage following irradiation of neighboring brdu residues in dna: after incorporation, the modified hal-modified residues are separated by only  <dig> bp.

the evaluation of polymerases shows clearly that the bacillus stearothermophilus dna polymerase exo- c-terminal fragment exhibits the highest final yield of the generation hybrid  <dig> bp dna molecule , while the mesophilic t <dig> bacteriophage dna polymerase, thermus aquaticus dna polymerase, proofreading taq-pfu blend dna polymerase  and thermus flavus dna polymerase exhibit a markedly lower reaction yield . pyrococcus furiosus proofreading dna polymerase does not result in any incorporation of brdu; indeed, substantial dna losses are observed . the reaction is assayed for the presence of the final product, namely, the desired  <dig> bp band, and factors other than the ability to utilize brdutp are likely to play a role in the final yield. this may involve maintaining the integrity of 3-nt 5'-protruding dna termini, owing to a lack of proofreading activities in the case of of taq, tfl and t <dig> polymerases. in view of the emergence of new thermostable polymerases, either discovered in nature or protein-engineered, further improvements of the method presented here are possible. among the commercially available dna polymerases a mutant of pfu dna polymerase that overcomes uracil stalling, allowing the polymerase to read through uracil located in the template strand or incorporated into the extending strand could be worth trying  <cit> . to further evaluate the universality of the method beyond just a single combination of fragments yielding a hybrid molecule, which increases the concentration of the label/per dna molecule unit length for the purpose of hplc analysis, additional  <dig> bp and  <dig> bp hybrid molecules were designed and constructed. the  <dig> bp fragment was synthesized in the single brdu residue integration mode and also in the double brdu incorporation mode using bst exo- dna polymerase . there was no difference in yield, regardless of whether double brdu or single brdu/single t residues were incorporated with a one bp precision . these results were confirmed with the construction of the  <dig> bp hybrid molecule . the reaction was closely monitored by the inclusion of a set of controls at key steps of the incorporation/assembly reaction . as a result of the use of non-phosphorylated primers and asymmetric cohesive ends, the synthesis reactions depicted in figures  <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> gave yields of the labeled molecules of over 50% with no by-products.

in order to simplify the analysis of labeled species, we have used  <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> bp model hybrid molecules. however, one should keep in mind, that the upper limit of labeled molecules length is much higher. with this method, extremely long dna fragment can be obtained by means of a multiple assembly reaction .

the method presented therefore seems to be uniquely suited to the construction of models for in vitro studies of anti-cancer therapy properties. moreover, the method can be extended to protein-dna interaction studies, by for example, the precise incorporation of modified bases into dna-interacting protein recognition sites present on long dna molecules.

determination of the presence of brdu in hybrid dna molecule
the occurrence of bands corresponding to the brdu-labeled hybrid dna molecules in the gels  is indirect proof that brdu is incorporated into the ultimate product. indeed, if the cohesive ends generated by bsai are not filled with brdutp , no final product is obtained. however, when the partial filling of the cohesive ends precedes ligation, the formation of a hybrid molecule is highly efficient . thus, one can infer that if the cohesive ends are partially filled with brdutp, brdu has to be present in a hybrid dna molecule. although this indirect reasoning sounds convincing, one can also demonstrate directly that the brdu molecule is present in the ligation product: namely, hplc coupled to dna digestion down to nucleosides is a suitable method for directly demonstrating the presence of brdu in the synthesized material. since the sensitivity of hplc detection depends on the amount of a substance in the assayed sample, we chose the shortest fragment  labeled with two brdu molecules to demonstrate the presence of 5-bromouridine. as a result of this choice we analyzed a digestion mixture in which the ratio of brdu to the remaining nucleosides was the highest possible . figure  <dig> shows two chromatograms: the upper panel  corresponds to the hplc separation of a mixture containing native nucleosides and 5-bromouridine; the lower panel  shows the chromatogram obtained for the digested  <dig> bp fragment containing two molecules of brdu. the peak with the retention time of  <dig>  min  corresponds well to the brdu signal  in the chromatogram of standards . the small peak  at  <dig>  min, as well as the peaks before the dc peak, between the dc and da, da and dg and dg and dt peaks, are due to the digestion procedure, as indicated by the chromatogram obtained for the  <dig> bp fragment, which does not contain the brdu molecules . additionally, by employing the peak areas of standards and the areas of the actual signals registered for the digested  <dig> bp labeled oligonucleotide, we were able to calculate its base content: the amount of brdu turned out to be equal to  <dig> , which is quite close to the theoretical value of  <dig>  hplc separation coupled to enzymatic digestion therefore demonstrates unequivocally that an oligonucleotide containing brdu is indeed produced within our protocol.

CONCLUSIONS
i. a new method of incorporating labeled nucleotides at a precisely-predetermined location has been developed.

ii. the length of these enzymatically synthesized dna molecules theoretically approaches a multiple of the maximum length obtainable in a single pcr reaction.

iii. the synthesis efficiency of the labeled molecules is better than 50% with no by-products

iv. this method is general and offers the possibility of preparing dna duplexes labeled with a controlled number of hal-nbs as well as other labels.

v. a number of dna polymerases have been tested for the incorporation of the haloderivative brdu into dna, indicating marked differences in the ability to distinguish modified dutp from the non-modified precursor. the most efficient incorporation was obtained using bst exo- dna polymerase.

vi. the presence of incorporated brdu was proven by both ligation assay and hplc analysis.

vii. the brdu incorporation study is a contribution to the long-term goal of devising an anti-cancer therapy based on the in vivo incorporation of a haloderivative, followed by treatment with ionizing radiation.

