BACKGROUND
the number of bacterial infectious disease outbreaks that are caused by gram-positive and gram-negative pathogens has increased tremendously over the past decade  <cit> . in particular, the increasing spread of bacterial resistance to commonly used antimicrobials has led to a significant threat in hospital as well as in community settings  <cit> . genetic alterations, caused by exchange of genetic material with other organisms or through mutagenesis of its own dna, allow bacteria to overcome the action of many antibiotics  <cit> . clinically important examples such as vancomycin resistance among enterococci, methicillin-resistant staphylococci, multiple resistant pneumococci and streptococci as well as multi- and pan-drug resistant gram-negatives are increasingly being encountered in clinical settings. however, at the same time the market for research and development of new antibiotics in the pharmaceutical industry has largely evaporated .

over the years, antibacterial drug-target interactions of the presently used antibiotics have been intensely studied, and it is well-known that these agents can inhibit various essential cellular functions such as cell wall biosynthesis, dna supercoiling, transcription, translation, or folate biosynthesis  <cit> . for many years, the development of resistance could be partly compensated by the synthesis of novel analogues of existing compounds. however, such chemical modifications are finite and to keep pace with the remarkable adaptability of the bacteria and to combat the prevalence of multi-drug-resistant pathogens, novel antibiotics that target distinct cellular functions are needed  <cit> . consequently the focus in the drug discovery processes has moved from introducing structural variations in existing classes of antibiotics to target-based or whole cell-based high-throughput screening  of large chemical libraries in order to identify novel “hits”  <cit> . unfortunately, these strategies have not yet led to any major successes so far  <cit> . on the one hand, “hits” from target-based in vitro assays often turned out not to penetrate the bacterial cell and hence difficulties arose when correlating the outcome of enzymatic inhibition studies with their in vivo antimicrobial effects  <cit> . on the other hand, in whole cell based hts, most of the established methods for the assessment of the antimicrobial efficiency of compounds such as the broth microdilution, and the disk diffusion methods have the disadvantage of being time consuming . even when a hts “hit” is identified, a series of drug development procedures is required to optimize the activity and characterize the selectivity and toxicity of novel compounds  <cit> .

in recent years further efforts have been spent using proteomic, genomic and metabolomic approaches to study the cellular processes and their responses to special antibiotic stimuli as well as potential targets . these approaches demand a departure from the current drug discovery strategies which typically follow a linear process of identification, evaluation and refinement towards a more integrated parallel process  <cit> . metabolomics in particular offers a unique strategy to detect metabolic changes that occur in an organism in response to drugs and the outcome of such studies can provide insights into their corresponding mode of action  <cit> . in addition, different physicochemical methods such as mass spectrometry  <cit> , ft-ir spectroscopy  <cit> , raman microspectroscopy  and nmr spectroscopy  <cit>  have already been developed for metabolic or whole-organism profiling of the microbial response to antibiotics. in metabolomics the investigations carried out so far have focused on studying changes in the intracellular metabolism in response to antibacterial compounds. we hypothesize that a combination of intracellular fingerprinting and extracellular footprinting metabolomics approaches would give rise to a more complete mechanistic insight. to evaluate this notion, we have used 1h nmr to analyze metabolic changes in bacterial extracts and in the extracellular culture medium from escherichia coli cultures following antibiotic treatments. specifically, we have studied the effect of various antibiotics with different mechanisms of action to determine if the metabolomics approach can be used as a potential classification tool.

our results show that the metabolic finger- and footprints of bacterial cultures are affected in a distinct manner by antibiotic treatments and that they provide complementary information about intra- and extracellular modes of action. clusters of antibiotics that target intracellular processes could be separated in the fingerprint analysis. in contrast, the metabolic footprints provided distinct profiles for antibiotics that inhibit cell wall biosynthesis. finally, we incorporated our metabolic profiling data in one descriptive model and in doing so we could predict the mode of action of several antibiotics that had not been included in the original training set.

RESULTS
antimicrobial susceptibility of e. coli
in this work we have investigated the antimicrobial effect of nine antibiotics which belong to five different classes of antibiotics with different modes of action . the mic  values were determined for e. coli for all antibiotics in defined medium to characterize their antimicrobial susceptibility . for reliable metabolite identification and quantification in the subsequent metabolomics study, a defined minimal medium was necessary to limit the presence of overlapping signals in the 1h nmr-spectra caused by the plethora of nutrients that are present in rich media. the different antibiotics showed mic values ranging between  <dig>  and  <dig>  μm. since the mic value is defined as the lowest concentration of an antibiotic that inhibits the visible growth of a microorganism after overnight incubation, a concentration of 100 μm was applied for the culture experiments in the metabolomics study which is in accordance with standard guidelines for cytotoxicity assays  <cit> . our goal was to cause a rapid reduction in the bacterial growth rate but not to inhibit the bacterial growth completely or to induce bacterial cell death during the period of antibiotic exposure. to adjust the required incubation time, bacterial cultures were grown in the exponential growth phase to an od <dig>  of  <dig>  and aliquots were then exposed to the antibiotics in a concentration of 100 μm as well as to the corresponding solvents as controls. except for cefalexin, ciprofloxacin and ofloxacin which were dissolved in an acidic aqueous vehicle, all antibiotics were dissolved in h2o . these subcultures were tested spectroscopically after  <dig>   <dig>   <dig> and 120 min of incubation . control samples reached the stationary phase of the growth curve after 120 min of incubation. both for bacteriostatic and bactericidal antibiotics, an incubation time of 30 min already resulted in an inhibition of cell growth. corresponding cfu  counts confirmed that the drug exposure was below lethal levels  and all bacterial cultures treated with antibiotics showed a survival rate of approximately 100 % compared to untreated cultures. in contrast, growth curves of bacteria exposed to bactericidal antibiotics that affect the cell wall  showed significantly decreased od values after an incubation time of 60 min, indicating progressive cell lysis. taken together the optimized experimental conditions to investigate the antibiotic effect on e. coli cultures by intra- and extracellular finger- and footprint analysis were identified after 30 min of antibiotic treatment at a concentration of 100 μm.table  <dig> mode of action of different classes of antibiotics

cell wall synthesis inhibitors:

penicillin-derivatives:

ampicillin, carbenicillin

cephalosporin-derivatives:

dna and protein synthesis inhibitors:
protein synthesis inhibitors:
protein synthesis inhibitors:
fig.  <dig> antibiotic effect on e. coli.
a od curves and b cfu counts of e. coli cultures exposed to solvents and antibiotics with bacteriostatic, bactericidal and cell wall affecting mode of action in a concentration of 100 μm. antibiotics affecting the cell wall resulted in significantly decreased od values indicating that a substantial amount of cells were lysed over time course. after an incubation time of 30 min normal cfu counts were obtained for all antibiotics



to investigate the impact of different solvents on the intra- and extracellular metabolic profiles of e. coli, samples of bacterial cell extracts and of the extracellular medium were prepared after 30 min of treatment with 1 % of the following commonly used solvents and solubilizers: h2o, an acidic aqueous solution at ph  <dig>  and dmso. it is well known that dmso has cytotoxic properties, however, as it is often used as standard solvent for natural plant compounds in screening assays for antimicrobial or antiprotozoal characteristics, we also analyzed its influence on the metabolic fingerprint and footprint, using pls-da . two components of the statistical analysis encapsulated  <dig> and 81 % of the interclass variation  with a corresponding cross-validation accuracy  of  <dig> and 30 % for finger- and footprints, respectively. results showed that the lower ph of the acidic aqueous solution did not affect the intra- or extracellular metabolite composition at this low concentration. however in cell extracts obtained after the treatment with 1 % dmso, significant changes in the metabolic profiles became visible . thus, only antibiotics soluble in aqueous solvents were included in our study .fig.  <dig> effect of different solvents on metabolic fingerprints and footprints derived from e. coli cultures. a pls-da scores plot  of intracellular metabolic profiles of e. coli cultures after incubation with different solvents  in a concentration of 1 % for 30 min. b pls-da scores plot  of corresponding footprints. n =  <dig> for each solvent



bacterial metabolic finger- and footprinting
ampicillin, cefalexin, doxycycline, ciprofloxacin and kanamycin are five antibiotics with different modes of action . ampicillin and cefalexin affect cell wall biosynthesis, doxycycline and kanamycin inhibit intracellular protein synthesis while ciprofloxacin inhibits dna synthesis. to examine the metabolic effect of these antibiotics on e. coli, 1h nmr metabolite profiles of cell extracts were compared to those of controls treated with solvent . pls-da of the metabolic fingerprint profiles  resulted in a r <dig> and q <dig> value of  <dig> and 65 % respectively for the first three components. antibiotics with intracellular and extracellular modes of action were clearly separated along the first component which explained 32 % of the total variation. antibiotics with different intracellular targets could be clearly separated from each other in different clusters. comparison between 1h nmr-spectra of cell extracts derived from different intracellular targeted antibiotics showed changed levels of alanine, glutamate, acetamide as well as of energy metabolites such as ethanol, citrate, formate and isobutyrate . based on the results of the corresponding pls-da, significantly increased and decreased levels of amino acids , energy metabolites  and stress induced metabolites  could additionally be identified and quantified. in contrast to antibiotics with intracellular mode of action, the effects of cell wall inhibitors on the metabolic fingerprint profiles were less pronounced and antibiotic profiles were similar to those of controls .fig.  <dig> multivariate statistical analysis of metabolic fingerprints and footprints derived from e. coli cultures after antibiotic treatment. a pls-da scores plot  of intracellular metabolic profiles of e. coli cultures after incubation with antibiotics with intra-  and extracellular  action for 30 min. b pls-da scores plot  of fingerprints treated with ampicillin and cefalexin compared to controls and c pls-da scores plot of footprints corresponding to a . n =  <dig> for each compound

fig.  <dig> qualitative and quantitative differences between 1h nmr spectra acquired from e. coli cultures after antibiotic treatment. a + b noticeable metabolite changes in fingerprints after treatment with doxycycline, kanamycin and ciprofloxacin. bar charts showing metabolite levels of important significantly increased and decreased intracellular c amino acids, d energy metabolites and e stress induced metabolites . f noticeable metabolite changes in footprints after treatment with cefalexin and ampicillin



to gain more insight into the metabolic effects caused by antibiotics with different antimicrobial modes of action, extracellular metabolic footprints obtained after antibiotic treatment were also statistically investigated by using a seven component pls-da model with a r <dig> and q <dig> value of  <dig> and 48 % respectively . while the metabolomic profiles derived from antibiotics with an intracellular mode of action, such as ciprofloxacin, doxycycline and kanamycin could be differentiated from controls, the magnitude and significance of the separation was much smaller than that for the cell wall affecting clusters of ampicillin and cefalexin. for those profiles, most of the tca  energy metabolites were decreased while metabolites derived from anaerobic energy pathways such as formate, acetate, and acetone were increased. noticeable changes of specific amino acids and precursors in clusters of ampicillin and cefalexin are presented in fig. 4f. taken together, while metabolic fingerprint profiles extracted after treatment with antibiotics with different intracellular targets could be clearly separated from each other, metabolic footprints were necessary to differentiate cell wall affecting antibiotics.

cell wall affecting antibiotics analyzed by facs and fluorescence microscopy
to better understand the metabolic changes, we characterized the permeability of the bacterial membrane by staining the bacteria with syto <dig> and propidium iodide  after incubation with different antibiotics. syto <dig>  which is membrane permeant, generally labels all bacteria in a population with a green fluorescence. in contrast, propidium iodide, characterized by its red fluorescence, is excluded by healthy cells due to membrane impermeability. in dead bacterial cells, both the displacement of syto <dig> by propidium iodide due to the stronger affinity of the latter for nucleic acids and the quenching of syto <dig> emission by fluorescence resonance energy transfer  is responsible for the replacement of the green fluorescence with the red one  <cit> . the fluorescent bacteria were then quantified by flow cytometry  and visualized by fluorescence microscopy . bacterial samples that had been incubated with cell wall affecting antibiotics such as ampicillin, carbenicillin, and cefalexin showed reduced membrane integrity, which allowed propidium iodide to cross the membrane and resulted in a significant increase in syto9/pi double stained population after 45 min . cfu counts in contrast were still unaffected after an antimicrobial incubation time of 30 min . a comparison of the corresponding dot plots of fsc  vs ssc  for e. coli in the various antibiotics is shown in fig. 5a. all cell wall affecting antibiotic samples displayed an increase in population outside the p <dig> gate where intact population of e. coli cells is located. fluorescence microscopy confirmed the presence of a red fluorescent bacterial population already 15 min post incubation with ampicillin; these cells also showed the first signs of cell debris after an incubation time of  <dig> and 45 min in contrast to the control or samples treated with intracellular targeting antibiotics such as streptomycin .fig.  <dig> cell wall permeability of e. coli after antibiotic treatment investigated by facs. flow cytometry measurements a + b of e. coli cultures stained with syto  <dig> and propidium iodide  after incubation with different antibiotics. a forward scatter  vs side scatter  dot plot of population of e. coli cells at 30 min time point. b ratio of e. coli populations stained with propidium iodide and syto  <dig> alone post  <dig>   <dig>   <dig> and 45 min antibiotic treatment

fig.  <dig> cell wall permeability of e. coli after antibiotic treatment investigated by fluorescence microscopy. fluorescence microscopy of e. coli cultures incubated with streptomycin a and ampicillin b for  <dig>   <dig>   <dig> and 45 min and stained with syto <dig> and propidium iodide . syto <dig> is membrane permeant and generally labels all bacteria in a population with a green fluorescence. pi is characterized by its red fluorescence and replaces the green fluorescence in cells with reduced membrane impermeability. images after ampicillin treatment showed increased signs of cell debris in the red fluorescence channel at  <dig> and 45 min time point compared to samples after streptomycin treatment



prediction of antibiotic mode of action by fingerprint analysis
a six component pls-da model, based on the intracellular metabolite profiles obtained for doxycycline, kanamycin, and control cells, was built to predict the response of e. coli to treatments with streptomycin, tetracycline, and carbenicillin . the model showed a r <dig> and q <dig> value of  <dig> and 90 % respectively. the degree of similarity was used to predict the likelihood of each of the latter having a similar mode of action to one of the former . the probabilities that the fingerprints of streptomycin, tetracycline and carbenicillin belong to one of the clusters of doxycycline, kanamycin or of the control is summarized in table  <dig>  a  <dig>  % prediction was calculated that the fingerprint of streptomycin is similar to that of kanamycin. the group of tetracycline showed  <dig>  % probability of being similar to the profiles of doxycycline, and the fingerprint of carbenicillin matched those of the control with a probability of  <dig>  %. in each case, the highest probability was assigned to the training class with the same known mode of action or in the case of carbenicillin with that of the control. the similarity of the response can be visualized by comparing the predicted scores of the test samples to those of the training samples .fig.  <dig> prediction of the antibiotic mode of action. pls-da scores plot of fingerprints of e. coli cultures incubated with a doxycycline, kanamycin and h2o for 30 min . using this model as reference data set fingerprints of cultures incubated with b tetracycline, c streptomycin and d carbenicillin were predicted according to their mode of action. tetracycline and doxycycline resulted in similar fingerprints as well as kanamycin and streptomycin. carbenicillin, an antibiotic which inhibits the cell wall showed strong similarities to the control group. n =  <dig> for each compound

calculations based on fingerprints extracted from exposed e. coli cultures using a reference data set of samples treated with h2o, doxycycline and kanamycin



discussion
increasing evidence suggests that metabolomics can be a useful tool to describe the mode of action of different antibiotics thereby driving drug discovery strategies in a more integrated parallel process of identification, evaluation and refinement  <cit> . recently, it was shown that the metabolic fingerprints of bacteria affected by antibiotics with similar mode of action cluster together in statistical pattern recognition analysis  <cit> . in our study we investigated nine antibiotics which belong to five different antibiotic classes  both by fingerprint and footprint analysis. systematically, we studied the antibiotic effects on the cellular metabolism. our results showed that metabolic fingerprints and footprints tell us different stories about antibiotics with intracellular targets and those affecting the bacterial cell wall. while antibiotics with intracellular targets showed specific fingerprints for different modes of action, cell wall affecting antibiotics induced fingerprints similar to those of control cultures and could only be separated and characterized by their corresponding footprints. ciprofloxacin, affecting dna supercoiling, as well as kanamycin and doxycycline, both affecting protein synthesis by different mechanisms, differed in their fingerprints significantly from control samples and cell wall inhibitors in the first and second component . distinct amino acid levels were found after kanamycin and doxycycline treatment which might be a consequence of the inhibition of different protein synthesis pathways while ciprofloxacin mainly led to signs of general stress response showing high concentrations in betaine and glutamate  . the unique effect of antibiotics on the intracellular bacterial metabolism allowed us to distinguish between the different classes of antibiotics that act within the cell. in contrast, the corresponding footprints showed similarities in a wide range of metabolites for bactericidal antibiotics with intracellular targets but differed significantly for cell wall affecting antibiotics as well as for bacteriostatic doxycycline . all cell wall perturbing antibiotics such as ampicillin, carbenicillin and cefalexin showed enhanced membrane permeability, indicating that membrane perturbation might result in intracellular metabolite leaking. this hypothesis was confirmed by the observation of cell debris in the scatter plots  and the visualization of cells with different shape and membrane integrity by fluorescence microscopy. since bacteria of the doxycycline treated group did not show altered membrane permeability but revealed significant changes in both finger- and footprints, it is plausible that metabolite changes in the extracellular medium are also caused by active metabolite release. the mode of action of doxycycline is based on a bacteriostatic effect which might additionally result in an active release of metabolites in the environment.

the proof of concept to use metabolomics as a powerful tool to classify antibiotics according to their different modes of action could be strengthened by predicting the class membership of antibiotics which belonged to different and known antibiotic classes, e.g. to the class of tetracyclines , the class of aminoglycosides  and the class of ß-lactam-antibiotics  . nonetheless, the use of metabolomics as a classification tool for antibiotics with different modes of action is still in its infancy. our study was restricted to antibiotics that were soluble in aqueous solutions. the high sensitivity of the method makes the use of different solvents a critical issue. since the different chemical characteristics of novel and customary antibiotics often require the use of different solvents  <cit> , the effect of the vehicle on the metabolomic profile might mask differences caused by different antibiotic classes . even final solvent concentrations between  <dig>  to 1 % in the bacterial culture which do not show any effects in standard cytotoxicity assays such as disk diffusion assays  <cit>  can have a significant impact on the bacterial metabolism and thus make the comparison of different chemical classes difficult, as our example of dmso showed. also the antibiotic effect might be enhanced and might not correlate with the actual mode of action any more. one possibility would be to add dmso in the culture medium in all experiments.

CONCLUSIONS
in conclusion, in this pilot study we have shown that the finger- and footprint metabolite profiles of bacterial extracts from cells exposed to antibiotics can be separated based on their mode of action, and provide complementary information about intra- and extracellular processes. this orthogonal information content underscores the importance of examining two different compartments - intra- and extracellular - to obtain a more complete picture of antibiotic modes of action, and lays bare the problems which can arise when studies assume footprint profiles reflect internal changes in biochemistry. nevertheless, in the proper context metabolic finger- and footprint profiles may be able to identify the mechanism of action of novel antibiotics. however, to better define the metabolic differences associated with different mechanisms of antibiotic action including differences between bacteriostatic and bactericidal action, a larger study will be necessary. to this end, the effect of additional intracellular acting antibiotics as well as multiple antibiotics that belong to the same class will be investigated on different clinical bacterial isolates in the future.

