BACKGROUND
in alzheimer's disease , brain deposits of extracellular amyloid-β  and intracellular tau tangles are characteristic of the disease. cerebrospinal fluid  is often investigated for levels of aβ <dig>  tau and phosho-tau in routine diagnostics of ad  <cit> , where decreased aβ <dig> and increased tau and/or phospho-tau  in csf are indicative of the disease. these measures are reasonably good predictors of future conversion to ad among subjects with mild cognitive impairment, but they are not suitable to follow disease progression or to monitor drug intervention. novel biomarkers are therefore needed, and evidence suggests that soluble, oligomeric aggregates of aβ could be such a marker. for instance, levels of soluble forms of aβ correlate more closely with disease severity than do the amounts of insoluble aβ aggregates in the brain  <cit> , and oligomeric aβ has been shown to be neurotoxic, lead to synaptic dysfunction and to inhibit maintenance of hippocampal long-term potentiation  <cit> . moreover, the so-called arctic mutation causing early onset ad is located within the aβ domain as are other mutations such as the flemish, the dutch and the italian mutations, and this particular mutation has been shown to specifically enhance the formation of large soluble oligomers of aβ , suggesting the notion that this aβ species plays a central role in disease pathogenesis  <cit> . we previously developed a sensitive sandwich elisa where the protofibril-selective mab <dig> was used both as capture and detecting antibody  <cit> . using this assay, the antibody used herein has been shown to detect aβ protofibrils also in other, well-known, tg-mice such as psapp and tg <dig>  <cit> . here, we demonstrate that the proximity ligation assay  can provide even more sensitive detection of synthetic aβ protofibrils.

pla is an affinity-based technology enabling sensitive and specific detection of proteins in which the detection of proteins by sets of antibodies results in the formation of a specific dna sequence by ligation of two parts. this sequence can then be amplified and quantified by methods such as real-time, pcr  <cit> . the technique makes use of affinity probes, typically antibodies coupled to oligonucleotides. upon recognition of a common target molecule by a pair of such probes, the attached dna strands are brought in proximity, allowing their free ends to be hybridized to a connector oligonucleotide that directs their joining by ligation. the reporter dna strand that forms upon ligation can be amplified and quantified by methods such as real-time pcr. the assays can be performed in the homogenous phase with no need for washes or separations  <cit> . alternatively, a solid support-bound affinity reagent can be used that offers the possibility to search for target molecules in larger sample volumes and to remove excess probes and undesired sample components before the ligation and amplification steps. this approach also adds specificity by requiring simultaneous recognition of three epitopes on the targets  <cit> . by using a single monoclonal antibody as the affinity reagent in all three affinity reagents required for solid-phase pla  we have achieved a highly sensitive assay that is specific for aβ protofibrils, with excellent discrimination against monomers. we demonstrate that pla is capable of detecting soluble aβ aggregates in brains from mice transgenic for a pathogenic form of app - the protein from which aβ is derived.

RESULTS
we have developed a solid-phase form of pla  using the mab <dig> antibody for sensitive and specific detection of aβ protofibrils, and we have compared this assay to the previously established sandwich elisa using the same antibody.

the sp-pla has been previously shown to provide a broader dynamic range and a lower limit of detection for a wide range of proteins compared to standard sandwich elisa protein assays  <cit> . using the microparticle-based sp-pla, aβ was first captured by monoclonal antibodies immobilized on magnetic particles. thereafter, the aβ protofibrils were detected using a pair of pla probes both utilizing the same monoclonal antibody as the capture reagent. this form of the assay thus ensures that only aggregates of aβ are detected. figure 2a illustrates the detection of aβ protofibrils spiked in buffer, and in 10% and 50% csf. the dynamic range of the assay on synthetic protofibrils extended over more than six orders of magnitude, and the limit of the detection was approximately  <dig>  pg/ml for aβ protofibrils spiked in buffer, and  <dig>  pg/ml for aβ protofibrils spiked in 10% and 50% csf. these results represent a  <dig> to 10-fold greater sensitivity than the mab <dig> elisa. figure 2b illustrates a comparison between sp-pla and mab <dig> elisa for detection of synthetic aβ protofibrils spiked in 10% csf, where sp-pla demonstrated a 4-fold lower limit of detection and a dynamic range four orders of magnitude greater than that of mab <dig> elisa.

since mab <dig> also has affinity for monomeric aβ- albeit with at least  <dig> times lower affinity than for protofibrils - it was of importance to examine whether the presence of aβ monomers could interfere with the assay. we therefore analyzed aβ protofibrils at a fixed concentration of  <dig> pg/ml  in the presence of variable concentrations of monomeric aβ1- <dig>  aβ1- <dig> was used in order to avoid trace amounts of aβ aggregates of the monomers, and since both mab <dig> and 82e <dig> bind this n-terminal region of aβ  <cit> . as seen in figure  <dig>  detection was not compromised even at a  <dig>  million-fold molar excess of aβ monomers. when the sp-pla was based on the monoclonal antibody, 82e <dig>  which recognizes a linear, conformation independent aβ epitope, a lower excess of  <dig> -fold aβ monomers was needed to compromise the signal.

one of the advantages of microparticle-based sp-pla compared to standard elisa and solution phase pla lies in the possibility of using greater volumes of the samples. to take advantage of this opportunity we used a modified sp-pla protocol in which  <dig> μl of a sample containing aβ protofibrils was investigated, using a correspondingly higher amount of microparticles with immobilized capture antibodies. this should be compared to the  <dig> μl sample volume used in the conventional pla protocol. in this form of the assay we achieved a further improved limit of detection of  <dig>  pg/ml and a similar dynamic range as in the regular sp-pla protocol. compared to the mab <dig> elisa this assay thus detected 25-fold lower concentrations of synthetic aβ protofibrils .

biologically derived aβ protofibrils
the aβ protofibrils in the experiments reported so far were all prepared by in vitro aggregation of synthetic aβ peptides. in order to investigate the ability of the sp-pla to detect biologically derived soluble aβ aggregates we used brain homogenates from five apparc-swe mice  <cit> , previously shown to have elevated levels of protofibrils  <cit> . in a blind-test, sp-pla revealed concentrations of soluble aβ aggregates in brain homogenates from the five transgenic mice, at levels ranging from  <dig> to  <dig> pg/ml. the samples from non-transgenic mice displayed background signals at  <dig> to  <dig> pg/ml  and a similar difference was observed using the mab <dig> elisa. we note, however, that in both transgenic mice and controls the concentrations of protofibrils estimated by elisa by reference to a standard dilution series of the in vitro aggregated form of the peptide were roughly 10-fold higher than those recorded by sp-pla . the differences in estimated concentrations in the two assays could be due to the requirement for antibody recognition of three identical determinants in sp-pla while two determinants are bound in the sandwich elisa, potentially rendering sp-pla specific for larger aggregates. when we used a homogenous form of pla where two recognition events are required to generate detection signals  <cit>  the estimated concentrations of aβ protofibrils - and possibly other lower molecular weight aβ species, oligomers - in the tested samples were in the same range as those determined by elisa , supporting the notion that the sp-pla form of the assays is limited to larger soluble aβ aggregates. to establish the feasibility of demonstrating the presence of aβ oligomers/protofibrils in human csf we spiked brain homogenates either from a transgenic or a non-transgenic mouse in 10% human csf. figure 5c illustrates successful detection of endogenous aβ aggregates from the transgenic mouse but not from the non-transgenic mouse after spiking the preparations in human csf. the results illustrate the potential of the assay to detect low levels of aβ oligomers in human bodily fluids.

discussion
despite extensive efforts there remains an unmet need for highly specific and sensitive detection of soluble forms of the aggregated proteins that are found deposited in the brain in some neurodegenerative diseases. sufficiently sensitive and specific methods could prove of great value in research, drug development, and for diagnostics and follow-up.

the proximity ligation assay has the advantage that it can be configured to require simultaneous binding to two or more epitopes in order to yield detectable signals. herein we have used sp-pla for specific detection of soluble aβ aggregates via recognition by three reagents binding identical epitopes , thus, providing a stringent requirement for recognition of protein aggregates. this form of the assay involves one capture probe and two pla probes, jointly ensuring low nonspecific background and exclusive detection of soluble aggregates where minimally three identical epitopes of the aggregated form of aβ are recognized by the antibodies.

the other salient feature of pla - the opportunity for dna-based signal amplification using real-time pcr - serves to greatly enhance detection signals from the recognition reactions. the combination of highly specific recognition and amplified read-out allowed detection of protein protofibrils with increased sensitivity compared to our previously established elisa . the sp-pla allowed capture of aβ protofibrils prior to extensive washes in a manner similar to a sandwich elisa to remove excess detection reagents and components of the samples that might otherwise interfere with ligation, polymerization, or with fluorescence detection. we used five μl samples diluted to fifty μl in reaction buffer. sp-pla served to further decrease background signals, providing for specific and near-linear detection of the protofibrils over a broad dynamic range.

the detection of different species of soluble aβ aggregates in csf could provide a means for unambiguous, potentially early diagnosis of ad. other reported sensitive assays for detection of soluble aggregate proteins such as the bio-barcode assay rely on affinity binders specifically recognizing the oligomeric conformations of the target proteins  <cit> , while in the sp-pla-based approach the requirement for three recognition events also contribute to a high selectivity for protofibril conformations. a limited study using the sp-pla tests for detection of aβ aggregates in human csf failed to reveal signals above background for either ad patients or controls, but this does not rule out protofibrils as a potential biomarker for the disease. it remains possible that further improved sensitivity will be required, or the lack of signal could be due to an inability of the antibody we used to detect the form of aggregated aβ peptides in human csf. evidence has been presented that ad patients indeed do have aggregated forms of aβ in csf  <cit> . the detection of endogenous aβ aggregates spiked in human csf  indicates that sp-pla performs adequately in this biological matrix.

CONCLUSIONS
we have established that the pla technique provides enhanced detection of aggregated aβ proteins, offering high specificity, sensitivity and a wide dynamic range of detection. this makes pla and further improvements thereof a promising tool for diagnostics in ad, and by extension also in other diseases characterized by increased levels of aggregated proteins.

