BACKGROUND
essential genes are those genes required for growth in a rich medium, i.e., medium containing all nutrients required for growth. the deletion of only one of these genes is sufficient to confer a lethal phenotype on an organism regardless the presence of remaining genes. therefore, the functions encoded by essential genes are crucial for survival and could be considered as a foundation of life itself  <cit> . the identification of essential genes is important not only for the understanding of the minimal requirements for cellular life, but also for practical purposes. for example, since most antibiotics target essential cellular processes, essential gene products of microbial cells are promising new targets for such drugs  <cit> . the prediction and discovery of essential genes have been performed by experimental procedures such as single gene knockouts  <cit> , rna interference  <cit>  and conditional knockouts  <cit> , but these techniques require a large investment of time and resources and they are not always feasible. considering these experimental constraints, a computational approach capable of accurately predict essential genes would be of great value.

for prediction of essential genes, some investigators have implemented computational approaches in which most are based on sequence features of genes and proteins with or without homology comparison  <cit> . with the accumulation of data derived from experimental small-scale studies and high-throughput techniques, however, it is now possible to construct networks of gene and proteins interaction and then investigate whether the topological properties of these networks would be useful for predicting essential genes. although many interaction networks have been built to date  <cit> , most of studies relating essentiality with topological properties of these networks have been limited to indicate what topological properties are predictive of essentiality instead of using them as predictors of essential genes  <cit> . we have previously shown the feasibility of using network topological features for predicting essential genes in the bacterium escherichia coli  <cit> . we have chosen e. coli as starting point for evaluating the prediction performance of essential genes by network topological features due to two reasons: the completeness of the catalog of e. coli essential genes  <cit>  and the vast amount of interaction data available for this organism. in this present work, we sought to evaluate if network topological features can also be used as predictors of essential genes in the yeast s. cerevisiae since most of its genes have already been classified as essential or non-essential  <cit>  and there are copious amounts of available interaction data for this organism.

for this purpose, we constructed a s. cerevisiae integrated network of gene interactions containing simultaneously protein physical, metabolic and transcriptional regulation interactions and used the topological features of this network as learning attributes in a machine learning-based prediction system. we tested individual and grouped network topological features as predictors of essential genes and showed that essential genes are best predicted by integrating the topological features in a single predictor. although the prediction performance of topological features was shown to be acceptable, we added to this set of learning attributes data on cellular localization and biological process of genes in order to increase the predictability of essential genes. we found that the integration of network topology, cellular localization and biological process information in a single predictor increased the predictability of essential genes in comparison with the predictor containing only network topological features. moreover, we observed that the predictability of essential genes by integration of cellular localization and biological process data in a single predictor was comparable to that of predictor containing network topological features.

finally, in addition to study the predictability of essential genes, we tried to define some general rules governing essentiality in s. cerevisiae by analyzing decision trees generated by a machine learning-based technique. using network topology, cellular localization and biological process information as training attributes, we discovered that essentiality depends on the number of protein physical interactions, the nuclear localization of proteins and the number of regulating transcription factors. taken together, all these findings show that the integration of network analysis along with cellular localization and biological process information is a powerful tool for both predicting biological characteristics of genes, such as essentiality, and discovering the biological determinants of phenotypes.

RESULTS
integrated network of gene interactions in s. cerevisiae and calculation of topological features
for obtaining the network topological features used as training data for predicting essential genes, we first constructed an integrated network of gene interactions  of saccharomyces cerevisiae simultaneously containing experimentally verified protein physical interactions, metabolic interactions and transcriptional regulation interactions . this network is comprised by  <dig>  genes interacting with one another via  <dig>  protein physical interactions,  <dig>  metabolic interactions and  <dig>  transcriptional regulation interactions. of  <dig>  genes in the network,  <dig>   are protein-coding genes ,  <dig>  are transfer rna-coding genes,  <dig>  are small nucleolar rna-coding genes and  <dig>  are rna-coding genes of unknown function. regarding protein-coding genes, including transposable elements, our network contains 96% of the total  <dig>  protein-coding genes of s. cerevisiae according to the current status of the yeast genome provided by the saccharomyces genome database   <cit> .

we calculated  <dig> different topological features for each gene in the ingi, including degree centralities for each type of interaction, clustering coefficient, betweenness centralities for each type of interaction, closeness centrality and identicalness. the detailed description of these topological features and how they were calculated are found in the additional file  <dig> and "methods".

comparison of the classification performance among balanced datasets
the performance of machine learning-based approaches is known to be affected by imbalanced data  <cit> . as the dataset containing yeast genes classified into essential and non-essential genes intended to be used as training data for our classifier is an imbalanced dataset, we used an undersampling scheme to generate ten balanced datasets from the original data . each balanced dataset contains different subsets of non-essential genes as a result of the sampling approach. due to these different subsets of non-essential genes, therefore, we statistically compared the prediction performance of balanced datasets before assessing the predictability of essential genes by the different features. we trained our classifier on each of the balanced dataset with all available training data  and evaluated the prediction performance of each balanced dataset. comparing the area under the receiver operating characteristic  curve  values among all the balanced datasets , we verified that their prediction performances are not statistically different as evaluated by a nonparametric statistical method based on the mann-whitney u-statistic  <cit>  . based on these results, we selected one of the balanced datasets to perform the following analyses.

prediction of essential genes by network topological features
we started the analyzes by assessing the predictability of essential genes by each of the  <dig> network topological features  and by all  <dig> network topological features integrated in a single predictor. for this purpose, we trained our classifier on a balanced dataset with all network topological features as training data and on a dataset containing only one of the network topological features as training data . the roc plot shown in figure  <dig> indicates that integration of all networks topological features in a single predictor outperforms the predictability of essential genes by the individual network topological features. by comparing the auc values of grouped and individual network topological features, we verified that the auc value of grouped network topological features  is statistically significantly higher  than auc value of any individual network topological feature .

we then verified if different combinations of grouped network topological features could show prediction performances comparable to that of all grouped network topological features. we found that the combination of protein physical interactions-related features with metabolic interactions-related features has the same performance  seen for the predictor containing all grouped network topological features . also, the combination of protein physical interactions-related features with clustering coefficient, identicalness and betweenness and closeness centralities has the same prediction performance  observed for all grouped network topological features . therefore, smaller sets of network topological features can be used to predict essential genes, thus making the calculation of all topological features dispensable.

to verify if the predictive power of all grouped network topological features could be improved by exclusion of topological features with marginal auc values, i.e., auc values ranging from  <dig>  to  <dig> , we compared the prediction performance of all grouped network topological features  with those of the combinations of features in which one feature or a small set of features was excluded . we discovered that the prediction performance of all grouped network topological features is not improved by the removal of any individual or small sets of topological features . as expected, the exclusion of grouped features related to metabolic interactions or grouped features related to protein physical interactions diminishes  the prediction performance of all grouped network topological features .

among all individual network topological features, the number of protein physical interactions is that one that best predicts essential genes . as further discussed in "cellular rules for essentiality", other investigators have shown that the number of physical interactions is indicative of essentiality  <cit> . to our knowledge, we are the first to compare the number of protein physical interactions with other network topological features. despite the good performance of number of protein physical interactions on predicting essential genes among other individual network topological features, the best predictors are those integrating other groups of topological features with the number of protein physical interactions. this indicates that essentiality depends more or less on each network topological feature and, therefore, the gene location in the network seems to be important for determining its essentiality.

prediction of essential genes by cellular localization and biological process data
although the prediction performance of the integrated network topological features in a single predictor can be considered acceptable for predicting essential genes, we decided to check if the addition of information on cellular localization and biological process as training data would increase the predictability of essential genes. before integrating cellular localization and biological process data with network topological data, we assessed the individual performance of each cellular component and each biological process, as well as the collective performance of all cellular components and all biological processes on predicting essential genes, in order to verify if any individual feature or grouped features related to cellular localization or biological process are good predictors of essential genes.

regarding cellular localization, we trained our classifier on balanced datasets with all cellular compartments as training data  and on datasets containing only one of the cellular compartments as training data. we can observe in the roc plot shown in figure  <dig> that the best predictor of essential genes seems to be the integrated set of cellular compartments. this is confirmed by the statistical comparison of the auc value of the integrated set of cellular compartments with those of individual cellular compartments: the auc value of grouped cellular compartments  is significantly  higher than auc values of any individual cellular compartment , although such auc value characterizes the set of all cellular components as fair predictors of essential gene prediction. with regard to biological processes, we trained our classifier on balanced datasets with all biological processes as training data  and on datasets containing only one of the biological processes as training data. the roc curves for biological processes  show the same behavior observed for the prediction of essential genes by both network topological features and cellular compartment: the integration of attributes in a single predictor increases the predictability of essential genes in comparison with predictability by individual attributes. the auc value of the integrated set of biological processes  is statistically significantly  higher than auc values of any individual biological process . with the auc value of  <dig> , however, the set of biological processes can be considered a poor predictor of essential genes.

the moderate and poor performances of cellular localization and biological processes as predictors of essential genes, respectively, suggest that essentiality, as further discussed in "cellular rules for gene essentiality", is probably a result of multiple factors, reinforcing what we found by analyzing the prediction performance of network topological features. therefore, we decided to evaluate the prediction performance of the integration of cellular localization and biological process information in a single predictor. we then trained our classifier on balanced datasets with all cellular compartments and biological processes as training data. figure  <dig> indicates that the performance of integration of cellular localization and biological process data on predicting essential genes is better than other predictors. in fact, the auc value of predictor containing all cellular localization and biological processes data  is statistically higher  than auc values of other predictors .

prediction of essential genes by integrating network topological features, cellular localization and biological process information
after determining the predictive power of individual and grouped cellular localization and biological process data, we sought to verify if integration of network topological features with cellular localization and biological process data in a single predictor would improve predictability of essential genes. moreover, we also sought to compare the predictability of essential genes by all network topological features integrated in a single predictor with that by all cellular compartments and all biological processes integrated in a single predictor. it is worth to mention that although we choose the predictor containing all network topological features to perform the following comparisons, the sets containing protein physical interactions-related features with metabolic interactions-related features or other features  also could be used since their prediction performances are comparable to that of all grouped network topological features.

for evaluating the integration of all data in a single predictor and comparing it with the predictor containing only cellular localization and biological process information and with the predictor containing only network topological features, we trained our classifier on balanced datasets with all available data as training data, all cellular compartments and biological processes as training data and all network topological features, cellular components and biological processes as training data. as expected, the roc curves in figure  <dig> indicate that integration of all network topological features with cellular compartments and biological processes information in a single predictor increases the predictability of essential genes in comparison with predictors containing only network topological features or cellular compartments and biological processes information. indeed, comparing the auc value of predictor containing all network topological features and all cellular compartments and biological processes information with that of predictor containing only network topological features or cellular compartments and biological processes information, we confirmed that predictability of essential genes by the integrated predictor  is statistically significantly  higher than that by others predictors .

regarding the comparison of the predictive power of integrated topological network features with that of integrated cellular localization and biological process data, we observed that the difference between the auc value of predictor containing all cellular compartments and biological processes information  and the auc value of predictor containing all network topological features  is not statistically significant  . considering that the function of a protein is intimately linked to its cellular localization  <cit>  and that both the biological process in which a protein is involved and the cellular localization in which a protein acts are predictable by network topological features  <cit> , it is not surprising that the predictabilities of essential genes by both the predictor containing all network topological features and the predictor containing all cellular localization and biological process data are similar.

classification of yeast genes not known to be essential
we obtained the list of genes classified as essential and non-essential used for training our classifier from giaever et al.  <cit>  . giaever et al. have systematically constructed a nearly complete collection of yeast gene-deletion mutants covering about 96% of all genes. however, about  <dig> genes of this collection were removed from the yeast genome after a comprehensive reannotation process of the s. cerevisiae genome performed in  <dig>  <cit> . in addition, new genes were annotated to yeast genome as a result of this reannotation process. in order to classify these genes not analyzed by giaever et al., we used our best classifier, that is, the one that containing all network topological features, cellular components and biological processes information as training attributes. for each gene, the predictor output the probability of classifying it as essential and non-essential, which we called, respectively, "essentiality score" and "non-essentiality score".

to predict a gene as essential, we defined an essentiality score of  <dig>  as the cutoff value, i.e., genes with essentiality score above  <dig>  were considered to be essential. this cutoff value was based on the optimal threshold, which is the score value that leads to the maximal accuracy of classification, calculated by the software star  <cit>  for the predictor containing all features . among the  <dig> genes with the essentiality status not defined by giaever et al.,  <dig> genes were predicted as essential . analyzing these genes, we found that  <dig> genes have been previously demonstrated to be essential  and other  <dig> genes  have been previously demonstrated to be non-essential by other investigators through small-scale gene deletion experiments in functional characterization studies  <cit>  . among non-essential genes,  <dig> genes  have been shown to impair substantially the growth of s. cerevisiae when they are completely deleted  <cit> , whereas the  <dig> remaining non-essential genes  have been shown not to affect the growth phenotype of yeast when they are deleted  <cit> . although roughly 1/ <dig> of the these genes predicted to be essential have been previously classified as non-essential, the complete deletions of most of them have been shown to severely reduce the fitness of organisms  <cit> , suggesting that our predictor, even when directly contradicted by these experimental findings, can nonetheless identify genes important to cellular function. regarding the  <dig> non-essential genes whose deletion has been shown not to affect the growth phenotype of yeast , we hypothesize that our classifier assigned a high essentiality score to these genes due to the following features:  their encoded proteins interact with more than  <dig> other proteins,  they are regulated by less than  <dig> transcription factors and  their encoded proteins are located in the nucleus. these characteristics are in accordance with two cellular rules for essentiality discovered by our approach as demonstrated in the section "cellular rules for gene essentiality": if proteins interact with more than  <dig> other proteins and are located in the nucleus, genes encoding them are likely to be essential and genes regulated by more than  <dig> transcription factors tend to be non-essential.

among the  <dig> genes predicted to be essential,  <dig> genes have not yet been investigated for essentiality to date . one of these genes is the yer029c whose encoded protein  binds to other  <dig> proteins to form the heteroheptameric complex that is required for the biogenesis of the spliceosomal u <dig>  u <dig>  u <dig>  and u <dig> snrnps  <cit> . these spliceosomal snrnps are involved in splicing of nuclear pre-mrnas  <cit> , an essential biological process for cell viability, and, interestingly, all proteins forming the heteroheptameric complex along with yer029cp have been demonstrated to be essential  <cit> . therefore, the presence of this gene among ones predicted to be essential reinforces the fact that our predictor is able to identify genes that are important to cellular function.

finally, regarding the remaining  <dig> genes predicted as non-essential, we verified that  <dig> of these genes have been previously tested for essentiality by other studies . among them,  <dig> have been demonstrated to be non-essential genes and only  <dig> have been demonstrated to be essential genes. thus, about 4% of genes with known essentiality status and predicted as non-essential are actually essential genes . providing that 38%  of the genes with known essentiality status and predicted as essential are actually essential genes, the predictor integrating all available features  leads to an enrichment of actual essential genes in the set of genes predicted as essential. this suggests that this predictor is committed to minimize the false negative rate thus avoiding the loss of essential genes.

cellular rules for gene essentiality
beyond the prediction capability, machine learning techniques can be used for knowledge acquisition in order to describe patterns in datasets. the machine learning algorithms most used for knowledge acquisition are those that generate decision trees. decision trees are decision support tools inferred from the training data that use a graph of conditions and their possible consequences. the structure of a decision tree consists of a root node representing the most important condition for discriminating classes, internal nodes representing additional conditions for class discrimination under the main condition, and leaf nodes representing the final classification. so, one can learn the conditions for classifying instances in a given class by following the path from the root node to the leaf node  <cit> .

therefore, in order to discover the rules for gene essentiality in s. cerevisiae, we analyzed decision trees generated by training the j <dig> algorithm, a weka's implementation of the c <dig>  algorithm  <cit>  , on the ten balanced datasets containing all network topological features, cellular components and biological processes as training data . as decision trees generated from the balanced datasets could be slightly different from one another due to the undersampling scheme used to balance the original set of classified genes--each balanced dataset contains a different set of  <dig>  non-essential genes, 1/ <dig> of the total amount in the original imbalanced dataset--we generated one detailed  and one simplified  decision tree for each balanced dataset  and then we manually inspected them in order to discover the general rules for gene essentiality.

from the  <dig> slightly different generated decision trees, we were able to devise the general rules for gene essentiality in s. cerevisiae. figure  <dig> shows the decision tree that best illustrates the general rules for gene essentiality . as we can observe in figure  <dig>  the root node of decision tree is the number of protein physical interactions ; so, this attribute can be considered the most important feature among all network topological features and cellular localization and biological process information for gene essentiality. accordingly, the predictor containing only the number of protein physical interaction as training feature is the one that best predicts  essential genes among all other individual features as we can observe in figure  <dig>  this is in concert with previous studies that have demonstrated that the number of protein physical interactions is indicative of essentiality  <cit> . several hypotheses about the connection between gene essentiality and number of protein physical interactions have been proposed. coulomb et al.  <cit>  have suggested that the relationship between this network feature and gene essentiality is partly due to biases in the interaction data that are enriched in small-scale experiments which are partial towards essential genes. on the other hand, zotenko et al.  <cit>  have recently hypothesized that the connection between gene essentiality and number of protein physical interactions is likely due to the involvement of proteins encoded by essential genes in subnetworks of densely connected proteins with shared biological functions that are enriched in proteins encoded by essential genes.

following the path from root node to first leaf node through the right branch , we found the following rule for gene essentiality: if proteins interact with more than  <dig> other proteins  and are located in the nucleus, genes encoding them are likely to be essential. this rule can be observed in  <dig> of  <dig> decision trees with  <dig> instances per leaf and  <dig> of  <dig> decision trees with  <dig> instances per leaf . if these proteins are located in cellular compartments other than the nucleus, essentiality of their corresponding genes depends on conditions particular to each decision tree . the path from root node to the leaf nodes through the left branch  drove us to discover another rule for gene essentiality: if proteins interact with  <dig> or fewer proteins and participate in a metabolic process inside the nucleus, genes encoding these proteins are likely to be essential. this rule can be observed in  <dig> of  <dig> decision trees with both  <dig> and  <dig> instances per leaf .

according to these rules, the ultimate condition for gene essentiality is the localization of proteins in the nucleus, suggesting that this cellular component is somehow important for essentiality. the importance of nucleus for essentiality has also been suggested by seringhaus et al.  <cit>  that have shown that nuclear localization has the strongest positive correlation with essentiality among other cellular components. the relationship between nucleus and essentiality can be explained by the fact that roughly one third of nuclear proteins are encoded by essential genes and most of essential biological processes for cell viability take place within the nucleus  <cit> . therefore, the participation of proteins in these nuclear-localized essential processes, such as dna replication, transcription and dna repair, should be a pivotal condition for essentiality in the rules defined by both the paths via the left and right branches of decision tree. it is worth to mention that, as a result of the annotation method we used , these nuclear-localized essential processes are embedded in the biological process "metabolic process", one of the conditions for essentiality along with nuclear localization and number of protein physical interactions equal or less than  <dig> in the rule defined by the path via the left branch of decision tree . in the rule defined by the path via the right branch, although essentiality is apparently not dependent on the involvement of proteins in metabolic processes inside the nucleus, the nuclear proteins encoded by genes classified as essential according to this rule may be actually involved in a nuclear metabolic process. in this case, however, the involvement in nuclear metabolic processes is overwhelmed by the number of protein physical interactions.

we discovered an additional interesting rule for gene essentiality in yeast: genes regulated by more than  <dig> transcription factors tend to be non-essential . this rule can be observed in  <dig> of  <dig> decision trees with  <dig> instances per leaf and in all decision trees when the number of instances per leaf is set to  <dig> . our finding is corroborated by yu et al.  <cit>  that have found that genes regulated by >  <dig> transcription factors are less likely to be essential than those regulated by 2- <dig> transcription factors, whereas these genes are less likely to be essential than those with only one transcription factor. at first glimpse, the fact that essential genes tend to be regulated by a few transcription factors seems contradictory since one would expect that gene essentiality is correlated with a high level of transcriptional regulation. however, most essential genes encode housekeeping proteins, i.e., proteins involved in housekeeping functions, such as rrna metabolic process and transcription initiation  <cit> . as housekeeping functions are the most basic and important functions within cell, genes encoding housekeeping proteins are ubiquitously expressed and, consequently, they tend to be regulated by fewer transcription factors than genes encoding non-housekeeping proteins. therefore, this phenomenon is likely due to the enrichment of genes encoding housekeeping proteins in the set of essential genes.

CONCLUSIONS
the identification of essential genes has largely been an experimental effort mostly performed by time-consuming whole-genome knockout experiments. in an effort to accelerate the pace of discovery of essential genes, we designed a machine learning-based computational approach that relies on network topological features, cellular localization and biological process information for predicting essential genes and evaluated it in the yeast saccharomyces cerevisiae.

we therefore constructed an integrated network of gene interactions for s. cerevisiae containing protein physical, metabolic and transcriptional regulation interactions and computed  <dig> different network topological features  that were individually and collectively evaluated for their ability to predict essential genes. we showed that the predictors containing all  <dig> network topological features or different combinations of protein physical interactions-related features with other groups of topological features as training data are reliable predictors  of essential genes in s. cerevisiae, thus reinforcing the fact that an integrated network of gene interactions can be an useful tool for the prediction of essential genes.

although the performance of predictors containing only network topological features can be considered acceptable for predicting essential genes, we decided to check if the addition of cellular localization and biological process information to these predictors would increase the predictability of essential genes. in fact, we verified that the performance of the predictor containing all network topological features, cellular localization and biological process information as training data is better than those of the predictors containing only network topological features or only cellular localization and biological process information. interestingly, we also showed that the prediction performances of the predictor containing only network topological predictions and the predictor containing only cellular localization and biological process information are similar. to our knowledge, this is the first time that gene ontology terms related to cellular localization and biological process are shown to be useful predictors of essential genes.

in addition to prediction of essential genes, we could also devise some cellular rules for gene essentiality using all network topological features, cellular localization and biological process information as training data for generation of decision trees . we discovered that the number of protein physical interactions, the nuclear localization and the number of regulating transcription factors are important factors determining gene essentiality. although these findings have previously been demonstrated by other investigators  <cit> , it is interesting to notice that we were able to obtain these same results by simply inspecting the decision tree generated as shown in section "cellular rules for gene essentiality". so, decision trees are useful tools for extracting knowledge from complex biological data.

besides confirming previous findings, the exploration of decision trees can also lead to new discoveries. this can be exemplified by an additional analysis that we performed due to a referee' s suggestion regarding the nuclear localization of essential proteins. the referee has suggested us to analyze the influence of some children terms of go term "nucleus" on the nuclear localization-related gene essentiality. for this purpose, we generated a decision tree by training the j <dig> algorithm on one of the ten balanced datasets  with all features plus the go terms "nucleolus", "nucleoplasm", "nuclear chromosome" and "nuclear envelope" and, as can be observed in the additional file  <dig>  an entirely new rule can be devised from the generated decision tree: the nucleolar localization of proteins is the most important factor for gene essentiality. we did not mention this potential and interesting rule for gene essentiality in the section "cellular rules for gene essentiality" since this rule per se is interesting enough to deserve a more exhaustive analysis that can be reported in a future paper.

albeit the good prediction performance and the ability to discover cellular rules for essentiality, our approach suffers from two limitations. first, it depends on existing gene ontology annotation and protein physical interaction data which are likely to be enriched in small-scale experiments involving essential genes. second, the construction of an integrated network of gene interactions requires a large amount of experimental interaction data that are currently available only to a limited number of organisms.

therefore, the prediction of essential genes in newly sequenced organisms, for example, is impractical by our approach. however, the integration of our approach with  computational-based methods for gene annotation and  computational-based methods for the construction of integrated networks of predicted gene interactions in which each type of interaction  can be distinguished from one another could give rise to a purely in silico network topology, cellular localization and biological process information-based methodology for prediction of essential genes. such a methodology would be totally independent on experimental interaction data and, accordingly, unbiased in essential genes-driven experiments.

in summary, despite the limitations discussed above, we could demonstrate that the integration of network topological features, cellular localization and biological process information is capable to predict essential genes. in this work, we tested the predictive performance of this integration in s. cerevisiae, but we envisage that it might be useful to predict essential genes in any other organism if a purely computational-based prediction approach, as suggested above, is used.

