BACKGROUND
qpx  is a unicellular eukaryote that infects hard clam  populations along the northeastern coast of north america  <cit> . qpx is thought to be an opportunistic pathogen occurring at low abundance in coastal waters, sediments and organic debris  <cit> , but occasionally becoming invasive to clams exhibiting lower resistance  <cit> , suppressed immunity and/or during unfavorable environmental conditions  <cit> . qpx is an undescribed species belonging to thraustochytrids in the phylogenetic group labyrinthulomycetes <cit> . labyrinthulids  are composed of ecologically important but greatly understudied marine protists closely related to water molds , diatoms, golden and brown algae, all of which collectively form a monophyletic cluster named stramenopiles  <cit> .

labyrinthulids are marine saprophytes associated with marine algal and animal detritus, but some are found as parasitic, commensal and mutualistic species  <cit> . labyrinthula zostera is the most known labyrinthulid parasite which has caused extensive devastation of marine seagrasses worldwide  <cit> . in the past, several labyrinthulids were reported to cause disease in mollusks including abalones, squids and nudibranchs  <cit> . in recent years, new labyrinthulid species have been emerging as parasites in other marine invertebrates  <cit> . all of these parasitic labyrinthulids lack any significant genomic or transcriptomic sequence information, making it difficult to determine how they evolved their parasitic abilities, and what the virulence mechanisms are which enable them to invade and survive in host tissues.

even though significant clam mortality has been associated with qpx disease since the early 1950’s  <cit> , many aspects of the disease remain unexplored and understudied. little progress has been made to understand qpx basic cell biology, including its life stages, nutritional requirements, and factors mediating its virulence toward clams. as is often the case for opportunistic infections, qpx disease occurrence and development is significantly dependent upon external environmental conditions affecting both the parasite and the host. qpx’s natural geographic range of distribution shows that this parasite can be considered as a temperate/cold species, as it has not been described in the relatively warm waters south of virginia. interestingly, qpx growth in vitro is optimal between 20°c and 23°c, and growth decreases at both colder  and warmer  temperatures  <cit> . the major impact of temperature on disease development is reflected in the seasonal fluctuations of disease prevalence in clams, with peaks ranging from fall in ma to early summer and spring in ny and va, respectively  <cit> . on the other hand, experimental transmission studies showed maximal disease development at low water temperatures, which has been attributed to the suppression of clam immunity  <cit>  and it is hypothesized that immunosuppression is a major factor controlling qpx disease development. in fact, the effect of temperature on clam immunity was demonstrated  <cit>  providing a possible mechanism for increased disease development at cold temperature. on the contrary, very little is known about the effect of temperature on qpx physiology, fitness or its virulence characteristics and ability to cause disease. very recently, the partial sequencing of the qpx genome and two transcriptomes of the parasite provided some sequence resources for qpx investigations  <cit> . the present study was also conducted to gather transcriptomic sequence information for a better understanding of qpx biology and exploration of its virulence factors. for that purpose, transcriptome sequences of qpx were generated, assembled and annotated and then used to build a custom designed 15 k oligonucleotide array that was subsequently used to investigate qpx molecular response to temperature conditions known to regulate disease development  <cit> . findings were discussed with a focus on the characterization of possible links between temperature and the expression profiles of virulence-related factors.

RESULTS
characterization of qpx transcriptome
in the present study, we sequenced, assembled and annotated the transcriptome of quahog parasite unknown, the thraustochytrid protist that causes disease and mortality in an important bivalve species, the hard clam mercenaria mercenaria. the cdna sequence library was generated from qpx cells  grown in a variety of culture media to obtain satisfactory coverage for transcripts that may have different expression profiles under various culture conditions. a total of  <dig>  sequence reads  were generated by the  <dig> gs-flx titanium platform. quality and length filtering yielded  <dig>  high-quality reads that were assembled using mira. the resulting qpx transcriptome library consists of  <dig>  transcript sequences including contigs , singletons , and long repetitive contigs  with sequence length ranging from 40 bp to over  <dig>  bp and a total of  <dig> ,495 bp in assembled library. sequences longer than 200 bp have been deposited into ddbj/embl/genbank under the tsa  accession number: galj <dig>  bioproject accession number: prjna <dig>  biosample accession number: samn <dig>  and sequence read archive accession number: srr <dig>  the number of assembled bases produced in this study represent about 20% of the genomic sequence assembly  recently produced for qpx  <cit>  which represents a smaller transcriptome coverage than that of other stramenopiles with fully sequenced genomes such as thalassiosira pseudonana for which about 32% of the genome is represented by coding sequences  <cit> .

blast2go server was used to find homologous sequences to qpx transcripts in publicly available databases and to assign functional information to these transcripts. a total of  <dig>  transcripts were found to have positive blastx homology matches  to other sequences in ncbi database . the top four species showing the most similarity to qpx sequences were the oomycete phytophthora infestans, the brown alga ectocarpus siliculosus, and the diatoms phaeodactylum tricornutum and thalassiosira pseudonana, all of which are stramenopilan species, thus confirming qpx affiliation to this phylogenetic group  <cit> . a total of  <dig>  sequences were identified to have a match to at least one conserved protein domain in the interpro database  and  <dig>  sequences were assigned at least one functional annotation term based on the gene ontology vocabulary database with a cut-off e-value of 10- <dig> . summary of the go annotation is present in figure  <dig>  the level- <dig> functional annotation of qpx transcriptome returned  <dig>  and  <dig>  gene ontology phrases associated with the biological process  and molecular function  categories, respectively. the combined level  <dig> and  <dig> functional annotation of qpx transcripts resulted in  <dig>  cellular component gene ontologies .

putative virulence factors in qpx transcriptome
the primary goal of generating a transcriptome library for qpx was to provide resources for future studies on qpx virulence factors. the go terms are commonly used as clues in the discovery of molecules involved in the infection process, pathogenicity and host-pathogen interactions  <cit> . likely the most destructive virulence molecules are hydrolytic enzymes produced by pathogenic organisms to destroy host-derived biopolymers  and to invade and colonize their hosts  <cit> . the annotation carried out in this study revealed  <dig> qpx transcripts encoding hydrolytic enzymes including glycosyl hydrolases , peptidases, lipases and phospholipases , all of which have been found to be involved in pathogenicity of many microorganisms  <cit> . for example, chitinases from the oomycete pathogen aphanomyces astaci of freshwater crayfish have been investigated as potential virulence factors  <cit> . since the molluscan shell is partially composed of chitin  <cit>  and qpx cells have been previously found associated with empty molluskan shells  <cit> , qpx’s ability to digest shell material represents a venue for future investigations. similarly, phospholipases are important enzymes utilized by many pathogenic organisms, including bacteria, fungi and protozoans, to hydrolyze cell membranes of host cells  <cit> .

peptidases can degrade host protein material such as collagen, fibrin and actin in the connective tissue of the extracellular matrix, but are also cable of destroying immunoglobulins  <cit> . in this study, we found over  <dig> transcripts annotated to encode peptidases belonging to five major peptidase clans: serine , cysteine , metallo , aspartate , and threonine peptidases  . within all peptidases, qpx was found to possess several peptidases commonly associated with pathogenicity. these include papain-type cysteine peptidases  also known as cathepsins, which are the dominant peptidases in pathogenic protozoans  <cit> . further, qpx possesses serine peptidases in the s <dig> family known as subtilisins or subtilases , which are universal virulence factors found in pathogenic bacteria  <cit> , protozoa  <cit> , and fungi. qpx also possesses sequences encoding peptidases found to be virulence factors in other pathogens  <cit>  including aspartic peptidases , serine peptidases  and metallopeptidases  . based on the sequence information, qpx is expected to use hydrolytic enzymes, including peptidases, to break down extracellular material of clam tissue to be able to propagate throughout the host body. in situ observation of degraded clam tissues surrounding qpx cells  <cit>  indirectly supports the involvement of peptidases in the pathogenesis of this parasite.

qpx infection inside the clam tissue leads to an inflammatory response of clam hemocytes aggregating around qpx cells. it is also known that the hemocytes of bivalves, including m. mercenaria, produce reactive oxygen species  to combat invading organisms  <cit> . to survive the clam defense, qpx would be expected to produce antioxidant molecules which can neutralize the toxic effect of ros. in the generated qpx transcriptome library, seventeen sequences were identified to be involved in antioxidant activity  including catalases , superoxide dismutases , thioredoxin peroxidases , glutathione peroxidases , and ascorbate peroxidases  . all of these antioxidant molecules have been shown to be effective against endogenous  and exogenous  ros species and are essential for resistance to oxidative stress in many pathogenic protozoans during disease development  <cit> . qpx antioxidant armor suggests that the pathogen is prepared to overcome m. mercenaria hemocyte-derived ros, and facilitate the establishment of an infection.

during infection, molecules that play the most important roles are the ones on the interface between the host cell or its extracellular matrix and the pathogen cell. these molecules are involved in cell recognition, cell adhesion and cell communication. the qpx library allowed the identification of  <dig> sequences annotated to molecular function term receptor activity ,  <dig> linked to g-protein coupled receptor protein signaling pathways ,  <dig> transcripts involved in cell communication , and  <dig> transcripts related to cell adhesion  . these molecules are excellent targets for future research studies on the capabilities of qpx to anchor itself to the extracellular matrix within clam tissue. for example, some adhesive and ligand binding molecules of plant and animal pathogens are related to thrombospondin  <cit> , integrin  <cit>  and lectins  <cit> . our results show that the qpx transcriptome contains transcripts with homology to lectins , fibronectin-related proteins , integrins , and thrombospodin-related molecules  .

qpx oligoarray gene expression profiles in response to temperature and qpx adaptation to temperature changes
the gene expression profiles of qpx cultivated at four different temperatures  were investigated using 15 k 60-mer oligonucleotide arrays. a total of  <dig>  transcripts were differentially expressed  in response to temperature changes . to confirm gene expression patterns obtained by the oligoarray analysis, transcription levels of seven different qpx peptidases  at four different temperatures were examined using quantitative real time pcr. using qpcr method, the mrna expression patterns of four of the seven examined peptidases altered by the temperature conditions were statistically significant  and the data was significant for six out of the seven peptidases based on oligoarrays results . the comparison of the relative transcript levels determined by the two methods, oligoarray and qpcr resulted in a strong statistically significant correlation .

among the  <dig>  de transcripts, only  <dig> had known predicted biological or molecular function  and a subset of these is presented in table  <dig>  the go annotations, as well as the information on the best blast hit result for the remaining sequences are given in additional file  <dig>  these  <dig> sequences were grouped into  <dig> functional categories  to identify biological processes differentially expressed under different temperature treatments. in general, the highest number of differentially expressed genes included those involved in cell metabolic processes such as amino acid, carbohydrate, protein, fatty acid and lipid metabolism . this pattern, however is biased by the fact that public databases are skewed toward most conserved genes which tend to be genes belonging to the metabolic pathways. more than half of the qpx genes regulated in response to temperature have unknown molecular functions .

mean fold changes are shown .

the patterns of de metabolic process vary between the temperature treatments with the most noticeable difference showing suppression of metabolic processes at cold temperatures:  <dig> transcripts down regulated at 13°c and  <dig> down regulated at 10°c in comparison to  <dig> transcripts down regulated at 27°c and  <dig> at 23°c . the slowing down of metabolism is a common response of ectothermic organisms to cold temperatures  <cit> . in addition, results suggest that the cold temperature conditions lowered the respiration rate of qpx  supporting a lower metabolic rate for the parasite. in contrast, seven transcripts within the respiration and oxidative phosphorylation process were induced at 23°c, suggesting an increased respiration rate at this temperature. the enrichment analysis revealed just a few biological and molecular processes being affected by the temperature changes but not in all temperature treatments . for instance, the histidine catabolic processes were enriched by  <dig> fold among genes up-regulated at 27°c, while cellular aldehyde metabolic processes were enriched by  <dig> fold among genes up-regulated at 23°c and by  <dig> fold among genes down-regulated at 10°c . these changes reflect the adjustment of metabolic rate of the parasite at different temperatures as shown by the overall patterns presented in figure  <dig> 

a
b
c
apercent of sequences with that gene ontology term in the differentially expressed gene group.

bpercent of sequences with that gene ontology term on the whole array.

cfold enrichment: fold increase of the go term in the differentially expressed gene group.

the 23°c is in a range of qpx optimal growth conditions, however this temperature condition was also associated with an up-regulation of genes related to oxidative stress . slight oxidative stress, characterized as an accumulation of reactive oxygen species , happens in every cell as a result of imbalance between oxygen availability and oxygen consumption from respiration  <cit> . if a small amount of ros, specifically superoxide anion, is produced during the normal respiration process as a simple by-product, an increased respiration rate would cause increased production of ros. qpx possesses six different sequences encoding superoxide dismutase enzymes , including four copper/zinc related sods which are usually found in the cytosol of a cell, and two iron/manganese sods which are usually found in mitochondria. the expression of only three qpx sods  were up-regulated at 23°c, suggesting that these three sods are the main enzymes expressed in qpx cells to cope with the accumulation of endogenous ros during the normal respiration process.

a well-documented response of organisms to temperature change is the regulation of expression of molecular chaperones known as heat shock proteins which are responsible for maintaining protein stability in situ. temperature stress can lead to changes in proteins configuration and their potential malfunction but heat shock proteins control aggregation of denatured proteins in the cell, and are responsible for their reconfiguration, translocation across membranes and degradation. overall  <dig> qpx transcripts coding for heat shock proteins were found to be regulated with temperature changes . the amino acid sequence alignments of theses transcripts show that qpx has three different heat shock proteins which can be classified into a group of molecular chaperones of low monomeric molecular mass, ranging from  <dig> to 43 kda  <cit> . these low molecular weight chaperones were up-regulated at the elevated temperature of 27°c . the transcription levels of these small molecular weight chaperones have been commonly investigated in pathogenic protozoans affecting humans and their expression is usually regulated during heat stress related to fever . nine molecular weight chaperons: three dnaj-like proteins, three heat-shock protein  <dig>  one heat-shock proteins  <dig>  one  <dig> and one 101 kda  were up-regulated in response to cold temperature conditions revealing that they fulfill a role of cold shock chaperons. heat shock proteins  <dig> and  <dig> have been previously documented to act as cold temperature chaperons in bacteria  <cit> , nematode larvae  <cit> , and oomycetes  <cit> . the dnaj proteins are co-chaperones of hsp <dig> and contain a conserved amino acid j domain which binds to hsp <dig> and stabilizes the interaction between the substrate and hsp <dig>  <cit> . their up-regulation in qpx at low temperature highlights a similar response to cold stress and underlines the ability of the parasite to cope with suboptimal temperatures.

qpx putative virulence factors regulated by temperature
temperature is one of the environmental factors controlling qpx disease development in hard clams  <cit>  and one of the goals in the present study was to investigate the response of qpx putative virulence factor to temperature changes. overall  <dig> qpx peptidases were found to be regulated with temperature changes including seven serine peptidases, five cysteine peptidases, and two metallopeptidases . one papain-like peptidase  was up-regulated at 27°c, two  were up-regulated at 23°c, and two  were up-regulated at 13°c and 10°c , suggesting different roles for these genes in basic metabolism and/or pathogenesis of the parasite. papain-like cysteine peptidases are some of the most extensively studied virulence factors. they play a crucial role in parasite biology, including growth, development and replication. they are also implicated in host tissue degradation, including digestion of host extracellular matrix proteins and destruction of host immune-related proteins such as immunoglobulins  <cit> . further specific experimental studies are needed to specifically characterize the biochemical function and role of each papain-like peptidase in qpx biology and virulence abilities. other qpx peptidases for which expression was shown to be regulated at different temperatures were subtilases. the amino acid sequence alignments of qpx transcripts annotated as belonging to the s <dig> family revealed that qpx possesses at least  <dig> different subtilisin-like peptidases . only three subtilases  were shown to be differentially expressed in response to temperature changes, with the highest levels measured at 23°c  which corresponds to qpx’s optimal growth temperature. qpx is a saprophytic microorganism which needs to degrade nutrient proteins extra-cellularly and transport oligopeptides and amino acids into the cell via diffusion. qpx maximal growth at 23°c could then explain and justify the need for an efficient extracellular protein degradation and nutrient acquisition system associated with high expression of its digestive enzymes. subtilases, however are also universally occurring secreted enzymes found in many medically important pathogenic microorganisms, including bacteria , protozoa , and fungi . therefore, the role of subtilisins as qpx virulence factors might also be a possibility, but these enzymes may be important for host tissue digestion and disease progression during advanced and late stages of infection when the overcoming of host immune system is less important but degradation of the tissue and pathogen proliferation takes over.

the m12b peptidase  which was up-regulated at 13°c and 10°c also require special attention. it belongs to the adams or a dis-integrin and metalloprotease family of zinc-dependent endopeptidases. the same qpx peptidase was also found to be regulated with temperature in another study  <cit> . in animals, adams are membrane-anchored glycosylated enzymes capable of degrading proteins from the surface of cells, thus playing important roles in cell adhesion, signaling, cell-cell fusion, and cell-cell interactions  <cit> . they possess two different protein components in addition to the metalloprotease domain, including an integrin domain  and a cytosolic domain which provides an attachment for various signal transduction proteins  <cit> . cell-surface glycol-metallo-proteases play an important role in the pathogenesis of trypanosomatids, as they allow these parasites to adhere and move through connective tissue of their hosts  <cit> . the specific role, if any, of adamysin-like protease in the virulence of the qpx requires additional studies.

the qpx m <dig> enzyme is a carboxy-taq-metallopeptidase . the first zinc-containing thermostable metallopeptidase was originally discovered and purified from thermus aquaticus and had an optimal enzymatic activity at 80°c  <cit> . most bacterial and archaebacterial species are known to possess the m <dig> carobxypeptidases, but they are considered absent in most eukaryotic genomes except for a few protozoan species  <cit> . their biological function in these organisms remains unknown. however, the basic characteristics of two recombinant m <dig> peptidases of trypanosoma cruzi have been investigated  <cit> . they were shown not to behave as themostable enzymes, with their activity significantly decreasing with increased temperature. the current study is the first report of m <dig> enzyme in a thraustochytrid species for which stability and activity increases at lower temperatures. this cold resistant qpx’s metallopeptidase is a very interesting target for investigation of its biological function and role in the infection process.

qpx cells release a gel-like muco-filamentous secretion which appears to protect qpx from clam hemocyte phagocytosis and encapsulation as seen during histo-pathologic observation of infected clam tissues  <cit> . in addition, qpx mucus causes necrosis of clam hemocytes in vitro  <cit>  and provides protection against clam humoral defense  <cit> . overall, the generated transcriptome library contains  <dig> sequences involved in polysaccharide metabolic processes  including  <dig> sequences involved in the biosynthesis of polysaccharides  but complete pathways of mucus production were not identified . the consistency of qpx mucus secretion changes with different temperatures, from a gel with low viscosity at 27°c to a very rigid gel at 10°c, thus it is surmised that cold temperatures would benefit the parasite by providing stronger protection during the infection process. thicker mucus secretion at lower temperature was associated with an up-regulation of gdp-mannose dehydrogenase . this enzyme essentially catalyzes irreversible conversion of gdp-mannose to gdp-mannuronic acid and ultimately leads to the biosynthesis of alginates in pseudomonas aeruginosa <cit>  and in the brown alga ectocarpus siliculosus <cit> . in addition, the expression of two enzymes involved in the production of mannose  and galactose  were also up-regulated at the two cold water temperatures . mannose is the most important monosaccharide required for the production of mannuronic acid, which is the major component of alginates  <cit> . interestingly, the mrna levels of several different transcripts coding for udp-glucose/gdp-mannose dehydrogenase were up-regulated in qpx at the two cold temperatures . further, there were also a few other molecules in the carbohydrate metabolism and vesicular secretion pathways that were induced at  <dig> and 13°c. these include two glycosyltransferases  which transfer and add a range of different sugars to other sugars, phosphates and proteins, thus participating in glycosylation of proteins and in synthesis of polysaccharides and glycoconjugates  <cit> . if the up-regulated glycotransferases are involved in the glycosylation process of qpx extracellular mucopolysaccharides, it can provide additional support of the hypothesis of considerable changes to the qpx mucus structure at cold temperature. in addition, two sugar transporters  which carry dissolved simple sugars across membranes in response to chemosmotic gradient  <cit> , and a syntaxin-type protein  that is a membrane protein participating in the vesicular membrane fusion during exocytosis  <cit> , were over-expressed at the colder temperatures. again, it can be speculated that these molecules participate in mucus polymers production and/or rearrangements. even though the composition and structure of qpx mucus is still to be determined, these findings identify specific candidates that may be involved in mucus biosynthesis and provide a plausible scenario for the regulation of mucus consistency at different temperatures. the present hypothesis that qpx mucus production is increased in cold conditions can also be supported by the up-regulation of several molecules in carbohydrate synthesis and secretion pathways.

CONCLUSIONS
in conclusion, this study characterized the transcriptome of a parasitic labyrinthulid, offering new insights into the molecular bases for the pathogenicity of these microorganisms. the gene ontology annotation completed in this study is an excellent source of information for future investigations of this parasite. results from the oligoarray experiment demonstrated the ability of qpx to cope with a wide range of environmental temperatures, including those considered to be suboptimal for clam immunity , providing a mechanistic scenario for disease distribution in the field and for high disease prevalence and intensity at low temperature. these results will serve as a basis for studies aimed at thorough characterization of specific putative virulence factors.

