BACKGROUND
in recent years, genomic research employing laboratory fish models, such as zebrafish , medaka  and pufferfish , has contributed to understanding the mechanisms of vertebrate development and has shed light on poorly understood evolutionary phenomena such as genome duplication and duplicate gene silencing  <cit> . the use of genomic technologies on fish is also essential to improve aquaculture research for the mass production of target species, which may have a profound impact on human welfare since fish is a major food source for humans. these studies may be very useful in providing a physiological and genetic basis for marker-assisted selection of strains with enhanced growth or disease resistance, or for identifying key genes and genetic networks involved in the production of viable gametes.

salmonids are important commercial fish and also unique models for evolutionary studies as they are recent tetraploids  <cit> . a large expressed sequence tag  database and several cross-species and species-specific cdna microarrays have recently been developed  <cit> . however, although efforts have been made to partially sequence the transcriptome of specific tissues in some species  <cit> , there are still few genomic tools available for commercially relevant marine fish, particularly for functional genomics studies.

flatfish, members of the order pleuronectiformes, are a relatively large group of teleosts with about  <dig> extant species  <cit> . they are benthic and carnivorous, and most are marine species, although about four probably occur only in freshwater. these fish undergo a unique development process, known as metamorphosis, during which one eye migrates across the top of the skull to lie adjacent to the other eye on the opposite side, while the body flattens and lies on the eyeless side  <cit> . this unique developmental event involves drastic morphological and physiological changes, although its molecular regulation is still poorly understood  <cit> . flatfish have long been a choice food, with many members of the group  being important for commercial fisheries. with the general worldwide decline in wild fishery  <cit> , with an essentially stable, wild catch of flatfish, research into producing them in aquaculture have been underway for the last fifteen to twenty years. aquaculture of japanese flounder , turbot , atlantic halibut  and others have been successfully achieved, although improvements in the efficiency of the industrial production of most of these species are still needed.

the senegalese sole, solea senegalensis , is a highly prized flatfish of which intensive culture has increased over the last decade, particularly in southern europe  <cit> . however, partly due to the lack of knowledge of the physiological and genetic mechanisms involved, the development of aquaculture is impaired by the lack of methods to control reproduction in captivity and those to improve larval growth and disease resistance. the pleurogene™ project, an initiative funded by genome spain and genome canada, was set up to improve understanding of physiological and evolutionary processes influencing the reproduction and larval development and survival of both senegalese sole and atlantic halibut in natural environments and aquaculture  <cit> . this project has developed genomic and proteomic research tools to help achieve these goals  <cit> . here we report the establishment of an est database for senegalese sole containing  <dig>  cdna sequences, and the construction and validation of an oligo-based microarray for the detection of  <dig>  putative transcripts from this species. in addition, an interactive bioinformatic platform termed soleamold, developed to accommodate the est database and results from microarray and in situ hybridization  experiments, is presented. currently, this platform only contains data on senegalese sole gonad development but it could be extended in the future with data from other tissues and organs, as well as from other flatfish, to become a powerful tool for flatfish genomic research.

RESULTS
est survey
ten non-normalized, directionally-cloned  cdna libraries were constructed from different adult tissues and larval stages . for all libraries, the percentage of clones with inserts  was high  with average insert sizes between  <dig> – <dig>  kb. to minimise redundancy before sequencing, aliquots of each library, depending on the titre after one round of amplification , were pooled into a master library, which was normalized through three rounds of hybridization. about  <dig>  clones from this master library were sequenced with t <dig> primer for sequences corresponding to the 3' utr in correctly oriented inserts. because the general low conservation in 3' utrs, and genome duplication events that have occurred in teleosts  <cit> , we focused on 3' sequencing to design specific oligos for a microarray to distinguish between potential paralogues arising from gene duplications. after trimming and vector and contaminant removal,  <dig>  high-quality sequences were obtained with an average read length of approximately 600– <dig> bp, with the majority of reads being >  <dig> bp . these sequences have been submitted to genbank .

athe recombination efficiency represents the percentage of clones containing inserts; btitre after one round of amplification; clarvae showing developmental alterations: albinism, malpigmentation, osteological malformations, and incomplete eye migration; dthree different primary libraries were pooled before amplification; emixed tissue from ovaries at pre-vitellogenesis, vitellogenesis and maturation stages; fmixed tissue from testes at mid and late spermatogenesis, and at functional maturation stage .

the est sequences were assembled using phrap under high stringency to identify clusters  representing redundant transcripts. clustering analysis yielded  <dig>  unique sequences, indicating a redundancy factor of  <dig>  . this compares positively with that obtained in other normalized cdna libraries available in the unigene database  <cit>  in which at least  <dig>  clones were sequenced from libraries prepared from a mixture of different tissues . lower redundancy could possibly be obtained by applying the duplex-specific nuclease method to the cdna  <cit> , prior to cloning and library generation, which requires mixing all initial rna samples. however, this method uses a pcr amplification step which may introduce bias against long transcripts, thus selecting for partial  transcripts. for the libraries to contain as many expressed full-length clones as possible, we consider our normalized library a good compromise between large clone size and efficient normalization.

the most abundant ests  in the sole normalized library corresponded to cytoskeletal proteins, vitellogenin aa and ab, apolipoprotein a <dig>  zona pellucida  proteins, elongation factors, creatine kinase  <dig>  lectin, ribosomal proteins and heat shock protein  <dig> . the high abundance of transcripts encoding cytoskeletal proteins, creatine kinase  <dig>  ribosomal proteins and elongation factors may be a consequence of the enrichment of cdnas of larval origin in the mixed library  since there is a complex reorganization of somatic tissues in sole larvae at metamorphosis and post-metamorphosis  <cit> . different isoforms of vitellogenins and zp proteins are known to be highly expressed in the liver of fish females at ovarian recrudescence  <cit> , and some zps are also highly expressed in the ovary  <cit> . therefore, high levels of vitellogenin and zp ests is consistent with the fact that sexually maturing females were used for the construction of the primary libraries. the over-representation of apolipoprotein a <dig> and lectin, also observed in cdna libraries from liver, ovarian follicles and larvae in other fish  <cit> , may also be related to the physiological stage of the females. finally, the low but significant abundance of ests encoding the stress-related heat shock cognate protein  <dig> probably reflects the widespread expression of this gene in both larval and adult tissues  <cit> , although it may also suggest a degree of stress caused by the capture and confinement of fish prior to sampling .

amost significant blastx hit is reported; bextent of blastx hit aligned region , and percent identity over the aligned region.

est annotation and gene ontology
the blast2go program uses blast to find homologous sequences for input sequences and extracts gene ontology  terms to each hit using existing annotations. these go terms are assigned to the query sequence to give an assessment of the biological process, the molecular function and the cellular compartments represented. in our case,  <dig>  sequences out of  <dig>  ests  did not show significant similarity to any known protein after blastx, while providing product or gene names for  <dig>  sequences  and unassigned protein matches  for  <dig> sequences . the number of identified ests in sole was lower when compared with est projects carried out on other fish species. this could be related to sequencing from the 3'end, with most of the nucleotide sequences corresponding to the 3' utr, and artifacts produced during cdna synthesis and cloning.

the majority of the functionally annotated sequences from sole had go assignments for biological process , molecular function  and cellular component  categories . sequences with go terms corresponding to biological process fell into  <dig> categories, with most of the ests being dedicated to cellular and metabolic processes , and lower, similar amounts dedicated to biological regulation , multicellular organism processes , localization  and developmental processes  . regarding molecular function in the go resource, defined as 'what a gene product does at the biochemical level', we found that 71% of the ests were dedicated to binding and catalytic functions, while the remaining ests were mostly dedicated to structural molecule activity  and transporter activity  . most of the binding functions were at the intracellular level rather than external and included nucleotide and nucleic acid binding, protein binding and ion binding. catalytic activities included transferase, hydrolase and oxidoreductase activities. in relation to cellular components, senegalese sole gene products were generally found associated with the intracellular space  or in organelles , with more associated with membrane bound organelles such as mitochondria . almost  <dig> % were found in protein complexes, such as the ribonucleoprotein complex.

blastx and go analyses, however, did not give full information on the tissue-specific transcription profiles as the ests were derived from a multi-tissue cdna library. future sequencing of ests in a tissue-specific fashion is necessary for this purpose. nevertheless, the analyses performed did give information on the nature of the ests in the current senegalese sole database, and identified a number of mrnas of potential interest during gametogenesis and larval development . for some of the ests, sequencing information from the 3' end allowed to identify isoform-specific ests or paralogues . the expression pattern of a number of these ests, including the complete set of 40s and 60s ribosomal proteins, has been further characterized during spermatogenesis and larval development  <cit> .

genbank
amost significant blastx hit is reported; bextent of blastx hit aligned region , and percent identity over the aligned region.

design and validation of a senegalese sole oligo microarray
we developed an oligonucleotide microarray for studies on s. senegalensis gene expression given the greater reproducibility of the data collected with oligonucleotide as opposed to spotted cdna microarrays  <cit> . tethys, the proprietary oligo design software from oryzon genomics, was used to design an oligo microarray based on the ests sequenced. as mrna labelling procedures such as the eberwein protocol  <cit>  are biased towards the 3' polya tail of the transcripts, oligo design was equally biased towards the 3' end of the sequences. specific  <dig> to 60-mer oligonucleotide probes were successfully designed for  <dig>  out of the  <dig>  unigenes assembled from the ests . we also designed probes for control mrnas, which were spiked into each mixture prior to hybridization, for quality control monitoring and data processing. the final design of each slide, comprising  <dig> arrays with gene specific probes for all  <dig>  s. senegalensis unigenes as well as negative and positive control oligos, was submitted for synthesis to agilent using the earray platform.

two independent experiments were conducted to estimate the rate of false-positive expression in the microarray. in the first experiment, self-to-self hybridization, total rna from two different aliquots of the same sample of sole ovary were used to produce either cy <dig> or cy <dig> differentially labelled amplified rna . the arnas were mixed in equal amounts, with the fluorescent cyanine dyes cy <dig> and cy <dig>  and hybridized in triplicate to the microarray . in the second experiment, mrna from sole larvae was used, from 16-day post-hatching to produce cy <dig> labelled arna and from 22-day post-hatching to produce cy <dig> labelled arna, mixed in equal amounts and hybridized in triplicate to the sole microarray . we assessed whether the variation of all three fold change  values were within the limits of expected variation, and any considered as an outlier , were eliminated. from this analysis we calculated the mean fc value for each oligo on the array and the distribution .

as expected, the narrow distribution obtained with the identical rna sources in self-to-self hybridization indicated very few differences in gene expression . in contrast, a much broader distribution was observed for the gene specific probes in the differential gene expression experiment , with distribution of the control oligos similar to that in the self-to-self experiment. individual error rates are a function of the fc and the reproducibility of the values for a single oligo in the experiment, but comparison of the distribution of the gene specific data between self-to-self and differential gene expression experiments gives an estimation of the overall false discovery rate . the fdr of a test is defined as the expected proportion of false positives in the significant results, and can be estimated by dividing the number of data points or surface under the data curve of the self-to-self  hybridization in the histogram beyond a chosen fc cut-off , by the datapoints or surface beyond the same fc cut-off under the data curve from the differential gene expression . overall, the fdr is expected to increase with lower cut-off fc values, and decrease when the dispersion of the self-to-self data is low, i.e. in function of the overall reproducibility of the microarray platform. in the differential gene expression experiment shown in figure 3c, we identified  <dig> up-regulated genes and  <dig> down-regulated genes, with a p-value ≤  <dig>  for genes considered significantly expressed and an fc cut-off ± 3σ, in this case equal to ±  <dig> . in the same interval, we identified  <dig> up-regulated and  <dig> down-regulated genes for the self-to-self experiment, giving an estimated overall fdr of  <dig> %. these results indicate excellent technical reliability of the platform.

the microarray developed may be of great interest in research on senegalese sole gene expression, given the range of questions that it can be used to address. this array, has already been employed within the pleurogene program to investigate changes in the transcriptome profiling during gonad differentiation, growth and maturation, and during larval metamorphosis and development. additional microarrays can be obtained from agilent using the est-specific oligos listed in the additional file  <dig> 

development of the soleamold bioinformatic platform
the use of functional genomics approaches can be highly implemented towards the discovery of new genes and genetic pathways by determination of the cellular localization of gene expression using ish. however, most current databases that integrate both approaches on an anatomical basis in vertebrates are based on model organisms, such as mouse  <cit>  or zebrafish  <cit>  embryos. the soleamold platform was developed as a bioinformatic resource able to manage and store all experimental data on gene expression levels and gene localization in solea senegalensis  <cit> . this platform is based on the orymold software  <cit>  which integrates microarray experimental data through an ontological description of organs, tissues and cell types of a given organism hierarchically. the current ontology of soleamold describes solea senegalensis male and female reproductive organs using a total of  <dig> terms, from 'ovary' and 'testes' to 'late spermatogenesis' and 'follicle maturation stages', but can be extended to cover many different organs and experimental treatments . the ontology is complemented with histological images, forming a coherent, user-navigable atlas that backs up the meaning of the terms included in the hierarchical description of senegalese sole. the user can input new data to both atlas and ontology.

the soleamold platform integrates experimental data from dna microarrays and ish based on the ontology . once integrated, data can be easily browsed and retrieved. the genome of solea senegalensis has not been sequenced yet, and therefore it was not possible to build a genomic knowledge database to serve as backend support for experimental data. instead, a blast-able  <cit>  database derived from the clustered and annotated sole est collection was incorporated into the tool. this database dynamically maps and annotates each of the probes contained in a dna microarray or employed for ish. once probes have been introduced into the system, experimental data is inserted by selecting a term in the ontology and uploading the expression values that are automatically linked to the backend database through probe names. users are also able to determine the quality of the introduced data and comparability of the results. when dealing with microarray data, the same reference sample must be used for all hybridization experiments, ensuring future cross-comparability of data.

the information in soleamold is retrieved while maintaining constant visual contact with the ontology and the atlas, demonstrating the biological significance of the gene expression data. users can make semantic queries, such as 'where or when do gene x and gene y show differential expression, so that gene x is overrepresented while gene y has a low level of expression?', based on ontology terms that allow for the isolation of genes whose expression values meet specific criteria spatially and temporally. semantic queries allow for the construction of lists of elements of interest based on the model ontology, therefore checking and validating both the experimental data and the model.

the current experimental database of soleamold includes nineteen normalized and scaled microarray hybridizations to compare the global pattern of gene expression during ovarian and testicular development, including data from males treated with different hormones, and few ish experiments. detailed analysis of these experiments, as well as validation of the fc variations in expression by real-time quantitative pcr, will be published elsewhere. the solemold can be extended to additional tissues and organs of senegalese sole, as well as of other flatfish, after normalization of microarray gene expression data.

CONCLUSIONS
the lack of genomic resources for non-model fish species of commercial interest has been in stark contrast to the increasing importance of aquaculture to counteract the world-wide decline in wild fishery. by sequencing and analyzing  <dig>  solea senegalensis ests, we have generated new genomic resources for this commercially important flatfish. in addition to contributing to the characterization of fish genes of unknown function, the est survey will be useful to identify molecular markers for future genetic studies in senegalese sole and to provide probes for ish cellular localization studies. the dna microarray can be used for further investigation of physiologically and ecologically relevant transcriptional regulation in solea senegalensis. finally, the soleamold interactive morphoanatomical atlas of gene expression may aid in the identification of crucial genes and regulatory pathways involved in different physiological process in flatfish, as such, it may be a powerful research tool for both academia and industry.

