BACKGROUND
preimplantation embryo development is a dynamic developmental process recognized by changes in the transcript type and quantity  <cit> , cell number, total and poly  rna contents  <cit> . these entire phenomena are known to be the basis for the changes in the shape, physiology and functions of the embryos leading to compaction, differentiation, implantation and further development. during this preimplantation period, however, about 15–50% of zygotes die, largely as a result of unknown factors  <cit> . therefore, it is imperative to understand the dynamics and search for factors contributing to the losses. moreover, elucidation of preimplantation development is critical for the management of infertility and refinement of assisted reproductive technology  <cit> . gene expression profiles would yield insight into the complex molecular pathways controlling early development. however, the use of classical techniques  <cit>  for embryo gene expression analyses was constrained by technical limitations and a dearth of starting materials. to overcome the problem, the production of embryos in large quantities is restricted by associated ethical and cost factors. we  have described in detail the problems associated with the use of common rna detection and analysis techniques for the application of preimplantation stage embryo studies  <cit> .

real time pcr is a sensitive quantitative method of choice that overcomes the potential sensitivity problems in the earlier classical analysis techniques  <cit> , and detects more subtle changes in gene expression  <cit> . its sensitivity allows working with a minimal amount of starting material, while still achieving an accurate quantification of poorly transcribed mrnas  <cit> . it is a fast and reliable technique, provided care is taken in all the procedures  <cit> . the precautions associated with the use of this technique were described elsewhere  <cit>  and, unless properly addressed, could lead to severe misinterpretation of the results  <cit> . to address the issue and account for variations, different normalization strategies were used, and the details were well reviewed  <cit> . some researchers use exogenously added references in the form of synthetic rna or globin rnas  <cit> . however, this approach has been challenged for competing with endogenous sequences for enzyme and nucleotides during pcr, its demand for extra procedures and associated cost  <cit> . as a result, it has not been adopted widely. the use of endogenous reference genes  to normalize the expression of gene of interest is the most commonly used approach. housekeeping genes are constitutively expressed to maintain cellular function, and they are presumed to produce the minimally essential transcripts necessary for normal physiology  <cit> . despite their ease of use and the wider adoption of this approach, inconsistency in the type and number of reference genes used has made cross-study comparisons difficult  and interpretation of the results questionable. as a result, this area has been a hot topic and the focus of many journals publication in recent times.

rabbits are classical experimental models with close similarity in developmental biology to large animals and humans  <cit> . they are also preferentially used in pulmonary, cardiovascular, metabolic disorder studies, and for antibody production and drug screening  <cit> . as an experimental animal for various models, different gene expression studies were carried out using rabbit embryos. most of these studies  <cit>  used a single normalizer gene that differed between studies. the uses of some of these genes  were evaluated in different studies and criticized, due to the observed variations between treatment groups  <cit> . we have earlier published a similar mouse study  <cit> . however, stable genes have not been identified for use in rabbit preimplantation stage embryo gene expression studies. the aims of the current study were to compare the expression profiles of  <dig> widely used reference genes in rabbit oocytes and preimplantation stage embryos that were derived in vivo and produced in vitro, to select the most stable ones as reference and finally to validate them by using to normalize the expression of pou5f <dig> gene. the gene pou5f <dig> belongs to the pou domain family transcription factors that regulate the transcription of their target genes  <cit> . the rabbit pou5f <dig> gene was recently cloned  <cit> , but its expression during rabbit embryo preimplantation stage has not been well characterized. thus, we analyzed the expression of this gene in the oocyte and in vitro produced preimplantation stage rabbit embryos. to our knowledge, this is the first study in rabbit to compare the wide selection of reference genes both in the in vitro and in vivo derived embryo samples with a final validation of the selected genes.

RESULTS
sequence analyses and product confirmation
for the  <dig> genes used in this study, the sequences were referred from the databases , and primers were designed from these sequences. after optimizing pcr conditions and amplification, the products were sequenced for confirmation. based on the sequence analysis, all primers amplified the expected amplicon sizes .

to amplify beta actin  gene, we designed primers from  <dig> different sequences , optimized and compared them. however, the current primer  gave the best amplification results. it has also the best beta actin similarity hits with orthologs. although the source sequence was identified as gamma non-muscle actin in the ncbi, and as actin, alpha skeletal in the ensembl databanks, we assumed this to be a wrong labelling. the feedback we got from the ncbi staff also supports our view. therefore we used it to design primer and further comparison.

quality control and primer screening
quality of the analyzed samples plays a major role in the correct interpretation of the results. based on the morphological observations, in both in vivo derived and in vitro produced embryo samples, presumably good quality oocytes and preimplantation stage embryos were collected. in the subsequent procedures, in addition to our established quality rna isolation procedures, the minus rt  reaction during cdna synthesis, and the design of most primers at the exon-exon junction enabled us to control the absence of contaminating genomic dna. during the initial screening assays, similar cdna dilutions from the pooled embryos were used and reaction conditions were optimised for each primer pair separately. optimum primer concentrations were selected based on the absence of dimer and signal detection recognized by earlier ct values. the ct is defined as the number of cycles needed for the fluorescence to reach a specific threshold level of detection and is inversely correlated with the amount of template nucleic acid present in the reaction  <cit> . the majority of the selected candidate reference genes were detected in most preimplantation stages, but with various signal intensities. using a similar low concentration template for all, the ten references  and pou5f <dig> genes were detected at ct values below  <dig>  the other three genes  were detected at ct values above  <dig> with irregularities in amplification . as embryo materials are scarce at the preimplantation stages, we excluded the three genes detected with the latest ct values. then, the ten candidate references and pou5f <dig> genes with the earlier signals  were selected for further comparisons.

standards and pcr efficiency analyses
for all the selected candidate genes, melt curve analyses were performed at the end of pcr reactions. the specificity and integrity of the pcr products were confirmed by the presence of a single peak . for the selected genes, the standard curves were deduced from four-fold serial dilutions of the five-pooled embryo cdna preparations measured at five points. to ensure the comparability of pcr assays, three serial dilutions were made independently that enabled us to determine the ct values and pcr efficiencies of the individual assay and calculate the correlation between them. the assays for the selected candidate reference genes were characterized by a linear correlation coefficient  that varied from  <dig>  to  <dig>   and pcr efficiencies between  <dig> % and  <dig> % , where as the assay for pou5f <dig> gene has  <dig> % efficiency and  <dig> % correlation . based on these results, the assays can be trusted and valid for the quantification of transcripts and further comparisons.

reference genes profile analyses at different developmental stages
in order to select the best stable genes for normalization, expressions of the selected ten candidate reference genes were compared in different preimplantation stage embryos. for gene transcript quantification, five individual embryo cdna preparations per stage were used in identical experimental procedures but optimised conditions for each gene amplification.

the ten candidate genes were detected in all developmental stages examined with various signal intensities. the oocyte stage was taken as a calibrator for all the genes and the relative expression levels at different developmental stages are shown in figures  <dig> and  <dig> 

compared to the oocyte stage, the relative levels of most genes  reduced at the 1-cell stage, while the relative levels of the remaining genes  increased in various intensities at this stage. the relative levels of some genes  were transiently reduced to the minimum levels at the 8-cell stages, and increased thereafter. despite differences in the embryo type , the above expression patterns remained similar . in both in vivo derived and in vitro produced embryos, the relative levels of h2afz and hprt <dig> genes showed a persistent increase in levels after fertilization. the gene ywhaz  also has the same profile.

comparative analyses in the in vivo derived and in vitro produced embryos
to examine the effects of embryo type  on gene expression stability, expression profiles of the selected candidate genes were compared in the in vivo derived and in vitro produced embryo samples.

major pattern differences were not observed due to change in the embryo type  . however, the stage-by-stage comparisons revealed differential transcript levels between the two embryo types. at the 2-cell stage, in vivo produced embryos showed higher transcript levels for majority of the genes  compared to their in vitro counterparts, and differences were significant  for some genes . however, at the 8-cell stage, the in vitro samples showed higher transcript levels for majority of the genes, with significant difference  for some . at the morula and blastocyst stages, the relative transcript levels of in vivo derived embryo samples were higher for most genes compared to the in vitro samples. these differences were significant  at the morula stage and  at the blastocyst stage .

gene expression stability analyses
the profiles of candidate genes were analysed and the expression stability measure values  were calculated using the genorm software  <cit> . following the procedures of the software, the least stable genes were determined  and continuously excluded to recalculate the m values for the rest. finally all genes were ranked based on the calculated m values and the three most stable genes  were selected. accordingly, for the in vivo derived samples, the genes h2afz and hprt <dig> were found to be the most stable, followed by the genes ywhaz, actb, ppia, g6pdx, gapdh, eef1e <dig>  polr2a and pgk <dig> in their order of appearance. similar analyses for the in vitro samples selected the genes h2afz and ywhaz as the most stable genes, followed by hprt <dig>  g6pdx, ppia, gapdh, eef1e <dig>  polr2a, actb and pgk <dig> in their order of appearance. generally, differences in the embryo type  had a minor rearrangement effect on the stability order for majority of the genes examined. the gene actb showed wider stability range between the embryo types with better stability in the in vivo samples compared to the in vitro .

expression profiles of pou5f <dig> gene in rabbit preimplantation stage embryos
to evaluate the performances of the newly selected reference genes, the normalization factor  was calculated. the expression of pou5f <dig> gene was quantified in the in vitro produced rabbit oocytes and embryo samples and the results were normalized by the newly calculated factor. the expression at the oocyte stage was used as a calibrator to calculate the relative expression levels in the different developmental stages . based on analyses, the pou5f <dig> gene was expressed in all developmental stages with various signal intensities. comparatively higher expression levels were observed at the oocyte and zygote stages, and declined gradually to the lowest levels at the 8-cell stage. however, starting from the morula stage, the levels increased continuously to the blastocyst stage.

discussion
the number of studies revealing the importance of normalization has increased recently and, as a result, the search for study-specific appropriate reference genes has gained momentum. this can be seen in the rising number of relevant publications. in this study, we selected a large number of reference genes and compared their expression in the rabbit oocytes and different preimplantation stage embryos that were derived in vivo or produced in vitro. after detailed analyses, here we show the selection of the three most stable reference genes in rabbit oocytes and embryos that can be used for normalization.

rabbits have many advantages  <cit> , including a convenient reproductive pattern , the possibility of keeping them in conventional housing in an indoor facility, the lower cost of procurement and handling compared to large animals. moreover, they have sizeable milk production that allows their use as test animals for therapeutic protein expression in milk. a combination of all these factors has led to the use of rabbits as experimental models and their use in gene expression studies. moreover, the studies of genetic reprogramming in rabbit embryos  <cit> , in which our laboratory is also taking part, are surging.

as gene expression results depend on the type of normalizer gene used  <cit> , finding appropriate reference genes is timely, and will help toward the correct interpretation of the experimental results. finding appropriate reference genes implies careful selection of stable genes evaluated for expression stability. differences arising from the quality and quantity of input rna, efficiencies of reverse transcription reaction and handling errors can be accounted by normalizing the expression of a target gene to the reference. this allows the direct comparison of normalized expression values between samples  <cit> .

earlier suggestions to use rna mass quantity and adding exogenous templates for normalization has been challenged for the inherent technical problems hindering its wider adoption  <cit> . moreover, adding exogenous template will compete with endogenous sequences for primers and nucleotides during the pcr reaction  <cit> . the use of endogenous reference genes for normalization is the widely used approach in most applications. it has gained acceptance over time due to its biological relevance, and its consideration of various errors during the process. moreover, compared to adding exogenous templates to the samples, it has no extra procedures for its application  <cit> . to address this issue, the use of individual embryos compared to the pooled ones was in line with earlier findings  <cit>  that indicated the significance of using individual samples. it can enable accurate statistical analyses, identify more biological variations and subtle gene expression changes.

most of the genes  had the respective lowest levels at the 8-cell stage. this transcript depression at the 8-cell stage coincides with the lag in development  occurring during the maternal to zygote transition  in rabbit embryos  <cit> . the morphological and molecular variations between embryos of different mammalian species have been discussed  <cit> . the effects of culture and treatment conditions on the rabbit preimplantation stage embryos have also been described earlier  <cit> . in this study, the comparative transcript levels of the same gene in different embryo types  were described. the profile shows transcript level variations and substantiates the fact that in vitro conditions, in general, are sub-optimal and influence gene expression levels. in our earlier mouse study  <cit> , we have indicated the effects of embryo type on the stability and selection of reference genes. as far as we know, such comparisons and selections were not made for rabbit gene expression studies. therefore, we made comparison of large number of commonly used reference genes and selected the most stable ones for normalization. thus, this study is timely and the recommendations derived from the study can be widely applicable for rabbit embryo studies elsewhere, as most rabbit embryo studies deal with both or either of the in vivo/in vitro models.

despite the traditional ways of using a single reference gene for normalization, the approach has been frequently criticized in a number of studies  <cit> . the implications of using an inappropriate reference gene have already been discussed  <cit> . another elegant study  <cit>  also demonstrated the error related to using a single reference gene and proposed to calculate a normalization factor based on the geometric averages of at least three carefully selected stable reference genes. in this study, detailed comparisons of the expression levels in different developmental stages and embryo types  indicated the comparative stable expression of the genes h2afz, ywhaz and hprt <dig>  this was also further confirmed by the genorm expression stability analyses . the selected constitutive genes were stable in both in vivo and in vitro conditions with slight variations in the order of stability . this variation might be attributed to the differences in expression levels with change in embryo type. our earlier mouse study  <cit>  has also indicated a shift in the stability order with the changes in embryo type.

in the current study, variations of gene stability values between the in vivo and in vitro comparisons were narrower than in the earlier mouse study. this may indicate better in vitro culture conditions of rabbit embryos than the in vitro mouse embryo culture. moreover, the comparative stability of h2afz and hprt genes were also shown in our previous mouse study. although the gene ppia was a preferred reference gene in the earlier studies  <cit> , it is not among the best in this study. this might be due to species differences or the presence of other better performing genes. in earlier studies, some genes  were assumed as universal reference genes, without further evaluation, and used individually for normalization of gene expression data  <cit> . the current result in rabbit embryos and our earlier mouse study  <cit>  clearly indicated the inappropriateness of some of the widely used reference genes for normalization, at least under the conditions examined, and reinforce the recommendation to evaluate study-specific reference genes before using them for normalization.

to evaluate the performances of the newly selected reference genes, the expression values of pou5f <dig> gene was normalized by the calculated new normalization factor. after normalization, the observed pattern closely resembled the profiles of pou5f <dig> orthologue genes. since pou5f <dig> orthologue genes, including human, bovine and porcine, are highly conserved, a similar role has been suggested for pou5f <dig> in all mammals  <cit> . in line with our finding of the pou5f <dig> profile, earlier studies in human  <cit>  and bovine  <cit>  embryos detected the expression of pou5f <dig> throughout all preimplantation stages. the decline of pou5f <dig> levels during the mzt stage and continuous increase after compaction was also observed in the earlier mouse  <cit>  and human  <cit>  embryo studies. therefore, the normalized pou5f <dig> gene profile revealed the conserved pattern and further confirmed the suitability of the selected reference genes.

CONCLUSIONS
our study, for the first time, revealed a detailed reference gene validation and selection for rabbit preimplantation stage embryo studies. the outcomes indicated the possibility of using the same selected genes for both in vivo derived and in vitro produced embryo gene expression studies. although transcript level variations were observed between individual embryos analyzed for the same gene, the expression patterns were almost similar. based on detailed analyses of the results, including the pattern and ranking with genorm, the genes h2afz, ywhaz and hprt <dig> were found to be the most stable. we also believe that the number of reference genes used for normalization depends on several factors  <cit> . however, using the geometric averages of the above three genes is preferred for accurate gene expression results in rabbit oocytes and preimplantation stage embryo studies. the appropriateness of these genes irrespective of the embryo type, and the conserved patterns of the pou5f <dig> gene after normalization, further confirm the suitability of these genes.

