BACKGROUND
insects represent the majority of the biodiversity on the earth described, being the most prosperous animal group in the terrestrial ecosystem  <cit> . one of the key traits considered to make insects so prosperous is their symbiotic association with microorganisms. symbiotic microorganisms are universally found in the gut, body cavity, or cells of a wide array of insects. some symbionts are obligate associates for their hosts and significantly contribute to the host fitness, other symbionts are facultative companions of their hosts and tend to negatively affect the host fitness, and the majority of the others are of unknown nature and are recognized only by means of microscopy, pcr detection, and/or dna sequences. whether their effects are beneficial, detrimental, or nearly neutral, many of these symbionts substantially affect the physiology, ecology, reproduction, and behavior of their hosts in a variety of ways  <cit> .

among them, the most intimate mutualistic associations are found in obligate endocellular symbionts like buchnera in aphids and wigglesworthia in tsetse flies. in these insects, the symbiotic bacteria are housed in the specialized cells called bacteriocytes or mycetocytes, where the inhabiting symbionts play their physiological roles such as provisioning of essential nutrients for the host insects  <cit> . the symbionts are vertically transmitted to the next host generation in the maternal body at early stages of oogenesis or embryogenesis, wherein the symbiont transmission is integrated into the intricate developmental process of the host insects  <cit> . the symbiont phylogeny usually mirrors the host phylogeny, suggesting host-symbiont co-speciation over evolutionary time  <cit> . in these obligate endocellular bacterial symbionts, remarkable evolutionary patterns, including at-biased nucleotide composition, accelerated molecular evolution, and reduced genome size, are generally observed in comparison with their free-living relatives. on the basis of these evolutionary patterns, it has been argued that the endocellular lifestyle of the obligate insect symbionts might have strongly affected their genomic evolution  <cit> .

on the other hand, symbiotic microorganisms are harbored in the gut cavity of many insects. while most of the gut microbes are commensals or parasites, some of them are known to play substantial biological roles for their hosts. a famous example is wood-eating termites , wherein a rich microbial community of cellulose-degrading bacteria and protozoa in the hindgut is essential for food digestion by the insects  <cit> . although less known, many plant-sucking stinkbugs  are also dependent on their gut symbiotic bacteria. in these insects, the terminal region of the midgut is characterized by the presence of many sacs or tubular outgrowths, called crypts or caeca, whose lumen is filled with specific symbiotic bacteria. when experimentally deprived of the microbial associates, the host insects suffer retarded growth, mortality and/or sterility  <cit> . certainly these gut symbionts are vertically transmitted by superficial bacterial contamination of eggs  or probing parental bacteria-containing excrement   <cit>  and important for their host insects, but researchers have conventionally thought that such extracellular associations are more casual than the endocellular associations, on the grounds that the symbionts are not isolated in the body cavity and thus vulnerable to invasion and replacement by foreign microbes  <cit> .

however, the conventional view was countered by a recent study on stinkbugs of the family plataspidae. these insects, which harbor a γ-proteobacterial symbiont named ishikawaella capsulata in their midgut crypts, had been known for their unique mechanism for vertical transmission, so-called 'capsule transmission'  <cit> , wherein mother insects deposit symbiont-filled particles  in association with eggs, and hatchlings probe the content of the capsules to acquire the symbiont. in the plataspid symbiosis, strict host-symbiont co-cladogenesis and reductive symbiont genome evolution were identified despite the extracellular association  <cit> . now it is of evolutionary interest whether similar cases are to be found in other insect-microbe extracellular symbioses or the case of plataspid stinkbugs is an orphan exception.

here we report a novel group of insect gut bacteria that exhibit host-symbiont co-cladogenesis and reductive genome evolution. the host insects are stinkbugs of the family acanthosomatidae, which are known for their social behavior such as maternal guarding of eggs and nymphs against predators  <cit> . rosenkranz  <cit>  described unique histological structures called 'isolated midgut crypts' and 'lubricating organs' for harboring symbiotic bacteria in these insects. in most plant-sucking stinkbugs, the lumen of the midgut crypts is connected to the midgut main tract, and thus the insects are able to excrete the symbiotic bacteria from the anus for vertical transmission to their eggs by surface contamination  <cit> . in acathosomatid stinkbugs, by contrast, the lumen of the crypts is completely sealed off, thereby retaining the symbiotic bacteria in the isolated cryptic cavities. the female ovipositor is equipped with a pair of peculiar lubrication organs of unknown developmental origin, which consist of numerous bacteria-filled tubulets. these highly-developed symbiotic organs suggest intimacy of the host-symbiont relationship, but there have been no studies on the acanthosomatid gut symbionts except for the early histological description by rosenkranz  <cit> .

in this study, we performed comprehensive microbiological characterization of the gut symbiotic bacteria associated with  <dig> species of acanthosomatid stinkbugs, which unveiled remarkable aspects of their genetic, genomic, and evolutionary features.

RESULTS
general observation of midgut crypts
in all of the  <dig> acanthosomatid species listed in additional file  <dig>  well-developed crypts were found in the fourth section of the midgut . the midgut crypts were white in color and arranged in two rows, fused into two-dimensional assemblages and forming a butterfly-shaped organ. when the organs of e. humeralis, elasmucha signoreti, sastragala esakii, and acanthosoma giganteum were subjected to sectioning microscopy, no connection was found between the crypt lumen and the midgut main tract .

bacterial 16s rrna gene sequences from midgut crypts
from  <dig> acanthosomatid species representing  <dig> populations , the crypt-bearing midgut was dissected and subjected to dna extraction. from the  <dig> dna samples, a  <dig>  kb segment of bacterial 16s rrna gene was amplified by pcr and cloned, and  <dig> or more clones for each of the samples were subjected to rflp genotyping. almost all of the clones derived from a single insect exhibited identical restriction fragment length polymorphism  patterns, except for one clone from e. signoreti and one from acanthosoma labiduroides.

three or more clones for each of the  <dig> samples were sequenced. all of the sequences derived not only from a single insect but also from the same species were completely identical to each other. the sequences from  <dig> acanthosomatid species showed high sequence similarities ranging from  <dig> % to  <dig> % to each other. dna database searches with these sequences identified over 90% similarities to 16s rrna gene sequences of γ-proteobacterial representatives. the exceptional clones identified by rflp genotyping from e. signoreti and a. labiduroides were also sequenced, which showed the highest similarities to 16s rrna gene sequences of wolbachia sp.  and spiroplasma citri , respectively.

in situ hybridization of midgut crypts targeting the bacterial 16s rrna
to confirm whether the obtained 16s rrna gene sequences were definitely derived from the gut symbiotic bacteria of the acanthosomatid stinkbugs, we performed 16s rrna-targeted in situ hybridization with specific oligonucleotide probes. in e. humeralis, in situ hybridization with the specific probes cy5-ehsym16s and tnkm16s-a <dig> detected dense signals in the content of the midgut crypts . such signals were observed neither in the midgut main tract nor in the tissue connecting the crypts to the main tract. in elasmostethus nubilus, s. esakii, e. signoreti, and acanthosoma denticaudum, in situ hybridization with the group-specific probe cy5-acsym16s also detected the symbiont signals specifically in the cavity of the midgut crypts in the same manner . a series of control experiments confirmed the specificity of the hybridization signals .

electron microscopy of midgut crypts
ultrathin sections of the midgut crypts from e. humeralis and e. nubilus were observed by electron microscopy. in both the species, the lumen of the crypts was full of symbiotic bacteria . the rod-shaped bacterial cells, whose cell wall looked very thin, were larger in e. humeralis than in e. nubilus . the cytoplasm of the epithelial cells of the midgut crypt contained a nucleus and many mitochondria but no bacterial cells .

phylogenetic analysis of symbiotic bacteria based on 16s rrna gene
the 16s rrna gene sequences originating from the gut symbionts of the acanthosomatid stinkbugs, representing  <dig> populations,  <dig> species, and  <dig> genera, were subjected to molecular phylogenetic analyses together with 16s rrna gene sequences of γ-proteobacterial representatives. the acanthosomatid symbionts formed a monophyletic group with high supporting values , and 95% in maximum likelihood , respectively). the phylogenetic relationship of the symbionts was generally in agreement with the systematics of the host insects: the symbionts from congenic host species, elasmostethus spp., elasmucha spp., sastragala spp., and acanthosoma spp., formed clades, respectively. the monophyletic group of the acanthosomatid symbionts showed a phylogenetic affinity to the clade of buchnera, obligate endocellular symbionts of aphids, and also to the clade of ishikawaella, obligate gut symbionts of plataspid stinkbugs .

phylogenetic analysis of symbiotic bacteria based on a protein-coding gene
to further confirm the phylogenetic placement of the symbiotic bacteria, a groel gene segment was cloned and sequenced from e. nubilus, elasmucha putoni, and s. esakii. molecular phylogenetic analyses of the sequences revealed that the sequences of the acanthosomatid symbionts formed a well-supported monophyletic group and clustered with the clade of aphid endosymbionts buchnera and also the clade of plataspid gut symbionts ishikawaella in the γ-proteobacteria . the results of groel gene analyses were generally concordant with the results of 16s rrna gene analyses .

prevalence of symbiotic bacteria in natural host populations
diagnostic pcr surveys of field-collected acanthosomatid stinkbugs consistently detected 100% infection frequencies of the symbiotic bacteria in all the species wherein multiple samples were examined: 38/ <dig> in e. humeralis; 50/ <dig> in e. nubilus; 6/ <dig> in e. putoni; and 6/ <dig> in s. esakii.

detection of symbiotic bacteria from dissected tissues
dissected tissues, including head, flight muscle, foregut, midgut first section, midgut second section, midgut third section, midgut fourth section with crypts, hindgut, abdominal tip, ovary, and egg, were prepared from adult females of e. humeralis, e. nubilus, and e. putoni, and were subjected to diagnostic pcr detection of the symbiotic bacteria. in all the species, positive signals were consistently detected from midgut fourth section, abdominal tip, and egg .

vertical transmission of symbiotic bacteria via egg surface contamination
diagnostic pcr surveys of field-collected egg masses consistently detected the symbiotic bacteria from all the eggs examined:  <dig> eggs from three egg masses of e. humeralis,  <dig> eggs from one egg mass of e. nubilus,  <dig> eggs from four egg masses of s. esakii, and  <dig> eggs from three egg masses of a. giganteum . meanwhile, the symbiotic bacteria were not detected from dissected ovaries of e. humeralis, e. nubilus and e. putoni , refuting the possibility of ovarial symbiont transmission. newborn nymphs of these species exhibited a characteristic behavior, probing of egg surface with their proboscis, soon after hatching , suggesting the possibility of symbiont transmission via egg surface contamination.

sterilization of egg surface disrupted symbiont transmission to newborn nymphs
in an attempt to experimentally confirm the possibility of symbiont transmission via egg surface contamination, we divided each of the egg masses of e. humeralis into two portions. one of the halves was left untreated, the other half was surface-sterilized, and newborn nymphs from these experimental egg masses were subjected to diagnostic pcr detection of the symbiotic bacteria after hatching. most of the nymphs from the control egg masses were symbiont-positive, whereas all of the nymphs from the sterilized egg masses were symbiont-negative .

aeggs were treated with 70% ethanol for  <dig> min and 4% formaldehyde containing  <dig> % triton x- <dig> for  <dig> min, and rinsed two times with 70% ethanol.

ball samples showed no amplification after  <dig> cycles of pcr.

effects of symbiont elimination on fitness and phenotype of host insects
between the control egg masses and the sterilized egg masses, no significant differences were found in time to hatching  and hatching rate , indicating that surface sterilization of eggs did not affect the embryonic development of the insect. however, when we examined another set of experimental egg masses of e. humeralis for inspection of post-hatch growth and development, drastic differences were detected between the sterilized group and the control group. adult emergence rate was significantly lower in the sterilized group than in the control group . developmental time to adulthood was significantly longer in the sterilized group  than in the control group  . body size in terms of thorax width was not statistically different between the sterilized group  and the control group  . however, adult insects from the control egg masses were normal in color , whereas adult insects from the sterilized egg masses exhibited abnormal pale coloration . diagnostic pcr detection confirmed that all the adult insects from the sterilized group were symbiont-free, except an individual exhibiting a faint pcr signal .

localization of symbiotic bacteria in lubricating organ
in the abdomen of adult females of e. humeralis, e. nubilus, and other acanthosomatid species, we identified a pair of characteristic 'lubricating organs' on the ventral side of the body cavity near the abdominal tip  which were covered with yellowish membrane  and lined with cuticular layer , as previously reported by rosenkranz  <cit> . in situ hybridization identified with certainty strong signals of the symbiotic bacteria in the lubricating organ . the symbiont in the lubricating organ was shown to be identical to that in the midgut crypts on the basis of cloning and sequencing of 16s rrna gene . the lubricating organ consisted of two distinct regions: the sac-like region populated by the symbiotic bacteria and the symbiont-free chitinous ridge region . on the outer surface of the sac-like part, numerous tubulet-like structures were densely arranged into a layer, wherein the symbiont signals were localized . the organ was not found in adult males .

phylogenetic analysis of host insects based on a mitochondrial gene
from the  <dig> acanthosomatid species, a mitochondrial coi gene segment was cloned and sequenced. molecular phylogenetic analyses of the sequences revealed that congenic species, namely elasmostethus spp., elasmucha spp., sastragala spp., and acanthosoma spp., formed distinct clades, respectively , which was in good agreement with the insect systematics.

host-symbiont co-evolutionary analysis
atree includes the fully resolved topologies in the symbionts from the genus acanthosoma , maximizing the host-symbiont congruence.

btree includes the fully resolved topologies in the symbionts from the genus acanthosoma , minimizing the host-symbiont congruence.

creconstruction with the maximum numbers of co-divergence events and the lowest cost values.

at-rich genes of acanthosomatid symbionts
when the base compositions of the 16s rrna gene region from γ-proteobacterial representatives were inspected, free-living bacteria like escherichia coli and salmonella typhi exhibited low at content of around 45%. on the other hand, obligate endocellular insect symbionts such as buchnera, wigglesworthia, blochmannia, and baumannia exhibited remarkably higher at content of over 50%. the at content of the acanthosomatid gut symbionts were, together with those of the plataspid gut symbionts ishikawaella, consistently over 50% , which were equivalent to the values of the obligate insect endosymbionts rather than the values of the free-living bacteria. when the base compositions of the groel gene region were examined, similar patterns were observed: free-living bacteria like e. coli and s. typhi exhibited at content of around 45%; obligate endocellular insect symbionts such as buchnera, wigglesworthia, blochmannia, and baumannia over 60%; the gut symbionts of plataspid stinkbugs ishikawaella  <dig> %; and the gut symbionts of acanthosomatid stinkbugs 62–64% .

accelerated molecular evolution in acanthosomatid symbionts
aacanthosomatid symbionts from e. nubilus , e. humeralis , e. brevis , l. gramineus , e. putoni , e. dorsalis , e. signoreti , s. esakii , s. scutellata , a. haemorrhoidale , a. labiduroides , a. forficula , a. denticaudum , a. giganteum . plataspid symbionts from megacopta punctatissima , brachyplatys subaeneus , and coptosoma sphaerula . aphid symbionts from geoica urticularia , yamatocallis tokyoensis  and acyrthosiphon pisum . e. coli  and salmonella typhi .

bs-symbiont of psyllid a. mori ; y. pestis .

cestimated mean distance between lineage  <dig> and the last common ancestor of lineages  <dig> and  <dig> 

destimated mean distance between lineage  <dig> and the last common ancestor of lineages  <dig> and  <dig> 

ek1–k <dig> 

fk1/k <dig> 

gp value based on the null distribution of distance values generated by  <dig>  bootstrap resamplings of the aligned nucleotide sites.

aacanthosomatid symbionts from e. nubilus , e. putoni , s. esakii . plataspid symbionts from megacopta punctatissima  and megacopta cribraria . aphid symbionts from acyrthosiphon pisum , schizaphis graminum , baizongia pistaciae  and cinara cedri . e. coli  and salmonella typhi .

bclosely related endosymbionts from wigglesworthia glossinidia from tsetse glossina brevipalpis , blochmannia floridanus from ant camponotus floridanus , baumannia cicadellinicola from sharpshooter homalodisca coagulata . vibrio cholerae .

cestimated mean distance between lineage  <dig> and the last common ancestor of lineages  <dig> and  <dig> 

destimated mean distance between lineage  <dig> and the last common ancestor of lineages  <dig> and  <dig> 

ek1–k <dig> 

fk1/k <dig> 

gp value based on the null distribution of distance values generated by  <dig>  bootstrap resamplings of the aligned nucleotide sites.

hdivided by  <dig> 

reduced genome size of acanthosomatid symbionts
discussion
identification of novel gut symbiotic bacteria from acanthosomatid stinkbugs
this study provides the first genetic and evolutionary characterization of the symbiotic bacteria from stinkbugs of the family acanthosomatidae since the early histological description by rosenkranz  <cit> . all of the  <dig> species representing  <dig> genera that we examined possessed a well-developed symbiotic organ, consisting of a number of closed tubular crypts fused two-dimensionally, in the midgut fourth section . electron microscopy showed that rod-shaped bacterial cells, which are morphologically uniform with reduced cell wall, are packed in the cavity of the crypts extracellularly . genotyping and sequencing of bacterial 16s rrna gene revealed that a specific γ-proteobacterium dominates the microflora in the symbiotic organ of each of the stinkbug species. molecular phylogenetic analyses based on the 16s rrna gene and groel gene sequences demonstrated that these bacteria from the acanthosomatid stinkbugs form a monophyletic group in the γ-proteobacteria . diagnostic pcr and in situ hybridization confirmed with certainty that the 16s rrna gene sequences originate from the symbiotic bacteria in the isolated cavity of the midgut crypts . on the basis of these results, we conclude that the acanthosomatid stinkbugs harbor a specific clade of γ-proteobacteria as extracellular symbiont in the highly-specialized midgut crypts.

relationship to gut symbiotic bacteria of other stinkbugs
a diverse array of stinkbugs are associated with gut symbiotic bacteria, most of which are harbored in the lumen of the midgut crypts  <cit> . despite these extensive histological descriptions, only a limited number of stinkbug gut symbionts have been microbiologically characterized, including γ-proteobacterial ishikawaella from stinkbugs of the family plataspidae  <cit> , β-proteobacterial burkholderia from broad-headed bugs of the family alydidae  <cit> , nocardioform actinomycetes from assassin bugs of the family reduviidae  <cit> , and an unnamed γ-proteobacterium from the southern green stinkbug nezara viridula of the family pentatomidae  <cit> . molecular phylogenetic analyses indicated that the clade of the acanthosomatid gut symbionts is related to but distinct from the clade of the plataspid gut symbionts ishikawaella in the γ-proteobacteria . these results indicate that the bacterial symbiont characterized in this study is specifically associated with the family acanthosomatidae, and strongly suggest that symbiotic associations with diverse microbes have evolved repeatedly and independently in different stinkbug lineages.

host-symbiont co-speciation in acanthosomatid stinkbugs
in obligate endocellular symbiotic bacteria of diverse insects, such as buchnera in aphids, wigglesworthia in tsetse flies, blochmannia in ants, baumannia in sharpshooters, carsonella in psyllids, portiera in whiteflies, nardonella in weevils, and others, the symbiont phylogeny generally mirrors the host phylogeny, indicating stable and intimate host-symbiont associations over evolutionary time  <cit> . by contrast, in gut symbiotic bacteria of various insects, such as those in termites and alydid stinkbugs, the symbiont phylogeny does not reflect the host phylogeny, suggesting promiscuous host-symbiont associations over evolutionary time  <cit> . conventionally, it has been thought that such extracellular symbiotic associations are evolutionarily more casual than the endocellular symbiotic associations, on the grounds that the symbionts are not isolated in the body cavity and vulnerable to invasion and replacement by foreign microbes  <cit> . recently, however, strict host-symbiont co-speciation was discovered in the gut symbiotic bacteria ishikawaella of plataspid stinkbugs  <cit> . in this study, we unveiled another example of co-speciating gut symbiotic bacteria in acanthosomatid stinkbugs , corroborating the idea that host-symbiont co-speciation can occur even in gut symbiotic associations. the co-cladogenetic pattern suggests that a single bacterial infection in the common ancestor of the acanthosomatidae has been stably maintained over evolutionary time, diversifying in parallel with the host speciation. the stable host-symbiont association is suggestive of important biological roles of the symbiont for the host insect and strict vertical transmission of the symbiont through host generations.

vertical symbiont transmission via egg surface contamination
from eggs of acanthosomatid species, the symbiotic bacteria were consistently detected, whereas dissected ovaries contained no symbiotic bacteria . newborn nymphs of these species exhibited a characteristic behavior, probing of egg surface with their proboscis, soon after hatching . sterilization of egg surface resulted in disruption of symbiont transmission to newborn nymphs of e. humeralis . these results indicate that the symbiont is vertically transmitted via egg surface contamination. in addition to the acanthosomatidae, this type of symbiont transmission has been also known from the family pentatomidae  <cit> , whereas different types of symbiont transmission have been reported from other groups of stinkbugs, including probing of parental bacteria-containing excrement  from the families cydnidae and coreidae  <cit> , deposition of bacteria-containing capsules with eggs  from the family plataspidae  <cit> , and acquisition of free-living bacteria from the environment every generation  from the family alydidae  <cit> . probably because of the extracellular symbiont location in the gut cavity, these stinkbugs have evolved post-hatch symbiont transmission mechanisms instead of the ovarial transmission mechanisms typical of endocellular symbionts of various insects.

symbiont-dependent host growth and development
thus far, diverse stinkbugs from the families pentatomidae, cydnidae, plataspidae, coreidae, alydidae etc have been reported to suffer retarded growth, sterility and/or mortality when experimentally deprived of their gut symbiotic bacteria  <cit> . in this study, we provided the first experimental demonstration that the gut symbiont is important for normal growth and development of e. humeralis, a member of the family acanthosomatidae: when deprived of the symbiont, the insects exhibited lower adult emergence rate, prolonged developmental time, and abnormal morphology . the biological roles played by the symbiont are currently unknown. acanthosomatid stinkbugs suck leaves, stems, and fruits of their host plants  <cit> . plausibly, the symbiont may provide the host with nutritional supplements, such as essential amino acids and vitamins, as has been demonstrated in other plant-sucking insects  <cit> .

novel symbiotic organ 'isolated midgut crypts'
in most of the stinkbug groups, a number of sac- or tube-like crypts are present in a posterior region of the midgut, and the cavity of the crypts, wherein the symbiotic bacteria are harbored, has a connection to the midgut main tract  <cit> . hence, the midgut main tract constantly receives symbiont supply from the crypts, which can be used for vertical transmission of the symbiont by egg surface contamination or other means. in the acanthosomatidae, however, the cavity of the crypts is completely disconnected from the midgut main tract   <cit> . the isolated midgut crypts form a highly-specialized symbiotic organ, in which the symbiotic bacteria are confined not in the cytoplasm but in the extracellular space . it is expected that the isolated cavity enables stable cultivation of the symbiotic bacteria that perform essential biological roles for the host insect. how the symbiotic organ is formed deserves future study. probably the midgut crypts are not closed in newborn nymphs, the symbiotic bacteria ingested by the nymphs colonize the rudimentary crypts, and the cryptic cavity is disconnected from the midgut main tract in the developmental course of the insects. rosenkranz  <cit>  observed that the midgut crypts are connected to the main tract at least until the second nymphal instar in acanthosoma haemorrhoidale.

novel transmission apparatus 'lubricating organ'
while suitable for stable retention of the symbiotic bacteria, the isolated midgut crypts in the acanthosomatidae entail a serious problem: symbiont supply to anal excrement for vertical transmission is, unlike the other stinkbug groups, structurally disrupted. the dilemma is, astonishingly, reconciled by the evolution of a novel 'lubricating organ' associated with the female ovipositor. rosenkranz  <cit>  reported that, on the ventral side of the posterior abdomen, adult females possess a pair of sac-like organs with a chitinous lining consisting of numerous bacteria-filled tubulets. considering the structural configuration, it was postulated that the organ is arranged in such a way that eggs gliding downwards in the ovipositor squeeze out a portion of the bacteria-containing fluid into the vagina, whereby the egg surface is contaminated. in this study, our histological observations confirmed the description by rosenkranz  <cit>  . in situ hybridization and diagnostic pcr demonstrated the microbiological identity of the bacteria in the isolated midgut crypts, those in the lubricating organ, and those on the egg surface . however, the development, infection process and evolutionary origin of the lubricating organ are not yet fully understood, deserving detailed histological and developmental studies in future.

occasional lateral transfer of acanthosomatid symbiont: possible relevant factors
despite the global host-symbiont co-cladogenesis, it was inferred that host switching of the symbiotic bacteria might have occurred at least twice in the acanthosomatid stinkbugs . how such lateral symbiont transfers have taken place in the acanthosomatid species is currently unknown, but it may be relevant that the postnatal symbiont transmission via egg smearing is potentially vulnerable to horizontal symbiont transmission between host lineages  <cit> . here, although speculative, we suggest the possibility that plant utilization patterns of the acanthosomatid stinkbugs might have been involved in the process. for example, a number of acathosomatid species such as e. nubilus, s. esakii, s. scutellata, a. labiduroides, and a. forticula commonly feed and reproduce on the same plant, swida controversa  <cit> . under the condition that egg-laying females of different species coexist on the same plant, wandering newborn nymphs might encounter an opportunity to acquire the symbiotic bacteria from heterospecific egg masses. on the other hand, we suggest the possibility that the maternal brood care behavior typical of the stinkbug group might have countered the process. in acanthosomatid species such as e. putoni, e. dorsalis, e. signoreti, s. esakii, s. scutellata, and a. gigantium, adult females lay an egg mass on the host plant, and guard the eggs and first instar offspring against predators by a series of defensive behaviors, including covering the clutch with the body, tilting the body toward the source of disturbance, strongly fanning the wings, etc.  <cit> . these anti-predator behaviors might also discourage the access of wandering newborn nymphs to heterospecific egg masses, thereby preventing the lateral symbiont transfer. in these contexts, experimental studies on lateral symbiont transfers between different acanthosomatid stinkbugs are of ecological and evolutionary interest.

reductive genome evolution in acanthosomatid symbiont
in most obligate endocellular symbiotic bacteria like buchnera in aphids, wigglesworthia in tsetse flies, blochmannia in ants, baumannia in sharpshooters, and others, remarkable evolutionary patterns, including at-biased nucleotide composition, accelerated molecular evolution, and reduced genome size, have been detected in comparison with their free-living relatives  <cit> . these peculiar genetic traits have been argued in relation to the attenuated purifying selection due to small population size and strong bottleneck, which are associated with the lifestyle of vertically transmitted endocellular symbionts  <cit> . here it should be noted that small population size and strong bottleneck are also found in vertically transmitted extracellular symbionts, like some gut symbiotic bacteria of stinkbugs. recently, from the gut symbiotic bacteria of plataspid stinkbugs ishikawaella, at-biased genes, accelerated evolution, and genome reduction were identified  <cit> . in this study, we demonstrated that the gut symbiotic bacteria of acanthosomatid stinkbugs also exhibit these peculiar genetic traits . these findings suggest that the reductive genome evolution in the insect symbionts is not simply attributable to their endocellular or extracellular habitats. anyway, stable living inside the host insect symbiotically may relax natural selection acting on a number of biological processes that are needed only for non-symbiotic life, leading to degeneration and loss of genes relevant to those processes over evolutionary time. also, it appears plausible that attenuated purifying selection due to small population size and strong bottleneck might have facilitated the reductive genome evolution.

proposal of candidate name
on account of the remarkable and distinct genetic, genomic, and microbiological traits described above, we propose the designation 'candidatus rosenkranzia clausaccus' for the symbiotic bacteria of the acanthosomatid stinkbugs.

 diagnostic features
the symbiont belongs to the γ-proteobacteria . the alignment of 16s rrna gene sequences from  <dig> isolates of the symbiont, representing  <dig> genera and  <dig> species of the host insects, plus other proteobacteria indicates the following distinctive residues : gaa at positions  <dig> to  <dig>  gaggaagaaa at positions  <dig> to  <dig>  augaa at positions  <dig> to  <dig>  and agguguagcugacuu at positions  <dig> to  <dig>  the 16s rrna gene sequences reported here are ab368822-ab <dig>  also available are groel gene sequences from three isolates of the symbiont, ab379694-ab <dig> 

the symbiont is harbored in the extracellular cavity of the symbiotic organ, consisting of a number of closed tubular crypts fused two-dimensionally, in the terminal region of the midgut . in adult females, the symbiont is also found in the lubricating organ associated with the ovipositor . electron microscopy shows that the symbiont is a rod-shaped bacterium, whose size and shape differ between the host species . the symbiont is vertically transmitted by egg surface contamination with symbiont-containing secretion from the lubricating organ associated with the female ovipositor . the symbiont genes exhibit high at content:  <dig> – <dig> % for 16s rrna gene  and  <dig> – <dig> % for groel gene . the symbiont genes exhibit accelerated molecular evolution . the symbiont genome size is  <dig> – <dig>  mb .

 hosts
the symbiont is associated with stinkbugs of the family acanthosomatidae, including e. humeralis, e. nubilus, elasmostethus brevis, l. gramineus, e. putoni, elasmucha dorsalis, e. signoreti, s. esakii, s. scutellata, a. labiduroides, a. denticaudum, a. forficula, a. giganteum, and a. haemorrhoidale . early histological descriptions  <cit>  suggest that the symbiont is also found in other acanthosomatid species including elasmostethus interstinctus, elasmostethus minor, elasmucha ferrugata, elasmucha fieberi, elasmucha grisea, cyphostethus tristiatus, planois bimaculata, and ditomotarsus gayi, although no molecular data are available for them. the host phylogeny is largely concordant with the symbiont phylogeny , suggesting stable host-symbiont association over evolutionary time. elimination of the symbiont results in retarded growth, elevated mortality, and abnormal coloration of the host insects . the symbiont has not been cultured outside the host insects.

 nomenclature
the generic name honors werner rosenkranz, who first described the symbiotic system of the acanthosomatid stinkbugs  <cit> . the specific name refers to the completely isolated midgut crypts for harboring the symbiotic bacteria .

CONCLUSIONS
our findings presented in this study strongly suggest that the endocellular or extracellular environment matters little in the symbiont genome evolution. symbiotic lifestyle itself, which entails relaxed natural selection, small population size, and strong bottleneck, is likely to have substantially affected the reduced symbiont genomes. here, in a broader evolutionary context, we call attention to the point that such population genetic features are not restricted to symbiotic bacteria of insects and other organisms, but may be generally found in bacterial parasites and pathogens intimately associated with their host organisms. for obligate bacterial parasites and pathogens that suffer no or inferior survival outside their eukaryotic hosts including insects, animals, and even humans, the microbial populations are expected to be more or less divided and structured, potentially leading to small effective population size and strong bottleneck. it should be noted that similar reductive genome evolution is also observed in bacterial pathogens like rickettsia, chlamydia, and mycoplasma, among which some are endocellular and others are not  <cit> . hence, the same evolutionary logic operating in the obligate endocellular and extracellular bacterial symbionts may also apply to the bacterial parasites and pathogens, illuminating the evolutionary continuum from parasitism through commensalism to mutualism.

whilst the obligate endocellular and extracellular insect symbionts exhibit globally similar patterns of reductive genome evolution, we expect that close examination of their genomes would reveal notable differences reflecting their adaptation to and constraint in the different symbiotic lifestyles. in this context, it may be notable that the genome sizes of the extracellular symbionts, ishikawaella and rosenkranzia, are somewhat larger than those of endocellular ones like buchnera and wigglesworthia. the phylogenetic affinity of the aphid endocellular symbionts buchnera, the plataspid gut symbionts ishikawaella, and the acanthosomatid gut symbionts rosenkranzia  provides an ideal opportunity for comparative genomic analyses, which would lead to further insights into how their symbiotic lifestyles have affected their molecular, evolutionary, and genomic features.

