BACKGROUND
serine protease is a class of peptidases widely distributed in all domains of life that use a serine residue at the active site to cleave peptides  <cit> . serine proteases are associated with virulence and nutrient cycling in many pathogens. in the human pathogen trichophyton rubrum seven serine proteases genes were detected, two of them encoding products able to cleave keratin, suggesting the importance of these proteases in the invasion process in the human host  <cit> . also, a secreted serine protease from microsporum canis was described. a serine protease inhibitor, as well as a monoclonal antibody directed to the protein inhibited fungal adherence to reconstructed interfollicular feline epidermis  <cit> . in the entomophatogenic fungus magnaporthe grisea, the spm <dig> serine protease is positively regulated during nitrogen starvation condition. m. grisea mutant cells for the spm <dig> gene encoding for this serine protease present decreased sporulation and appressorial development as well as a greatly attenuated ability to cause disease  <cit> . serine proteases play important role in nematophagous fungus during cuticle degradation. an alkaline serine protease was described as virulence factor in the nematophogous fungus hirsutella rhossiliensis presenting higher protein expression level when nematode cuticle was used as the single source of nitrogen  <cit> . in the nematophagous fungus clonostachys rosea, the disruption of the gene prc encoding a subtilisin protease attenuated infection of the fungus to nematodes, indicating that this proteases acts as virulence factor  <cit> .

paracoccidioides brasiliensis is a thermally dimorphic fungus with a broad distribution in latin america, the causative agent of the paracoccidioidomycosis. the infection is initiated by inhalation of airborne propagules of mycelia, which reach the lungs and differentiate into the yeast parasitic phase  <cit> . few p. brasiliensis proteases have been characterized. previous analysis of the ests in the transcriptome of mycelim and yeast cells revealed a total of  <dig> open reading frames  encoding proteases in p. brasiliensis. the deduced amino acid sequences allowed the proteases to be classified in aspartyl, cysteine, metallo, serine proteases and proteasome subunits  <cit> . an extracellular subtilisin-like serine protease has been detected in the fungal yeast phase  <cit> . this protease is inhibited by pmsf , mercury acetate and p-hmb , allowing to classify the protein as a serine-thiol protease which was able to cleave, in vitro, murine laminin, human fibronectin, type iv-collagen and proteoglycans  <cit> . an aspartyl protease has been recently characterized in p. brasiliensis. the cdna encoding the aspartyl protease  and the deduced amino acid sequence encoding this protease  were identified and characterized. it was demonstrated that pbsap is a n-glycosylated molecule. this aspartyl protease was detected in the p. brasiliensis protein extract and culture supernatant, suggesting that pbsap is a secreted molecule. pbsap is also detected in the yeast cell wall by immunoelectron microscopy. zymogram assays indicated the presence of aspartyl protease gelatinolytic activity in yeast cells and culture supernatant  <cit> .

transcriptome analysis of the p. brasiliensis yeast cells derived from infected mice  <cit>  revealed a serine protease transcript positively regulated, wich was also induced in p. brasiliensis after incubation of yeast cells in human blood and plasma  <cit> . we analysed the effect of nitrogen deprivation on protein and transcript expression. studies were also performed in order to characterize pbsp interaction with other p. brasiliensis proteins. our studies indicated the regulation of pbsp by nitrogen availability and suggest additional roles of this serine protease in p. brasiliensis.

RESULTS
analysis of the cdna and of the deduced protein sequence
the additional file  <dig>  presents the genomic and cdna sequences encoding pbsp. the cdna sequence contains a  <dig> bp open reading frame. the genomic sequence presents two introns and three exons. the deduced amino acid sequence presented  <dig> amino acids residues with a predicted molecular mass of  <dig> kda and pi  <dig> . pbsp homology analysis in merops database reveals homology with serine proteases from s <dig> family of subtilases . analysis of the promoter region reveals a tata box and a 5'-gata-3' domain, putatively related to nitrogen metabolite regulation . analysis of the deduced amino acid sequence revealed a  <dig> amino acid signal peptide, suggesting that pbsp is a secreted molecule. comparisons of the predicted protein sequence with well-known serine proteases allowed us to identify three conserved amino acids residues dhs that compose the catalytic triad of the subtilase family. six n-glycosylation sites were also predicted at positions 76- <dig>  98- <dig>  160- <dig>  245- <dig>  287- <dig> and 450- <dig> in the deduced protein sequence . the sequences of the serine proteases from ajellomyces dermatitidis , coccidioides posadasii  and aspergillus fumigatus  showed the higher sequence identity to pbsp  .

expression of pbsp in escherichia coli and antibody production
sds-page analysis of the bacterial transformants revealed that iptg induced a dominant protein, migrating at  <dig> kda . this dominant protein was absent in cells growing in the absence of iptg . the size of the induced protein is in accordance to the expected size of the pbsp fused to glutathione s-transferase . the polyclonal antibody produced against pbsp reacted with the recombinant protein in western blot analysis . no reaction was detected with preimmune serum . the polyclonal antibodies recognized a protein species of  <dig> kda in p. brasiliensis proteome .

deglycosylation assays
the pbsp molecular mass, as detected by western blot analysis  was higher in comparison to the value obtained to the deduced protein. the probable glycosylation of the molecule was analyzed by treating total protein extract of yeast cells with endoglycosidase h. treatment with endoglycosidase h rendered a protein species of  <dig> kda . the data support the inference that the  <dig> kda protein in p. brasliensis yeast cells extract is the glycosylated form of the  <dig> kda protein.

analysis of proteases expression during nitrogen starvation in p. brasiliensis
the total proteases activity was analyzed in p. brasiliensis total protein extract during fungal nitrogen starvation. p. brasiliensis yeast cells were incubated in mmcm medium without nitrogen sources. control reactions were performed. protease activity was measured by using an azocasein assay in absence and presence of the protease inhibitors pmsf, pepstatin a and edta. the total protease activity was higher in yeast cells extracts in the absence of nitrogen sources . in the non-limiting nitrogen condition, a strong protease activity reduction was detected in the presence of edta  . in this condition the protease activity in the presence of pmsf or pepstatin was poorly reduced . during nitrogen limiting condition the protease activity was strongly reduced in the presence of pmsf, a serine protease inhibitor  and edta, a metalloprotease inhibitor . it was observed no significant protease activity reduction in the presence of pepstatin a .

the pbsp expression was evaluated by western blot analysis after incubation of yeast cells in mmcm medium in the absence and in the presence of nitrogen sources. pbsp expression was higher in yeast cells submitted to nitrogen starvation condition, both in total protein extract  and culture supernatant  in comparison to the pbsp expression in the non-limiting nitrogen condition .

analysis of pbsp expression by quantitative real-time pcr
the pbsp expression was evaluated by using real-time pcr in yeast cells submitted to nitrogen starvation. the pbsp expression was strongly induced during limiting nitrogen condition in  <dig> and  <dig> h , compared to the non-limiting condition . the pbsp expression was also evaluated in mycelium, yeast cells and yeast cells infecting macrophages. the results are presented in figure 3c. the pbsp expression in mycelium is strongly reduced  compared to the pbsp expression in yeast cells . there is an increased pbsp expression in yeast cells infecting macrophages .

interaction of serine protease with other p. brasiliensis proteins
the interaction of pbsp with other p. brasiliensis proteins was evaluated by two-hybrid system in s. cerevisiae. the proteins identified interacting with pbsp are described in table  <dig>  it was detected homologues of fkbp-peptidyl prolyl cis-trans isomerase, calnexin, hsp <dig> and a possible cytoskeleton associated periodic tryptophan protein. protein interactions were confirmed by co-immunoprecipitation assays and are shown in figure  <dig> 

discussion
the p. brasiliensis serine protease cdna/gene here characterized encode a protein with a n-terminal  <dig> amino acids with the characteristic of a leader peptide. the protein sequence corresponding to the mature pbsp shows high similarity with serine proteases sequences from other fungi. analysis of the promoter region revealed the presence of a nitrogen metabolite repression  region binding protein, responsible for positive regulation of genes in response to nitrogen metabolite presence such as area proteins in aspergillus nidulans  <cit>  and nit <dig> protein in neurospora crassa  <cit> . the data suggest that pbsp could be a molecule regulated by the nitrogen metabolite presence.

the recombinant pbsp was obtained fused to gst, exhibiting a molecule of  <dig> kda. by using the recombinant protein, polyclonal antibodies were obtained in mice. the serum, specifically, recognized the recombinant protein as well as a protein species of  <dig> kda in p. brasiliensis yeast cells extract. treatment of fungal protein extracts with endoglycosidase h resulted in a  <dig> kda protein species, corresponding to the pbsp in silico deduced molecular mass. the data suggest that the  <dig> kda additional in the  <dig> kda species is due to n-glycosylation.

total protease activity was evaluated during fungal nitrogen starvation by incubating yeast cells in chemically defined medium in the presence and absence of nitrogen sources. protease activity was higher in the absence of nitrogen sources. protease activity was also evaluated in the presence of specific inhibitor to serine, aspartyl and metalloprotease. in the presence of nitrogen sources, the most reduced activity was detected in the presence of edta indicating that metalloproteases have higher activity in nitrogen non-limiting condition. in nitrogen-limiting conditions, the protease activity was reduced in the presence of pmsf and edta, suggesting that serine proteases activity is higher in the nitrogen starvation condition.

in accordance to the western blot and qrt-pcr results, pbsp and pbsp expression levels were higher during nitrogen starvation. pbsp was detected by western blot in the yeast cell culture supernatant, suggesting this is a secreted protease and could be related to the nitrogen starvation response in p. brasiliensis. the nitrogen starvation response can be important in human pathogens since neutrophil phagosome presents low nitrogen concentration. in this way, the s. cerevisiae and candida albicans transcriptional profiles during neutrophil internalization are most similar to that of amino acid deprivation  <cit> . similarly, a subtilisin like serine protease from mycobacterium tuberculosis is described as a cell wall-associated protein and is induced during infection of macrophages  <cit> .

serine protease can be relevant during the infectious process. we demonstrated increased pbsp expression in p. brasiliensis yeast cells infecting macrophages. the serine protease importance during infection was also reported to the pathogenic dermatophyte arthroderma benhamiae since these proteases were positively regulated during experimental infection in guinea pig as demonstrated by using cdna microarray analysis  <cit> . in the fungus histoplasma capsulatum, a range of proteins associated to pathogenesis are secreted, including a serine protease, detected in vesicles of the parasitic yeast phase  <cit> . also, candida spp. isolated from gingival erythema are able to secret serine proteases that may be involved in the initial colonization events since the pre-treatment of candida spp. cells with the serine protease inhibitor pmsf diminished the candida spp. interaction with epithelial cells  <cit> .

two hybrid assays were performed to detect p. brasiliensis proteins interactions with pbsp. pbsp interacts with proteins presumably related to protein processing such as fkbp-peptidyl prolyl cis-trans isomerase, calnexin and hsp <dig>  the pbsp interaction with these proteins could be related to protein processing such as retention of incorrectly folded proteins  <cit> , trafficking of serine protease into and through the compartments in the cell  <cit>  and acceleration of folding process  <cit> . glycosylation has been associated to many processes such as folding, transport, secretion and degradation of the proteins containing the glycan chains. these processes are mediated by proteins that recognize these glycan chains, such as lectin-chaperones and calnexin and occurs in the endoplasic reticulum  <cit> . the demonstrated interaction of pbsp with calnexin can be related to the protein n-glycan chains. work will focus in this subject. calnexin is also related to protein secretion  <cit> . the detection of pbsp as a secreted molecule could reinforce its association with calnexin, as demonstrated. the pwp <dig> protein also interacts with serine protease. pwp <dig>  in the cytoplasm, may be associated to the cytoskeleton since s. cerevisiae strains presenting depletion of the pwp <dig> gene are defective in the hydrolysis of the septal junction between mother and daughter cells and cell growth  <cit> . further analyses are required to confirm the relevance of the pbsp interaction with these proteins.

CONCLUSIONS
in the present work a serine protease was characterized. this protease is a n-glycosylated molecule detected by immunoassay in p. brasiliensis cellular proteins and culture supernatant. this secreted protease and the cognate transcript were induced by nitrogen starvation indicating its possible role in the nitrogen acquisition. protein interactions with serine protease were firstly reported. pbsp interacts with proteins related to protein folding such as calnexin and fkbp-peptidyl prolyl cis-trans isomerases. pbsp interactions with hsp <dig> and with a pwp protein were also detected. the function of the interactions with pbsp molecules are possibly related to acceleration and quality control of pbsp folding and trafficking to compartments in the cell. interaction with a possible cytoskeleton protein was also reported, suggesting that the pbsp could be associated to different proteins in many subcellular localizations, playing role in a range of processes.

