BACKGROUND
the proximate and ultimate mechanisms leading to the evolution of eusocial behavior, in which there is a reproductive division of labor between highly fecund females  and largely sterile females , has long fascinated biologists. it has been hypothesized that eusocial behavior evolved from solitary behavior via changes in expression of existing “toolkits” of genes  <cit> , in which ancient molecular and physiological pathways became modified and expressed in new contexts, thereby leading to profound behavioral and physiological changes. this is exemplified in the major functional changes that have occurred in juvenile hormone , a principle regulator of physiological processes in insects, during the evolution of eusociality. however, except in the case of apis mellifera, whether and how the downstream transcriptional responses to jh evolved have not been explored. here, we examined the interactions between jh and one of its main transcriptional targets, vitellogenin , in a primitively eusocial species , and compare our results with studies of the interactions between jh and vitellogenin in other solitary and social species.

jh displays pleiotropic functions during the insect’s life cycle. in pre-adult stages it regulates developmental processes, while in adult females it induces vitellogenesis   <cit> . however, while the role of jh in development  appears to be widely conserved across insect species, its role in reproduction has been subjected to many modifications. in some highly eusocial insects, such as the honey bee and several termite and ant species, it no longer acts as a gonadotropin but instead regulates maturation and the division of labor in the worker caste  <cit> . modifications in the hormone’s traditional role have also been reported in several non-social insects in which jh is either not essential for female reproduction or is not an absolute requirement for ovarian activation  <cit> . furthermore, in several primitively eusocial hymenopteran species jh regulates formation and maintenance of dominance hierarchies in addition to its gonadotropin role  <cit> .

many effects of jh appear to be mediated by vitellogenin, and jh and vitellogenin interact in many species  <cit> . as the major egg yolk protein in insects, vitellogenin is synthesized in the abdominal fat body, released into the hemolymph, and sequestered by the developing oocytes  <cit> . in most insects, mainly non-social species, jh positively regulates vitellogenin levels  <cit> . for example, in adult female locusta migratoria, blocking jh action either by ablation of the corpora allata  or by treatment with jh inhibitors abolishes vitellogenin production. furthermore, vitellogenin biosynthesis can be induced in these females by injection or topical application of jh or an active jh analogue  <cit> . an exception is the parasitic wasp pteromalus puparum, a non-social hymenopteran species in which vg expression and jh titers are negatively correlated, and jh seems to play only a secondary role in stimulating oocyte growth  <cit> .

in contrast, social insect species exhibit a much more complex interplay between jh and vitellogenin, and vitellogenin appears to have acquired new functions. for example, in honey bee  workers, high jh levels significantly reduce vg transcription as well as vitellogenin protein levels  <cit> . interestingly, in the honey bee, vitellogenin operates in a negative feedback loop with jh, apparently slowing the onset of foraging behavior by suppressing jh titers, and thus appears to function as more than just an egg-yolk protein  <cit> . although in most of the best studied ant species, including solenopsis invicta <cit>  and pogonomyrmex barbatus <cit> , jh retains its gonadotropin function, in several primitively eusocial ant species jh levels and vitellogenin levels and/or egg production are negatively correlated: topical application of jh to founding queens reduced egg production in harpegnathos saltator <cit>  and reduced fertility in streblognathus peetersi <cit> . in some termite species, jh does not always stimulate vitellogenesis in reproductives. for example, jh synthesis correlates with the number of vitellogenic ovarioles in nymphoids but not in ergatoids of reticulitermes flavipes <cit> , and an elevated jh titer may inhibit reproductive processes in immature alates of zootermopsis angusticollis <cit> . in hodotermopsis sjostedti, jh titers of secondary reproductives are low compared to nymphs, pre-soldiers, and soldiers  <cit> ; whereas in queens of the termite reticulitemes speratus, jh and vitellogenin were found to correlate in an offset pattern, with an increase in jh titer preceding the rise of vg expression levels  <cit> . although the number of species studied is still limited, we can hypothesize that jh and vitellogenin have undergone a change in their roles and the way they interact during the transition from solitary to sociality  <cit> .

bombus terrestris colonies offer an excellent model system in which to examine how the interactions between jh and vitellogenin changed during the evolution of eusociality. b. terrestris are eusocial, with a reproductive division of labor between morphologically distinct castes  <cit> , and jh has maintained its original role as gonadotropin and is positively correlated with reproduction in both queens and workers  <cit> . however, the role of vitellogenin and its interactions with jh have not been explored in this species, and whether vitellogenin retains its ancestral role and functions largely in reproduction or if it has acquired other functions remains elusive. furthermore, the interactions between vitellogenin and jh are also uncharacterized in this species: it is unknown if these two factors follow the ancestral pattern , have become uncoupled, or are negatively correlated, as observed in other eusocial hymenopteran species.

in many social insects , reproductive competition between the queen and workers and among workers is accompanied by overt aggression. this is particularly apparent in b. terrestris, where aggression is a major means by which to establish reproductive dominance in queen-worker and worker-worker competition  <cit> . jh titers were hypothesized to correlate with dominance and aggressive behavior in bumblebee workers, but the experimental results of several studies were equivocal  <cit> . aggression also precedes ovarian activation in workers  <cit>  and previous aggressive encounters by workers are sufficient to establish the reproductive hierarchy among them  <cit> . this raises an intriguing possibility that the molecular and physiological processes that regulate aggressive behavior  occur upstream to the processes involved with vitellogenesis and ovarian activation. most of the studies to date, to our knowledge, that sought to explore the relation between jh and vitellogenin were carried out with either non-social species or highly eusocial insects, in which aggression is rare or absent. in the bumble bee b. terrestris, aggression is a major factor in colony social behavior, but the impacts of dominance hierarchy on the interplay between jh and vitellogenin have not been examined.

here, we investigated the interactions between jh and vg rna expression levels. first, we examined vg expression specificity in relation to caste, reproduction, and worker task allocation, by monitoring its levels in virgin and mated queens, sterile and reproductive workers, and workers engaged in foraging or brood care. second, since worker ovarian activation is associated with multiple factors  we uncoupled all of these factors by manipulative experiments and monitored how these affect vg expression. we then extended this experiment by examining the effect of jh regulation on vg expression in workers introduced into two different kinds of social groups, in which they experienced different levels of aggression.

RESULTS
experiment 1: examining the association of vg expression with caste, ovarian activation and worker task in b. terrestris
we measured ovarian activation and vg expression levels in the heads of queens and workers  and statistically compared the results across the various groups . levels of vg were significantly higher  in fertile queens than in 10 day-old, queenless , fertile workers. virgin queens  also had higher vg expression levels compared to 4-day-old, queenright , sterile workers , but this difference was not significant. levels were also significantly higher  in fertile queens compared to virgin queens, and significantly higher  in 10-day-old, ql, fertile workers compared to 4-day-old, qr, sterile workers. finally, although ovarian activation levels were significantly higher in nurses than in same-age foragers, vg levels were not significantly different.
vg 
rna expression levels in bumble bee queens and workers

vitellogenin 
data are presented as means ± se.
vg 
expression levels

vg
vg
vg
vg
vg
vg
vg
vg
comparisons of caste, reproduction, age and social condition were performed using a mann-whitney test. task was compared using a wilcoxon matched paired test.

levels of vg thus seem to be affected by both caste and reproductive state, but not by task. however, there were many parameters that differed among our fertile and sterile workers in addition to ovarian activation, including age and social context . in the following experiment, we uncoupled the effects of age, social context , and ovarian activation, in order to determine which, if any, factor was primarily associated with vg expression levels.

experiment 2: uncoupling the effects of age, ovarian activation and queen presence/absence on vg rna expression levels in workers
the effects of age and queen presence/absence on ovarian activation and vg levels were examined in cages of 5- and 8-day-old workers that were kept either in ql or qr groups . ql workers usually posses ready-to-lay eggs at the age of ~7 days, thus only 8-day old workers were predicted to have vitellogenic oocytes in their ovaries. among the qr workers, neither vg levels nor ovarian activation were significantly different between 5-day and 8-day old workers. among the ql groups, 5-day-old workers had significantly lower ovarian activation, but still comparable levels of vg expression compared to the 8-day-old workers.

in this same group of workers, we examined the effects of social condition  on ovarian activation and vg levels. both 5- and 8-day-old workers in ql groups had significantly higher ovarian activation than age-matched workers in qr groups, but levels of vg were again not significantly different.

in these experiments, we examined the expression of vg in the dominant worker  in each group . if vg levels are associated with dominance, this may explain the lack of variation across the groups. thus, we further explored the effects of social interactions on vg expression in ql groups of workers.

experiment 3: examining the impact of social interactions  on vg rna expression levels in queenless worker groups
in ql worker groups, workers establish reproductive dominance hierarchies via aggressive interactions. aggression precedes ovarian activation  <cit>  and thus aggressive interactions can be used to determine a bee’s position in the dominance hierarchy before ovarian activation is completed.

we established ql worker groups using callow  workers . previous behavioral observations revealed that workers could be classified on the basis of aggressive interactions during days  <dig> and  <dig> after group establishment  <cit> . we therefore collected these groups for analyses at the end of day  <dig>  we identified three categories of workers in each cage: the most aggressive , the most aggressed , or the most passive bee . passive workers performed aggressive behaviors least frequently. among the two top bees in the hierarchy, the aggression exhibited by the aggressive  bee was almost twice as frequent as that exhibited by the aggressed  bee. the aggressed  workers received a higher amount of aggression compared to the other two bee categories . judging from the low aggression that the aggressive  bee received, we can conclude that the majority of the aggression exhibited by the aggressed  bee was towards the other bees in the group and not towards the most aggressive  bee in the hierarchy.

since the workers were only 4 days old when sacrificed they all had relatively low ovarian activation, with oocytes averaging less than  <dig>  mm compared to the size of ~3 mm of ready-to-lay eggs in b. terrestris. there were no significant differences between the mean oocyte sizes of the three bee categories ; kruskal-wallis test h  =  <dig> , p >  <dig> ).

significant differences were found in the vg rna expression levels between aggressive  and passive  worker categories both in the head and in the abdominal fat body, with the aggressive bees possessing the highest vg expression levels  =  <dig> , p =  <dig>  followed by multiple comparison post hoc test p =  <dig>  for passive vs. aggressive. abdominal fat body: kruskal-wallis test: h =  <dig> , p =  <dig>  followed by multiple comparison post-hoc test p =  <dig>  for aggressive vs. passive). the aggressed  workers had intermediate levels of vg expression that were not statistically significantly different from either the aggressive  or the passive  worker categories .

experiment 4: examining the effect of juvenile hormone and social interactions  on vg rna expression levels in workers
here, we compared aggression, ovarian activation, and vg expression levels in jh-treated, dimethylformadide  treated , and untreated control workers  that were introduced into either peer or older established groups . we hypothesized that workers introduced into peer groups  would have an equal probability of becoming dominant as any of the other workers; whereas workers introduced into established groups  are more likely to remain subordinate. thus, workers introduced into peer groups are expected to receive and perform more aggressive behaviors while attempting to achieve dominance, and to activate their ovaries more rapidly compared to workers introduced into the established groups. we also hypothesized that jh treatment should stimulate vg expression and aggression  in both contexts, but more profoundly in the peer groups in which the social context is more tolerant to dominant behaviors.

two experiments were performed. in the first we examined the effect of group type on ovarian activation by introducing callow workers into the two group types and examining their ovarian activation 7 days post-introduction. workers that were introduced into established groups had lower ovarian activation relative to that of workers that were introduced into peer groups  . this indicates that our manipulation of social state  impacted the reproduction of the introduced workers, and thus their ability to achieve reproductive dominance. in the second experiment we examined the effects of treatment  and group type  on ovarian activation, vg rna expression levels, and aggressive interactions over a four-day post-introduction period.

the introduced worker was assigned to one of three treatments:  100ug jh-iii diluted in  <dig> ul dmf applied to the thorax before introduction  5ul dmf  untreated control. all workers were callow when introduced. groups were composed of full sisters originated from the same colony  statistical comparison was done using a nested anova test. ‘iw’ refers to the introduced worker. hdt refers to the sum of humming, darting and attack behaviors received or performed by the introduced worker

1nested anova, treatment is nested in group-type: f =  <dig> , p =  <dig> , for group-type only: f =  <dig> , p =  <dig> .

2nested anova, treatment is nested in group-type: f =  <dig> , p =  <dig> ; for group-type only: f =  <dig> , p =  <dig> .

3nested anova, treatment is nested in group-type: f =  <dig> , p =  <dig> ; for group-type only: f =  <dig> , p =  <dig> .

4nested anova, treatment is nested in group-type: f =  <dig> , p =  <dig> ; for group-type only: f =  <dig> , p =  <dig> . data was transformed using arcsin.

5nested anova, treatment is nested in group-type: f =  <dig> , p =  <dig> ; for group-type only: f =  <dig> , p =  <dig> .

since ovarian activation in callow workers takes about 7 days  <cit>  it was accordingly low in the examined 4-day-old workers and not significantly different between group type or treatments for all group-types and all treatments  =  <dig> , p =  <dig> ; for group-type only: f =  <dig> , p =  <dig> ).

within a group type there was no effect of treatment  on vg expression levels in the abdominal fat body  or head . interestingly, however, there were significant differences between the groups types. levels of vg in workers introduced into the established groups were higher than in those introduced into the peer groups, irrespective of treatment  =  <dig> , p =  <dig> ; for group-type only: f =  <dig> , p =  <dig> ) .

treatment  did not affect the level of aggression performed or received by the introduced worker in either peer or established groups . however, there were differences in aggression as a function of group-type. the total aggression  was not significantly different among groups, irrespective of the group-type or treatment  =  <dig> , p =  <dig> ; for group-type only: f =  <dig> , p =  <dig> ). nonetheless, workers that were introduced into peer groups were significantly more aggressive towards their group-mates and were involved in more aggressive behaviors compared to workers that were introduced into the older established groups  =  <dig> , p =  <dig> ; for group-type only: f =  <dig> , p =  <dig> ; aggression involved: nested anova, treatment in nested in group-type: f =  <dig> , p =  <dig> ; for group-type only: f =  <dig> , p =  <dig> ). however, the amount of aggression that the introduced workers received was comparable, irrespective of the group type into which they were introduced to  =  <dig> , p =  <dig> ; for group-type only: f =  <dig> , p =  <dig> ).

discussion
it has been hypothesized that complex social behaviors evolved by adapting and modulating existing genetic “toolkits” so that they are expressed in novel contexts  <cit> . in the case of toolkits involving key genes in endocrine signaling pathways, changes in expression may produce profound changes in morphology, physiology, or function. two outstanding examples of this model are vitellogenin and juvenile hormone in adult insects. these two factors play critical roles in shaping reproductive processes in many solitary insects  <cit> , but have been co-opted to function in maturation and division of labor in apis mellifera honey bee workers  <cit> . furthermore, the molecular interactions between these two factors have undergone a fundamental alteration in the honey bee: in the ancestral state, jh appears to positively regulate vitellogenin transcription , but in the honey bee jh and vg appear to function in a negative feedback loop  <cit> . here, we examine the function and interactions of jh and vg in a primitively eusocial species, b. terrestris, in which jh has retained its ancestral gonadotropin role. we demonstrate that jh and vg expression are uncoupled, and that vg expression appears to be more tightly associated with social context than with reproductive physiology in workers. these results suggest that b. terrestris represents an intermediate stage in the evolution of the jh-vg pathway, from its ancestral role in reproduction to its new role in mediating worker social interaction and division of labor in advanced eusocial species.

vg role in b. terrestris
our studies suggest that vg expression levels in b. terrestris are primarily associated with caste and social context, and are not strongly correlated with ovarian activation in workers. expression levels of vg were higher in active queens than in workers, which is consistent with studies in honey bees  <cit> , and with the superiority of the b. terrestris queen over workers in terms of egg production. unlike the honey bee, however, vg expression levels were not associated with worker task. finally, while vg expression levels were associated with reproductive state in queens, their levels were not strongly associated with reproductive state in workers. when correlations between vg and ovarian activation were observed in workers, they were likely to be mediated through aggressive behavior. since aggression precedes ovarian activation in bumble bees  <cit> , these two factors are closely intertwined. selecting younger bees that differ in aggression levels but have inactive ovaries allowed us to disentangle the effects of aggression and ovarian activation, and demonstrated that expression of vg is higher in aggressive workers even before ovarian activation takes place. thus, vg expression primarily correlates with aggression and only secondarily with reproduction. this is consistent with studies in the honey bee in which vg expression levels do not differ between sterile and reproductive workers  <cit> , or between virgin queens and instrumentally inseminated queens with activated ovaries  <cit> .

these inconsistent correlations of vg with reproduction can be explained in several ways: first, vitellogenin may evolve to function beyond the restricted context of reproduction  <cit> . recent studies in honey bees showed that vitellogenin has multiple coordinating effects on social organization, such as pacing the onset of foraging behavior, priming bees for specialized foraging tasks, and influencing worker longevity  <cit> . vitellogenin in honey bees was further suggested to reflect the nutritional status of the bee  <cit> , and is associated with changes in gustatory responsiveness  <cit>  and metabolism  <cit> . in several other species, vitellogenin can reduce oxidative stress by scavenging free radicals and promote longevity  <cit> . recently, vitellogenin was linked with immune defense and was suggested to be produced under immune challenge. in fish, vitellogenin has been shown to recognize pathogens and to promote macrophage phagocytosis  <cit> ; and in the honey bee, vitellogenin is downregulated in parasite infested bees  <cit> . these studies suggest that vitellogenin has many divergent functions in different species, and is not restricted solely to reproduction.

a second explanation for the inconsistencies in correlations is that vitellogenin may have evolved to regulate reproduction indirectly. in solitary species where there is no competition over reproduction, jh may directly regulate vg levels, which in turn directly regulate ovarian activation. however, in primitively social species, social groups are composed of both dominant and subordinate females that compete over reproduction, and egg-laying is monopolized by the most aggressive females. thus, a double control system, in which vg responds to aggression levels instead of or in addition to jh levels, may be useful in order to prevent the subordinate females from overloading their system with higher vg levels when reproduction is not feasible. a recent study in the harvester ant, pogonomyrmex barbatus harbors, may support this hypothesis: in this species, the gene for vitellogenin has been duplicated and subfunctionalized to acquire reproductive and non-reproductive functions - mainly behavioral - in sterile workers  <cit> .

a third possible explanation is that vitellogenin’s mode of action masks the positive correlation between vg levels and reproduction. for example, regulation may occur at the level of translation to the protein, or at the rate at which the circulating protein is sequestered in the developing oocytes. for example, in grasshoppers preparing for oviposition, high levels of vg mrna persist but translation diminishes  <cit> . a similar mechanism was suggested for apis mellifera <cit> . if a similar mechanism operates in b. terrestris, vg mrna levels would remain high while protein levels decrease in workers with almost fully developed ovaries. this may also explain why 5- and 8-day-old workers do not differ in their vg levels despite large differences in their ovarian activation. further studies are needed to determine whether these hypothesized alternative regulatory mechanisms are operating.

interaction between jh and vg in b. terrestris
we found no effect of increasing jh titers on vg expression in worker bees. since jh-vg interactions may be dynamic, it is possible that the timepoint we used  did not fully capture any effects on vg. however, previous study at this timepoint demonstrated that jh treatment resulted in significant changes in brain expression levels in b. terrestris <cit> . furthermore, we selected this timepoint because it takes seven days for workers to produce fully mature ooctyes, and thus the oocytes of four day old workers are immature. this is critical for two reasons: first, the correlation between vg mrna and vitellogenin titer occurs only during the oocyte growth period, rather than when the oocyte has reached its ready-to-lay size  <cit> . second, jh does not induce an immediate response at the vitellogenin protein levels, but a progressive one. in locusta migratoriain, for example, vitellogenin shows only a small increase in the first 48 hours post-treatment and then steep increases to its maximum at 72 hours. thereafter it gradually declines  <cit> . however, though we selected this time point to optimally capture any effects of jh on vg, it is possible that the effects occurred at an earlier or later time point. furthermore, since we did not measure jh levels in the hemolymph of the bees, we cannot preclude the possibility that the lack of effect of jh was due to its post-application degradation. finally jh may exert its primary effects on other endocrine glands or tissues, and only indirectly affect vitellogenin synthesis  <cit> , which should be taken into consideration when measuring vg rna levels in response to jh. nonetheless, despite choosing the seemingly optimal time point, jh application did not appear to have any effect on vg expression.

according to these findings, either both jh and vg are regulated by a third party; or jh regulation of vg, if exists, must be indirect. the correlation of vg with aggression, the fact that aggression precedes ovarian development , and that jh affects ovarian activation in workers   <cit> , lend credence to the hypothesis that both jh and vg are regulated by a third player. alternatively, it is possible that the gonadotropin effect of jh in b. terrestris is separated from the association between vg and aggression, and that both pathways  independently but jointly affect ovarian activation.

what might be the selective advantages of two disparate mechanisms for regulating reproduction? the queen presumably inhibits worker reproduction through reducing their jh levels  <cit> . even when worker reproduction occurs, only about 40% of the workers lay eggs, although about 70% have activated ovaries  <cit> . since resources are limited and not all the eggs can develop to adults, egg-laying workers gain their position through aggressive interactions and establishment of a dominance hierarchy  <cit> . thus, access to reproduction requires detection of both the right social condition of the colony  and the right social context among workers . while the first can be achieved through manipulating the jh levels in subordinates by the queen or dominant workers, the second can be mediated through aggressive interactions that affect vg levels and thus determine which bees will reproduce. such a double control ensures that efforts will be invested in reproduction only when feasible.

effect of social context on jh-vg interactions
while vg levels were not affected by jh, they were affected by social context. interestingly, vg levels were higher in bees introduced into established groups although they exhibited less aggression compared to those introduced into peer groups. this is in contrast to the finding that vg levels were higher in aggressive compared to passive workers . one explanation is that it is not only the aggression performed by workers that matters, but also the aggression they receive. workers that were introduced into the established groups in experiment  <dig> had higher vg, performed significantly less aggression, and received slightly more aggression , while both aggressive and aggressed workers in experiment  <dig> expressed higher levels of vg . thus, it is possible that vg is higher in both the performer and receiver of aggression . this hypothesis is supported by ample evidence from the bees’ life cycle. for example, larger groups of workers, in which aggression is higher, are more productive  compared to smaller ones  <cit> . recently published studies conducted with paired bees of b. impatiens have suggested that aggression in one worker stimulates aggression in the other  <cit> , though whether vg levels rise in both workers remains to be determined. finally, newly mated queens are stimulated to lay eggs in the presence of other queens or workers, with egg-laying following a period of intensive aggressive interactions . however, this hypothesis still remains to be tested directly.

CONCLUSIONS
here, we comprehensively examined the interactions between jh and vitellogenin in a primitively eusocial species, b. terrestris. we have demonstrated that vg expression levels are higher in queens than in workers, and in laying versus virgin queens, but that levels in workers are not associated  with age, ovarian activation, task, or queen presence. interestingly, however, there is a strong association between expression levels of vg in workers and the amount of aggression performed or received. furthermore, jh does not regulate vg levels in queenless workers. our results suggest that although jh has retained its traditional role as a gonadotropin in bumble bees, vitellogenin has already been co-opted into a novel role and is regulated by different, uncharacterized, physiological factors, which, in turn, may be regulated by aggression. further studies in bumble bees may reveal the molecular and physiological mechanisms by which the vg-jh pathway became uncoupled in this system.

