BACKGROUND
as a fast-growing renewable feedstock, shrub willow has the potential to off-set fossil fuel usage and contribute to the production of renewable fuel products with positive environmental impacts. as the demand for bioenergy and bioproducts continues to rise, shrub willow will be a significant source of woody biomass, because of its fast growth, ease of cultivation, flexible harvesting window, and suitable biomass characteristics for conversion. shrub willow is an established bioenergy crop in europe and interest is expanding in the united states and canada. current research efforts are focused on improving willow biomass traits important to the renewable fuels industry, including production yield and biomass composition. breeding and development of shrub willow began in the mid-1980s and the production of new genotypes through intra-specific crosses and inter-specific hybridization has led to the commercialization of many cultivars suitable for bioenergy production  <cit> .

genetic improvement of shrub willow utilizes controlled pollination of this dioecious and highly heterozygous species and then selection of superior genotypes for subsequent clonal propagation. the genus salix consists of approximately  <dig> species with ploidy levels that range among species from diploid up to dodecaploid and can even vary among individuals within a species  <cit> . species hybridization leading to heterosis has been exploited by many breeders to improve growth and vigor in several woody species, including willow, although little is known about the genetic basis for this phenomenon  <cit> . heterosis has long been studied and theories to explain the genetic basis of this phenomenon were first proposed a century ago and are still being refined today  <cit> . recent studies using advanced genetic and genomic approaches demonstrate that the genetic mechanisms behind heterosis are complex and varied among different systems and may well involve combinations of effects explained by the dominance, overdominance, and epistasis hypotheses  <cit> . heterosis is commonly observed in polyploid individuals, which is the case for the allopolyploid crops, wheat and cotton. willow and poplar triploids, in general, have been known to display improved vigor, but the basis for this observation has not been studied  <cit> .

one objective of this study was to evaluate progeny from crosses performed in  <dig>   <dig>  and  <dig>  in particular to determine any association of heterosis for growth traits and ploidy. many of the initial breeding efforts for shrub willow focused on first-generation intra-specific crosses and inter-specific hybridization, utilizing natural accessions of willow throughout the native region. progeny from initial rounds of breeding have displayed significant gains in biomass yield, many of which have been tested in multiple yield trials and scaled up for commercial production  <cit> . improvements in breeding and selection of shrub willow through the development of more complex pedigrees, compared to those in previous years, has potential to increase yield productions.

as breeding programs advance through multiple rounds, the intensity of selection will likely need to be increased to continue to achieve genetic gain. this can be accomplished through evaluation of larger populations of progeny, but this requires rapid early screening to reduce the costs associated with long-term field trials. in addition to evaluating heterosis, the current trial was used to examine the value of early measurements that could be used to screen large numbers of progeny and predict yield rankings through allometrics. combined, the objectives of this study will not only help us understand the morphological variance among different pedigrees of shrub willow, but will also provide a framework for designing new strategies for early selection and crop improvement.

RESULTS
breeding to produce novel pedigrees
willow breeding was performed in  <dig>   <dig>  and  <dig> by richard kopp and kimberly cameron producing over  <dig>  progeny. all individuals were planted in single plant, non-replicated family screening trials at lafayette road experiment station, syracuse, ny, during the following spring. each trial was coppiced after the first growing season. after coppice and the three following growing seasons, all plants were measured for survival, total stem area, height, and were monitored for incidence of pest and diseases. the best individuals from these data were scaled-up into a 75-clone selection trial planted in geneva, ny usa in  <dig> to test the performance of progeny relative to parents . each genotype was planted in 24-plant plots in a randomized complete block design with three replicate blocks. commercial cultivars were included within the trial and are indicated by their cultivar epithet and all non-commerical genotypes are identified by their clone id.

ploidy of parental and progeny genotypes
flow cytometry was used to estimate ploidy levels of  <dig> of the  <dig> genotypes in the trial, selected to represent all of the parents and at least one progeny genotype from each family. genotypes were determined to be diploid, triploid, or tetraploid based on nuclear dna content relative to well characterized diploid  and tetraploid  parental genotypes included in each batch of analysis . nuclear dna content measurements were significantly different among ploidy groupings , as determined by mean separation test. the majority of genotypes  were determined to be diploid based on nuclear dna content values ranging between  <dig> - <dig>  pg 2c− <dig> or were inferred to be diploid based on pedigree. these included selected genotypes of three pure species . all of the genotypes classified as s. miyabeana  were tetraploid according to flow cytometry with values ranging from  <dig> - <dig>  pg 2c− <dig> or were inferred based on pedigree.

all of the genotypes selected for flow cytometry that were progeny of diploid by tetraploid crosses were triploid based on nuclear dna content values ranging from  <dig> - <dig>  pg 2c− <dig>  the other progeny in those families were inferred to be triploid, so that among the  <dig> genotypes in the trial,  <dig>  were triploid in ten families from six different species hybrid combinations. while we did not conduct flow cytometry on all  <dig> genotypes, all the parents and at least one progeny genotype from each family were tested and conformed to the predicted ploidy based on parental ploidy . there were three progeny derived from crosses between a diploid mother and a triploid father. one of those  is triploid based on flow cytometry, while the other two from a different pedigree were designated as tetraploids  based on dna content values .

growth and biomass production
of the  <dig> genotypes harvested in this trial, total stem biomass yield ranged from  <dig>  mg ha−1 yr− <dig> to  <dig>  mg ha−1 yr− <dig> . the highest yielding genotype was a triploid hybrid,  × s. miyabeana 05x-281- <dig>  and the lowest yielding genotype was a wild, native accession of s. eriocephala, 01-07- <dig>  the mean yield of all triploid genotypes was greater than the mean yields of the diploids or tetraploids . among the top 50th percentile  for yield, there were  <dig> triploids,  <dig> tetraploids, and only  <dig> diploids, while among the bottom 50th percentile , there were  <dig> diploids,  <dig> tetraploids, and only  <dig> triploids. many of the poor-yielding diploids were s. eriocephala, a native species in the us.

measurements taken at the end of each growing season included height of the tallest stem per plant, diameter of every stem, stem number per plant, and specific gravity of a stem segment. the stem diameter measurements were used to calculate the mean total stem diameter per plot and mean total stem area per plot. all traits were significantly different by year and genotype . both height and total stem area had a significant interaction by year and by genotype. a significant interaction for total stem area by year and by ploidy was also identified. the greatest height after three years of growth was observed for s. miyabeana ‘sx64’, a tetraploid and a parent of many of the triploid progeny . the majority of height growth occurred in the first year post-coppice. the tallest diploid after year three was s. × dasyclados ‘sv1’, which was significantly taller than any other diploid, with height more similar to the triploids and tetraploids. by ploidy level, mean total stem area was greatest for the triploids, compared with mean values for diploids and tetraploids . there were several diploid genotypes with large total stem area, including ‘sv1’ with the greatest, however the majority of diploids had mean values below 200 cm <dig>  several diploid genotypes lost stem area due to stem dieback from year two to year three, including: s. purpurea ‘fish creek’, s. purpurea × s. suchowensis 05x-275- <dig>   × s. purpurea 05x-297- <dig>  and s. purpurea 01-07- <dig>  stem number was significantly different by ploidy, with diploids having the greatest mean stem number per plot,  <dig> , while the mean for triploids was  <dig> , and tetraploids had the lowest mean number of stems per plot,  <dig> . while diploids had the greatest number of stems, the total area of those stems was the smallest regardless of year . diploids had the shortest mean height compared with triploids and tetraploids , but the general growth trend from year to year was very similar regardless of ploidy. diploids had the greatest total stem diameter, but the smallest total stem area, whereas tetraploids showed the opposite relationship, with large total stem area and small total stem diameter. triploids maintained large stem area and large stem diameter across all three years. triploids also had the greatest specific gravity across all three years. overall, regardless of genotype or ploidy, specific gravity increased from year one to year two and then dropped in year three.

*height, stem diameter, stem area, and stem number are the highest in block one, block three is the lowest.

height, total stem diameter, and total stem area strongly correlated with yield over all three years of growth . there was a weak correlation between specific gravity and yield across all three years, however, when the genotypes were separated by ploidy, only the diploids had a correlation between specific gravity and yield in years two and three. stem number did not correlate with yield for any year of growth, except when the data were analyzed with regard to ploidy. stem number correlated with mean yield for diploids and triploids in the first year of growth and only triploids in the second year of growth. height and total stem area displayed the strongest correlations with yield than any of the other traits.

3
rd 
all significant correlations at α ≤  <dig>  are highlighted in bold.

allometric modeling of yield
height, total stem area, and specific gravity were used as variables in allometric models to identify relationships between yield and the yearly growth measurements. total stem diameter was found to be an insignificant variable in the models and was removed. multiple linear regression models used to estimate third-year harvest yield were significant for all three years of growth . among third-year measurements, specific gravity was not a significant predictor in the model. height was the strongest predictor of yield across all three years.

a
b
c
d
a is a constant; b, c, and d are slopes of the parameters height, area, and diameter, respectively.

discussion
polyploidy is a common phenomenon among species of willow, and may have been a strong contributor to speciation through reproductive isolation  <cit> . many species of willow hybridize in nature and even more can be forced to hybridize through controlled pollination, including those with different ploidy. salix miyabeana, native to japan, korea, and china, is a tetraploid species  <cit> . this species has been exploited in recent breeding of willow to produce triploid progeny with superior performance, as was observed in this study and in the work of others   <cit> . based on previous breeding and yield analysis that has led to the development of commercial cultivars such as ‘tully champion’, ‘fabius’, ‘millbrook’, and ‘oneida’, it was expected that hybrid progeny with pedigrees s. viminalis × s. miyabeana and s. purpurea × s. miyabeana would likely perform well and produce high yields  <cit> . however, the results from this selection trial with  <dig> genotypes representing various ploidy levels suggest that the basis for this improved performance is associated with the triploid nature of these hybrids. it would be expected that a diploid by tetraploid cross would produce a sterile triploid assuming normal segregation of gametes during meiosis; however progeny have been recovered from crosses using a triploid as the male parent in a controlled pollination of a diploid mother. these progeny were likely the products of an abnormal meiotic division resulting in unreduced gametes in the form of pollen with an even number of chromosomes - in one case producing a triploid, s. viminalis ×  ‘sheridan’ and in the other case, producing the two tetraploid individuals in the trial, s. koriyanagi ×  01x-264- <dig> and 01x-264- <dig>  siblings produced from a cross of a diploid by a triploid.

heterosis and ploidy
the selection trial established and analyzed is this study consisted of a comprehensive collection of new progeny produced from controlled crosses performed in  <dig>   <dig>  and  <dig>  many of which involved s. miyabeana as a parent. within the trial many of the parents were included along with the selected progeny for the purpose of examining heterosis, as well as any transgressive segregation, often observed among hybrid progeny in willow and other highly heterozygous species. in this trial, the majority of the high yielding genotypes were triploid progeny of a naturally tetraploid s. miyabeana parents, whereas many of the diploid progeny were lower yielding. this was clearly demonstrated for several of the families in the trial. the 05x- <dig> triploid progeny and the 05x- <dig> diploid progeny are half-sibs with the same diploid mother, s. koriyanagi × s. purpurea ‘allegany’. the 05x- <dig> triploid progeny were among the top yielding, with  × s. miyabeana 05x-281- <dig> producing the greatest yield in the trial and outperforming its diploid mother, s. koriyanagi × s. purpurea ‘allegany’ and its tetraploid father, s. miyabeana ‘sx67’. in contrast, nearly all of the 05x- <dig> diploid progeny all produced smaller yields than either their diploid mother or their diploid father, s. suchowensis p <dig> . in effect, only the 05x- <dig> triploid progeny displayed heterosis, not the half-sib diploid progeny. this was also observed among the 05x- <dig> and the 05x- <dig> progeny, half-sibs with s. purpurea 05-01- <dig> as the common maternal parent. the triploid 05x- <dig> progeny displayed heterosis with all progeny greater than the mid-parent mean, with two having greater yield than both parents. only three of the diploid 05x- <dig> progeny were included in this study. two were only slightly higher in yield than 05-01- <dig>  and the third had significantly greater yield than both parents.

the performance of diploid vs. triploid half-sib progeny suggests that in willow, heterosis is not directly a result of heterozygosity at deleterious loci, since both types of progeny are likely to be highly heterozygous based on previous characterization of microsatellites in willow. a better explanation or a more likely explanation for heterosis observed in polyploids may be gene dosage effect. this has recently been observed in triploid maize  <cit>  building on the proposed hypothesis by birchler and veitia  <cit>  that heterosis in polyploid individuals is similar to quantitative traits controlled by genes with additive effects. in addition, it is becoming clear that heterosis in polyploids and hybrids is largely due to complex molecular changes at epigenetic, genomic, proteomic, and metabolic levels  <cit> . gene expression changes in response to the previously mentioned biological changes have been shown to have significant impact on stress responses and phytohormone signaling in allotetraploids of a. thaliana <cit> . we are presently using transcriptomics to compare patterns of gene expression in triploid willows to those in diploids and tetraploids to test if expression of critical genes is correlated with gene dosage.

biomass growth traits
while this particular study does not address the underlying molecular differences between genotypes with different ploidy, we did observe key differences in growth patterns correlated with ploidy. these differences by ploidy were significant despite the high level of variation among all the genotypes. while stem number may not have a significant correlation with yield, stem number did vary significantly by ploidy . diploids have the largest number of stems per plant, resulting in large total stem diameter, but the lowest total stem area . tetraploids had the lowest number of stems per plant, resulting in the lowest total stem diameter, but high total stem area. while tetraploids had large total stem area and tall stem height, they had low specific gravity, reducing their overall biomass yield. tetraploids grew fast, in terms of diameter and volume, but the low specific gravity in the wood reduced their potential biomass yield. triploids, on the other hand, produced stem numbers intermediate between those of diploids and tetraploids, with the greatest total stem area and the greatest specific gravity, putting them at the top with regard to yield. triploid aspen were also identified as having greater growth rates and greater specific gravity than diploids  <cit> . previous work examining morphological traits in willow showed similar results with regard to diploids and tetraploids, however no triploids were ever examined  <cit> . the tetraploids examined in tharaken et al.  <cit>  previous work examining morphological traits in willow showed similar results with regard to diploids and tetraploids, however no triploids were ever examined  <cit> . the tetraploids examined in tharaken et al.  <cit>  clustered separately from all the diploids and were characterized by a small number of large diameter stems and low specific gravity, similar to what was observed in our trial.

our analysis of first-, second-, and third-year stems revealed that specific gravity does not continue to increase with age, similar to what has been seen in poplar  <cit> . differences in specific gravity along the length of the stem have been previously observed in willow and in poplar, making sampling at the same location on the stem critical for comparisons. for shrub willow, pith can form in the third year of growth and may explain the drop in specific gravity measured in the third-year stems, but more detailed anatomical studies are needed to verify this. negative relationships between specific gravity and volume growth rates have been observed among populations of poplar  <cit> , however in this study no clear relationship between volume measurements and specific gravity could be identified. there were minor negative relationships observed among triploids in their first year between specific gravity and stem number, total stem area and total stem diameter, but there was a positive relationship between specific gravity and stem number for diploids in the same year. among diploids in their second and third years of growth, there was a positive relationship between height and specific gravity. across the entire trial, there was a correlation between specific gravity and yield, but it was weak.

among all of the traits analyzed in this study, the strongest correlation with yield was observed for height and total stem area across all three years. tharakan et al.  <cit>  also identified a strong and significant correlation between height and biomass yield. total stem diameter was strongly correlated with total stem area and stem number. across all genotypes, regardless of ploidy, and across all years, total stem area displayed a stronger correlation with yield than total stem diameter. since there are many stems produced by each plant, total stem area better reflects aboveground volume than total stem diameter. in optimizing allometric equations to estimate yield, height and total stem area were critical parameters, while total stem diameter was an insignificant variable.

estimating yield from allometric regressions
allometric regressions have been used in the forestry community for decades to predict biomass production from volume measurements, mainly diameter-at-breast-height  and height  <cit> . typically, stem diameter measurements for shrub willow have been collected at the lowest practical point in the stem to take the measurement with digital calipers, approximately  <dig> to 30 cm above the soil surface. these numbers are then used to calculate total stem area, which is somewhat analogous to the basal area measurement of trees. using models that rely on height, total stem area, and specific gravity, it is possible to estimate third year biomass yield with 60% accuracy. third year measurements estimated third year yield the best with an r <dig> of  <dig> . these models clearly do not address all of the variation associated with aboveground biomass production in shrub willow. one variable that is unaccounted for in these models is branching, a trait that contributes to the final biomass yield, but is not easily measured. arevalo et al.  <cit>  was able to estimate aboveground biomass from four willow genotypes using diameter-based allometric equations. height was not found to be significant, which contradicts the findings in the current study. model development in arevalo et al.  <cit>  was based off of single stems cut and dried, not entire plants, which would reduce the amount of variation within the model. more research needs to be done to understand the relationship between whole plant growth and final yield in shrub willow.

CONCLUSIONS
we have demonstrated that triploid shrub willow produce higher yield than their diploid and tetraploid parents. the mean yield of the top five performing new genotypes  in this trial was  <dig> oven dry mg ha−1 yr− <dig>  while the mean yield of the top five current commercial cultivars was  <dig> oven dry mg ha−1 yr− <dig>  this represents an improvement of  <dig> % in yield over current commercial cultivars on this single site. larger scale yield and evaluation trails with a selection of these top genotypes have been planted in ny, pa, and wv to further test their performance prior to final selection, scale-up, and commercial deployment. overall the three classes of genotypes based on ploidy had significantly different growth patterns and specific gravity of the stem biomass. strong correlations were identified among all of these traits. correlations with yield indicate that there are many factors and their interaction impacting willow biomass production. understanding how first and second year growth measurements, such as total stem area and height, relate to final yield and how these traits change over a three-year rotation period will allow for the possible selection and prediction of performance of genotypes within the first year of growth.

