BACKGROUND
endurance exercise training exhibits a powerful influence on the immune system. as a physical stressor, exercise can induce different immune responses, depending on the intensity and the duration of the exercise. they can be immunoprotective , immunopathological  or immunoregulatory/inhibitory   <cit> . it is generally believed that moderate intensity exercise can enhance immune function and reduce the risk of upper respiratory tract infection. conversely, prolonged bouts of strenuous exercise can result in a transient depression of immune function  <cit> , which suggests that to protect immune function, individuals should avoid strenuous exercise. nevertheless, emerging evidence suggests that high-intensity training can induce a more advanced anti-inflammatory response  <cit>  which is favored in the prevention and treatment of diseases associated with chronic inflammation such as cardiovascular disease. recently, it has been reported that former elite athletes with a history of vigorous physical activity had better metabolic health in later life than their controls, and this was independent of the effect of their current leisure-time physical activity levels  <cit> . for this reason, it has been suggested that increased susceptibility to minor infection is the small price to be paid for the long-term health benefits of regular exercise at high intensity  <cit> .

to promote more effective use of high-intensity endurance exercise training in health promotion and disease prevention, a complete understanding of the nature of its immune regulatory effect is required. however, this is currently lacking. immune response and regulation is complex involving a complicated interaction of a variety of immune cells, various cytokines, and chemokines. it has been widely accepted that assessing changes in transcript abundance in blood on a genome-wide scale, via transcript profiling using microarrays, affords a comprehensive view of the status of the immune system in health and disease, because leukocytes present in the blood convey valuable information about the status of the immune system  <cit> . microarray has been used to study peripheral blood leukocytes in response to exercise . however, the majority of studies have been undertaken to investigate the immune response to acute exercise in either the trained  <cit>  or untrained state  <cit> . less is known concerning the alterations in the transcriptional profile of leukocytes induced by chronic high-intensity endurance exercise training, although it has been demonstrated that training influences the effect of acute exercise on immune cells  <cit> . this may happen because the change in immunity that occurs after each prolonged exercise bout is more clinically significant than training-induced alterations at rest in athletes. consequently, to produce an unbiased global view of the primary and secondary molecular and cellular processes associated with the immune response to chronic high-intensity exercise training, we used young endurance athletes as high-intensity endurance exercise training model, analyzing their blood transcriptomic changes as compared with sedentary controls, using genome-wide microarray. specifically, our aims were to gain a more complete understanding of the mechanism underlying the altered immunity, and to reveal molecular changes signifying latent immunological consequences as a result of regular exercise at high intensity.

microarray data from the present study provided transcriptional evidence for the anti-inflammatory effect of high-intensity endurance exercise training, and produced novel data suggestive of immune enhancing effect of high-intensity endurance exercise training mediated by transcriptional upregulation of leukocyte mitochondrial energetics and ribosomal protein production.

RESULTS
physiological characteristics of subjects
twelve endurance athletes and  <dig> healthy sedentary volunteers were included in the study. the athletes and non-athlete controls were group-wise matched for age, gender and bmi. the immune function markers in blood showed no significant difference between athletes and controls except for interleukin  <dig> receptor antagonist , which was significantly lower in athletes .table  <dig> characteristics of the subjects

values are expressed as mean ± sd; a significantly different from controls




genes with differential expression in leukocytes in athletes
results of an intensity-based bayesian moderated t-test  revealed extensive transcriptional differences between athletes and controls across the leukocyte genome . at the significance level of p <  <dig> ,  <dig> genes exhibited higher transcript levels and  <dig> genes lower transcript levels in athletes compared with controls. the magnitude of change across the transcriptome was generally moderate. using a stringent significance level of fdr <  <dig> ,  <dig> genes showed a differential expression with a mean fold change of  <dig>  ±  <dig> . the majority of them were up-regulated in athletes  and only two were down-regulated. the information about these  <dig> genes is included in table  <dig>  the upregulated genes included mainly the genes encoding ribosomal proteins, and the genes involved in mitochondrial oxidative phosphorylation .fig.  <dig> heatmap of differential gene expression in young endurance athletes as compared with non-athlete controls.  <dig>  genes with ibmt p-values ≤  <dig>  are included. green represents downregulation of transcripts and red represents upregulation. each column represents each subject and their identity  is marked on the bottom of the map


significantly differentially expressed genes having a false discovery rates  of ≤ <dig>  from an intensity-based bayesian moderated t-test  are shown. fc, fold change, calculated as the ratio of mrna levels 




identification of biological processes whose genes tend to be up- or down- regulated across the leukocyte genome in athletes
differentially expressed genes were further analyzed using directional lrpath analysis. to capture the small, coordinated changes in gene expression that occur across a whole pathway, we used a less stringent significance level of p <  <dig>  for gene selection and  <dig> genes were selected as input. lrpath analysis revealed  <dig> go bps and  <dig> kegg pathways significantly enriched . among them,  <dig> were upregulated and  <dig> downregulated. based on the semantic grouping of the enriched go terms using revigo , two super clusters were identified for upregulated biological processes including mitochondrial oxidative phosphorylation and gene translation . downregulated biological processes were centered on inflammatory responses. other biological processes related to anti-apoptosis, gene transcription and regulation of rna metabolic process were also downregulated in athletes .table  <dig> go terms and kegg pathways significantly enriched with genes showing higher transcript levels in blood leukocytes in athletes vs. controls

kyoto encyclopedia of genes and genomes  pathways and gene ontology  terms having false discovery rates  of ≤ <dig>  from logistic regression-based method  are shown. no. genes indicates how many analyzed genes belong to each enriched category; p value indicates significance of enrichment testing by lrpath analysis


gene ontology  terms having false discovery rates  of ≤ <dig>  from logistic regression-based method  are shown. no. of genes indicates how many analyzed genes belong to each enriched category. p value indicates significance of enrichment testing by lrpath analysis




technical validation of cdna microarray data
to confirm the validity of the microarray data, we randomly selected two upregulated  and two downregulated  genes identified by microarray and analyzed them using rt-pcr. the results showed that consistent with microarray analysis, hrh <dig> and ms4a <dig> were upregulated in athletes , and anxa <dig> and slc22a <dig> were downregulated .

discussion
we investigated the transcriptional changes in the complete genome of peripheral blood leukocytes in young endurance athletes as compared with non-athlete controls. gene-level testing and pathway analysis revealed that genes involved in mitochondrial oxphos and gene translation and ribosomal protein synthesis were significantly up-regulated in endurance athletes as compared to their non-athletic counterparts. the pathway analysis also revealed that the biological processes linked to inflammation were downregulated in athletes.

we observed extensive moderate changes  in the leukocyte transcriptome of athletes. these moderate changes were expected. in our previous work as well as the research by others, we observed changes in transcript abundance in response to acute exercise stimuli that are largely transient  <cit> , and most of these changes return to basal levels within 48 h  <cit> . it is conceivable that genomic expression adapts over time to a new steady-state level, with small differences in transcript abundance, as found in yeast cells subjected to various environmental changes  <cit> . the coordinated changes we observed, albeit moderate, in the transcription levels of multiple genes within a particular biological process or a signaling pathway, may be critical to the alteration of immunological state and immune function in highly trained individuals.

blood, a fluid tissue functioning to connect the entire biological system at the physical level, expresses over 80% of the genes in the human genome. it has been found that the expression profiles of circulating blood cells contain a specific signature in response to various physiological, pathological and environmental changes  <cit> . overall, the findings from the present study support this notion. the upregulation of mitochondrial oxphos and ribosomal protein synthesis, and downregulation of inflammation, as a consequence of endurance exercise training, have been frequently reported in skeletal muscle  and adipose tissue  <cit> . thus, the results of the present study support the idea that peripheral blood can serve as a surrogate tissue to assess the effect of exercise training on the whole system.

the alterations in the athlete’s leukocyte transcriptome may not only reflect cellular changes occurring in other tissue types, such as skeletal muscle and adipose tissue, but may also reflect alterations in immune function, since blood cells constitute the first line of the immune defense system  <cit> . in the present study, we found that genes implicated in the cellular translation machinery were consistently upregulated in athletes. this included genes involved in rna processing , and ribosome biogenesis . vigorous exercise exerts a heavy assault on the biological system of participants, such as alterations in energy substrates, accumulation of metabolites, increases in body temperature, and changes in neuro-endocrine activity, etc. living cells, including blood cells, exposed to these environmental changes, may respond with activation of protein synthesis, and accordingly activation of transcription, pre-mrna processing, alternative splicing, etc. it is conceivable that the upregulation of genes involved in these processes is part of the molecular basis associated with the adaptation to long-term exercise training. based on our results, the leukocyte transcriptional profile suggests that endurance athletes have a higher translation capacity and thus, protein production rate. presumably, a higher protein turnover rate should be linked to an improved immune function due to the replacement of defective proteins with newly synthesized functioning proteins. however, the evidence linking this transcriptional change to immune function is lacking. interestingly, a downregulation of these pathways and the pathways related to mitochondrial oxphos, has been identified as a key feature of aging immune cells   <cit> . therefore, the results of our study suggests that transcriptional upregulation of leukocyte mitochondrial oxphos and ribosomal protein synthesis may be implicated as a protective effect of endurance exercise on immunosenescence.

in the present study, genes involved in mitochondrial oxphos and biogenesis were upregulated in athletes. they included those encoding electron transport chain proteins , and genes encoding mitochondria ribosomal proteins . a similar finding has been made previously, in which genes encoding enzymes in the oxidative cycle had an upregulation in blood leukocytes following six months of high volume endurance exercise training  <cit> . research over the past several years provides evidence that mitochondria play a fundamental role in the innate immune response involved in pattern-recognition, anti-bacterial immunity and sterile inflammation  <cit> . further, leukocyte mitochondria dysfunction, manifested by a decrease in mitochondria o <dig> consumption and an increase in the production of reactive oxygen species, has been implicated in the pathology of various diseases such as neurodegenerative disease  <cit> , insulin resistance  <cit> , type ii diabetes  <cit> , and cancer  <cit> . accordingly, the data from our study suggest that intense exercise training can augment individual innate immunity and resistance to certain types of diseases via upregulation of mitochondrial energetics in circulating leukocytes. it is also plausible that this transcriptional change in leukocytes reflects a low metabolic and inflammatory stress from the whole system in athletes as compared with non-athlete controls.

consistent with the majority of the studies on endurance exercise and inflammation, the anti-inflammatory effect of chronic exercise training was reflected in the leukocyte transcriptional profile of athletes. this finding was revealed through pathway analysis. the inflammation-related pathways, such as response to endogenous/external stimulus, defense response, regulation of cell proliferation, were significantly enriched among genes showing downregulation in athletes. however, the downregulation did not reach the significance level of fdr <  <dig>  based on a gene-level test. the genes driving the enrichment of inflammation-related biological processes included both pro-  and anti-inflammatory cytokines , chemotactic factors , and factors related to leukocyte migration . at the protein level, the circulating immunoglobulins a, g and m were not significantly different between athletes and controls, which is consistent with some studies, suggesting that in the resting state, the plasma immunoglobulin levels of athletes and non-athletes are very similar  <cit> . however, the anti-inflammatory factor, il-1ra, was significantly lower in athletes. at the transcriptional level, il-1rn, the gene encoding il-1ra, was downregulated  in athletes, but did not reach significance . these results are in agreement with a previous study  <cit>  that reported a coordinated downregulation of pro- and anti-inflammatory cytokines  in chronically trained elite kayakers. a similar finding in former elite athletes suggested that the decrease of cytokines was associated with high volume of current leisure time physical activity  <cit> . in our study, other cytokines  were not detectable in most of our samples likely related to the use of frozen blood samples. overall, the transcriptional downregulation of inflammatory pathways and decreased plasma levels of il-1ra appears to indicate a depressed inflammatory status in athletes. interestingly, the genes associated with antigen presentation, including hla-dpb, hla-dpb <dig>  hla-dpb <dig>  hla-dqa <dig>  and hla-dra, were upregulated in athletes. thus, it is plausible to suggest that chronic vigorous exercise training has an anti-inflammatory effect; however, the immune function, especially the adaptive immune function, is less likely to be affected if not improved.

the clinical importance of these transcriptional changes is hard to predict because of the complexity of the immune system and the redundancy of immune functions. additionally, the post-transcriptional regulation of gene expression might shift the profile of the end product of proteins. nevertheless, if the actual activation status of the peripheral blood does mirror the expression data, the results of the present study suggest that chronic intense exercise training might be a double-edged sword with respect to affecting one’s health. it adversely influences participants’ efficacy of wound healing and their resistance to minor infection  <cit> . it also positively reduces one’s risk for inflammation-associated chronic disease  and autoimmune conditions.

the biological processes related to the regulation of apoptosis, transcription, and regulation of cellular metabolic process, were also enriched among the downregulated genes. however, the genes driving the enrichment of these processes significantly overlapped  with those responsible for the enrichment of inflammation-related pathways. thus, they may not have specific implications towards the impact of exercise training on leukocytes.

in the present study, we chose to study young and healthy athletes to minimize the influence of potential confounding factors such as aging and disease, that is known to influence immune function  <cit> . also, it is worth mentioning that to avoid the potential immune dysregulation associated with intensified training and excessive emotional stress  <cit>  , thus to best mimic the general population who undergo intense endurance exercise training for health and fitness purposes, the athletes were in their regular training period and were not preparing for any competition in the following three months.

our study has a few limitations. first, we used the whole blood and did not account for the influence of changes in peripheral leukocyte subpopulations on the transcription profile. however, considering that gene expression may be influenced by manipulation inherent to the sorting procedure and the focus of the study is the overall immune status of the peripheral blood leukocytes, we believe that involvement  of minor shifts in leukocyte populations/subpopulations, would not influence the valuable biological information conveyed by the results of the study. second, due to a limited sample size, we could not examine males and females separately. however, in the design, the athlete and the control group were matched for sex. thus, we believe that the findings of the study are the common features in both females and males. the sex effect of immune function should be investigated in a focused study in the future.

CONCLUSIONS
in conclusion, our data indicate that in young healthy individuals, high intensity endurance exercise training can chronically induce transcriptional changes in the peripheral blood leukocytes. the directional changes in the transcriptional profile of leukocytes suggest that exercise can induce an upregulation of genes involved in leukocyte protein production rate and mitochondria biogenesis, as well as a downregulation of inflammation. the findings of the study also provide support for the notion that peripheral blood can be used as a surrogate tissue to study the systemic effect of exercise training.

