BACKGROUND
isolation has been historically considered the most frequent mechanism to limit gene flow, promoting divergence of lineages leading to speciation  <cit> . the two dominant proposed forms of isolation have been vicariant allopatric  and peripatric, while sympatric and parapatric speciation appear less common  <cit>  . the classical model of vicariant allopatry starts with an ancestral distribution, which is split into large, disjointed populations  <cit> ; hereafter referred to as “vicariant allopatry” or simply “allopatry”. numerous examples have been cited demonstrating the process of allopatry in driving speciation , and the signal of vicariant barriers limiting gene flow has been shown in many comparative phylogeographic studies . in peripatric speciation, a small population is isolated at the edge of a larger population and rapidly diversifies, often crossing a previous barrier to dispersal and/or occupying a newly available ecological niche/habitat type. over short periods of evolutionary time, peripatric events leave different evolutionary footprints from allopatry in terms of range, historical demography, and degree of ecological and morphological divergence  <cit> . parapatric speciation events also involve a shift in habitat requirements or ecological niche, though unlike in peripatric speciation, there are no physical barriers separating divergent lineages. sympatric speciation, where species diverge within the same environment without spatial or ecological barriers, has rarely if ever been observed  <cit> . new analytical approaches using multiple types of data enable testing for these processes in greater detail .

different speciation processes produce predictable outcomes in the molecular, morphological, and geographic relationships among lineages. in contrast to the stable population sizes associated with allopatric speciation, a peripatric speciation event yields genetic variation consistent with bottlenecks and low founder population numbers  <cit> . peripatric species are also more likely to be ecologically divergent, as they have crossed a barrier to dispersal that previously limited occupation of new habitat at the edge of the ancestral range  <cit> . allopatric species, in contrast, more often retain their ecological niche due to the similarity of habitats isolated by vicariant barriers . morphologically, divergence in physical traits, especially those shaped by sexual selection, are predicted to be especially affected in peripatric populations both due to drift in small populations and as reinforcement between sister lineages in close proximity . quantifying molecular, ecological, and morphological metrics among sister lineages can therefore distinguish between these two modes  in species formation.

across the african continent, speciation patterns are largely consistent with fragmentation of formally continuous forests through fluctuating climate . such patterns occur in the eastern afromontane biodiversity hotspot . here, isolation of forest endemics on refugial mountain tops appears to be a common driver of exceptional levels of endemism and species diversity . however, in part due to incomplete phylogenetic and phylogeographic sampling and imprecise distribution models, little attention has been paid to whether regional-scale fragmentation  or local-scale expansions or niche shifts  are the dominant speciation process within this sky-island system.

we evaluate an insular montane radiation of spiny-throated reed frogs within the eabh and assess regional-scale and local-scale speciation mechanisms. deciphering these two processes for individual radiations is imperative to understand diversification in tropical ecosystems, as both niche conservatism and niche divergence appear to play a major role in amphibian speciation  <cit> . establishing the speciation processes involved in the spiny-throated reed frog radiation allows for direct comparisons with other eabh endemic radiations as well as linking these processes to montane and island archipelagos around the world.

within the eabh, the arrangement of montane areas of varying size and distance from each other provides an ideal setting in which to compare mechanisms of divergence. the mountains of the eabh system are dominated today by two forest vegetation types: rainforest found approximately between 700-1800 m or lower depending upon the mountain block and aspect , and a montane forest/grassland mosaic  above ca. 1800 m in the southern eabh  <cit> . the extent and distribution of these biomes throughout the eabh has varied through time, with a gradual shift towards increased grasslands from  <dig> mya onward  <cit> . the areas of high montane forest/grassland mosaic have historically expanded and contracted and at times likely vanished or become restricted to extremely narrow refugia as forests expanded  <cit> . lower elevation rainforest habitats fluctuated to a lesser extent, and were likely persistently stable on montane slopes despite habitat cycling in the adjacent lowland savannahs . the larger fluctuations, smaller potential distributions, and the relative newness of mosaic habitat compared to mid-elevation rainforests, may make the mosaic habitat biome more susceptible to peripatry mechanisms than the more persistent rainforest biome. though other biome-specific patterns of diversification are known  <cit> , whether peripatric speciation could also be biome-specific is less well documented  <cit> .

in this study we evaluate the african spiny-throated reed frog complex from the eabh of tanzania, malawi, and mozambique  and quantitatively assess the isolation mechanisms among sister-lineages. the spiny-throated complex is comprised of six taxa   <cit> , with species occupying localities often restricted to either montane mosaic or rainforest habitats . by using molecular, morphological and ecological indicators, we make a first assessment of whether allopatric or peripatric speciation processes are supported and whether peripatric speciation is facilitated by the fluctuating montane forest/grassland mosaic biome. these results highlight a possible speciation syndrome within biodiversity hotspots composed of a variety of habitat types where variation in persistence may generate endemicity.fig.  <dig> elevation map of kenya, tanzania, and malawi encompassing the entire range of species within this complex. colored dots correspond to localities sampled for each species in this analysis : red = hyperolius tanneri, purple = h. burgessi, black = h. ukwiva, green = h. minutissimus, dark blue = h. davenporti, light blue = h. spinigularis. estimated iucn range limits for each species are drawn in corresponding colors



RESULTS
phylogenetic relationships
summary statistics on the loci used in this study are shown in table  <dig>  all molecular sequences are deposited along with voucher numbers in genbank and are available along with all specimen information in additional file 1: table s <dig> table  <dig> summary statistics of molecular loci used in this study


h. burgessi

h. tanneri

h. minutissimus

h. spinigularis

h. ukwiva

h. davenporti

h. burgessi

h. tanneri

h. minutissimus

h. spinigularis

h. ukwiva


species tree methods all agreed on a single reconstruction of the evolutionary relationships within this group, though support for the sister relationship of h. ukwiva and h. minutissimus was weak or unresolved in some methods . all methods show monophyletic relationships supporting six lineages: the previously described species of h. tanneri and h. minutissimus, a new species from the rubeho mountains , three distinct lineages  which once were lumped into a single species  . hereafter the clade previously refered to as h. spinigularis will be refered to in quotes  and the newly defined species names will be used. raxml genetrees are shown in additional file 2: figure s <dig>  specimens previously identified as h. spinigularis from the udzungwa mountains  <cit>  were included in this analysis and all were definitively genetically and morphologically h. minutissimus, confirming earlier estimates that only h. minutissimus is found in the udzungwa mountain block.fig.  <dig> species trees and species delimitation. left: rate calibrated beast tree with nodal support values from each species tree and phylogenetic tree method . root age =  <dig>  mya. unresolved node = na, pre-defined clades  = def. right: bgmyc posterior probabilities of species delimitation are shown as well as simplified species delimitations using bgmyc, bfd, and bpp methods. each colored block corresponds to a single individual. pictures from each named species are shown



species delimitation
species delimitation methods  were largely in agreement in defining lineages within this radiation except for some variation in support of additional distinct lineages in addition to the six described here and in  <cit>  . in each case of additionally distinct lineages associated with the named six  specimen for h. spinigularis shown in yellow for bpp, uluguru mountains locality of h. burgessi shown in pink for bgmyc), a distinct locality with comparatively low sampling within a large distribution is involved. additional sampling will be necessary to determine whether additional taxonomic units are supported. the bgmyc probability threshold above which individuals are considered conspecific was set at  <dig>   to avoid over lumping or splitting species . bfd support for the six-species model shown in fig.  <dig> was positive , as was bpp <dig> .table  <dig> species delimitations from bfd *beast stepping stone and pathsampling and bpp

areas are coded by mountain block as follows: eu = east usambara, ng = nguru, ul = uluguru, sh = southern highlands, mu = mu, na = namuli, ud = udzungwa, ru = rubeho, wu = west usambara. bfd: log likelihood values  are given for potential species grouping scenarios for path sampling  and stepping stone analysis. bayes factors of each progressively more likely scenario are shown . bayes factors above  <dig> are considered “decisive”. top models from each analysis both predict six species, though bpp lumps h. davenporti and h. burgessi and splits the two populations of h. spinigularis




effective population size, population bottlenecks and expansions
no populations showed signs of ancestral bottlenecks or expansions, though the narrowly distributed species  did not have sufficient sample sizes to analyze extended bayesian skyline plots . in ebsp plots, most populations showed potential current bottlenecks, which may be related to recent range reductions of habitats due to climatic and/or anthropogenic events . only the population of h. burgessi in the east usambara mountains does not appear to show a current reduction, though this is also the population with greatest sampling. ebsp plots of all individuals from deeper nodes did not show bottlenecks or expansions except when including all individuals from all species, which shows an expansion beginning around  <dig> mya that peaks around  <dig> mya. this coincides with the split between h. tanneri and the h. spinigularis/burgessi/davenporti clade.table  <dig> species, altitudinal range, habitat and available area of occurrence from iucn estimates


h. burgessi

h. davenporti

h. minutissimus

h. spinigularis

h. tanneri

h. ukwiva
fig.  <dig> ebsp plots of effective population sizes and potential bottlenecks in populations and species with largest sample sizes. a-d show single mountain block populations within species. a
h. minutissimus population in the udzungwa mountains. b
h. burgessi in the east usambara mountains. c
h. burgessi on malundwe hill. d
h. burgessi in the nguru mountains. e-g show all descendent individuals from deeper phylogenetic nodes



bpp estimates of theta  show essentially stable mean and 95 % confidence intervals for all splits within the tree ). however, estimates from the limited-distribution species are based on 1– <dig> individuals, and thus are not informative. stable θ estimates of the species with larger distributions  agree with ebsp population estimates that these populations have been stable through time without marked reductions or expansions .

morphological divergence
measurements for all traits and species summary statistics are presented in  <cit> . in males, aspects of gular shape  contributed most to distinguishing species in pc <dig>  , though overall size  was also significantly involved. pc <dig>  though contributing much less to distance between the groups, separates h. tanneri and h. spinigularis from all other species based on head length and gular flap height. both gular shape estimates and sul were significant in single trait anova estimates . for females, head-width, sul, and leg measurements were the primary distinguishing characteristics in pc <dig> . in anova analyses of these traits controlled for size, only sul was significantly different between species . presence and distribution of gular and ventral spines are different between all species  <cit>  and is a diagnostic tool for separating species .fig.  <dig> principle component analysis of morphological divergence between species. males are distinguished by snout-urostyle length  and aspects of gular shape. females are distinguished by sul

morphological measurement abbreviations are: snout-urostyle length , tibiafibula length , head width , gular flap width , gular flap height . for raw measurements, see loader et al., submitted



environmental niche divergence, timing of shifts, and range sizes
pca analysis of full and reduced bioclim variables  showed equivalent patterns, and thus only the reduced dataset is discussed. two major clades of species were identified along pc <dig> marking the split between a rainforest adapted group  and a mosaic-adapted group  . pc <dig>  is dominated by the temperature and precipitation during the coldest and driest times of year. these habitat syndromes, when mapped onto the phylogenetic tree, show two major adaptive habitat shifts to high elevation grasslands , presuming that the ancestor was forest-adapted in line with paleoclimatic estimates of conditions ~  <dig> mya  <cit> , before a general shift to grasslands at  <dig>  mya  <cit> .fig.  <dig> ecological niche divergence of speciation according to major habitat types. left: principle component analysis of current habitat suitability for each species. montane grassland/forest mosaic species are on the right, while rainforest adapted species are on the left. right: distribution of forest  and mosaic  adapted species on *beast species tree. a double-sided arrow between habitat types indicates the two nodes where ecological shifts are inferred. relative population sizes based on field collection estimates and potential range sizes are shown in the relative size of color-key circles. the split distribution of h. spinigularis is represented by two circles to represent the two distant populations in malawi and mozambique separated by ~160 km. the two localities of h. tanneri are represented by a single circle as they are within the same mountain block and separated by only ~25 km



in testing potentially peripatric sister species pairs for niche shifts, h. davenporti falls outside of the pca confidence ellipse probability threshold for h. burgessi into different niche space . the presence of h. davenporti and h. burgessi in two divergent areas of niche space  implies a major niche shift at the time of speciation. hyperolius ukwiva localities were outside of the pca confidence ellipse probability threshold for h. minutissimus , but only separated by pc <dig>  the appropriate comparison for h. tanneri in a phylogenetic context is between h. tanneri and the ancestor of h. burgessi, h. spinigularis, and h. davenporti. to approximate their ancestral niche, we combined distributional data from these three species into a lumped distribution, which we then compared to h. tanneri in a pca analysis as above. no separation was seen between h. tanneri and the combined niche space of the “spinigularis” group  .

the two cases of adaptation to grasslands  occurred at differing times  and therefore a single event cannot have caused these shifts. both events coincide with periods of increased climatic cycling and a gradual increase in coverage from the forest/grassland mosaic from the previously extensively distributed rainforests of this region. geographic range estimates , underline range asymmetries between sister species  <cit> .

discussion
new lineages within the spiny-throated reed frog clade
prior to this study and our complementary taxonomic revision  <cit> , only three species were recognized within the spiny-throated reed frog radiation within the highlands of east africa: h. spinigularis, h. tanneri, and h. minutissimus. our field surveys in isolated mountain ranges and associated molecular analyses and morphological assessments of members within this group have documented three new lineages within this radiation: h. burgessi, h. davenporti, and h. ukwiva, each corresponding to a different mountain block or blocks within the eabh. in addition to morphological diagnoses, species delimitation methods based on molecular data were in general agreement in the recognition of each of these species. deeper population-level sampling should help clarify the levels of divergence within and between species. nodal support was strong in most methods, though *beast showed weak support at basal nodes. increased sampling of additional molecular markers may help clarify relationships in these deeply divergent lineages.

peripatric speciation or not
three species within this radiation are known from single localities in the mountains of the eabh , raising the question of whether these lineages are the result of peripatric speciation events when isolated from their broadly distributed sister species. though evidence is limited, many cases of speciation within the spiny-throated reed frogs are consistent with peripatric speciation. in support of peripatric origins, the three species with limited distributions all have smaller realized and potential distributions than their broadly distributed sister lineages . uneven population sizes and population bottlenecks could not be explicitly tested in peripatric species as field observations showed very low population densities and genetic material was limited, yet the rarity of populations and low population sizes of the limited-distribution species were apparent from repeated surveys across localities  <cit> . in contrast, their sister lineages showed much larger distributions with large and stable population sizes through time. minimally, the lack of bottleneck patterns from the well sampled, broadly distributed species and limited distribution of sister lineages fits with our a priori predictions for peripatric speciation.

we expected peripatric lineages would differ in climate/habitat, and this was found in 2/ <dig> pairs. though a habitat shift is not necessary for peripatric speciation, these shifts are less likely in vicariant speciation. the expectation of accentuated divergence in sexually-dimorphic traits in peripatric lineages compared to allopatric was not altogether supported, as all species differed in sul, gular shape, and the arrangement of gular spines which we assume to be involved in some aspect of sexual selection. there is, however, a complete loss of gular spines in h. tanneri differing substantially from its sister group. this rapid morphological change in h. tanneri, potentially the result of sexual selection, is what would be predicted for peripatric speciation.

within the allopatric populations of both h. burgessi and h. spinigularis, we find conserved ecological niche/environmental tolerance despite population distances greater than most peripatric species pairs, and no evidence of population bottlenecks. as most species within this radiation are known from single mountain blocks, we were concerned that morphological variation would be high even within species on different mountain blocks . however, this was not the case in h. burgessi, where morphology was conserved despite substantial divergence times  between different blocks. sufficient morphological data are not yet available for the newly discovered mozambique population of h. spinigularis to determine if they are similarly conserved in relation to malawian specimens.

distinguishing between allopatric and peripatric speciation can be difficult, as these processes anchor a continuum of progressively asymmetric isolation. the precise point at which a process ceases to be allopatric and becomes peripatric is therefore blurred. the cases of mixed support in the indicators we examined might therefore be a consequence of the extent to which some of the events were truly “peripatric” or “allopatric” events. likewise, the indicators themselves  may yield ambiguous results when evaluating species pairs that are deeply divergent. with the current data available on the spiny-throated reed frogs, it seems possible that peripatric speciation plays a role in generating biodiversity within the forests and grasslands of the eabh. in systems such as the eabh, which contain a high concentration of old endemics with limited and fragmented distributions in isolated highlands  <cit> , a community approach may be necessary to clarify the prevalence of these speciation mechanisms in order to more fully understand the formation of its rich biota.

biome specific speciation mechanisms
based on the comparisons outlined here from spiny-throated hyperoliids found across these habitats – it seems that peripatric processes may be more pronounced in higher elevation species compared to those in more persistent rainforests . if there were a correlation between the less persistent montane forest/grassland mosaic sites and peripatric speciation, we would expect a common biogeographic pattern repeated across other species. little data from other amphibians of peripatry has been reported worldwide , however, and information is particularly lacking for amphibians within the eabh. similarly little is known about the phylogenetic relationships and demographic history among eabh high-altitude species and whether patterns exist that might be consistent with peripatry. evidence in analogous systems, however, suggests that such a distinct boundary in biomes – as in rainforest and grasslands - might be important for generating specific speciation mechanisms. for example, ecotones across savanna-forest mosaics of central africa been suggested to be important in generating rainforest diversity through peri – and para – patric processes  <cit> ; however, the generality of such patterns has not be quantified. the role of distinct habitat boundaries promoting speciation processes clearly deserves further investigation, potentially such situations might favor fundamentally different speciation processes compared to other areas . likewise, there are also clear conservation implications that arise from these considerations. if high elevation species consistently exhibit limited population numbers and historical population genetic bottlenecks, they may be at increased risk if exposed to global anthropogenic pressures such as habitat destruction, fragmentation, and climate change.

CONCLUSIONS
molecular, morphological, range, and niche analyses provide mixed support for cases of peripatric speciation in spiny-throated reed frogs. the highest support is in species pairs exhibiting extreme potential and realized distributional asymmetry, niche shifts, and morphological divergence driven by sexually selected traits: h. burgessi vs. h. davenporti; h. minutissimus vs. h. ukwiva. the older break between h. tanneri and the “spinigularis” clade of h. spinigularis/burgessi/davenporti is less clear, though the limited distribution and unique loss of gular spines  in h. tanneri both support the potential for a peripatric split across the 10 km gap separating their current distributions. though low survey numbers and extremely limited range size in potentially peripatric populations limited our ability to employ demographic reconstructions to confirm peripatric speciation from a signature of founding bottlenecks within the narrowly-distributed species, these conditions themselves support that these are small and divergent populations on the periphery of sister lineages with larger geographic distributions. the emergence of the highland forest/grassland mosaic ecosystems during the same historical interval of this radiation may have facilitated a peripatric mode of speciation as these novel habitats created dispersal opportunities within the larger ranges of rainforest adapted species. whether the high elevation species that occur along the edge of forest and grassland areas are more amenable to peripatric speciation than rainforest-restricted species awaits additional assessment across more taxonomic groups. however, biome specific peripatric speciation process appears to be supported in some eabh hyperoliids.

