BACKGROUND
beginning with the bacteriophage φx <dig> genome in  <dig> by sanger et al.  <cit> , microbes have spearheaded technological advances in genome sequencing. this is almost certainly because their small size and limited genomic complexity  makes genomic analysis especially tractable, and because of their founding role and long history in the study of molecular biology. microbial genomics also yields enormous and otherwise inaccessible informational gains compared to the relatively few easily observable phenotypes of microbes . this preponderance shows no signs of abating; the current genomes online database  lists  <dig> bacterial and  <dig> archaeal genome projects either completed or ongoing. these statistics do not include a myriad of sequenced viruses or projects not registered in gold.

for approximately  <dig> years following its original publication in  <dig>  <cit> , the sanger dideoxy terminator method was the standard for dna sequencing. whereas this technology is now fully mature and capable of routinely yielding reads >  <dig> bp long, its reliance on capillary electrophoresis created a ceiling for the volume and speed of sequences that can be generated inexpensively by this approach  <cit> . so-called "next-" or "second-generation" sequencing approaches emerged in  <dig> following the release of the  <dig> pyrosequencing platform , followed closely thereafter by the illumina/solexa  and solid  systems  <cit> . second-generation sequencing platforms all produce reads shorter than those achieved by modern sanger sequencing, although new pacbio and roche flx titanium xl+ technologies may offer alternatives. regardless, short-read sequencing remains the most cost-effective on a per-base basis , leading to the dominance of these technologies  in terms of market share http://www.genomicslawreport.com/wp-content/uploads/2011/04/jp-morgan-ngs-report.pdf.

next-generation sequence assembly is an inherently challenging computational problem, stemming from the relatively low amount of data contained within each sequencing read, the huge volumes of data produced, and platform-specific error frequencies and profiles  <cit>  including difficulties with regions of high %gc bias  <cit>  and homopolymeric regions leading to frame-shifts  <cit> . simulations suggest that completely unbroken coverage of a bacterial genome is impossible using short read lengths  <cit> , although to some extent this can be compensated for using  paired-end approaches  <cit> . improving a draft-quality genome to completion is typically costly and laborious due to its general requirement for targeted pcr and sanger sequencing. fragmented genomes should therefore be the expectation from modern genome sequencing projects, at least for the foreseeable future, given the current economic reality and the market dominance of short-read sequencing platforms.

consequently, data occurring between genomic contig ends are omitted from draft-quality genomes. this affects comparative analyses using phylogenetic techniques; because the state of these missing characters cannot be otherwise estimated, their phylogenetic analysis is impossible. in contrast, analyses based on presence-absence of particular open reading frame  types, e.g., using blast  <cit> , can be performed using orf fragments. these estimations are primarily susceptible to two types of errors: false-negatives, where orfs that should be present are not annotated; and false-positives, where multiple fragments actually belonging to the same orf are annotated separately. in the present work, we attempt to understand the extent and consequences of the biases partial orfs introduce into annotation analyses. furthermore, we attempt to mitigate these biases by linking fragmented orfs based on their relatedness to homologs in closely-related organisms. we acknowledge that orf fragmentation can introduce other biases into comparative analyses, e.g., due to the increased difficulty of correct orf modeling  <cit>  or potentially, misannotation due to the lower informational content of orf fragments relative to full-length sequences. however, these errors fall outside the scope this current work.

RESULTS
extent of predicted orf fragments in publicly available draft genomes
whereas it is intuitive to expect orf fragmentation in a draft genome due to the existence of multiple contigs, the extent of this problem is currently unknown. the majority of draft genomes in the ncbi database at the time of this study contained tens to hundreds of partial orf fragments, although some fell both above and below this range . the largest number of orf fragments in a particular genome was  <dig>  and the maximum percentage of the total number of predicted orfs composed of partial sequences was  <dig> % . the increased numbers of orf fragments is a result of decreased assembly quality, as indicated by the negative correlation of both the number of fragments and the percentage of the total number of predicted orfs composed of partial sequences with n <dig> . note that, whereas n <dig> values from different genomes cannot be directly compared due to their dependence on genome size, the strong negative correlation with genome fragment abundance supports its use here as an estimate of genome quality. these distributions likely reflect the technological transition from sanger sequencing towards 454-, illumina- and solid-based methods.

the effect of partial orfs on annotation efficacy
as noted, genome fragmentation can affect orf annotation either by erroneously omitting orfs or by duplicating annotations for fragments originating from the same orf. we examined the effect of fragmentation on orf annotation in  <dig> streptomyces genomes using three different annotation types, representing different annotation targets  and sensitivities . genome assembly quality was approximated using the percentage of predicted orfs composed of fragments and the average orf length. note that these metrics reflect genome quality oppositely: high quality genome assemblies have longer mean orf lengths and lower percentages of partial orfs.

regardless of the genome quality metric used, orf fragmentation caused significant over-annotation using kegg and significant under-annotation using pfam . some under-annotation was also observed using cog, although this was not as significant as that observed for pfam . under-annotation using pfam may reflect the increased omission of partial or entire domains due to orf fragmentation. over-annotation using kegg suggests that this annotation type is especially sensitive. all trends remained, although with lowered statistical significance, when streptomyces sp. pp-c <dig>  the only genome in our dataset generated using solely illumina sequencing  <cit> , was excluded . this may suggest that annotation difficulties are especially exacerbated by some applications of short-read genome sequencing technologies.

apearson correlations between annotation frequency and genome quality, as represented by the percent of the predicted orfs composed of partial sequences and mean orf length. complete genomes are excluded in all cases; including them has essentially no effect.

identifying functional categories enriched in partial orfs
to further explore the effect of orf fragmentation, we separately annotated the partial and complete orfs according to their cog superfamilies in the draft genomes from our streptomyces dataset . we aggregated the cog superfamily annotations for partial and complete orfs in this analysis because the low number of partial fragments in some genomes became non-representative when converted to a percentage. furthermore, the average percentage of orfs belonging to some cog superfamilies for these genomes exhibited a strongly bimodal distribution , somewhat undermining statistical inferences based on the mean. despite these limitations, most cog superfamilies were represented by complete and partial orfs approximately equally . this suggests that orf fragmentation is a largely stochastic process driven by local, sequence-specific characteristics. however, three cog superfamilies were substantially enriched in partial orf fragments: "replication, recombination and repair", "signal transduction mechanisms" and "secondary metabolites biosynthesis, transport and catabolism" . inspection of the underlying data revealed that these enrichments were almost entirely due to three cog families: cog1020--non-ribosomal peptide synthetase  modules and related proteins, on average  <dig> % of complete orfs but  <dig> % of partial orfs; cog3321--polyketide synthase  modules and related proteins, on average  <dig> % of complete orfs but  <dig> % of partial orfs; and cog0515--serine/threonine protein kinase, on average  <dig> % of complete orfs but  <dig> % of partial orfs. cog <dig> and cog <dig> both belong to the "secondary metabolites biosynthesis, transport and catabolism" superfamily, and cog <dig> belongs to both the "replication, recombination and repair" and "signal transduction mechanisms" superfamilies. fragmentation of pkss, nrpss and serine/threonine kinases are likely due to their multi-modular structures which are composed of homologous modules  <cit> . the repetitive nature of these enzymes, along with the lower per-base information content inherent to the gc-bias characteristic of actinomycetes, is likely to complicate genome-based drug-discovery efforts based on short-read sequencing platforms.

linkage of partial orfs using homologs in related genomes
whereas missing data in fragmented genomes cannot be compensated for without improvements to the genome sequencing and assembly procedure itself, the same is not necessarily true for fragments leading to falsely inflated annotation estimates. we hypothesized that linkage between some fragmented orfs could be inferred based on their common homology to complete orfs in other genomes. after extensive parameterization to find the most sensitive and specific similarity and coverage thresholds for fragment assembly using our algorithm , a substantial proportion of orf fragments could be so linked, ranging from  <dig> % for s. clavuligerus atcc <dig> # <dig> up to  <dig> % for s. roseosporus nrrl <dig> . the parameters used yielded a low overall false positive rate for the entire dataset  as determined by the congruency of the linked orf fragment sets with scaffold information .


b

a all streptomyces genomes except streptomyces sp. pp-c <dig> and each query genome were used to link partial orfs in that query genome. the parameters used were: ≥ 20% identity to and ≥ 60% coverage between the query and reference sequence and ≥ 50% similarity between the identities of each partial fragment to the reference sequence.

bfalse positive linkages were identified from their incongruencies with the scaffold information

inspection of the relationship between genetic relatedness and partial orf linkage revealed insights into the varied rate of partial orf linkage observed between genomes in our test dataset . in some cases, genome relatedness influenced partial orf linkage, with genomes having average amino acid identities  < 80%  linking few sets of partial orfs . however, many exceptions to this trend could also be found resulting and an overall lack of correlation between the aai between two compared genomes and the number of linked fragments . using the percentage of orthologous full-length proteins as the metric of genome similarity yielded equivalent results . even more important than genome relatedness per se was the degree to which related samples sampled the variable genome of the taxon of interest  <cit> . both the influence and variability in this parameter are exhibited by s. roseosporus nrrl <dig>  for which more partial orfs were linked using streptomyces sp. xylebkg- <dig> as a reference  compared with either s. roseosporus nrrl <dig>  or s. griseus subsp. griseus nbrc <dig> .  note that 95-96% aai correlates to 70% dna-dna hybridization, i.e., bacterial species as currently defined  <cit> . in contrast, the three replicate s. clavuligerus atcc <dig> genomes  could link relatively few of each other's partial orfs despite the high relatedness of these genomes . this may indicate that:  some genome fragments are inherently not linkable using homology e.g., due to the presence of multiple, closely related paralogs in a genome;  some highly similar genome regions may fragment similarly, requiring slightly more divergent homologs for linkage;  even extremely highly related genomes  can differ in some respect, e.g., plasmid content  <cit> . regardless, these results suggest that this homology-based approach to fragment linkage might become more effective as more related genomes become available, as is expected due to the ever-decreasing cost of genome sequencing. however, selecting appropriate reference genomes remains somewhat empirical due to the current lack of a strong correlation between genome similarity and fragment linkage.

to determine whether our partial orf linkage method could compensate for errors in kegg over-annotation, we tested the correlation between the number of kegg annotations after correction and both the mean orf length and percentage of the total number of orfs composed of fragments as described above . all correlations between the proxies used to represent genome quality and the percentage of kegg annotations decreased in significance or became statistically non-significant following fragment linkage. these results suggest that over-annotation can at least be partially compensated for by fragment linkage, especially as the variable genome for each species becomes better sampled. similar correction of the cog and pfam annotations increased the degree of under-annotation where this was previously statistically significant, albeit only slightly .

discussion
next-generation dna genome sequencing has irrevocably moved microbiology  towards extensive data volumes and the concomitant challenges of their analyses. these advances are not without attendant compromises, especially the economic trade-off between dataset breadth and quality which appears to be increasingly towards the former at the expense of the latter. emerging technologies such as pacbio and  <dig> flx titanium xl+ offer enhanced read lengths, but these formats still cannot match the per-base costs of shorter-read sequencing platforms. cheaper short read techniques therefore seem poised to dominate the sequencing market for the foreseeable future, especially given that human genome re-sequencing, the main economic driver for innovation in genome sequencing technologies, is focused on clinical personal genomics where short reads appear largely sufficient for reference assembly and snp detection.

given this technological reality, draft genomes are likely to dominate microbial genomic data for the immediate future. here, we have attempted to address some of the limitations of this data type for comparative genomics analysis. we find that orf fragmentation has the potential to dramatically cause false-negatives in some annotation types, especially those relying on relatively small stretches of sequence . these biases will be difficult to address without improvements in genome quality. reciprocally, we also find that orf fragmentation can cause false-positive annotations of multiple orf fragments belonging to the same complete orf where sufficiently sensitive detection methods exist . however, we also suggest that these problems can likely be at least partially mitigated by linkage of protein fragments based on their complete homologs in related organisms . the impact of a well-sampled variable genome on orf fragment linkage is especially intriguing , and suggests that sampling multiple related strains will not only more accurately represent biological diversity but will also improve the data quality of all these strains by unmasking otherwise obscured homologies among orf fragments. this is likely to be particularly important for streptomyces and other similar organisms, for which the most biotechnologically interesting genes involved in secondary metabolism are both variable between strains  <cit>  and highly fragmented , and assembly is particularly challenged by low per-read information content due to %gc bias.

although our analyses indicate the potential for biases, they in no way diminish the value of draft bacterial genome sequencing. indeed, as described above, taking advantage of low cost-sequencing is essential to begin generating sufficient representation of the vast microbial diversity present in nature. with this increased sampling we can begin to differentiate between neutral and adaptive  genome contents. however, we must also be aware of the limitations of these data types. for example, if > 80% of the predicted orfs in a given bacterial genome are likely to be fragmented, analyses that can accommodate orf fragmentation, even if imperfectly, will be crucial. extensively fragmented draft genomic data will be insufficient for some applications, even with downstream in silico correction. this will necessitate proper resource allocation to ensure data usability for a given experimental objective. furthermore, data analysis requirements scale even faster than data accumulation, e.g., all-versus-all comparisons of n sequences most simply require n <dig> comparisons. it may therefore be necessary to use judicious subsets of a global dataset when attempting fragment linkage. in the end, there is no substitute for well designed, tractable research; draft sequencing, for all its promise and pitfalls, is no different.

CONCLUSIONS
draft genome quality will be the dominant form of microbial genomic data produced for the immediate and foreseeable future. this approach produces highly fragmented genomes, which concomitantly translates into abundant predicted orf fragments. these fragmented orfs lessen annotation efficacy, especially of repeating, multi-modular proteins. however, this problem can be somewhat ameliorated by increased sampling of a species' variable genome. therefore, despite their great utility in many applications, there exist disadvantages to draft genome sequencing that need to be addressed by appropriate experimental design and deployment of sequencing resources to effectively answer the study questions posed.

