BACKGROUND
during evolution, phosphorylation emerged as a prominent type of post-translational modification, because of its versatility and ready reversibility  <cit> . due to sessile lifestyle, kinomes have remarkably expanded in the plant kingdom: in arabidopsis and rice four percent of genes encode kinases  <cit> , whereas in the human genome this number is 2 %  <cit> . although kinases are overrepresented in plants, and despite their obvious importance in key processes, knowledge on actual plant protein kinase substrates is seriously lagging behind those of animal kinases. mitogen-activated protein kinases  are very good examples: plant mapks are most similar to human erk-type mapks, and while well over  <dig> erk1/ <dig> substrates are known  <cit> , there are only about twenty individually characterised substrates described in the model plant arabidopsis  <cit> . due to independent evolution of mapk signalling networks in different kingdoms, homology-based substrate search is not a suitable option, known plant mapk substrates have been identified using specific and targeted techniques, such as yeast two-hybrid screens. therefore the generation of novel tools for analysing cellular protein phosphorylation is critical in order to efficiently dissect plant kinase networks  <cit> .

technical advances in kinase research have primarily focused on phosphoproteomics related technologies  <cit>  and thus have resulted in various screening methods. however, genes expressed at low levels or in rare cell types are easily missed by such methods. advances in bioinformatics and systems biology can deliver solutions to this issue by efficient prediction of underrepresented substrates. accordingly, in vitro mapk substrates were reported using protein microarrays  <cit>  and phosphoproteomics  <cit> , and a consensus phosphorylation sequence for mpk <dig> and mpk <dig> was identified by screening a random positional peptide library, which was consequently used for predicting novel candidate mapk substrates  <cit>  in arabidopsis.

nevertheless, whether identified by in vivo or in silico screening, at least a subset of the substrate proteins has to be verified by targeted experiments. yet, development of unbiased discovery tools has not been followed by a corresponding improvement of candidate-based approaches. protein phosphorylation is commonly demonstrated by in vitro kinase assay, a method developed decades ago, without substantive improvement since. this is a tedious method, involving protein affinity purification, and entails use of hazardous radioisotopes. moreover, the use of high concentrations of purified kinases and the lack of cellular regulatory mechanisms in vitro relatively often lead to false results  <cit> . therefore it is timely to develop alternative methods capable of addressing in vivo phosphorylation interactions in a targeted manner.

capillary isoelectric focusing  coupled nanofluidic immunoassay has been developed to detect differentially present protein isoforms in cellular protein samples  <cit> . in this system, protein isoforms of varying isoelectric points are separated by isoelectric focusing in a capillary, immobilised by uv light, and immunoprobed with antibodies. chemiluminescent signal generated by antibody-coupled enzyme is captured by a sensitive ccd camera. however, scarcity of specific antibodies means a serious bottleneck for the application of immunodetection-based assays in plants.

combination of cief-immunoassay with transient expression of fusion-protein constructs in protoplasts offers two important advantages: i) it circumvents the issue of limited availability of specific antibodies, ii) transfection enables the co-expression of investigated proteins with active or inactive protein kinases to study specific kinase-substrate relationships of interest. protoplasts are commonly used to demonstrate protein-protein interactions, and have also been applied to study mapk-substrate interactions, e.g. . here we demonstrate that detection of changes in phosphoisoform distribution of transfected fusion proteins by cief-immunoassay is a suitable approach to study in vivo kinase-substrate phosphorylation interactions in plants, by showing phosphorylation of a known and two novel mapk substrates.

RESULTS
phosphorylation of the known mapk substrate, acs <dig>  is detected by the novel method
in order to provide a cellular alternative to the often unreliable in vitro kinase assay to study specific kinase-substrate interactions, we have optimised a cief-coupled nanofluidic immunoassay to detect differentially present protein isoforms in transfected protoplasts with or without co-expression of active protein kinases and designated the concept kinase-associated phosphoisoform assay . for primary testing of the concept we first assayed phosphorylation of the c-terminal domain of 1-aminocyclopropane-1-carboxylic acid  synthase  <dig>  acs <dig> , a known substrate of the map kinase mpk <dig>  <cit> . protoplasts were transformed either with green fluorescent protein  or a construct consisting of acs-c fused to the c-terminus of gfp . gfp is predominantly present in a single isoform , whereas gfp:acs-c is detected as several peaks of different isoelectric point  values implying the parallel presence of differentially phosphorylated isoforms . although, in silico analysis can predict phosphorylation with limited reliability, various putative phosphorylation sites in the c-terminus of acs <dig> are identified by the eukaryotic linear motif  resource  <cit> , , indicating intense and dynamic phosphorylation, in good agreement with our observations. the complex isoform distribution could be reduced by phosphatase treatment of the protein extracts . co-expression of mpk <dig> in protoplasts treated with the bacterial flagellin-derived elicitor peptide flg <dig>  <cit> , an activator of mpk <dig>  resulted in the marked accumulation of acidic isoforms, most significantly the isoforms of pi  <dig> ,  <dig>  and  <dig>  , indicating de novo protein phosphorylation. co-expression with non-activated mpk <dig> also brought about acidification to a lesser extent, which primarily manifested in the accumulation of the pi  <dig>  isoform. as a negative control, a mutant gfp:acs-c variant deprived of the mapk phosphorylation sites  was also co-expressed with mpk <dig>  but its isoform distribution was unaffected by mpk <dig> . similarly, neither unfused gfp is phosphorylated by mpk <dig> . in comparison, transfected proteins were also detected by conventional sds-page immunoblot, where a slower-migrating band appeared in the gfp:acs-c sample co-transformed with activated mpk <dig> . thus, using a known mapk substrate we have demonstrated that it is possible to detect protein phosphorylation by a co-expressed active kinase by transfection-coupled cief-immunoassay, even if the protein exists in multiple phosphorylated isoforms in the cellular context.fig.  <dig> experimental setup of kinase-associated phosphoisoform assay. the concept is based on the differential phosphoisoform distribution of candidate substrates transiently expressed with or without co-expression of activated kinases. full-length cdnas of protein kinase and candidate substrate are cloned into plant expression vectors as translational fusion constructs. use of fusion proteins containing commonly used epitopes also circumvents the need of specific antibodies. candidate substrates are transfected into protoplasts, where intracellular phosphorylation can occur. following an appropriate incubation period the protoplasts are harvested, lysed and the protein extracts are loaded into capillaries. isoelectric focusing takes place in a ph gradient within the capillaries. finally, separated proteins are immobilised to the capillary surface, and detected by chemiluminescent enzyme-coupled antibodies, specific against the epitopes fused to the substrate proteins

fig.  <dig> detection of phosphoisoform distribution of transiently expressed gfp variants by cief-immunoassay. a-c electropherograms of various gfp-fusion proteins and their isoform distributions in cief-immunoassay. expressed proteins and treatments are indicated for each sample. a unmodified gfp is present in one major isoform and is not phosphorylated by mpk <dig>  top: control , middle: gfp co-expressed with mpk <dig>  bottom: gfp co-expressed with flg22-activated mpk <dig>  b isoform distribution of gfp:acs-c . top: control , middle: gfp:acs-c co-expressed with mpk <dig>  bottom: gfp:acs-c co-expressed with flg22-activated mpk <dig>  asterisks indicate acidic isoforms specifically accumulating in the presence of activated mpk <dig>  c isoform distribution of a gfp:acs-c variant, which is nonphosphorylatable by mapks . top: control , middle: gfp:acs-c-aaa co-expressed with mpk <dig>  bottom: gfp:acs-c-aaa co-expressed with flg22-activated mpk <dig>  d conventional sds-page immunoblot of transiently expressed gfp variants. arrowhead indicates a band, which specifically accumulates in the presence of activated mpk <dig>  negative control  denotes a protoplast sample not transfected with gfp

data correspond to the electropherograms shown in fig. 2b, c




wus is an mpk <dig> substrate in vivo
initial advances in plant mapk research predominantly revealed their functions in stress responses, yet, the essential roles of mapk signalling in plant development are increasingly evident  <cit> . as most of the identified substrates are also defence related, we aimed at identifying novel substrates with developmental function. we took advantage of the conservation of mapk docking sites  <cit> , and screened key developmental regulator transcription factors for the presence of the d-site motif as an indicator of possible mapk interaction  <cit> .

wus is a key transcription factor controlling the stem cell pool in shoot and floral meristems  <cit> . this factor is characterised in great detail by genetic methods, yet nothing is known about post-translational modifications of wus. wus contains an rrtlpl motif, which may serve as a mapk docking d-site, and four potential mapk phosphorylation sites . here we show that wus exists in two major isoforms using both gfp and myc epitope tagged wus constructs . next we tested whether co-expression with active mapks results in wus phosphorylation. to this end wus was co-expressed with four mapks, representing three phylogenetic groups of plant mapks . the marked accumulation of more acidic wus isoforms indicates that wus is specifically phosphorylated by mpk <dig>  but not by the related mpk <dig> of group a, nor by mpk <dig>  and mpk <dig> . the mpk3-triggered phosphorylation event could not be brought about by flg <dig> treatment without mpk <dig> co-expression, nor by co-expression with non-activated mpk <dig>  as an additional negative control, an inactive mpk <dig> variant was used in flg22-treated samples, without affecting any isoform redistribution . these results strongly imply that wus is an mpk <dig> substrate in vivo.fig.  <dig> wus is an mpk <dig> substrate in vivo. a-c electropherograms of various wus:myc fusion proteins and their isoform distributions in cief-immunoassay. expressed proteins and treatments are indicated for each sample. a effect of activated mpk <dig> on c-terminal myc-tagged wus isoform distributions in cief-immunoassay. top: control , middle: wus:myc co-expressed with mpk <dig>  bottom: wus:myc co-expressed with flg22-activated mpk <dig>  asterisks indicate acidic isoforms specifically accumulating in the presence of activated mpk <dig>  b differential charge compositions of point mutant wus variants are detected as changes in protein pi values. wusaa: non-phosphorylatable mutant, wus-dd: phosphomimetic mutant, wus-Δdock: mapk docking d-site disabled mutant. c alanine substitutions at the mapk phosphorylation sites t <dig>  s <dig> impair wus phosphorylation by mpk <dig>  d conventional sds-page immunoblot of transiently expressed wus variants

corresponding visualised peak areas used for calculating area percentages are shown in additional file 5: fig. s3



to further verify wus phosphorylation by mpk <dig>  three different mutations affecting mapk phosphorylation were introduced. the phosphoacceptor residues in two s/tp sites , which lay outside of the homeodomain were substituted either by alanines  or by glutamic acids . in a third mutant the putative d-site was disabled . two of these mutations also altered the pi values calculated by the expasy server  <cit> . while the wus-aa mutant has the same theoretical pi as the wild-type protein, the introduced or swapped charges decrease the pi values of wus-dd and wus-Δdock. the major peaks of all mutant forms were detected at the expected pi values, demonstrating that subtle differences in protein charge composition are reliably detected . the mpk3-mediated acidification of wus was completely abolished in both the non-phosphorylatable and the phosphomimetic mutants . moreover, phosphorylation was significantly impaired without a functional d-site , implying direct interaction through this motif. transfected proteins were also detected by conventional sds-page immunoblot, which confirmed expression but failed to resolve variations in phosphoisoform distribution .

for comparison, phosphorylation of wus by mpk <dig> was also tested by the traditional in vitro kinase assay. in agreement with the above findings, wild-type wus but not wus-aa was phosphorylated by mpk <dig>  as indicated by radiolabelled phosphate incorporation . conservation of the identified tandem phosphorylation sites in wus orthologues is shown in additional file 7: fig. s <dig> fig.  <dig> wus is an mpk <dig> substrate in vitro. kinase assay with in vitro translated, affinity purified wild-type gst-wus  and t108a, s112a mutant gst-wus  variants. c: control, mpk3: wus variants incubated with in vitro translated, affinity purified, eluted mkk4/mpk <dig>  sds-page separated wus protein on the autoradiograph is indicated by arrowhead. phosphorylation of myelin basic protein  by mpk <dig> is shown in the right panel



wus isoforms are consistently detected with various antibodies
in order to make sure that our results are not an artefact of protein tagging or antibody-mediated detection, wus variants were detected by various antibodies. although gfp contains one s/tp site, this is located within the globular structure and is most likely inaccessible. in contrast, there are no s/tp sites in the myc tag sequence. similar wus isoform distributions were detected with both fusion variants, although in case of the smaller myc tag additional minor peaks could be resolved, therefore this version was studied in more detail . phosphatase treatment of the protein extracts resulted in the accumulation of a single wus isoform , confirming protein phosphorylation. to further verify myc-epitope based detection, wus:myc was detected by three different antibodies with consistent isoform distributions. routinely, a monoclonal anti-myc antibody directly fused to horseradish peroxidase  was used, which did not require the use of a secondary antibody. as a consistency control an anti-myc antibody from an independent source  was also tested, with identical results . moreover, a specific anti-wus antibody is available from agrisera, which facilitated the choice of wus as a candidate substrate for testing the fusion-protein-based experimental concept. indeed, the same isoforms were detected by the specific anti-wus antibody as with the anti-myc antibodies, both in cief-immunoassay and in sds-page immunoblot . these results confirm that tagging and immunodetection do not interfere with intracellular wus phosphorylation and detection.

interestingly, wus fusion variants migrate anomalously in sds-page. molecular weights of wus:myc and wus:gfp are  <dig>  kda and  <dig>  kda, respectively, however wus:myc has an apparent molecular weight of about 68 kda, whereas wus:gfp migrates at about 54 kda. nevertheless, sds-page migration of differentially phosphorylated isoforms is identical. similarly, wus-aa and wus-dd mutants migrate as their wild-type counterparts, whereas wus-Δdock migrates slightly slower. conventional sds-page is thus not capable to resolve subtle changes in wus charge composition. moreover, several faster migrating bands can also be observed, which can be significantly abolished by treating protoplasts with the proteasome inhibitor mg- <dig>  implying that the lower molecular weight bands are degradation products .

the antibodies used in this study are presented in detail in additional file 8: table s <dig> 

ap <dig> is an mpk <dig> substrate in vivo
the homeotic gene ap <dig> is a key floral regulator and according to the abc model of flower development ap <dig> is a type-a transcription factor  <cit> . although, similarly to wus, ap <dig> function is extensively characterised by genetic means, post-translational modification of ap <dig> has not been reported yet. nonetheless, ap <dig> contains a remarkably high number of putative kinase interaction motifs and phosphorylation sites, . accordingly, the parallel existence of several ap <dig> isoforms in untreated cells was detected . the complex isoform distribution could be significantly reduced by phosphatase treatment of the protein extracts .fig.  <dig> ap <dig> is an mpk <dig> substrate in vivo. a effect of mapk co-expression and flg treatment on c-terminal myc-tagged ap <dig> isoform distributions in cief-immunoassay. expressed proteins and treatments are indicated for each sample. dashed line indicates the position of a major acidic isoform specifically appearing in the presence of activated mpk <dig>  b conventional sds-page immunoblot of transiently expressed ap2:myc variants in the samples corresponding to panel a. negative control  denotes a protoplast sample not transfected with the myc epitope

data correspond to the electropherograms shown in fig. 5a. peaks  <dig> - <dig>  may represent the same isoform, not well separated from the neighbouring major peaks. accumulation of a major isoform of pi ~  <dig>  occurred exclusively in the mpk6 + flg <dig> samples in three independent biological repeats



we assayed phosphorylation of ap <dig> by co-expression with activated mapks . theoretical pi of the ap2:myc fusion is  <dig> , which corresponds to the main peak that was consistently detected in all samples. some acidification can be observed in flg-treated samples , indicating phosphorylation by endogenous kinases. when mpk <dig> was co-expressed, a pronounced acidification of ap <dig> was observed. in this case a novel major isoform of pi  <dig>  appeared. in contrast, the pi  <dig>  isoform is not present in samples where ap <dig> is co-expressed with either the related mpk <dig> or mpk <dig>  these data imply that ap <dig> is an mpk <dig> substrate in vivo. again, conventional immunoblot is insufficient to resolve alterations in phosphoisoform distribution .

discussion
currently phosphorylation of a given protein by a specific kinase is commonly studied by in vitro kinase assays, although due to the use of purified proteins outside of the cellular context this method is prone to false positive and negative results  <cit> . furthermore, the use of radioisotopes also means serious safety and environmental hazards. here we present kinase-associated phosphoisoform assay, a method which provides an alternative approach to study specific phosphorylation interactions in vivo, and using the novel method we demonstrate phosphorylation of two key plant developmental regulators for the first time. cloning of substrate-encoding cdnas into fusion vectors is required for both methods. in case of in vitro kinase assay most commonly gst-fusion proteins are expressed in suitable e. coli strains. however, an important difference is that efficient expression of plant proteins in a prokaryotic system can be problematic . moreover, purification of expressed proteins requires further intense efforts prior to the actual kinase assay reaction, which is then followed by sds-page separation, with subsequent detection of incorporated radioisotopes by autoradiography. in comparison, with the novel method proteins of interest are expressed in plant cells, and a rapidly obtained crude extract can then be directly applied for cief-immunoassay, where separation and detection is carried out within a few hours.

capillary electrophoresis has brought about ground-breaking advances in biomolecular analysis and when coupled with immunoassay it can overcome many limitations of the cumbersome conventional sds-page immunoblot method. to the best of our knowledge, this is the first application of cief-immunoassay in plant research, and expansion of the kinase experimental toolkit can contribute to narrowing the knowledge gap in cellular signalling between mammalian and plant systems. transfection-based experiments are commonly used in signalling studies, and protoplast transient expression has been widely used in plant mapk research  <cit> . furthermore, instead of relying on specific antibodies for each protein of interest, commercial antibodies for commonly used epitopes are available from several sources, they are specific, reliable and reasonably priced. capillary electrophoresis is extremely sensitive, it is reportedly capable of detecting proteins from 25-cell samples  <cit> , therefore the amount of transfected cells and plasmid dna may be significantly reduced to optimally utilise resources.

protoplasts can be isolated from various types of tissues or from specific mutant plant materials, thus experiments can be specifically designed for specific purposes, e.g. to avoid pairing of proteins that do not exist in the same cell types. the problems associated with overexpression are commonly alleviated by using inducible or cell-type-specific promoters. however, protoplasts offer an outstanding advantage in this respect: transformation occurs synchronously at a given time point, and translated proteins can be detected in a few hours after transformation, which is usually followed by a linear increase for about twenty hours. therefore, it is possible to fine-tune expression levels in protoplasts by adjusting incubation times  <cit> . furthermore, when assaying candidate substrates of a given kinase, protoplasts may be derived from a kinase null mutant background, and the transfected kinase can also be driven by its own promoter.

importantly, protoplast transfection methods have been developed for a wide range of plant species, some of which are difficult or lengthy to transform  <cit> . therefore the novel method can be also applied to directly study signalling in economically important crop species.

we have identified putative substrates, which are exclusively expressed in specific cell types and are thus likely to be missed by most screening experiments, by using an online motif search tool. however it is reasonable to expect that more sophisticated motif search methods will be developed and applied for efficient substrate prediction in the future. for example a machine-learning-based method was developed to identify d-site motifs in human proteins  <cit> . in arabidopsis novel candidate substrates were predicted for mpk <dig> and mpk <dig> by consensus phosphorylation sequences  <cit> . such computational methods will certainly benefit from a robust method to rapidly and reliably verify phosphorylation interactions and thereby facilitate iterated models of identification and prediction of kinase substrates.

when addressing biological questions it has to be taken into account that each method has certain strengths and weaknesses. this has to be considered upon experimental design in the context of the prior knowledge, hypotheses and independent lines of evidence. just as all commonly used cellular methods of the protein interaction toolkit , due to its cellular nature, the presented assay also does not fully exclude the possibility of indirect phosphorylation interactions. nevertheless, as the method provides protoplast samples expressing differentially tagged proteins, it is also feasible to use aliquots for parallel interaction assays, which are commonly carried out in protoplasts in kinase-substrate studies. besides other lines of evidence, if specific interaction sequences are known, direct interaction can be inferred from mutating them.

scaling up kinase-associated phosphoisoform assay seems feasible using high-throughput protoplast transformation  <cit>  and publicly available gateway-based cdna collections  <cit> . besides validating screening results or computational predictions, medium-throughput application of the method could in principle be also used for screening expression libraries.

at present meristem organisation and organ formation are understood in great detail due to decades of intense genetic research. use of mutant lines led to the identification and characterisation of various master regulator transcription factors. in vivo phosphorylation of two well-characterised regulators, as shown here, suggests that their cellular functions are dynamically modulated, and that post-translational modifications have to be considered to gain accurate functional understanding, for example by using phosphorylation mutant gene versions in transgenic studies.

CONCLUSIONS
the presented method expands the plant kinase experimental toolkit and complements technical advances in unbiased screening and in silico prediction methods. it provides a cutting-edge analytical approach to assay specific kinase-substrate interactions in vivo. moreover, this method is non-radioactive and also markedly hassle-free in comparison to the in vitro assay. using a known substrate and various control setups we have demonstrated that the proposed principle to assay differential phosphoisoform distributions is feasible to identify in vivo protein phosphorylation events. the presented experimental approach can be further adjusted and improved for specific purposes, for example by using various promoters, sources of protoplasts or capillaries of other characteristics . therefore this strategy can facilitate future progress in unravelling kinase targets in the various regulatory pathways, which comprise the complex adaptation mechanisms of sessile plants.

