BACKGROUND
protein-protein interactions  play a critical role in most cellular processes and form the basis of biological mechanisms. over the last decade, the development of novel high-throughput techniques, such as yeast-two-hybrid , tandem affinity purification , and mass spectrometry , has resulted in a rapid accumulation of data that provide a global description of the whole network of ppi for many organisms  <cit> . however, due to the limitations of the associated experimental techniques and the dynamic nature of protein interaction maps, the high-throughput methods are prone to a high rate of false-positives and false-negatives, i.e. protein interactions which are identified by the experiment do not take place in the cell or interacting protein pairs can not be identified by current experiment technology. for example, y2h screens have false negative rates in the range from 43% to 71% and tap has false negative rates of 15%-50%  <cit> . false positive rates for y2h could be as high as 64% and for tap experiments they could be as high as 77%  <cit> . therefore, the mathematical and computational analysis techniques for assessing the reliability of interactions and predicting new interactions of ppi network are highly desirable.

in the past several years, many computational techniques have been proposed to assess and predict protein interactions. among them, the network-topology-based methods have attracted extensive attention due to geometric intuition and computational feasibility. the main idea of these approaches is to rank the reliability of an interacting protein pair solely based on the topology of the interactions between the protein pair and their neighbors within a short radius  <cit> . examples include interaction generality  <dig>   <cit> , interaction generality  <dig>   <cit> , interaction reliability by alternative path   <cit> , czekanowski-dice distance   <cit> , and functional similarity weight   <cit> . more specifically, saito et al.  <cit>  developed two indices called ig <dig> and ig <dig>  which use the local topology of a pair of proteins to rank their interaction probability. chen et al.  <cit>  introduced a more global measure called irap, which is defined as the collective reliability of the strongest alternative path between two proteins. a reliability index called cd-dist, which is defined as the proportion of interaction partners that two proteins have in common, was originally introduced to predict the protein function by brun et al.  <cit> . similarly, chua et al.  <cit>  introduced an index called fsweight that exploits indirect neighbors to predict protein functions.

these network-topology-based methods do yield impressive results on some benchmark data sets. however, there are two main shortcomings of using indices such as ig, irap, cd-dist, and fsweight for assessing and predicting protein interactions. on one hand, most of these methods are based on a single biological evidence, which makes them hardly gain both a high specificity and a good sensitivity at the same time  <cit> . to reduce the intrinsic false positives and false negatives from a single source, researchers tended to integrate multiple data sources. by using logistic regression  approach, bader et al.  <cit>  combined multiple heterogeneous biological evidences, including mrna expression, genetic interactions, and protein domain-domain interaction, to predict the biological relevance of protein-protein interactions obtained from high-throughput screens for yeast. jansen et al.  <cit>  used bayesian network to integrate four genomic features that are only weakly associated with interaction . qi et al.  <cit>  developed a random-forest-based technique to combine diverse high-throughput biological data sets, including direct experimental data, indirect high throughput data, and sequence-based data sources, for predicting ppi. dohkan et al.  <cit>  used an svm to combine multiple domain effects with other protein features, aiming to improve the accuracy of prediction.

on the other hand, their performance will deteriorate rapidly when the network-topology-based methods are applied to sparse ppi networks  <cit> . this is because these indices like ig, cd-dist, and fsweight are constructed on basis of the connectivity information of original ppi networks . obviously, the number of direct and indirect interactions is much lower for sparser networks due to limited connectivity, which inevitably leads to unreliable indices. in order to circumvent the shortcoming that these methods are sensitive to the sparseness of ppi network, some researchers adopted low-dimensional modeling to fit a ppi network  <cit> . for example, przulj et al.  <cit>  represented the given ppi network as a geometric random graph in which nodes correspond to uniformly randomly distributed points in a low-dimensional euclidean space and edges exist between pairs of nodes in the graph if the corresponding points in the space are close enough  according to the euclidean distance norm. fitting the geometric random graphs to the  <dig> publicly available ppi networks of various organisms indicated that it can successfully discover the geometric structures of these ppi networks. they demonstrated that the technique can be efficiently applied to the denoising of ppi data.

it is well known that proteins generate interactions with each other based on their biochemical and structural properties  <cit> . mathematically, we can consider these properties to be dimensions of some abstract metric space. therefore, each protein can be represented as a point in this metric space, and protein interactions with each other restrict the distribution of these proteins  to some low dimensional manifold embedded in the high-dimensional unorganized observation space. in this paper, we aim to combine manifold learning theory  <cit>  with multiple information integration to develop an effective tool for assessing and predicting protein interactions in a two-stage process. in the first stage, the logistic regression approach is used to combine multiple genomic and proteomic data sources, and infer weighted ppi networks in which each edge  is associated with a weight representing the probability of that interaction, whereas, in the second stage, a fast isometric feature mapping  algorithm based on manifold learning theory is firstly proposed to seek a low-dimensional manifold embedding of the weighted ppi network , which recasts the problem of assessing and predicting protein interactions into the form of measuring similarity between points in its metric space. the embedding is reasonable if it assigns to nodes of a ppi network a set of point in a low dimensional space such that adjacent nodes in the ppi network correspond to points that are close in the low dimensional space, whereas non-adjacent nodes correspond to points that are further away in the low dimensional space. given such an embedding, we then assign a topological metric called weighted cd-dist which indicates the reliability of two proteins to interact with each other, to each protein pair in the ppi networks based on the similarity between the points in the embedding space. the quality of assessing and predicting protein interactions will be evaluated in terms of functional homogeneity and localization coherence of the protein interactions.

RESULTS
in this section, we firstly quantify the success of embedding ppi network into low dimensional metric space using probability density function and receiver operator characteristic  curve which are learned from the data given by manifold embedding. the performance of the proposed approach is then evaluated using functional homogeneity and localization coherence of protein interactions from four ppi networks that are derived from various scales and high-throughput techniques, i.e., yeast-two-hybrid , tandem affinity purification , and mass spectrometry .

the distribution of pairwise distance in embedding space for interactions and non-interactions
in order to quantify the success of embedding ppi network into low dimensional metric space, we learn the following two conditional probability density functions based on original ppi network and its embedding space: p and p, where p is the conditional probability density function which describes the distribution of pairwise distances in the embedding space between pairs of proteins which are known to interact  and p is the probability density function which describes the distribution of pairwise distances between pairs of proteins which do not interact with each other .

in figures 1a, b, c, and 1d, we present the conditional probability density functions p and p learned from the data given by embedding the components of the following ppi networks into 20-dimensional euclidean space: krogan, dip, tong, and dip+biogrid. as can be seen, the two functions p and p describe the difference in distance distributions of the interacting and non-interacting protein pairs. more importantly, we find that the interacting protein pairs in the original ppi network are usually very close in its corresponding embedding space while the non-interacting protein pairs in original ppi network are usually far away in the embedding space. it means that ppi network is well represented by embedding it into a low dimensional metric space and the topological structure of the network can be faithfully preserved. in addition, the difference between the two conditional probability density functions proves it is reasonable to classify pairs of nodes into interactions and non-interactions based on the similarity between them in the embedding space.

receiver operator characteristic curves for embedding ppi network into metric space
to measure the ability of the proposed manifold embedding method to recover original ppi network, we use a standard roc curve analysis. figure  <dig> demonstrates the roc curves for the four ppi datasets of s.cerevisiae. for each ppi network, the ten roc curves for different embedding space dimensions are constructed by varying the distance threshold from  <dig> to the maximum distance between the points in the corresponding embedding space. specificity and sensitivity are two commonly used measures of the performance of a binary classification test, and they are defined as follows.

  specificity=tntn+fpandsensitivity=tptp+fn 

where tp  is the number of true interacting protein pairs which are predicted to be interacting . tn  is the number of non-interacting protein pairs that are predicted to be non-interacting . fp  is the number of non-interacting protein pairs which are predicted to be interacting, and fn  is the number of interacting protein pairs which are predicted to be non-interacting.

it is well known that a roc curve depicts relative trade-offs between true positive  and false positive . the best possible roc curve would contain a point in the upper left corner or coordinate  of the roc space, representing 100% sensitivity  and 100% specificity . from figure  <dig>  we can see that the performances of the roc curves are encouraging. for example, in figure 2a, the sensitivity and specificity of roc curve can reach 92% and 94% respectively when ppi network is embedded into the  <dig> dimensional space. this corresponds to the false negative rate β=1-sensitivity=8% and the false positive rate α=1-specificity=6%. meanwhile, for dimension  <dig> of the embedding space, the area under roc curve is  <dig> . it means that the structures of the original ppi networks are faithfully preserved by its corresponding low dimensional spaces. note that here we regard only those protein interactions in our used ppi datasets as true interactions. however, tap and y2h false positive and false negative rates are believed to be at about 64% and 50% correspondingly  <cit> , so using the ppi datasets as the golden standard may underrate the performance of roc curve. the actual performance of the embedding should be better than what we reported here.

as can be seen from figure  <dig>  with the decreasing of the embedding space dimension  the performance of the roc curve is only slightly worse, which means the choice of dimension is not crucial for manifold embedding. therefore, the ppi network is well modeled by low dimensional embedding metric space and the value of dimensionality does not change the performance much.

assessing the reliability of protein interactions
to validate the proposed method for assessing the reliability of protein interactions in the case of embedding into the 20-dimensional space, we systematically compare it with ig  <cit> , fsweight  <cit> , and cd-dist  <cit>  approaches in term of functional homogeneity and localization coherence on one densely-connected ppi network, dip+biogrid  <cit> , and three sparse ppi networks, krogan  <cit> , dip  <cit> , and tong  <cit> . for details on these data sets, see methods, section entitled data sets under study.

for our proposed method, there are two parameters: d  and ε . for the parameter d, we found that the proposed method is generally insensitive to the dimension of the embedding space in the last section, therefore, it was empirically set to be  <dig> in the following experiments. for parameter ε, it depends on the distribution of pairwise distance in the embedding space for interactions and non-interactions. figure  <dig> illustrates the choice of parameter ε. therefore, for different ppi datasets, a realistic value of ε may be different. in addition, it is noticeable that in the original manifold learning algorithms such as isometric feature mapping , locally linear embedding , laplacian eigenmaps , hessian-based locally linear embedding , and local tangent space alignment , the neighborhood size k is one of the important parameters. the success of these manifold learning algorithms depends greatly on selecting an appropriate neighborhood size. it is well known that how to choose a suitable value of this parameter in constructing a neighborhood graph is an open problem. however, the neighborhood size k can be neglected in the context of ppi network dataset because a ppi network can be intuitively represented as a neighborhood graph with proteins as nodes and interactions between the proteins as edges. it obviously contributes to the robustness of our proposed method for assessing and predicting protein interactions.

the strategy of 'guilt by association' provides the evidence that interacting proteins are likely to share a common function and cellular localization  <cit> , which means true interacting protein pairs should share at least a common functional role or they should at least be at a common cellular localization if a pair of proteins to be interacting in vivo. therefore, we utilize the degree of functional homogeneity and localization coherence of protein pairs as the measure to evaluate our method. it is expected that as the true positive interactions increase in the resulting interactome processed by the proposed method, the proportion of interacting proteins with functional homogeneity and localization coherence should increase correspondingly.

in the study, the gene ontology  based annotations is used to evaluate the functional homogeneity and localization coherence. the go is one of the most important ontologies within the bioinformatics community  <cit> . the three organizing principles of gene ontology are cellular component, biological process, and molecular function. here we used the first taxonomies of the go terms for localization coherence calculation, and the last two taxonomies of the go terms for functional homogeneity calculation. the go terms are organized hierarchically into functional subfamilies. two different go terms may have a common parent or a common child in the hierarchy. go terms at high levels may occur in many genes , while go terms at low levels appear in very few proteins. in our experiment, we just choose those go terms at middle levels.

experiment using the densely-connected ppi network
the experiment is conducted on the dip+biogrid dataset. the densely-connected protein interaction network comprises of  <dig> non-redundant interactions between  <dig> of yeast proteins. among the  <dig> proteins in our densely-connected yeast dataset,  <dig> proteins have functional annotations. the number of interactions whose two proteins both have common function annotation is  <dig>  therefore, the proportion of interactions with functional homogeneity is  <dig> %. about  <dig> proteins in this yeast dataset have cellular component annotations. the number of interactions whose two proteins both have common localization annotation is  <dig>  therefore, the proportion of interactions with localization coherence in the dataset is  <dig> %.

we rank interactions according to their ri values from the lowest to highest, and measure the functional homogeneity and localization coherence by computing the rate of interacting protein pairs with common functional roles and cellular localization. figure  <dig> shows the functional homogeneity and localization coherence performance of the interactions in our densely-connected yeast dataset ranked using ig, fsweight, cd-dist, and our proposed method. in terms of function homogeneity, it can be seen from figure 4a that our method is significantly better than ig, fsweight and cd-dist methods. for example, more than 90% of the top 20% of the interacting protein pairs ranked according to our method are annotated to have a common cellular role; in contrast, less than 83% of the top 20% of interacting pairs ranked according to fsweight and cd-dist are annotated to have a common cellular role. we notice that the proportion of interacting proteins with a common functional role almost doesn't increase in filtered interaction data according to ig method. similarly, though fsweight and cd-dist methods achieve a good performance in terms of localization coherence, our method still exhibits better localization coherence than the other three methods, as shown in figure 4b. specifically, as can be seen, our method identifies more interactions that have common cellular localization than any other methods did in the top 20%. the performances of fsweight and cd-dist are comparable to it achieved by our method in the top 40%, but their performances are worse than ours after the top 40%. on the whole, our method is clearly better than all other methods for identifying true ppis. the ig performs the worst among the four methods. besides, fsweight and cd-dist shows a comparable performance.

experiment using the sparse ppi networks
as is well known, the real ppi networks are typically very sparse, with average degree of  <dig> or less  <cit> . therefore, in this section, we apply our method to assess the reliability of interactions in three sparse ppi networks, krogan  <cit> , dip  <cit> , and tong  <cit> . then we systematically evaluate the performance of our method in comparison with ig, fsweight, and cd-dist approaches in term of functional homogeneity and localization coherence.

we rank interactions according to their ri values in the same manner as we did in the last section, and measure the functional homogeneity and localization coherence by computing the rate of interacting protein pairs with common functional roles and cellular localization. the experimental results on the three datasets krogan, dip, and tong are respectively showed in figures  <dig>   <dig>  and  <dig> 

in figure 5a, we show the positive effect of ri value as a filtering measure: as the ri threshold is decreased, the proportion of interacting pairs with common functional roles increases from  <dig> % to  <dig> %, indicating an increased rate of true positives in the filtered interaction data. for comparison, we also show the performance of ig, fsweight and cd-dist in figure 5a. for the fsweight and cd-dist methods, at the beginning, with the decrease in coverage rate, the proportion of interacting pairs with common functional roles increases. however, the trend is not maintained. when they attain their tops  <dig> % and  <dig> % at 50% and 60% coverages for fsweight and cd-dist, respectively, the proportions begin to decrease with the decrease in coverage rate. for ig, the proportion yields with very little increase. therefore, our method significantly performs the best among the four methods in terms of function homogeneity. similarly, as shown in figure 5b, our method exhibits better localization coherence than ig, fsweight, and cd-dist. to further demonstrate the effectiveness of our methodology, we also use other two sparse ppi networks of s.cerevisiae derived from various scale and high-throughput technologies. the multifaceted nature of the datasets enables us to perform a more objective comparison of the four algorithms tested. specifically, we can see from figures  <dig> and  <dig> that the proposed method achieves the best performance in assessing false positive interactions in the sparse yeast dataset--as more interactions which are detected as potential false positive interaction are removed from the interactions, the degree of functional homogeneity and localization coherence in the resulting interactome increases at a faster rate than using other three methods.

since ig, fsweight and cd-dist methods are define purely on basis of the topology of the neighbors of the protein pairs and their formulation implicitly requires the protein pairs being considered to have sufficient number of partners  <cit> , the limited direct and indirect interactions in sparse network lead to their poor performances. however, in our proposed method, some potential connection information, which is very important for methods based on topology to attain good performance, is discovered by preserving local geometry structure. therefore, we argue that the proposed method is independent on the network sparseness.

predicting new protein interactions
in this section, we evaluate our proposed method for predicting new protein interaction, using the same data sets as in assessing the reliability of protein interactions. because ig method tends to assume interaction between protein pairs to be true, ig may overestimate the reliability for the missing links during the false negative detection process  <cit> . for example, under the ig method, all missing interactions will be identified as false negatives since they all have the lowest ig values. moreover, previous works did not report that the ig method is used to detect false negative interactions. therefore, in the study, we did not use the ig method for false negative prediction. the fsweight and cd-dist methods will be compared on these data sets.

we inspect whether the top new interactions predicted by our method exhibit a higher degree of functional homogeneity and localization coherence than those predicted using other two approaches. the results are illustrated in figures  <dig>   <dig>   <dig>  and  <dig> 

the results in figure  <dig> are obtained from the densely-connected ppi network, dip+biogrid, which comprises of  <dig> non-redundant interactions between  <dig> of yeast proteins. the number of protein pairs of proteins that are assigned ri value of  <dig>  or higher is about  <dig>  as can be seen, our method yields satisfactory results. the top new interactions predicted by our method exhibit a higher degree of functional homogeneity and localization coherence than those predicted by other two approaches. fsweight and cd-dist perform comparably to each other.

discussion
it is worthwhile to highlight several aspects of the proposed approach here:

 we present a novel network-topology-based approach with information fusion for assessing and predicting protein interactions. it effectively avoids the false positives and false negatives from "single evidence models" such as ig, cd-dist, and fsweight.

 the purpose of low-dimensional manifold modeling is to represent each node of a ppi network  as a low-dimensional vector which preserves similarities between the node pairs, where similarity is measured by a ppi network  similarity matrix that characterizes certain geometric properties of the data set. by manifold modeling, we make our proposed approach general enough to work over a variety of ppi networks irrespectively of densely-connected or sparse ppi network.

 in order to make the isomap algorithm suitable for ppi network datasets, we present a fast isomap algorithm based on minimum set cover . the success at detecting both new and spurious interactions confirms that the proposed algorithm is able to uncover the intrinsic structural features of ppi network. to our knowledge, this paper is one of the first studies aiming at utilizing manifold learning theory to assess and predict protein interactions.

CONCLUSIONS
in this paper, we have developed a robust technique to assess and predict protein interactions from high-throughput experimental data by combining manifold embedding with multiple biological data integration. the proposed approach first used the logistic regression approach to integrate multiple genomic and proteomic data sources. after obtaining a weighted ppi network, we utilized the fast-isomap algorithm based on manifold learning theory to transform the weighted ppi network into a low dimensional metric space, and then a reliability index which indicates the interacting likelihood of two proteins is assigned to each protein pair in the ppi networks on the basis of the similarity between the points in the embedded space. to the best of our knowledge, this is one of the first studies on assessing and predicting protein interactions which explicitly considers low-dimensional manifold modeling and uses manifold learning theory to embed ppi network into a low-dimensional metric space. the experimental results show our method consistently performs better than the existing network-topology-based methods on both densely-connected and sparse ppi networks, which indicates that the proposed approach is independent on the sparseness of the ppi network and might shed more light on assessing and predicting protein interactions.

although our experimental results on the four protein interaction data sets demonstrate that our proposed method is insensitive to the dimensionality of the embedding space, the intrinsic dimensionality of data manifold, or degrees of freedom, contributes to capture the inherent attributes hidden in the high-dimensional unorganized observation space. therefore, how to estimate the intrinsic dimensionality of the ppi dataset is a problem deserving further investigation. in addition, the isomap algorithm requires the analyzed manifold is a convex subset of rd. then, the data set must be an open connected subset of rd  <cit> . therefore, the isomap algorithm can only handle fully-connected ppi networks or the largest connected component of the non-fully-connected ones. but we have to confess that it is very important to assessing and predicting protein interactions for the whole non-fully-connected ppi network. therefore, we will address this problem and try to build a general framework for assessing and predicting protein interactions based on multimanifold modelling in the near future.

