BACKGROUND
the arrival of the ‘omics’ era has revolutionised the study of model organisms, including humans and mice, and even greater gains are arguably being made in less tractable non-model organisms. the number of organisms with sequenced genomes is increasing rapidly, facilitating proteomic, transcriptomic and molecular studies. however, proteomic studies have been hampered in organisms with unsequenced or incompletely annotated genomes  <cit> . this is because proteomics usually relies on genome annotation for identifying peptides detected by high-throughput liquid chromatography with coupled tandem mass spectrometry  . we previously reported a new approach called proteomics informed by transcriptomics  that circumvents the requirement for a reference genome by identifying peptides based on transcripts assembled de novo from rna-seq data   <cit> . importantly, especially for non-model species, we showed that the approach was universal and comparable to using gold standard bioinformatic datasets in humans. amongst other non-model organisms, pit has been applied to reservoir hosts and arthropod vectors of infectious diseases, including bats and ticks . while proteomic data can provide genome annotation  <cit> , whether pit can evaluate the state of a genome’s annotation has not been tested. here, we used the reference genome sequence for the important vector mosquito aedes aegypti  <cit>  to assess pit’s utility in evaluating genome annotation. the ae. aegypti genome is particularly amenable to such studies because it is in an intermediate state of annotation, less complete than the human genome, but more advanced than that of other non-model organisms.fig.  <dig> pit identifies additional proteins in ae. aegypti cells compared to ‘conventional’ proteomics. a overview of the pit pipeline. in ‘conventional’ proteomics , proteins detected by high-throughput lc-ms/ms from ae. aegypti cell extracts are identified by comparison to mass spectra computationally predicted from protein or transcript annotations on the ae. aegypti reference genome. . pit identifies additional proteins by using rna-seq to identify transcripts in rna samples matched to protein isolates . transcripts are assembled de novo using trinity software, translated in silico, and used for mass spectra prediction for peptide identification. from a single experimental sample, proteins are identified without the need for an annotated reference genome, and transcript abundance can be inferred from rna-seq data. b total unique proteins  and proteins with at least two recorded peptides  identified in aag <dig> cells based on the ae. aegypti reference genome protein or transcript annotations, or using pit. percentages indicate the proportion of proteins identified only by pit. c blast analysis of the pit-identified proteome. hits were mapped against the ae. aegypti , culex quinquefasciatus   or drosophila melanogaster   ref-seq databases. a subset of hits did not match annotated genes from these dipteran insects .  total pit proteome,  translated orfs from trinity transcripts matched with at least two peptides




we also investigated the usefulness of pit to study the ‘mobilome’  in a genome) in ae. aegypti cells. while several transposon classification systems have been proposed , we will here use conventions described by tu et al.  <cit> , because this system is specific to mosquitoes, and because it aligns with the major database used in our analyses  and with te classifications used by nene et al. in the published ae. aegypti reference genome  <cit> . as described by tu et al., mosquito tes can be divided into two major classes based on their mechanism of transposition. class i tes replicate via a reverse transcriptase-generated rna intermediate and result in amplification of the element, while class ii transposons transpose without rna intermediates and may or may not involve te amplification  <cit> . class i tes can be further subdivided into several orders; long terminal repeat  retrotransposons, non-ltr retrotransposons ), and penelope-like elements   <cit> . ltr retrotransposons share similarities with retroviruses, encoding a structural group-associated antigen -like protein, polymerase -like protein required for reverse transcription and genomic insertion, and sometimes a transmembrane receptor-binding envelope -like protein, flanked by 200–500 bp regulatory non-translated ltrs . ltr retrotransposons can be classified into four major clades, ty1/copia, ty3/gypsy, bel and dirs, based on their pol-encoded reverse transcriptase domain  <cit> . non-ltr retrotransposons also encode a pol-like  and sometimes a gag-like  protein, and can be classified into  <dig> clades based on the pol-encoded reverse transcriptase domain  <cit> . class ii  tes include ‘cut and paste’ dna transposons, typified by 10–200 bp terminal inverted repeats  that flank one or more orfs encoding a transposase . these elements transpose via a non-amplifying ‘cut and paste’ mechanism, with copy number increasing through cellular dna repair mechanisms, and are classified into several families or superfamilies according to their transposase sequence  <cit> . the recently-discovered helitrons are thought to replicate via a rolling-circle mechanisms and encode proteins similar to helicases and replicases  <cit> . short interspersed elements  and miniature inverted repeat tes  rely on proteins expressed from other tes for their replication  <cit>  and would not be expected to be identifiable by pit.

characterising the proteomically active mobilome is of interest because tes are implicated in processes as diverse as gene regulation  <cit> , mammalian pregnancy  <cit>  and carcinogenesis  <cit> . tes also contribute to genome plasticity and evolution  <cit> , and have been ‘domesticated’ for certain host functions  <cit> . mobile genetic elements are of particular interest in relation to ae. aegypti, because approximately 47% of the genome consists of tes, contributing to a five-fold larger genome size compared to the distantly related mosquito anopheles gambiae  <cit> . furthermore, ae. aegypti is a vector for several emerging arthropod-borne viruses , including dengue virus , the most significant arbovirus infecting humans  <cit> , the re-emerging yellow fever virus , which continues to cause death and disease despite an effective vaccine  <cit> , chikungunya virus , which has spread rapidly across the globe to become a major public health concern  <cit> , and zika virus , which recently emerged in the americas and has been associated with a rise in microcephaly and neurological complications in brazil  <cit> . of relevance to arbovirus transmission, tes have been shown to help establish persistent viral infections in mosquitoes and the model organism drosophila melanogaster by reverse transcribing incoming viral rna into extrachromosomal and/or genomically integrated dna forms  <cit> . transcripts from these virus-derived genomic sequences feed in to the antiviral rna interference  pathway to suppress viral replication and allow viral persistence  <cit> .

to our knowledge the mobilome-derived proteome has not been characterised for any organism. previous studies have focussed on genes encoded by just a subset of transposons , and usually analysed a subset of spots on a 2d sds-page gel rather than performing a systematic proteomic analysis . in mosquitoes, te activity has additionally been inferred indirectly through comparative genomic and transcriptomic analyses . however, genomic data only provide a long-term evolutionary view of transposition events whilst transcriptomic data do not distinguish between bona fide te activity and host responses mounted against tes.

here, we report for the first time a pit analysis of a mosquito species, using the ae. aegypti cell line aag <dig>  the proteins encoded by approximately  <dig>  transcripts were identified, vastly increasing the number of experimentally confirmed ae. aegypti proteins. the analysis provided  <dig> new genome annotations, the majority of which did not lie in either regions of poor sequence quality or mapping data, suggesting that the completeness of a genome’s assembly may not be a major driver behind gaps in annotation. the utility of pit analysis for guiding annotation efforts was demonstrated by the identification of chromosome  <dig> and chromosomal loci 1p <dig>  1q <dig> and 2p <dig> as hotspots of poor annotation. we also detected  <dig> proteins expressed by tes, representing the first proteomic characterisation of an organism’s mobilome. interestingly, the relative abundance of specific mobile elements in the ae. aegypti genome is not reflected at the protein level. while different types of genomic element are known to be more or less active in terms of transposition events in different cellular contexts , our proteomic analysis is the first to make this observation at the protein level, with clear implications for the co-opted functions of te-derived proteins in cellular processes. the overrepresentation of long terminal repeat  retrotransposon proteins is of particular interest due to the potential role these tes play in antiviral defence. our data may inform future studies into virus persistence and arbovirus control methods, and demonstrate pit’s utility for interrogating a genome’s annotation and proteomically active mobilome.

RESULTS
side-by-side comparison of pit and ‘conventional’ proteomic analysis of aag <dig> cells
we performed pit on aag <dig> cells, an immortalised ae. aegypti cell line commonly used for arbovirus research  <cit> . total rna and protein was isolated from the same population of exponentially growing aag <dig> cells. rna-seq analysis of poly+ enriched rna resulted in ~ <dig> million paired-end reads, 91 nt in length that were assembled into a de novo transcriptome using trinity  <cit> . to maximise the protein search database for proteomic analysis, a combined database was prepared by translating each of the  <dig>  trinity transcripts and the official ae. aegypti transcript list  in all  <dig> reading-frames  and combining the resulting protein sequences  with the official ae. aegypti predicted peptides list  into a fasta file. this file was then used as a search database for the ms/ms data acquired from analysis of the aag <dig> proteome using maxquant/andromeda  <cit> . the analysis resulted in the identification of  <dig>  unique protein groups , of which  <dig>  were identified by two or more peptides . although routinely only proteins identified by at least two peptides are reported in many studies, proteins identified using only one peptide using a stringent peptide-spectrum match  false discovery rate  can be informative  <cit> , especially when combined with specific transcript data  <cit> . there was a good correlation between the protein groups identified using the ae. aegypti translated transcripts search list and the predicted proteins list. the differences observed could reflect differences in the way the two databases are curated, i.e. protein predictions based on direct transcript analyses rather than from the reference genome sequence-derived transcript list, and/or the existence of alternative orfs not present in the predicted peptides list. by contrast, the use of the translated trinity transcriptome as a search database  resulted in 16%  and 14%  uniquely-identified protein groups  corresponding to all or  <dig> or more peptide hits respectively. the results confirm that pit provides additional information compared to ‘conventional’ proteomics. a subset of protein groups were identified using the official ae. aegypti transcript and predicted peptides lists but not by pit, which has been reported before and may be due to insufficient rna-seq coverage and/or incomplete de novo transcript assembly in this particular experiment  <cit> .

characterisation of the aag <dig> pit proteome
to provide further information on the identity of protein groups uniquely identified by the pit analysis, we performed a second pit analysis of the de novo assembled transcriptome using a bespoke pit workflow implemented in the galaxy integrated omics  platform  <cit> . in this workflow, proteins identified by pit were blast searched against the ae. aegypti, culex quinquefasciatus, drosophila melanogaster and ncbi non-redundant protein refseq protein databases. ae. aegypti and cx. quinquefasciatus are distantly related mosquitoes classified in the order diptera  with the even more distantly related d. melanogaster. we extended our analysis to these non-aedes insects to identify proteins that might be missing from the current ae. aegypti genome assembly .

a total of  <dig>  proteins  matched known ae. aegypti genes . most of these  shared homology with cx. quinquefasciatus proteins, and  <dig>  matched proteins from all three dipteran insects, although we did not check whether these represent 1:1: <dig> orthologues. a further  <dig> hits  matched proteins from cx. quinquefasciatus and d. melanogaster, but not ae. aegypti. their homology to non-aedes insect proteins suggests these proteins represent ae. aegypti genes not annotated in the current genome assembly . finally, 14% of the pit proteome  shared no similarity with known ae. aegypti, cx. quinquefasciatus or d. melanogaster proteins. for simplicity, we will refer to these proteins as ‘non-insect hits’, although we acknowledge that the three dipteran species we used in our analysis do not encompass the full diversity of proteins expressed by all members of the class insecta, and therefore a proportion of these hits might display homology to proteins from other insect species. these non-insect hits may represent agents such as viruses and tes . overall, similar results were obtained when we included only proteins identified through two or more peptides in our analysis , although a larger proportion of the non-insect hits were identified with just one peptide. for the remainder of this report we used the complete list of identified proteins for our analyses unless otherwise indicated. as explained above, we believe that hits associated with one peptide still provide valuable biologically relevant information in the context of pit, due to the additional transcriptomic evidence for their expression. the pit-identified proteins are listed in additional file  <dig> 

new annotation for the ae. aegypti reference genome
of the known ae. aegypti proteins identified ,  <dig>   are annotated with names and/or functions . the rest are listed as ‘hypothetical’  or ‘conserved hypothetical’  . the proportion of annotated and ‘ hypothetical’ proteins in our data is comparable to their relative proportion in the reference genome  <cit> . all of these proteins had previously been verified at the transcript level, yet only a minority  have been detected at the protein level . the overrepresentation of annotated versus hypothetical proteins previously verified proteomically is possibly due to a bias towards proteins with better annotation in functional studies.fig.  <dig> new annotation for the ae. aegypti genome. a vectorbase annotation of the pit proteome that maps to ae. aegypti . b previously published transcriptomic and proteomic evidence for the expression of our pit-identified proteins that are either annotated or listed as ‘hypothetical’ or ‘conserved hypothetical’  in vectorbase . c result of vectorbase blast alignment against the ae. aegypti genome of all  <dig> pit transcripts initially marked as having homology to proteins from cx. quinquefasciatus or d. melanogaster, but not ae. aegypti . d mean transcript length of non-aedes insect pit hits that do  or do not  map to the ae. aegypti genome. error bars represent standard error of the mean; * p <  <dig> . e examples of non-aedes insect pit transcripts mapping precisely , or as extensions or transcript variants  of ae. aegypti genes already annotated in vectorbase . f examples of non-aedes insect pit transcripts providing new genomic annotation as potentially novel orfs , or extensions or transcript variants of known orfs  .  contigs not shown in entirety; illustrations are modified vectorbase blast alignments of representative pit transcripts ; <> indicates annotated transcript orientation; filled boxes represent regions of alignment to genome 




we next focussed on the proteins identified through homology to cx. quinquefasciatus and d. melanogaster, but not ae. aegypti, proteins  . we aligned their pit transcripts to the ae. aegypti reference genome  using the blast function at vectorbase.org  <cit>  . of the  <dig> non-aedes insect proteins,  <dig> hits did not map to the ae. aegypti reference sequence . the short transcript length of these hits  might reduce the ability of algorithms to detect homology across several shorter exons. a further  <dig> hits were already annotated, likely because of new annotation added since our initial pit analysis . eleven hits mapped to multiple locations in the genome  and were excluded from further analyses. these may represent duplicated genes due to genome assembly errors or paralogues arising through real gene duplication events. the remaining  <dig> hits  represent new annotation provided by pit. this annotation takes several forms, such as extensions to predicted orfs  that might be due to the current annotation being incorrect or because we identified an unknown transcript variant. we also identified new orfs , and new exons close to or within existing orfs  that may represent new genes, or new transcript variants. additional file  <dig> summarises our new annotation data.

evaluation of the ae. aegypti reference genome annotation using pit
we next investigated why our new annotations were not already present in the ae. aegypti reference genome. as a measure of sequence quality, we used vectorbase.org to analyse the genome sequences aligning to our pit transcripts and the  <dig>  up- and down-stream bases for sequencing gaps . poor sequence quality was associated with 36% of our annotations . this was slightly higher than, but comparable to, a set of randomised pit transcripts mapping to annotated genes .fig.  <dig> interrogation of the ae. aegypti genome annotation using pit. a sequencing gaps surrounding  <dig> previously non-annotated proteins identified by pit  compared to a matched sample of annotated ae. aegypti genes . b number of supercontigs within the ae. aegypti genome assembly, or the subset containing new annotation from pit, that have been mapped to chromosomal locations  <cit> . c supercontigs to which our pit hits align mapped to the three ae. aegypti chromosomes . the normalised ratio of pit-containing supercontigs to total mapped supercontigs per chromosome is also specified. full mapping data given in additional file 3





when the ae. aegypti genome was sequenced, sequencing reads were assembled into contigs and then supercontigs and scaffolds  <cit> . some of these supercontigs have been assigned physical chromosomal locations . we used the most recent mapping data  <cit>  as a proxy for the quality of the genome assembly surrounding our pit annotation. chromosomal locations have been assigned to 45% of all supercontigs, compared to 38% of supercontigs containing new pit annotation . note that some supercontigs contain more than one pit hit. although there is a trend for our pit annotation to map to regions of poor sequence  and assembly  quality, this trend is not pronounced, suggesting the completeness of a genome’s assembly may not be a major driver behind gaps in annotation.

the  <dig> supercontigs containing new annotation were spread across all three chromosomes . normalised to the number of supercontigs mapped to each chromosome, new pit annotation exhibited a two-fold enrichment on chromosome  <dig>  normalised on a finer scale, chromosomal regions 1p <dig>  1q <dig> and 2p <dig> were enriched in new annotation. while annotation on 1p <dig> and 2p <dig> was associated with poor sequence quality, annotation on 1q <dig> was not. full mapping data is given in additional file  <dig>  our data demonstrate that pit can evaluate the state of a genome’s annotation by identifying hotspots of incomplete annotation.

identification of proteins derived from mobile genetic elements
we next turned to the pit hits lacking homology to ae. aegypti, cx. quinquefasciatus or d. melanogaster proteins . we reasoned that some of these hits may stem from transposons or viruses. studying the proteome derived from highly repetitive mobile genetic elements is intrinsically difficult for several reasons. individual elements may be present in multiple copies within the genome, and each copy may differ markedly from the consensus sequence  <cit> . elements that invaded the genome more recently are less divergent from their consensus sequence  <cit> . however, the repertoire of recently acquired elements differs between individuals in both the identity and genomic location of tes  <cit> . therefore, a given experimental sample may match poorly to the organism’s reference genome. the sequence of evolutionarily ancient invaders, on the other hand, may degenerate until these tes are difficult to identify  <cit> . while ancient tes are less likely to be actively transposing  <cit> , they may still express protein, especially where a te protein is co-opted for host cell functions  <cit> . finally, repetitive genetic elements are masked in genome reference sequences and therefore do not show up in classical transcript and protein databases  <cit> .

for these reasons, proteomic studies of the mobilome have so far focussed on a subset of te proteins, such as transposase  <cit> , and are therefore inherently biased and non-systematic in their approach. we hypothesised that pit might overcome some of the intrinsic difficulties in studying the mobilome, because pit allows potentially divergent te proteins to be matched to their corresponding transcripts irrespective of differences from the reference genome. ae. aegypti provides a tractable platform for a proof-of-principle study because a large number of mobile genetic elements previously identified in evolutionarily divergent mosquito species have been curated in the tefam database . while it is likely that many more tes remain to be identified and characterised in each of these mosquito species, the existing data allowed us to validate our approach.

we began by blasting the translated orfs from the trinity transcript list that had been experimentally confirmed by pit, and had been classified as ‘non-insect’ hits, against all mosquito te proteins in the tefam database. in principle, any  proteomic dataset can be searched by blast against the tefam database. however, given the highly divergent nature of mobile genetic elements, the in silico translated transcripts  should identify more low homology hits than the much shorter peptides identified by lc-ms/ms. identifying these lower homology matches is essential for characterising proteomically active tes that diverge markedly from the limited list of known mobile genetic elements.

given the lack of high-throughput proteomic studies on tes, we then sought to empirically define criteria for identifying te proteins with high confidence. using an e-value threshold of 10− <dig>  considered a significant match at the amino acid level, we identified  <dig> proteins matching tes from ae. aegypti, cx. quinquefasciatus and anopheles spp. . we next used the pit dataset corresponding to known ae. aegypti genes as a calibrator for determining a stringent, yet inclusive, threshold for te protein identification. since repetitive mobile genetic elements are masked in the reference genome  <cit> , we would expect our ae. aegypti pit hits to contain no te proteins. however, in practice a small number of te-derived proteins might be included in the reference genome if they are misannotated or have been co-opted for known cellular functions. at the level of amino acid homology, 90% of protein pairs with 30% identity or greater represent bona fide homologous proteins  <cit> . while te proteins might be expected to be more divergent, we used this threshold to plot pit hits matching known te proteins in the non-insect and ae. aegypti datasets at different % amino acid sequence coverage cut-offs . as expected, the ae. aegypti dataset contained a lower proportion of hits with homology to te proteins . at a cut-off of 0% coverage   <dig> % of the non-insect hits matched te proteins, while only  <dig> % of ae. aegypti hits did . as the % coverage cut-off is increased, the number of te matches drops rapidly in the ae. aegypti dataset , suggesting that a large proportion of the te hits mapping to ae. aegypti genes are false positives. in contrast, the te hits in the non-insect dataset are predominantly resistant to an increase in the % coverage cut-off , suggesting that the majority of the te proteins identified in this dataset represent real te proteins. therefore, our criteria for the identification of te proteins was >30% amino acid identity across >45% sequence coverage, which maximises the number of bona fide te proteins identified in the non-insect database, while minimising the number of potential false positives in the ae. aegypti pit dataset . at >45% sequence coverage, increasing the % identity threshold has a marginal impact on ‘background’ te detection in the ae. aegypti pit list, while the number of real te proteins identified in our non-insect dataset is reduced . therefore, the lower 30% identity threshold is preferable for maximising the detection of bona fide te proteins.fig.  <dig> identification of proteins derived from mobile genetic elements using pit. a proportion of non-insect pit hits  and pit hits matching known ae. aegypti genes  that display >30% amino acid sequence similarity to known mosquito tes  at increasing thresholds for % sequence coverage. arrow indicates optimal threshold for te identification, used for all remaining analyses unless otherwise specified. b as for , except that the proportion of pit hits with >45% sequence coverage is plotted at different sequence similarity thresholds. c  breakdown of the non-insect pit proteome into virus-derived proteins, proteins with homology to known mosquito tes , and other non-classified proteins . proteins with >95% amino acid homology and >95% sequence coverage were considered ‘exact matches’ to known tes .  identification of tes in the aedes pit proteome. d as for , except only hits associated with two or more peptides were included in the analysis. e  identification of tes in the non-insect pit hits using either tefam, repbase, or both databases as a reference.  identification of tes in the aedes pit proteome using a combined tefam and repbase reference database




using these criteria, we identified  <dig> te proteins in our non-insect pit hits  . on the other hand, just nine  of ae. aegypti pit hits matched te proteins . additional file  <dig> lists the complete set of te proteins identified by pit. fifteen non-insect proteins exhibited >95% amino acid homology to known ae. aegypti tes across >95% sequence coverage , which, given the highly divergent nature of mobile genetic elements, might be considered the closest thing to an ‘exact match’  <cit> . the remaining te proteins shared lower homology with known mobile elements from ae. aegypti and other mosquito species. importantly, the overall proportion of te proteins identified in the non-insect and ae. aegypti pit datasets did not change when we analysed only pit-identified proteins associated with two or more peptide hits . in addition to using tefam as a source database for identifying te proteins, we also used repbase , a larger database of tes from eukaryotic genomes  <cit> . using repbase alone, or in combination with tefam, increased the number of te proteins identified in our non-insect dataset by up to 53% . importantly, almost all of the te proteins identified by tefam alone  were also identified using repbase, with close correlation in terms of the type of elements identified, indicating that these te proteins are high-confidence hits. of the new te proteins identified through the repbase database  41% disagreed with tefam in terms of the te identity , with only 25% agreeing at the clade/superfamily level. since these hits may therefore be of lower quality, we decided to focus on our more robust hits identified in the initial tefam analysis  for the remainder of this paper. in fact, we found that combining tefam and repbase as source databases for the identification of te proteins increased the ‘background’ identification of te proteins in our aedes protein dataset . interestingly, 96% of te proteins identified through repbase alone matched mosquito tes, suggesting that tefam, which is more tailored to mosquito tes and identified highly confident hits in our analysis, may be sufficient and favourable for the identification of mosquito tes over repbase.table  <dig> known ae. aegypti tes active at the protein level in aag <dig> cells


ele40
gag
tf000135
all elements are class i tes. detected proteins exhibit >95% amino acid homology and >95% sequence coverage with specified elements

bold typeface indicates trinity transcripts associated with two or more peptides




in summary, our analysis demonstrates that the use of pit with the criteria we have described can identify proteins expressed from mobile genetic elements in an organism’s genome. furthermore, pit is superior to ‘conventional’ proteomic approaches in this regard, as the vast majority of tes were identified in the ‘non-insect’ list of hits that were only identified by pit.

using our thresholds for te identification, a number of non-insect hits  remained unidentified . whilst many of these hits might represent tes that fall below our threshold of detection, we also identified proteins derived from the insect-specific flavivirus cell fusing agent virus , a known contaminant of aag <dig> cells, and the recently discovered insect-specific bunyavirus phasi charoen-like virus , which we identify here as a previously unknown contaminant of aag <dig> cells . we confirmed that pclv is an actively replicating virus in aag <dig> cells , and deposited all viral genome sequences in genbank . for more information on these viruses, please refer to additional file  <dig>  the remaining  <dig> non-insect hits  showed sequence identity to tes which was below our cut-off threshold value and may be explained by; erroneous assembly of transcripts by trinity, false assignment of specific peptides to a protein predicted from the transcriptome, the presence of contaminants and/or poor annotation of specific tes in the sequence databases.

types of mobile elements expressing protein in aag <dig> cells
we next wanted to determine what sorts of tes express protein in ae. aegypti cells. mobile genetic elements previously described in mosquitoes are summarised in fig. 5a. we found proteins from ltr retrotransposons, non-ltr retrotransposons and ‘cut and paste’ dna transposons in our complete pit dataset, with a larger number of ltr retrotransposon proteins detected compared to other tes . a larger number of ltr retrotransposon proteins was also detected when only te proteins identified through two or more peptides were analysed, although in this case we were no longer able to detect proteins derived from non-ltr retrotransposons . this overrepresentation of ltr retrotransposons could in principle result from a greater number of ltr retrotransposons in the tefam database, which includes tes from non-aedes mosquitoes, or in the ae. aegypti genome . we therefore normalised the absolute number of proteins detected in our pit dataset for each type of te to the respective known representation of each type of element in the tefam database or ae. aegypti reference genome, and plotted the resulting ‘relative enrichment’ proportional to the relative abundance of ltr retrotransposons, which was set to  <dig> . interestingly, ltr retrotransposon proteins remained enriched two- to nine-fold , while proteins from non-ltr retrotransposons and ‘cut and paste’ dna transposons were detected at similar relative frequencies to each other despite differences in their absolute abundance . to exclude the possibility that this observation was an artefact of our thresholds for te identification, we repeated our analysis using only te proteins exhibiting >40% or >50% amino acid identity to known mosquito te proteins  . at these higher thresholds, the ‘background’ identification of proteins derived from mobile genetic elements in our ae. aegypti pit dataset is reduced, although many bona fide te proteins are likely also excluded . we observed an even greater four- to 19-fold enrichment of ltr retrotransposon proteins in this more stringent analysis . finally, we repeated our analysis using only hits associated with more than two peptides . again, ltr retrotransposon proteins remained overrepresented in our pit data , and were the only elements identified with greater than 40% amino acid identity to known te proteins . we conclude that, under our experimental conditions, ltr retrotransposons are more likely to express protein at levels detectable by pit than other ae. aegypti mobile genetic elements.fig.  <dig> ltr retrotransposons are disproportionately active at the protein level compared to other tes. a schematic illustrating representative tes previously identified in mosquitoes . filled boxes indicate protein-coding regions, open boxes and grey shading indicate non-translated regions and conserved non-coding domains . note that not all sines are trna-like. bracketed orfs are not always found in that te subclass. typical terminal amino acids are indicated for non-ltr retrotransposons, sines and helitrons. env-like, envelope-like protein ; gag, group antigen; ltr, long-terminal repeat retrotransposons; mite, miniature inverted repeat transposable element; non-ltr, non-ltr retrotransposon; ple, penelope-like element; pol, polymerase; sine, short interspersed element; tir, terminal inverted repeat. b absolute abundance of proteins derived from known mosquito protein-coding tes in the total pit proteome  and for all pit hits associated with two or more peptides . c relative enrichment of proteins from detected tes using >30% , >40%  and >50%  amino acid identity as a threshold for te discovery . enrichment is shown relative to the proportion of the ae. aegypti reference genome that is comprised of sequences derived from each respective te subclass )  <cit> , relative to the total copy number of elements from each te subclass within the ae. aegypti reference genome )  <cit> , and relative to the total number of entries for each te subclass in the tefam database used to identify tes in our dataset. enrichment is shown relative to ltr retrotransposons. d as for , except that only pit hits identified through more than two peptides are shown




the data were then analysed at the level of te clades/superfamilies. for ltr retrotransposons, we detected more proteins from ty3/gypsy and bel elements than ty1/copia elements . the relative enrichment of ty3/gypsy proteins and underrepresentation of ty1/copia proteins was still observed when normalised to their respective copy number  or % coverage  in the ae. aegypti genome. this discrepancy between an element’s genomic abundance and the detection of its proteins is more clearly illustrated for non-ltr retrotransposons , which are classified into more clades than ltr retrotransposons. for example, the second highest number of detected proteins come from jockey elements, which are nevertheless underrepresented relative to their genomic abundance, while the elements l <dig> and outcast are detected in lower absolute numbers, but are overrepresented relative to their genomic abundance . the data for ‘cut and paste’ dna transposons are unclear, since is630-tc1-mariner elements were underrepresented relative to genome copy number but not % genome coverage . we did not detect protein from l <dig>  or p, piggybac, pif-harbinger or transib  elements, even though some of these tes are present in higher numbers in the tefam database and ae. aegypti genome than other detectable elements. therefore, at different classification levels, the abundance of mobile elements in a host’s genome does not correlate with their activity at the protein level.fig.  <dig> protein expression from mobile genetic elements does not correlate with their genomic abundance. a-c breakdown of elements from different te clades/superfamilies detected in the total pit proteome.  absolute number ,  relative enrichment compared to copy number in the ae. aegypti genome  <cit> ,  relative enrichment compared to ae. aegypti genome coverage   <cit> . yellow, overrepresented tes; blue, underrepresented tes. genome copy number was not known for mutator 




te orfs expressed in aag <dig> cells
of the tes for which we detected protein, ltr and non-ltr retrotransposons encode more than one orf . for all ltr retrotransposon clades, we detected a greater number of gag proteins than pol proteins . protein from env-like genes was only detected for a few ty3/gypsy elements. note that this analysis quantifies the total number of different elements for which each orf was detected, not absolute te protein levels. for non-ltr retrotransposons, the reverse trend was observed, with more proteins detected for orf <dig> than orf <dig> . of the  <dig> ‘perfect match’ tes , there were none for which more than one orf was detected. we therefore conclude that te orfs are not expressed equally at the protein level in aag <dig> cells.fig.  <dig> protein expression across orfs for tes that encode multiple orfs. a ltr retrotransposons and b non-ltr retrotransposons




discussion
we report, for the first time, a pit analysis of a mosquito species, and provide the first protein expression data for almost a third of ae. aegypti genes. this includes  <dig>   genes listed as ‘ hypothetical’ and lacking functional annotation. we provide  <dig> new annotations, representing novel genes and new exons for known transcripts. our data will benefit molecular studies, where misannotations waste time and resources. intron-exon junctions in particular are incorrectly annotated in many genome assemblies  <cit> , and we confirm that pit can help resolve these  .

while pit has been used to provide annotation in other organisms , this study is the first to demonstrate pit’s utility in interrogating the state of a genome’s annotation. by its very nature, this sort of proteomic analysis cannot be performed when the reference genome is used to identify peptides. we also establish proof-of-principle that pit can characterise the proteome derived from an organism’s mobile genetic elements, and show that pit identifies vastly more elements compared to ‘conventional’ proteomics analyses that rely on existing genome annotation.

pit as a tool for evaluating a genome’s annotation
the reference genomes of non-model organisms often lack comprehensive annotation, with missing, out-of-frame and duplicated orfs, incorrect splicing predictions and poor functional annotation, posing problems for molecular studies  <cit> . given limited resources, identifying hotspots of incomplete annotation would focus annotation efforts and maximise their impact. by identifying ae. aegypti chromosome  <dig>  and chromosomal regions 1p <dig>  1q <dig> and 2p <dig>  as enriched in new pit annotation, we demonstrate pit’s utility in characterising such hotspots. pit is superior to proteomic or transcriptomic analyses alone, as pit simultaneously verifies protein expression and an orf’s transcript structure. although chromosomal regions 1p <dig> and 2p <dig> were associated with poor sequence quality, region 1q <dig> was not, and more generally our new annotations were only marginally associated with poor sequence and assembly quality. this suggests that the completeness of a genome’s assembly may not be a major driver behind gaps in annotation. instead, the large number of minisatellites and rapid evolution of chromosome  <dig>  <cit>  may hinder gene prediction and annotation  <cit> . furthermore, some pit annotations were close to contig termini , and genes spanning misassembled contigs often lack annotation  <cit> . regions with low manual annotation are also enriched for new pit annotation  <cit> . we mapped new annotation to chromosomal locations, but where this is not possible a list of incompletely annotated contigs, as we also provide , is still of benefit.

pit for characterising the proteome expressed by an organism’s mobilome
we present the first characterisation of an organism’s proteomically active mobilome. only  <dig> proteins exactly matched known ae. aegypti tes. this might reflect mobilome differences between mosquito populations  <cit>  and aag <dig> cells not captured in the single existing reference genome. te sequences are also difficult to characterise  <cit> , perhaps leading to incomplete te annotation. in fact, at least  <dig> mobile genetic elements were identified that are not represented in the tefam database, and the majority of these hits map with close to 100% homology to non-annotated regions of the ae. aegypti reference genome , suggesting that the current list of ae. aegypti tes is incomplete. our data demonstrate the utility of pit in the discovery and annotation of protein-expressing mobile elements. of note, mutator, a ‘cut and paste’ dna transposon, was identified for the first time in ae. aegypti.

for this initial proof-of-concept study, a threshold for te protein identification was empirically determined that we believe to be highly stringent, yet inclusive. however, it was noted that almost all  pit hits in our non-insect dataset displayed varying levels of homology to known mosquito mobile genetic elements, which was not the case for the ae. aegypti pit hits . given the highly divergent nature of mobile genetic elements, and their likely incomplete representation in the tefam database, many more of these hits may represent bona fide te-derived proteins. by compiling a database of ae. aegypti te proteins identified by pit in different cell lines and wild and laboratory mosquitoes under varying experimental conditions it should in the future be possible to more confidently characterise a larger array of mobile genetic elements in this mosquito species.

genomic abundance does not predict a te’s protein expression
interestingly, at different levels of classification, the genomic abundance of mobile genetic elements in aag <dig> cells did not predict protein expression. similar observations regarding the propensity for a transposon to transpose have been made previously . however, at the level of expression of individual te proteins, this observation could not have been predicted prior to the systematic analysis of the proteomically active mobilome reported here. this distinction is important because many non-transposing genomic elements might be contributing to cellular functions through the expression of their individual proteins, and we demonstrate that pit is particularly well-suited to further elucidating such non-transposition-related functions of tes. interestingly, we found ltr retrotransposon proteins to be overrepresented compared to other types of mobile genetic elements . at the clade/superfamily level, a similar discordance between the genomic abundance of elements and their protein expression was observed . while half of the ae. aegypti genome consists of tes, only around  <dig> encode intact orfs  <cit> . at the level of individual tes, protein expression was only detected from  <dig> of these elements . despite the likelihood of incomplete proteomic coverage, it would therefore appear that not all elements encoding intact orfs express protein. finally, not all proteins are equally detectable proteomically for tes encoding multiple orfs . for elements that exactly match known ae. aegypti tes, expression of more than one orf per element could not be detected.

although incomplete pit coverage and the unknown abundance of elements in the aag <dig> genome might influence our results, this was compensated for by also normalising to the tefam database. given the large number of data points at the class and clade/superfamily level, we believe our overarching conclusions hold true, even though trends might change for individual elements. additionally, the enrichment of ltr retrotransposon proteins  correlates with the overrepresentation of small rnas derived from these elements, which predict te activity  <cit> , in d. melanogaster  <cit> .

several mechanisms might account for the lack of correlation between te protein expression and the presence of an element/orf in the genome. firstly, genomic elements themselves regulate their own protein expression  <cit> . secondly, host immune pathways suppress te activity to protect against the deleterious genomic effects of transposition, and it is conceivable that certain elements and their orfs are more effectively silenced by host immunity  <cit> . finally, a subset of te proteins may be co-opted for host cell functions  <cit> , while other orfs within the same element, and other elements within the same clade/superfamily, may not be active in this way.

biological implications of te protein expression detected by pit
our data cannot prove transposition-in-progress. instead, the strengths of pit lie in its ability to provide an unbiased global characterisation of protein expression from mobile genetic elements, whether or not these are in the process of actively transposing. pit is therefore useful as a starting point for functional studies into transposon activity and te proteins co-opted for cellular functions. pit can also give insight into mobilome biology. non-ltr retrotransposons for example are often 5’-truncated due to incomplete reverse transcription during transposition  <cit> , which is reflected in the higher abundance of orf <dig> versus orf <dig> proteins in our dataset . the greater abundance of gag proteins than env-like proteins of ltr retrotransposons also makes sense, because, unlike endogenous retroviruses, not all ltr retrotransposons encode an env-like protein  <cit> . in addition, gag is a structural component of the virus-like particles produced during the lifecycle of ltr retrotransposons, and therefore more gag is required  than the enzymatically active non-structural pol protein  <cit> . these observations highlight the ability of pit to provide biologically relevant information about tes.

for arbovirus transmission, the overrepresentation of ltr retrotransposon proteins is of particular interest. these tes are enriched at genomic sites of viral sequence integration and play a critical role in arbovirus persistence in insects  <cit> . cells may distinguish between such ‘useful’ elements and ‘hostile’ tes  <cit> . it is unclear whether ltr retrotransposon protein expression is tolerated to facilitate mosquito immunity, or whether these elements are better at evading host defences against tes. our data provide a starting point for studies into how specific ltr retrotransposons contribute to arboviral persistence and transmission. a list of proteomically active tes should also facilitate the identification of active elements for typing mosquito populations, and might improve transposon-mediated genome editing of mosquitoes  <cit> . given that our current dataset is representative of just one experimental condition in one cell line, it will be important in the future to expand on these proof-of-principle studies by analysing different experimental conditions and by expanding our work into wild and laboratory mosquito populations.

CONCLUSIONS
pit represents a valuable new tool to investigate mobilome activity and protein expression, since genomic data cannot identify current mobilome activity and rna-seq data do not distinguish between te activity and cellular defences against tes  <cit> . furthermore, our data on te protein expression, ae. aegypti genome annotation and persistent aag <dig> viruses are of value to arbovirus-vector interaction studies. finally, we provide proof-of-principle for pit’s usefulness in evaluating genome annotation, with clear utility in guiding annotation efforts in the increasing number of sequenced genomes of non-model organisms.

