BACKGROUND
feline hepatic lipidosis  is a common cholestatic disease affecting cats. it is considered the consequence of prolonged anorexia and subsequent dramatic lipolysis . feline hepatic lipidosis is characterized by an excessive accumulation of triglycerides  in hepatocytes. although the exact mechanisms remain elusive, there is clearly an imbalance between the influx of fatty acids  derived from peripheral fat stores and de novo synthesis of fa in the liver on the one hand, and the rate of hepatic fa oxidation and the efflux of hepatic tags via very-low density lipoprotein  on the other hand . in cats with fhl, serum tag levels significantly increase with the greatest distribution into the vldl fraction. it has been suggested that a lower capacity to excrete vldl plays a role in the development of fhl  <cit> .

secretion of vldl is dependent on the rate of hepatic phosphatidylcholine  synthesis. phosphatidylcholine is synthetized in the liver by two pathways, the kennedy or cytidine diphosphate-choline  pathway and the phosphatidylethanolamine n-methyltransferase  pathway. the kennedy pathway produces more saturated and mono-unsaturated acyl chain-containing pc, whereas the pemt pathway synthesizes pc with a long highly unsaturated acyl chain    <cit> . the kennedy pathway is the major route for pc synthesis and is present in all mammalian tissues. the synthesis of pc via this pathway depends on the intake of choline  <cit> . the pemt pathway is independent of choline intake and converts phosphatidylethanolamine  to pc via the transfer of three methyl-groups from s-adenosylmethionine  <cit> . the pemt pathway is liver-specific and is estimated to account for approximately 20–40 % of the newly synthesized pc in the liver in humans, mice and rats . in premenopausal women, intact female mice and rats it has been estimated that a larger fraction of pc is made in the liver via the methylation of pe, than in men, postmenopausal women and sterilised mice and rats .

the role of choline in hepatic lipidosis  has been evaluated in humans  <cit> , cats  and mice  <cit> . both choline deficiency and low pemt activity have been associated with hl . suboptimal concentrations of dietary choline are associated in the cat with a diminished capacity of the liver to synthesize pc resulting in accumulation of lipids in the liver .

in humans, mice and rats pemt expression and activity is known to be upregulated by oestrogens. this explains why premenopausal and intact females are less choline dependent than males or postmenopausal/spayed females . pre-menopausal women have a 30–50 % higher capacity than men to form pc de novo via the pemt pathway  <cit> . premenopausal women and female rats on a choline deficient diet are less likely to develop hl than their male counterparts. postmenopausal women and castrated female mice with less pemt activity are considered more susceptible to develop pc deficiency and, subsequently, hl  <cit> .

center et al. have reported that female cats are more affected than male cats  <cit> , but it is more commonly reported that fhl has no breed, age or sex predisposition  <cit> . an explanation for an occasionally proposed sex predisposition in fhl has never been convincingly described.

as demonstrated in other species, the loss of oestrogen influence could cause spayed female cats to have a lower capacity for pc synthesis than intact females. if so, spaying female cats, a practice widely performed in all western countries, could be a predisposing factor for female cats to develop fhl.

the aim of this study was to analyse the lipid metabolism in healthy cats before and after spaying/neutering and subsequently the influence of sex hormones on pc synthesis via the pemt pathway.

RESULTS
cats
six intact females with a median age of  <dig>  months  and  <dig> intact males with a median age of  <dig>  months  were enrolled. median body weight of the female cats was  <dig>  kg ; median body weight of the male cats was  <dig>  kg .

all cats accepted the diet without any problems. results of the complete blood count , biochemistry and coagulation profile of all twelve cats, analysed following standard chemical analyses, were within reference intervals . the surgical procedures and ultrasound guided liver biopsies were without incident in all cats. the cats recovered uneventfully from anaesthesia and were discharged the day after.

histological analysis
histological evaluation of the liver biopsies performed in each subject  at 4 weeks and at 8 weeks from the start of the diet revealed no histological changes compatible with hepatic lipidosis or other histological changes.

hormone analysis
the results of the sex hormones measurements in the blood of the male and female cats pre and post spaying/neutering are reported in table  <dig>  oestrogen levels dropped significantly after spaying , indicating successful spay in all female cats. in one female cat, both before and after spaying, the oestrogen levels were below the detection limit of the test.table  <dig> plasma oestrogen and testosterone levels  before and after spaying/neutering


a
p <  <dig>  male intact versus neutered


b
p <  <dig>  female intact versus spayed



the testosterone level dropped significantly  in male cats, indicating successful neutering.

plasma choline and liver pemt activity analysis
free plasma choline levels were not statistically different between intact female cats compared to intact males  . after spaying the choline levels increased in female cats by 35 % to levels similar to those in male cats pre and post neutering , but the increase was not significant.table  <dig> plasma choline levels and hepatic indicators of phosphatidylcholine  metabolism  in male and female cats before and after spaying/neutering


a
pemt phosphatidylethanolamine n-methyltransferase


bpc species implicated in pemt activity i.e. pc containing long highly unsaturated acyl chains


c
pe phosphatidylethanolamine



activity of pemt varied considerably between samples and did not differ significantly between male and female cats before or after spaying/neutering, and no effects of spaying/neutering were found in either group . no correlation between the individual plasma choline levels and pemt activity was observed .

as presented in table  <dig>  no significant differences were observed in total liver pc and the pemt-specific pc species i.e. long chain highly unsaturated  pc species, pc 38: <dig>  and pc 40: <dig> , and the pc/pe ratio between male and female cats before or after spaying/neutering.

discussion
choline deficiency and low hepatic pemt activity have been associated with hl in humans, mice and rats. pre-menopausal and intact females in these species appear better protected from the development of lipidosis when exposed to a choline deficient diet. the up-regulation by oestrogens increases their capacity to synthesise pc via the pemt pathway, reducing the dependency on choline intake  <cit> . also in cats, the importance of choline in the development of hl has been substantiated in supplementation and deficiency studies . this study could not demonstrate an effect of a reduced exposure to oestrogens on the pemt pathway and the level of pemt-specific pc species in cats. therefore, this study does not support the hypothesis that a down-regulated pemt pathway, as result of spaying/neutering, is a predisposing factor for the development of hl when cats are fed at recommended choline levels  <cit> .

the choline levels in the plasma  were low compared to what has been established in humans   <cit>  and the earlier reported choline levels in cat plasma   <cit> . however, the latter range has been established with a different assay method  <cit> . the lower choline levels in the plasma may have been influenced by assay interference of substances in cat plasma.

the choline levels in female intact cats tended to be lower compared to the levels in spayed female cats and male cats. nevertheless, this finding should be interpreted with caution based on the overall low choline levels close to the lower limit of quantitation. we have no clear explanation for the rise in plasma free choline levels after spaying in female cats, but it may suggest an effect of oestrogen on either choline uptake from the diet or on the conversion of choline to other metabolites like acetylcholine, betaine or phosphatidylcholine.

in contrast to what has been reported in humans, mice and rats, the pemt activity tended to be lower in intact female cats than in male cats and spayed female cats. unexpectedly, there was no higher pemt activity in intact females before spaying, nor a decrease in pemt related parameters after spaying. this is in contradiction to what is anticipated when oestrogens would up-regulate the pemt pathway. the low pemt activity in intact female cats may not have reached significance because of the large variation in activity between samples. this may be partly due to the relatively low signals in the respective assays, making them more susceptible to variation in background noise.

to further elucidate the activity of the pemt pathway, pc 38: <dig> and pc 40: <dig> and the pc/pe ratio were evaluated. phosphatidylcholine 38: <dig> and pc 40: <dig> are products of the pemt pathway and therefore reflect indirectly the activity of this pathway  <cit> . the pc/pe ratio is also considered a proxy for the pemt pathway although it may also be influenced by the rate of the pc and pe synthesis and breakdown by other pathways  <cit> . it is suggested that the higher the pc/pe ratio, the higher the pemt activity should be, as more pe would be converted to pc in the hepatocytes via three sequential steps of methylation  <cit> . also, in these indirect parameters, there were no significant differences between the groups that could suggest an effect of oestrogen levels on activity of the pemt pathway.

as the study was performed in client-owned cats, a diet with recommended choline content and not a choline restricted diet was used. with sufficient choline in the diet to allow pc to be formed via the kennedy pathway, the expression and activity of the pemt pathway may not have been fully stimulated. however, as it has been demonstrated in humans, mice and rats, the pemt pathway is also active with diets that contain sufficient choline for the specific species, contributing to 20–40 % of the pc produced .

this study was performed in a relatively small series of animals. a power analysis indicated that  <dig> cats per group would have been sufficient to evaluate the hormonal effect on the pemt pathway. the power analysis was based on the assumption that changes needed to be large to be considered clinically relevant. nevertheless, it cannot be excluded that significant differences would be found with larger numbers.

it is possible that the difference of prevalence of lipidosis in female cats compared to male cats might be associated to a specific female lipid profile  <cit> . further evaluation of lipid profiling of liver and plasma of healthy female and male cats before and after spaying/neutering may help to clarify potential sex difference in cats.

CONCLUSIONS
phosphatidylcholine synthesis in cats, when fed a recommended amount of choline in the diet, seems to differ from what has been observed in humans, mice and rats, with no evidence of influence of sex hormones on the pemt pathway. current recommendations for diet choline levels are adequate for spayed female cats and it is unlikely that castration predisposes cats for hl by causing pc deficiency as suggested in other species when recommended dietary choline level are provided.

