BACKGROUND
the importance of the philippine archipelago for southeast asian biogeography was first recognized by alfred russel wallace when he distinguished the australian and indian regions  <cit> . he placed the philippines in the indian region, but considered them “in some respects of doubtful location”. later, he moved the philippines into the oriental region  <cit> .

with almost  <dig> endemic plant and more than  <dig> endemic vertebrate species, the philippines constitutes one of the  <dig> biodiversity hotspots for conservation priority and is among the leading ten hotspots regarding the number of endemics  <cit> . however, the complex geological history of the more than  <dig> islands stretching over nearly 2000 km in north-south direction has made it difficult to understand the diversification of the rich plant and animal biodiversity in the country  <cit> . nevertheless, biogeographers, population geneticists, conservation biologists, and phylogeneticists have been intrigued by the archipelago and its diverse endemic species, and have used it as a model system for addressing a variety of conceptual questions relating to evolutionary history. consequently, the philippine archipelago has become one of the globally important model island archipelagos for studying evolutionary processes of diversification  <cit> . studies utilizing robust and well-sampled phylogenetic analyses as a basis for understanding the complex biogeographical histories of philippine plants and animals have advanced in the last two decades; however, most of them are dedicated to animals . biogeographical studies including philippine plants were conducted only for a few genera such as cyrtandra j.r.forst. & g.forst. , rhododendron l. , begonia l. , and aglaia lour. .

in the philippines, rubiaceae is the most diverse family, and  <dig>  of the  <dig> species found in the country are endemics  <cit> . species diversity, phylogenetic and biogeographical relationships of philippine rubiaceae have received renewed interest in recent years. greeniopsis merr.  has been identified as an endemic philippine genus with its closest relatives  in southeast asia  <cit> . likewise, the endemic philippine genus antherostele bremek.  is most closely related to a set of southeast asian genera . in contrast, the endemic philippine genus villaria rolfe  forms a well-supported clade with the southeast asian genus hypobathrum blume and the west african genus pouchetia a.rich.  <cit> .

none of these endemic genera comprise more than six species, and little is known about species diversity, phylogenetic and biogeographical relationships of the philippine representatives of other, larger rubiaceae genera. the pantropical genus ixora l.  is the third largest genus in the family rubiaceae, with approximately  <dig> species  <cit> , most of them shrubs or small trees in the understorey of tropical forests. approximately  <dig>   species occur in tropical asia  <cit> , with  <dig> species in india  <cit> ,  <dig> in thailand  <cit>  and  <dig> species on borneo alone  <cit> . in contrast, only  <dig> species are known from continental africa, about  <dig> species from madagascar and  <dig> species from tropical america  <cit> . ixora is one of the largest rubiaceae genera on the philippines, and one of the best recognizable: morphologically, it is characterized by a combination of articulate petioles, terminal trichotomously branching inflorescences, narrowly tubular 4-merous flowers, contorted aestivation, a single ovule per locule, and drupaceous fruits and seeds with a large adaxial excavation  <cit> . however, identification at species level is much more difficult  <cit> . while several taxonomic treatments of ixora are available for specific geographical regions such as africa  <cit> , madagascar  <cit> , the marquesas islands  <cit> , and australia  <cit> , a revision of the continental asian taxa is lacking. therefore, species delimitation is not yet fully understood, and the actual number of species is still unknown  <cit> .

previous phylogenetic studies have clarified the tribal placement and circumscription of the genus . mouly et al.  <cit>  resolved ixora species into two large lineages, an asian-pacific lineage  and an afro-neotropical lineage . tosh et al.  <cit>  recently investigated the evolutionary history of afro-madagascan ixora and recovered two separate lineages of madagascan taxa. they  <cit>  estimated an ixoreae crown age of  <dig> million years ago  and dated the onset of divergence between the asian-pacific clade and the remainder of the genus as 15 ma, indicating a mid-miocene origin  for the lineages, in agreement with the results of mouly  <cit> . no samples from the philippines have been included in any study so far.

in the philippines, the genus ixora provides an exemplary case, with a particularly high number of endemic species known from the country . the only available prior account was an enumeration by merrill  <cit> , more than 85 years old and outdated . preliminary investigation of type material and available herbarium specimens showed that species of ixora in the philippines are distinguished based on subtle differences of the inflorescences and morphoclines rather than discrete characters, e.g. length ratio of the corolla tube vs. corolla lobe, and the pubescence of the inflorescence  <cit> . this corresponds to de block’s  <cit>  observations regarding their african congeners.

in this study, we include for the first time a wide range of philippine ixora species in a phylogenetic analysis using sequence data from two chloroplast regions, the rps <dig> intron and the trnt-f region including the trnt-﻿trnl and trnl-trnf intergenic spacers and the trnl intron, and the 5′ external transcribed spacer  and internal transcribed spacers  of the nuclear-encoded 35s rdna cistron. we interpret our results in the light of the hitherto known patterns of faunal and floral migrations and evolution in the philippines. we address the following questions.  are the philippine ixora species monophyletic?  are phylogenies derived from chloroplast and nuclear dna congruent?  which species or groups of species are the closest relatives of the philippine ixora species?  does the phylogenetic pattern of philippine ixora have wider implications on the biogeographic history of the philippines?

RESULTS
outgroup sampling and ingroup sequence characteristics
one of the non-coding gene regions used here, the nuclear-encoded its <dig>  cannot be aligned across all ixoroideae, and alignment of the most divergent and length-polymorphic plastid region, the trnt-trnl intergenic spacer, is difficult in some parts. also, the other two nuclear spacers, the its <dig> and the ets, include sequence portions that will lead to ambiguous alignments when incorporating all ixoroideae data. nonetheless, we could infer four guide trees based on the harvested data , which confirmed that our outgroup selection includes the closest relatives of ixora with best-possible data coverage on the gene regions used here .

the  <dig> new sequences generated in this study were combined with sequences previously generated and used by mouly et al.  <cit>  and tosh et al.  <cit>  resulting in a total of  <dig> sequences of  <dig> ixora samples, representing approximately  <dig> ixora species. levels of genetic variation between species were generally low for all investigated regions. the total number of parsimony informative characters  ranged from  <dig> in rps <dig> to  <dig> in ets for the ingroup; the number of distinct alignment patterns  ranged from  <dig> in rps <dig> to  <dig> in trnt-f. in the concatenated cpdna dataset,  <dig> characters  were variable, with  <dig> characters  variable in the nuclear dataset. the characteristics of the individual chloroplast and nuclear regions are listed in table  <dig> table  <dig> information for phylogenetic analyses 


abbreviations: dap distinct alignment patterns, pic parsimony-informative characters




incongruence and congruence between nuclear and plastid genealogies
phylogenetic analyses of individual gene regions generate largely unresolved and poorly supported phylogenetic trees . concatenation of the nuclear data and the plastid gene regions respectively leads to better resolved phylogenetic trees  and limits the number of scenarios of potential phylogenetic relationships between species and clades .fig.  <dig> tanglegram showing maximum likelihood trees based on the nuclear  and the plastid  datasets, after exclusion of the cultivated species. branch numbers indicate bootstrap support values and posterior probabilities for the main lineages. major clades are labelled with roman numbers for nuclear data, and uppercase letters for the plastid data . colours highlight main lineages characterized by coherent combinations of nuclear and plastid genotypes: red, lineage endemic to the philippines ; orange, putative south asian-australasian sister lineage of the red lineage ; purple, southeast asian lineage with philippine members , blue, african-new world lineage ; green, east asian lineage with members on palawan and in the philippines . same colouring scheme is used in subsequent figures and tables


fig.  <dig> bootstrap support network, nuclear data. ambiguous signal in the nuclear data  visualized using bipartition  networks  <cit> , a special from of consensus networks in which the edge lengths are proportional to the frequency of the corresponding phylogenetic split in the bootstrap  replicate sample the bootstrap support network is based on  <dig> bs replicate trees inferred from the nuclear data.. members of major lineages  coloured accordingly, outgroups in black. circles, non-philippine individuals; 7-pointed stars, palawan samples; 5-pointed stars, other philippine samples. 


fig.  <dig> bootstrap support network, plastid data. ambiguous signal in the plastid data  visualized using bipartition  networks, a special from of consensus networks in which the edge lengths are proportional to the frequency of the corresponding phylogenetic split in the bootstrap  replicate sample. the bootstrap support  network is based on  <dig> bs replicate trees inferred from the plastid data. members of major lineages  coloured accordingly, outgroups in black. circles, non-philippine individuals; 7-pointed stars, palawan samples; 5-pointed stars, other philippine samples. 




two large, mutually monophyletic lineages, an asian-pacific clade  and an asian-afro-neotropical clade , are inferred based on the nuclear dataset . based on the plastid data, three main clades emerge: a philippine clade , a mixed asian-pacific clade , and a clade including the african and new world species . the nuclear tree suggests a split between the indian-mascarene species and the remainder of the african-new world clade. a nuclear clade iii corresponds to the plastid clade c. this is the best-supported  and most probable  clade . in both phylogenies, the american taxa i. aluminicola and i. ferrea are nested in the african subtree. taking the nuclear and plastid inferences together, four or five main lineages can be defined based on the exclusive combination of nuclear and plastid signatures: ia/a , ib/b <dig> , ii+iv/b , and iii/c . the nuclear clade ia corresponds exactly to the plastid clade a. based on nuclear data, this clade  is sister to a clade of asian-pacific species  with b-type plastids . based on plastid data, this clade  is sister to the remaining taxa, reflecting a deep incongruence. although different in their nuclear signatures, the members of the nuclear clades ii and iv share the same plastid. consistently, the plastid haplotypes of members of clade ii appear to be generally more derived  and include unique ribo−/haplotype combinations  as reflected by their placement in the plastid tree and the support of critical branches .

both the nuclear and chloroplast maximum likelihood  trees  placed the  <dig> samples  of philippine ixora in five distinct subtrees. the positions and support of the five corresponding clades, however, differ between the two datasets. lineage ia/a is exclusively philippine. the remaining four clades comprising philippine species mixed with southeast asian species are part of lineage ii+iv/b. the structure of the nuclear clade ii reflects two radiations with philippine species. while the exclusively philippine subclade iia matches exactly the chloroplast clade b <dig>  composition and arrangement of the i. palawanensis subclade  differs between the two datasets. using the nuclear data the malayan i. iteophylla is included in this clade but i. otophora and i. sp. nov.  <dig> “palawan” are excluded. a similar situation is found in nuclear clade iv; one subclade  is exclusively philippine, while the other  is comprised of both philippine and several southeast asian species. in the chloroplast tree, these two radiations do not correspond, and the involved species are largely unresolved.

multiple accessions of the same species are placed in the same subclades ; but only i. bartlingii and i. macrophylla are resolved as actual sisters, irrespective of the data used . the highest variability is encountered in the five accessions of i. philippinensis which fall into two groups with  different plastid and nuclear signatures.

signal ambiguity in nuclear and plastid data sets
detailed inspection of split patterns in the bootstrap samples  demonstrate that the nuclear types are generally more distinct than the plastid types of the same specimens; this is illustrated in the more tree-like general structure of the nuclear-based bootstrap network. signal ambiguity in the nuclear data relates to the initial radiation within the core group ixora and the initial diversification of clade iii. the plastid signal is not sufficiently clear either to resolve several backbone relationships. most importantly, the signal from many philippine taxa of clade b commonly is ambiguous. other taxa  inflicting topological ambiguity at deeper nodes in the ixora core group plastome are i. diversifolia, i. javanica, i. acuticauda, i. kinabaluensis, and i. valetoniana.


individual taxa of unclear affinity are: 1) i. nigricans from india, with somewhat inconclusive nuclear signals but an african-american -type chloroplast; 2) i. brunonis from thailand with southeast asian nuclear signals but an african-american type chloroplast; and 3) i. acuticauda from borneo with incongruent asian nuclear and chloroplast types.

further topological ambiguity arises from to the cultivated taxa which occupy markedly different positions in the nuclear- and plastid-based inferences . the cultivars ixora finlaysoniana, i. pavetta, i. casei, and i. chinensis are nested in the asian  nuclear-based clade iv; but their plastid affinity lies with the new-world african clade c. similarly, i. brunonis from thailand is the poorly supported sister of i. casei and i. chinensis in the nuclear tree , while it is the well-supported sister of i. finlaysoniana in the cpdna tree . the accession of i. finlaysoniana cultivated in the philippines always formed a strongly supported clade with an accession cultivated in tanzania. the last cultivar, ixora coccinea, retains its association with a second clade of asian  species in both trees , but changes position inside this clade.

biogeographic patterns in ixora with special reference to philippine taxa
in the philippines, distantly related nuclear lineages occur sympatrically , indicating that natural populations of the main lineages are genetically isolated. plastids in ixora are geographically sorted. with a few exceptions, each nuclear lineage  carries one sort of plastid haplotype  . the outgroup-inferred root suggests an initial split in ixora between a lineage that today occurs from the pacific islands to the philippines  with an outlier in sri lanka , and the rest of the genus . plastid variation indicates substantial genetic drift between african  and south asian-indomalayan members  of the genus in general, and the two pacific-philippine potential sister lineages ia/a and ib/b <dig> . plastid signatures indicate that the now mostly pacific lineage ib/b <dig>  and the south asian-indomalayan group  within ixora evolved within or near to the same geographically restricted area . at the time of this divergence, both the african  and the exclusively philippine  ixora were geographically isolated from the main bulk of south asian-indomalayan ixora .fig.  <dig> overview map including all analysed samples. geographic distribution of nuclear-inferred  and plastid-inferred  lineages within sampled ixora. phylogenetic relationships of distinguished nuclear and plastid lineages are depicted as schematic cladograms, root as defined by outgroups . members of major lineages  coloured accordingly, grey: not genotyped individuals. circles, non-philippine individuals; 7-pointed stars, palawan samples; 5-pointed stars, other philippine samples


fig.  <dig> close-up on philippine archipelago. geographic distribution of main ixora lineages  on the philippines  and hypothetical evolutionary pathways of plastid haplotypes as inferred using median networks of individual gene regions. b
 trnt-trnl intergenic spacer. c trnllf region including trnl intron and trnl-trnf intergenic spacer. d
 rps <dig> intron. circles, non-philippine individuals; 7-pointed stars, palawan samples; 5-pointed stars, other philippine samples




discussion
relationships of the philippine ixora species
well-supported incongruence between the nuclear and the plastid datasets prevents the analysis of a combined dataset . therefore, the two different genealogies were explored separately.

our main nuclear clades, the asian-pacific clade  and the asian-afro-neotropical clade , correspond to those of mouly et al.  <cit> , who also found an afro-neotropical and a pacific clade. however, while mouly et al.  <cit>  inferred a poorly supported monophyletic asian clade, our greatly increased sampling of asian, and in particular philippine taxa, shows that asian  species occur in both major clades in ixora.

the species from the philippines are represented in five different lineages, corresponding to three major ribo−/haplotypes in the nuclear and the chloroplast dataset. two of these ribo−/haplotypes are shared with mainland southeast asian species, while the third one is a rather distant relative  of an asian-pacific lineage. thus, the phytogeographical relationships of the ixora species found in the philippines are fully decoupled.

lineage ia/a comprises a strongly supported, genetically isolated group of endemic philippine ixora species that possibly share a common, potentially widespread  ancestor with a lineage  composed of species from the wider pacific area, which also includes i. calycina from sri lanka and southern india. ixora angustilimba and i. bibracteata are strongly supported sister species, both characterized by solitary  or at the most, three, flowers in an inflorescence supported by bracts  <cit> . sister to these two species are two recently described species, i. reynaldoi and i. silagoensis  <cit> . both species are characterized by subsessile leaves, sessile or shortly pedunculate, erect and lax inflorescences . nested in this group are the two samples of i. bartlingii characterized by long-pedunculate, pendulous inflorescences bearing numerous flowers . the sister clade to this group contains i. luzonensis and i. sp. indet.  <dig> “batanes”, which differ from their relatives by their shortly pedunculate and lax inflorescences.fig.  <dig> examples of species of the five subclades of the philippine ixora. a
 ixora bartlingii elmer ; b
 ixora angustilimba merr. ; c
 ixora silagoensis manalastas, banag & alejandro ; d
 ixora macrophylla bartl. ex dc. ; e
 ixora philippinensis merr. ; f
 ixora philippinensis merr. ; g
 ixora longistipula merr. ; h
 ixora cumingiana vid. ; i
 ixora alejandroi banag & tandang ; j
 ixora palawanenis merr. ; k
 ixora salicifolia dc. . — credits: p. pelser ; g. alejandro ; j. dela bajan ; d. tandang ; r. bustamante ; c. banag 




the nuclear clade ii, one of the two lineages with exclusively b-type plastids, contains two well-supported subclades, one of them exclusively consisting of philippine  species  with derived plastids . the ‘plesiomorphic’ plastids found in other members of the same lineage including all samples from palawan, cause the ambiguous, but weak signals along the proximal part of the b-type subtree, characterizing, to various degrees, all members of clades ii and iv . the palawan clade b <dig>  comprises i. palawanensis and i. leucocarpa . ixora sp. nov.  <dig> “palawan” is sister to these species included in clade b <dig>  but outside the i. palawanensis–i. leucocarpa subclade in the nuclear tree, where it is sister to the malayan i. iteophylla. though sharing similar habitats, forested ravines or humid forest, the species of the palawan clade differ in their flower colour ; i. leucocarpa, white; ixora sp. nov.  <dig> “palawan”, orange).

the three accessions of i. salicifolia are all part of clade b <dig> in the plastid tree and of iia in the nuclear tree, but are not resolved as discrete clades . ixora longifolia and i. gigantifolia group with i. salicifolia  <dig> in the nuclear tree, while i. salicifolia  <dig> and i. salicifolia  <dig> remain unresolved. all species in this group possess derived, similar or identical, haplotypes of lineage b  and share morphological traits: pedunculate, erect and compact inflorescences and long-pedicellate flowers . ixora magnifica, another philippine endemic with showy bright red flowers, is resolved with high support as sister to an unidentified accession from thailand in the nuclear tree, while sharing the characteristic b <dig> haplotype.

within the third ixora lineage  found in the philippine archipelago, the differentiation patterns are less clear. of the widespread species i. philippinensis, two samples collected in the northern part of the philippines  are sister of the widespread, but monophyletic i. macrophylla  and i. alejandroi , and are separated from the three samples collected in the southern part of the country . in the nuclear tree, the latter are contained within the sister clade of i. longistipula , a species characterized by pendulous inflorescences in which the flowers form a simple, dense head . tosh et al.  <cit>  observed a similar pattern for i. mangabensis, in which the populations from northern and southern madagascar did not form a natural group and exhibited small morphological differences. in i. philippinensis, the material collected from the north has longer peduncles and many flowers per inflorescence  compared to the sessile to shortly pedunculate inflorescences with at most ten flowers per cyme in materials collected from the south . re-evaluation of the taxonomy of i. philippinensis is required in view of the genetic differentiation and morphological variation observed between these populations currently united in this species. the palawan endemic i. alejandroi did not group with other species of palawan . ixora alejandroi  is characterized by an elongated cyme with congested secondary axes, reddish brown corolla and stigmatic lobes shortly cleft in the middle; characters which are not known from any other philippine species  <cit> . except for a pubescent inflorescence and non-articulate branching of the inflorescence axes, i. alejandroi shares no morphological characters with i. macrophylla and i. philippinensis. its plastids are plesiomorphic within the iv/b lineage .

subclade ivb  comprises the two samples of i. cumingiana from luzon, i. myriantha  and two sterile accessions attributed to i. macgregorii . these species share white flowers and lax inflorescences , which become more compressed towards the south.

in our study, some species thought to be closely related based on morphology were placed in different subtrees . this is the case with i. macrophylla, i. bartlingii, and i. longistipula, which are often misidentified in herbarium collections due to their long-pedunculate, pendulous inflorescences with white corollas and overlapping shape of the leaves. however, other morphological characters support their separation in the phylogenetic tree, particularly the articulate, terminal inflorescences of i. bartlingii and i. longistipula as opposed to the non-articulate, cauli- or ramiflorous inflorescences of i. macrophylla  as well as the sessile to capitate flowers of i. longistipula  as opposed to the pedicellate flowers of i. bartlingii and i. macrophylla .


it is interesting to note that the most widespread and variable philippine species  are found in different groups, associated genetically with morphologically related species of narrower distribution. this suggests that these widespread, genetically diverse species might act as pools for the diversification of locally adapted new species in a process of ongoing speciation, as recently shown for i. margaretae in new caledonia  <cit> .

while our investigation provides unequivocal evidence for the polyphyly of the philippine ixora, the relationships of several species to related species from the asian mainland remain to be studied in more detail, because the plastid tree  is not yet well resolved inside clade b. lineage sorting in this complex group appears yet to be incomplete . moreover, our present results indicate that several species from asia display unusual combinations of nuclear and plastid ribo−/haplotypes  that could be indicative of recent or ancient reticulation between major lineages . however, an enlarged sampling of malesian and indian taxa and an increased number of loci will most likely refine our results for clade b. ultimately, the combination of additional, more variable plastid markers and the nuclear markers used here should be able to discriminate further between reticulation and incomplete lineage sorting; the latter appears to be a minor issue in ixora, but it may account for the pattern seen in southeast asian/malesian species of lineage ii+iv/b. reticulation, possibly caused by hybridization  <cit> , is indicated in particular for the cultivated species in our nr- and cpdna trees  by their conflicting, relatively terminal positions.

endemism
twenty-one of the  <dig> philippine species included in this phylogenetic study are endemic to the philippines. the three non-endemic species are i. longifolia, i. philippinensis, and i. salicifolia. while lineages ia/a and ii/b <dig> comprise only species endemic to the philippines, lineages iva/b, ivb/b and ii/b <dig> contain both species endemic to the philippines and species also reported from a wider asian range. in clade iva, both i. macrophylla and i. philippinensis are reported from all major philippine islands including palawan, and i. philippinensis is supposed to also occur in other areas of malesia, and as far as taiwan. however, in our analysis, the multiple accessions of i. philippinensis occur in two relatively distinct, well-supported nuclear subclades . this raises the question whether i. philippinensis represents a single species. the type specimen of i. philippinensis comes from bataan, a peninsula in central luzon, neither included in the area of the northern nor of the southern samples. therefore, it is not yet clear whether one of these two lineages constitutes i. philippinensis in the sense of the protologue or whether the central philippines might be home to a another, the typical, sublineage. more samples, including material from outside the philippines presently included in i. philippinensis, need to be studied with combined morphological and molecular data to assess species boundaries within lineage iva/b.

lineage ii/b <dig> comprises species centred in mindanao and the visayas, except for i. salicifolia which is widely distributed in the philippines and also found in borneo and java. in this case, the present species concept may still apply, as the interspecies relationships in this subclade are unresolved. all members of lineage ii/b <dig> apparently share a recent common geographic origin . should further studies identify i. salicifolia in malesia as an emigrant from the philippines, it would underpin the key role of mindanao as stepping stone for ixora dispersal in the region  <cit> . our sample identified as i. longifolia comes from cebu and thus represents a typical member of the exclusively philippine lineage ii/b <dig>  in the philippines, this species is reported from southern luzon, the visayas, mindanao and palawan  <cit> . however, the type of i. longifolia was collected on the island of honimoa   <cit> . further reports come from borneo, sumatra, and amboina  <cit> . this may be an example for a species colonizing from the philippines. however, because its area includes the sunda shelf  and both western and eastern wallacea  and is thus extremely large for an ixora species, detailed combined molecular and morphological analyses are necessary to establish whether the current concept of this species is valid.

biogeography
the signal from nuclear and plastid data is far too complex to allow for application of currently available methods of biogeographic inference. all current methods need a fully-, or at least well-resolved, ultrametric phylogenetic tree as input. computation of such trees for the nuclear and plastid data, which would provide the necessary discriminating topology to obtain meaningful ancestral area reconstructions, is not feasible based on the available data. signal strength is a limiting factor in the nuclear, and to aneven greater extent, the plastid, data. deep incongruences prevent concatenating both data sets. in addition to primary nuclear-plastid incongruence, the genetic complexity in ixora indicates phases of secondary reticulation  and incomplete lineage sorting . these two evolutionary phenomena, not uncommon at the intra-generic level in plants, cannot be captured by a single phylogenetic tree. thus, we used an alternative approach. the plastome is only maternally inherited and should be stronger geographically constrained than the nucleome, but less affected by early  or late  reticulation. therefore, we assume that species with similar plastid signature come from the same area of origin. similarity in the biparentally-inherited nucleome is taken as indication that two or more taxa are closely related in an evolutionary sense, and have not been isolated for a long time. it has been shown that in densely sampled, sympatric oak species speciation processes directly affect the nucleome, but not the plastome . two closely related species are more likely to hybridize and introgress, which will eventually lead to a homogenization of the nucleome but not necessarily of the plastome. widespread species with species-diagnostic nuclear signatures can carry distinct plastid signatures . thus, nuclear data will more likely reflect the  systematic affinity of an individual or species, whereas plastid data may reflect the provenance of the  population .

the simplest explanation for the geographic distribution of nuclear and plastid lineages  is that an originally south asian-indomalayan sister lineage  of the exclusively philippine lineage , migrated or expanded into the southern pacific area, possibly in response to the expansion of earlier diverged other ixora in that region . alternatively, assuming that the root in the plastid tree may be slightly misinformed , the divergence between the pacific  and african-asian  plastids effectively represents a geographic differentiation already between a  south/southeast asian  and malesian-australasian lineage . in this context, one should note the distinctness of the trnt-trnl spacers , the most variable plastid marker included here with an overall divergence hindering alignment across all ixoroideae. this is combined with lower divergence in the rps <dig> and trnl introns , plastid intron  regions that can be straightforwardly aligned across all ixoroideae . taken together, this could be indicative for a widespread common ancestor with a heterogenous plastome that was already starting to diversify due to genetic drift.

under the primary assumptions , the distinctness of both the nucleome and plastome of the exclusively philippine lineage  suggests that this is the genuine  ixora lineage of the philippines, or at least a lineage originating and evolving in a different area to the rest of the genus. thus, the modern mosaic of haplotypes found on the philippines bears witness of several colonization waves by the african-asian ixora , highlighted by the plastid signatures found in that lineage. only the least derived haplotypes of this lineage  – with respect to the trnl intron and downstream trnl-trnf spacer  and rps <dig> intron and in comparison to the haplotypes of the pacific-philippine lineages – are found on palawan. more derived types  are scattered across the archipelago. these haplotypes can also be found outside of the archipelago , indicating multiple colonizations.

our study presents an opportunity to make several inferences about the biogeographical patterns and diversification of the philippine ixora. in the philippines, four major colonization routes, or biogeographic umbilici  <cit>  have been identified as entryways to parts of the archipelago that have never been connected to a mainland. one colonization route includes the eastern island arc involving sulu archipelago-mindanao-leyte-samar-luzon which is most likely the route followed by the species of lineage ia/a, seeing as their distribution is recorded in these areas. relatively long isolation from the rest of ixora and its potential asian-pacific siblings, as well as small population size and areas, would explain its marked distinctness . interestingly, lineage ia/a  predominantly occurs in the northern philippines and comprises species collected from the provinces of aurora , ilocos norte , zambales , and batanes island . this may reflect the fact that northern luzon constitutes one of the geologically comparatively old parts of the philippines that has undergone considerable northwestern movement during the neogene  <cit> . two species from eastern visayas, i. reynaldoi and i. silagoensis, collected in samar and leyte, respectively, as well as the two samples of i. bartlingii are also nested within clade ia/a. ixora bartlingii is a widespread species found in most islands or provinces but never recorded from the island of palawan.

the four clades containing philippine species of lineage ii+iv/b are derived from a general asian group. thus, our data suggest  four independent colonization events between southeast asia and the philippines for ixora. this reflects the dispersal mode of the genus, whose fleshy fruits are dispersed by understorey birds with usually limited ranges of action  <cit> .

palawan is playing a special role in improving our understanding of southeast asian biogeography. while the famous wallace’s line  <cit>  separates wallacea from the sunda-region including the philippines, huxley’s line  <cit> , separates the philippines  from the sunda-region, thus linking the island of palawan biogeographically to borneo. recent analyses by van welzen et al.  <cit>  revealed evidence for partitioning of malesia into three instead of two regions: the western sunda shelf minus java , central wallacea , and the eastern sahul shelf . however, van welzen et al.  <cit>  treat palawan as part of the philippines, while its plate tectonic history identifies it as part of sundaland  <cit> . in our study, we have included five of the eleven ixora species occurring in palawan. for lineage ia/a, our results indeed support the separation of the island from the philippines along the traditional huxley’s line, because the only widespread species included in this clade, i. bartlingii, was never recorded from palawan. in lineages ii/b and iv/b, however, representatives from palawan are involved in several radiations . nevertheless, the comparison of the corresponding subclades in the nuclear and plastid trees , and the in-depth analysis of the philippine plastid haplotypes  converge to a rather simple hypothetical scenario. the lineage represented by nuclear clade ii diversified in southeast asia, with a malesian sublineage  reaching palawan, and colonizing from here the philippines , but also indonesia . bottleneck events while jumping into palawan and the rest of the philippines would explain the incomplete lineage sorting expressed in the plastid of lineage ii/b, with one  haplotype shared with members of the nuclear clade iv, while the other two are distinct, but of ambiguous phylogenetic affinity within clade b. one hypothesis could be that the founder populations were very small . once established on palawan they prevented further migration of their closest relatives. a similar situation may be that observed for hoya on new guinea, where the dominant australasian lineage blocked the migration of two genetically more derived lineages except for a single sublineage each  <cit> . in contrast, in clade iva, a clade with relatively underived b-type plastomes, the widespread species i. philippinensis and i. macrophylla are both reported from the island. the fact that the palawan endemic i. alejandroi groups with the northern accessions of i. philippinensis , and not with the i. philippinensis accession from palawan in the southern group, indicates that, at least for this group of species, regular exchange between all philippine islands, including palawan, is still taking place. in its sister lineage ivb/b, the widespread species i. cumingiana is present on palawan as well as on the other islands. because our study does not include samples of these species from palawan, their migration routes inside the philippine archipelago remain to be investigated.

for the species of lineage ii+iv/b, our present results support the conclusion of atkins et al.  <cit>  in cyrtandra , who found that palawan has both strong biogeographical ties with the other philippine islands and, via borneo, with the remainder of sundaland. an increased sampling of the species recorded from indonesia, particularly from borneo, the most diverse area for the genus  <cit> , will help to disentangle the supposedly multivalent role of palawan for the biogeographic history of ixora.

CONCLUSIONS
for ixora, the philippines seem to constitute a crossroad where species from two major lineages in ixora, the pacific and the african-asian one, have immigrated and subsequently radiated . our results further indicate that no secondary mixing has occurred between the two main lineages, as both nrdna and cpdna analyses suggest the same species groups. a more detailed study of lineage ii+iv/b, focusing on asian material, is needed to understand the complex biogeographical patterns in ixora inside the malesian region and adjacent continental asia. future studies should also include more populations, especially of species with wider distributions – be it on several islands or a presumed distribution on mainland asia – to more finely resolve the phytogeography of the philippine ixora species.

