BACKGROUND
the evolution of reproductive isolation is of fundamental interest in evolutionary biology because it represents a key step in speciation processes and the generation of biological diversity  <cit> . merging of divergent lineages can be prevented by prezygotic barriers that reduce heterospecific mating or by decreased offspring fitness . some of the most inclusive studies on postzygotic isolation have focussed on taxa that have been separated for millions of years. for instance, hybrids among species of drosophila are often completely sterile or inviable, which can be explained by dobzhansky-müller incompatibilities  <cit> . postzygotic isolation results from genetic changes in the parental lineages that, while functional on their normal genetic backgrounds, reduce the viability or fertility when recombined in hybrids. intrinsic postzygotic isolation is likely to manifest as soon as the respective factors are expressed, i.e. during early development  <cit> , whereas effects on reproductive traits are naturally associated with the reproductive phase. such intrinsic barriers to reproduction are thought to evolve slowly through a stochastic accumulation of genetic incompatibilities  <cit> . however, when young species have split only recently, extrinsic postzygotic isolation can also be effective through a more subtle effect. alleles that reduce the fitness in a given genetic background can be removed by externally  caused natural selection. here, heterospecific allele combinations are not lethal but perform worse than pure parental genotypes in dependence of the ecological context. differentially adapted genes can be instrumental to generate initial patterns of genetic divergence and are thought to govern the divergence and merging of young evolutionary lineages  <cit> . at least under conditions of gene flow, speciation will be driven by natural selection imposed by external ecological factors  <cit>  and models generally agree that intrinsic hybrid inviability is not an initial event that drives speciation  <cit> .

there may be a bias in our perception of the contribution of intrinsic and extrinsic postzygotic isolation to speciation processes. this is because it is usually more straightforward to analyse intrinsic barriers than to grasp extrinsic barriers experimentally, since the latter will most likely depend on unknown ecological interactions. therefore, traits that could provide a basis for genomic isolation in young lineages remain insufficiently explored. a possible approach is given by transcriptome analysis. here, gene expression data may help identifying key genes involved in speciation since regulatory evolution is hypothesized to be a key factor in microevolutionary processes  <cit> . genes that are regulated differently are likely to loose compatibility with the genetic environments of alternative lineages. microarray approaches offer the potential to study genome-wide patterns of divergence, and can be considered as an inventory of characters that could serve as a basis for genome divergence. although this does not provide evidence that selection acts on each of the particular genes under study, it will reveal the processes and functions that may be affected.

in this study, we explore by means of transcriptomics the regulatory divergence between incipient species of lake whitefish ) in order to identify candidate traits that could contribute to barriers to gene flow. this system is of particular interest to study the emergence of postzygotic isolation as the diverging lineages are of recent, most likely postglacial, origin   <cit> . dwarf and normal whitefish have evolved multiple times in response to ecological selection pressures  <cit>  and genome scans and mapping projects demonstrated that natural selection drives this divergence in multiple genomic regions  <cit>  while also suggesting that the lineages are at a phase of speciation where gene flow is still occurring. on the other hand, rogers and bernatchez  <cit>  have found evidence for genetic factors causing postzygotic isolation in developing eggs. the actual genes and functions involved in these processes are largely unknown due to a use of anonymous genetic markers. however, the application of transcriptome data offers a promising approach to identify candidate genes. microarrays made for salmon  can be readily used in whitefishes  <cit> . derome et al.  <cit>  and st-cyr et al.  <cit>  have identified a suite of candidate adaptive traits that display parallel changes in gene expression between adult dwarf and normal whitefish in replicated lakes.

here, we tie in with the above studies, which suggest than both intrinsic and extrinsic barriers to reproduction play a role in the divergence of dwarf and normal whitefish at the embryo stage and during the adult life respectively. our main objective was to compare regulatory changes at different life history stages to obtain an insight into the processes that may contribute to genomic divergence. our results indicate that there is little regulatory divergence in embryos in sharp contrast with evidence that numerous genes display regulatory divergence in juvenile fish. given that the latter patterns can be partially linked to ecological divergence, we conclude that extrinsic postzygotic barriers may be more important to explain early evolutionary divergence of dwarf and normal whitefish than intrinsic barriers to reproduction.

RESULTS
number and types of genes analysed
the number of features  for which we obtained gene expression data of sufficient quality for subsequent analyses was  <dig> for the embryos and  <dig> for the juvenile dataset. this discrepancy is correlated with technical aspects of the experiments. the number of spots that were excluded because they had a bad quality flag  after visual editing was  <dig> in the juvenile dataset vs.  <dig> in the embryo dataset. furthermore, the average background in the embryo experiments was lower than in the juvenile experiments . a total of  <dig> features were common to both datasets. accordingly, the embryo data contained  <dig> and the juvenile data contained  <dig> unique features. those features of the whole embryo dataset that were associated with a go term could be linked to  <dig> unique unigene clusters and the features of the whole juvenile dataset represented  <dig> unique unigene clusters.

the overall representation of gene functional groups among the expressed features between the two datasets differed significantly according to the ease score provided by the ease software. the juvenile fish dataset contained a significant relative excess  of unigene clusters representing three go-biological processes: catabolism , lipid metabolism , proteolysis and peptidolysis . in contrast, the embryo dataset contained an almost significant relative excess of unigene clusters representing two go-biological processes: cell cycle  and nucleobase\, nucleoside\, nucleotide and nucleic acid metabolism . these trends in the representation of genes in the two life history stages reflect the importance of metabolism and growth processes in the juvenile stage while gene transcription regulation and development predominate in the embryos.

genes displaying significant differences
after applying a fdr correction for multiple testing, only  <dig> est clones showed significant differential expression between the embryos of dwarf and normal whitefish . in contrast, a total of  <dig> est clones displayed significant differences in gene expression between dwarf and normal whitefish in the juvenile fish dataset. this difference in the proportion of est clones that display significant differentiation in gene expression in the two datasets was highly significant . for the embryos,  <dig> out of the  <dig> features tested would be expected to have false positive tests according to our significance criterion . however, the number of raw significant results in the embryo analysis was  <dig> . the corresponding number of significant genes in the juvenile dataset was  <dig> , while  <dig> false positives would be expected. this indicates for both datasets that the number of significant tests is not explainable by the expected false positive rate. the true number of genes with differential patterns of expression was higher than the list obtained after the fdr procedure, but the trend that there was much more differentiation in the juvenile compared to the embryonic stage remains independent of the fdr procedure.

for comparisons between datasets, est clones were assigned to est clone groups based on; i) unigene cluster or accession numbers  unless there was no known function, and ii) unique patterns of gene expression divergence. in doing this, significant patterns were integrated over replicate clones and overrepresentation of different genes by multiple clones was corrected. among the features displaying significant differentiation in the embryo dataset,  <dig> can be assigned to one of twelve unigene clusters. eleven out of the twelve unigene clusters that display significant differentiation in the embryo dataset also appear in the list of significant unigene clusters of the juvenile dataset . a total of  <dig> of the significant est clones of the juvenile fish dataset were assigned to one of  <dig> unigene clusters. accounting for the different numbers of unigene clusters that were represented by the raw data in the egg  and juvenile  datasets, this indicates that roughly fourteen times more genes as represented by distinct unigene clusters display overall significant differentiation in the juvenile fish than in the embryos.

comparisons with results from previous studies on adult fish
some of the est clones displaying significant divergence of gene expression in the analyses presented above have already been demonstrated to display differential expression in dwarf and normal whitefish. only one est clone for which significant differentiation was detected in the embryo dataset  was previously found to be differentially expressed in white muscle between laboratory dwarf and normal whitefish  <cit> . in contrast,  <dig> est clones that can be assigned to  <dig> different est clone groups  identified in whole juvenile fish  also show significant differentiation in gene expression in white muscle of adult fish of the same dwarf and normal strains in a controlled common environment  <cit> . although different tissues and life history stages were compared, there was a significant excess of  <dig> out of  <dig> est clone groups  where gene expression divergence between dwarf and normal whitefish was congruent in the pattern of up or down regulation in dwarfs relative to normals  as compared to a random distribution of changes in both directions. likewise, a comparison of the set of est clones displaying significant gene expression divergence in juvenile fish reveals matches with candidate features that have been identified in independent natural lakes  <cit> . it should be noted that the study by derome et al.  <cit>  used a less inclusive microarray containing five times less features, which reduces the relative power of that study to identify genes that were found here or by st-cyr et al.  <cit> . a total of  <dig> est clones that displayed significant divergence in whole juvenile dwarf and normal whitefish of the strains studied here could be matched with est clones displaying parallel adaptive divergence in gene expression in liver or white muscle of adult dwarf and normal whitefish from cliff lake  and indian pond  . ten out of  <dig> different est clone groups  show regulatory changes in the controlled environment that were congruent with the patterns of candidate adaptive traits as observed in adult tissues in natural lakes. among these, there appears to be a bias in that eight of ten affected genes are related to energy metabolism, which shows that regulatory changes between dwarf and normal whitefish related to this function are more constant across different environments, life history stages and tissues than those related to other functions .

in contrast to the observations for juvenile and adult fish of the experimental strains in controlled common environment , the direction of upregulation vs. downregulation of the transcript level of dwarf whitefish relative to normal whitefish shows less congruence when samples from natural environments and a new tissue  are included in the comparison. thus,  <dig> out of  <dig> groups of features that display significant divergence of gene expression in candidate adaptive features differ in the direction of the change between juveniles and adults  or between adult muscle and liver tissue  .

discussion
our results revealed a pronounced pattern of gene expression divergence for  <dig> est clones between 16-week old juvenile dwarf and normal lake whitefish  as compared to embryos of the same experimental groups, which displayed little divergence in gene expression . although the number of evolutionary changes causing the observed differences is currently unknown, a fourteen-fold excess of unigene clusters displaying significant differentiation in the juvenile dataset suggests that multiple regulatory changes take effect only after development has passed the embryo stage. if gene expression divergence were the result of random accumulation of evolutionary differences between the studied populations, roughly equal proportions of gene expression differences would be expected to occur in both life history stages. the much more likely scenario is that evolutionary change in gene expression plays a greater role at the juvenile stages than the embryonic stage.

the general pattern observed for gene expression divergence and regulatory changes resembles the ontogeny of morphological features across the animal kingdom. briefly, early developmental stages are usually extremely well conserved, whereas adult phenotypes vary as a consequence of evolutionary divergence, a classical observation made by early developmental biologists  <cit> . this observation has often been made for distantly related taxa. this study suggests that the same evolutionary pattern may not only apply to morphological characters, but also to transcriptomic divergence at the level of recently evolved lineages of fish. below, the observed changes in gene expression are discussed in relation to life history divergence of dwarf and normal whitefish. we propose that the excess of gene expression divergence in juvenile fish relative to embryos can be attributed to selective pressures that are related to ecological adaptation in the juvenile and the adult phase rather than an evolutionary constraint on divergence in embryonic stages.

a key concern in the analyses was that the absence of differentiation observed in the embryos could represent an artefact. developmental processes and therefore gene expression in embryos can be expected to change rapidly throughout ontogeny. the problem such heterogeneity in gene expression imposes for the analysis resembles that of allometry in studies of body shape  <cit>  and the relevance of heterogeneity for the analysis of gene expression data has recently been pointed out by leek and storey  <cit> . if different stages with accordingly changed patterns of gene expression were sampled, the variance in gene expression would be inflated. intra group variance could then exceed the between group variance to a point where the latter is not detected as significant in anova based statistical approaches. the extent to which such variation occurs in the transcriptome can be inferred from a study by arbeitman et al.  <cit>  who performed a very complete analysis of patterns of gene expression throughout development of drosophila melanogaster and found that significant heterogeneity was observed for 52% of all studied genes during the embryogenesis but few genes displaying developmental heterogeneity in adult drosophila. moreover, some classes of genes that are expressed during the segmentation phase of fishes show highly dynamic and cyclical patterns of expression through short periods of time  <cit> . the sampling of a relatively well-defined segmentation stage as done in this study is merely a snap-shot of the whole embryogenesis and should therefore contain considerably more genes with relatively constant expression patterns that are consequently useful for anova. accordingly, the inter sample variance in gene expression for eggs and juveniles was in the same order of magnitude  as estimated from a more inclusive dataset of the same stages including technical replication . even if only half of all genes  in the embryo dataset displayed homogeneous gene expression, one would still expect to detect considerably more significant genes if the proportion of significant genes in the embryo data was identical to that in the juvenile data. although an effect of developmental heterogeneity cannot be excluded, it is unlikely to explain the observed excess in gene expression divergence in the juveniles.

the ontogeny and evolution of gene expression differentiation
dwarf whitefish from lake témiscouata and normal whitefish from lake aylmer studied here have a similar reproductive biology. adult fish live in the lake throughout the year and enter tributaries only for a brief spawning period. spawning migrations are short and occur on a daily basis at night from late october to early november. eggs are dispersed in currents and settle into rock and gravel substrates where they are left unattended to develop. ninety-one percent of the unigene clusters that displayed significant regulatory divergence in the embryos were also significantly divergent in juvenile fish and in one case, found to be differentially expressed in white muscle tissue of adults of the same laboratory strains used here. however, none of the significantly different genes of the embryo stage was found to be a candidate for adaptive divergence in previous studies. the fact that ecological divergence of the egg stages of whitefishes has not been discovered to date together with the relative lack of gene expression differentiation suggests strongly that little or no adaptive evolutionary divergence has occurred specifically at the embryo stage and that most of the gene expression differentiation between dwarf and normal whitefish must develop at a later phase of the ontogeny.

upon hatching whitefish larvae are washed from their natal river into the lakes were they spent their entire life. to date it is unknown at which phase of the life history the ecological differentiation into the dwarf  and normal  lifestyles occurs in nature. in a study of dwarf and normal whitefish in cliff lake, larvae of dwarf and normal populations did not differ in their hatching time, diet, distribution and vertical migration within the lake  <cit> . unlike their parents, the larvae lived in total syntopy and there was no evidence for differential trophic ecology or circadian vertical migration, suggesting that ecological divergence of the two forms must begin after the larval stage  <cit> . the experimental populations used in this study had a total age of  <dig> weeks and had morphologically transformed into juvenile fish  for approximately  <dig> weeks before sampling was done. at the level of the transcriptome, the transformation into the juvenile stage is accompanied by an emergence of gene expression divergence between the two forms that was absent at the embryo stage. also, gene expression divergence at this juvenile stage could be matched with patterns observed in adult fish.  <dig> est clones representing  <dig> differentially regulated genes or accessions  also displayed regulatory divergence in muscle tissue of adult fish belonging to the same experimental groups and kept in a controlled common environment  <cit> . there was a significant excess of congruent regulatory change, which suggests that gene expression divergence between dwarf and normal whitefish is of a similar nature in juvenile and adults. the notion that regulatory divergence does not change much after the development of the adult morphology has finished is in line with the observation that many patterns of gene expression change little throughout adult life in drosophila  <cit> . hence, the juvenile stage studied here is useful to study the transition of life histories from non-differentiated larval fish  <cit>  to adult dwarf and normal whitefish with pronounced differential adaptation  <cit> .

a total of  <dig> of the est clones identified here matched with  <dig> accessions or genes that were also described by derome et al.  <cit>  and st-cyr et al.  <cit>   who found a recurrent association of divergence in gene expression and parallel adaptive differentiation in multiple lakes  for these genes. briefly, dwarf whitefish tend to have a shorter lifespan and begin to reproduce earlier than normal whitefish. they are specifically adapted to the open water where they specialise on a zooplankton diet as opposed to the more benthic lifestyle of normal whitefish  <cit> . according to trudel et al.  <cit>  this ecological differentiation is driven by differences in metabolic rate and energy allocation between dwarf and normal whitefish. derome et al.  <cit>  and st-cyr et al.  <cit>  have inferred candidate adaptive traits bases on patterns of parallel divergence in independent lake systems each containing dwarf and normal whitefish. in agreement with the experimental results of trudel et al.  <cit> , the biological function of a part of these candidates implies a role in energy metabolism. our results on the gene expression divergence between juvenile dwarf and normal whitefish has revealed ten out of  <dig> genes which match adaptive regulatory changes in the adult stage irrespective of the fact that different tissues were used. most conspicuously, eight of these ten genes can be associated with energy metabolism. the comparison of different studies reveals a recurrent pattern of up regulation of transcripts for glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase, fructose-bisphosphate aldolase a, beta-enolase and trypsin- <dig> precursor as well as a down regulation of transcripts for a mitochondrial precursor of cytochrome c oxidase polypeptide via, nucleoside diphosphate kinase and nucleoside diphosphate kinase a in dwarf relative to normal whitefish  in different tissues and life history stages. this adds evidence for the hypothesis that energy metabolism as a complex trait plays an ubiquitous role in driving the adaptive divergence between dwarf and normal whitefish while other candidate adaptive traits play more tissue and context specific roles.

the results obtained here for juvenile fish and the comparison of the direction of the regulatory changes in different tissues or the controlled common environment vs. natural lakes shows that regulatory changes at candidate adaptive traits are not always congruent in terms of the direction of the change. it must be emphasized though, that the inference of adaptive divergence from parallel regulatory changes relies on the use of comparable samples. if tissue type and environmental context vary, the regulatory response can be expected to vary as well. accordingly, there was more agreement in the direction of the regulatory changes when comparison based on liver tissue or natural environments were excluded . this implies that the inference of an adaptive value of parallel divergent traits by derome et al.  <cit>  and st-cyr et al.  <cit>  is not invalidated by contrasting patterns of regulatory divergence for a given candidate gene in juvenile fish and vice versa. although the relationship of the direction of regulatory change according to tissue context, age and environmental factors needs to be addressed in future studies, the fact remains that many candidate genes for adaptive divergence in adult fish also show regulatory differentiation at the juvenile stage. in contrast to the embryo stage analysed here, these results suggest that the divergence in gene expression in juvenile fish is subject to directional selection related to adaptive divergence.

the identification of candidate adaptive gene expression divergence still draws an incomplete picture of the processes that ultimately lead to the life history differentiation into dwarf and normal whitefish. if adaptive differences at the transcriptome level are expressed as early as young  juvenile stage, then it is likely that these genetic factors may initiate the development of life history divergence. although data on juvenile fish from natural lakes are missing, inferences can be made from our laboratory populations. experimental fish were kept in a controlled common environment and the candidate adaptive traits remain prevalent at the transcriptome level suggesting that juvenile fish already display differential adaptation. on the other hand, the phenotypes of our experimental populations bred in the laboratory seem to contradict a persistent ecophenotypic differentiation between dwarf and normal whitefish. although morphological features distinguishing dwarf and normal ecotypes are heritable  <cit> , the differentiation of life histories under laboratory conditions is less pronounced than in nature. dwarf whitefish remain only slightly smaller than normal whitefish and grow older than their natural counterparts . this strongly suggests that there is an environmental component that interacts with a genetic one to shape the ecophenotypic differentiation of dwarf and normal whitefish.

a potential role for stabilizing selection
aside directional selection driving divergence at the juvenile and adult stages, an alternative explanation for the relative lack of embryo gene expression may be derived from developmental biology. the embryos during the segmentation phase that were studied here correspond closely to the phylotypic stage, a developmental phase that corresponds to an archetype bauplan of all representatives of a given phylum. this stage is generally extremely conserved  <cit>  suggesting that strong evolutionary constraints prevent divergence. while the morphological conservation of phylotypic stage embryos remains undisputed, it has been found that patterns of gene expression need not be constrained. selection on adult genotypes may alter gene regulation in embryos  <cit>  and developmental system drift  <cit> , a process whereby gene regulatory networks evolve without changing the expression level of a gene, have been demonstrated for even closely related taxa  <cit> . this casts doubt on the validity of the phylotypic stage concept at the transcriptome level  <cit> . given these alternatives, the similarity between embryos of dwarf and normal whitefish could imply the action of strong evolutionary constraints that preserve identical patterns of gene expression relative to what we observed at the juvenile stage. under an evolutionary constraints hypothesis, genes that determine the expression level of a transcript may still evolve as long as the sum of their effects would not be changed. f <dig> – hybrids or segregating backcrosses would prove useful to reveal such cryptic regulatory divergence. they would combine the altered regulatory elements into a common genetic background, which can result in misexpression of genes  <cit> . very much in line with this, crossing experiments by lu and bernatchez  <cit>  and rogers and bernatchez  <cit>  suggest that f <dig> hybrids or backcrosses of the same populations studied here suffer from raised embryonic mortality in the same stage studied here. this would indicate the presence of alleles or genes that malfunction and should manifest as misexpression at the transcriptome level . in any case, the scarcity of regulatory divergence observed here for the embryo stage suggests that regulatory divergence is rare and may have a narrow genomic basis involving only a small number of genetic factors. this view would agree with the fact rogers and bernatchez  <cit>  have only found a limited number of qtl associated with hybrid embryo mortality in their mapping analysis.

implications for the emergence of genomic isolation and speciation in whitefish
at the level of the transcriptome, only traits causing regulatory divergence produce a phenotype that differs between two diverging lineages. these could be affected by natural selection and are therefore candidate traits that may reduce the fitness of individuals of mixed ancestry. thus, a screen for regulatory divergence can identify traits that could have fitness effects under conditions of gene flow and serve as a genetic basis for the emergence of genomic isolation. models suggest that recombination can oppose genomic divergence and speciation because loci that are not selected for may still be exchanged relatively freely among populations  <cit> . even if single genetic factors have a strong isolating effect, they may not be sufficient to reduce gene flow throughout the genome if hybrids are partially viable, as it is the case in coregonus  <cit> . it is therefore evident that the more loci are divergent between two lineages, the easier it becomes to explain how these could, as a whole, provide a basis for evolutionary divergence and reproductive isolation. few transcripts are regulated differently at the embryonic stage analysed here, which points towards a comparably small number of genes that may be differentially regulated between dwarf and normal whitefish embryos, at least relative to later stages. although rogers et al.  <cit>  provided evidence for the presence of genetic factors causing considerable hybrid embryo mortality, it may be concluded that the regulatory changes that could cause postzygotic isolation at the embryo stage are comparably rare. admittedly, the question to which degree this would be sufficient to prevent gene flow in nature cannot be answered at present. in any case, it would be easier to explain a reduction in gene flow if there was a broad genomic basis to reproductive isolation, i.e. effects of multiple traits that could be selected for, rather than few. our results suggest strongly that the largest part of regulatory divergence occurs throughout the juvenile and adult phases. a pattern of more pronounced divergence in juvenile and adult fish corresponds well with what has been observed in studies on interspecific regulatory divergence  <cit> . moreover, a suite of traits contributing to a diversified adult phenotype is expected to play a more important role in evolutionary divergence as compared to genes producing the conserved phylotypic stage phenotype  <cit> .

a gap in the sampling of potentially relevant life history stages of this study is that the reproductive phase could not be analysed here. studies on drosophila  <cit>  and mus  <cit>  have demonstrated an above average rate of regulatory divergence in genes associated with reproduction and in addition, have shown that these genes may be among the first to cause reproductive isolation. future studies will have to show whether reproductive characters may play the same crucial role in evolutionary divergence of incipient species of fish or if ecologically selected traits are among the first to cause genomic isolation.

CONCLUSIONS
if the relative rarity of gene expression divergence in embryo stages was a general pattern in recently diverged species, then a focus on embryo dysgenesis in studies of the early evolution of postzygotic isolation could be misleading in that they would distract from a large pool of adult characters. while tests for embryonic mortality are straightforward, it is much more difficult to test the role of particular genes on complex adult phenotypes as those may have small effects  <cit>  or their effects may depend on unknown environmental components. still, the transcriptomic patterns in whitefish suggest that a full understanding of how gene flow is reduced among incipient species may depend more heavily on genes affecting adult phenotypes than developmental phenotypes. in agreement with this, van der sluijs et al.  <cit>  suggest, for closely related cichlids from lake victoria, that postzygotic reproductive isolation is mediated by extrinsic selection rather than intrinsic hybrid dysgenesis. furthermore, studies across a broader phylogenetic range of taxa show that intrinsic genomic incompatibility evolves slowly and after the point of speciation between diverging species  <cit> . our results together with these studies support the view that subtle selective pressures and ecological interactions that are related to specific complex environments may be the key in explaining incipient genomic divergence  <cit> .

