BACKGROUND
we studied genomic responses to the effects of chemicals routinely found in complex mixtures of pollutants present in the urban estuaries during late organogenesis of fundulus heteroclitus embryos. natural fundulus populations are one of the few studied fish species in north america that have established resistant populations in highly contaminated urban estuaries
 <cit> . changes in gene expression, coupled with biochemical, physiological, and behavioral alterations play a critical role in adaptation to environmental stress. our study explores the ways natural populations may have adapted to local polluted environments by correlating their genomic responses to changes in morphology and physiology during development.

fundulus heteroclitus, a small, abundant, salt marsh fish that inhabits the eastern north american coast, has become a leading model in environmental biology. natural fundulus populations can tolerate a variety of environmental conditions and display an array of adaptations to both natural and anthropogenic variables in their ecosystems. f. heteroclitus is an ecologically important and genetically diverse model to elucidate pollution effects and genotype–environment interactions within and among natural populations.

f. heteroclitus is one of the few studied species in north america living in the highly polluted urban estuaries that has shown resistance to pollutants among both adults and embryos
 <cit> . multiple fundulus populations inhabit and have adapted to heavily contaminated urban estuaries
 <cit>  which contain persistent and bioaccumulative chemicals that are toxic to early fish development
 <cit> . acute and chronic exposure of fundulus embryos to chemicals present in the polluted sites can lead to functional deficit, growth retardation, malformation, and even death
 <cit> .

resistance to the lethal effects of pollution has been reported in f. heteroclitus embryos from the elizabeth river, va, a superfund site contaminated with creosote, a mixture of polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons 
 <cit> . pahs are petroleum products created by the combustion of organic materials that originate from both natural and anthropogenic sources. they have been found at  <dig> of  <dig>  national priority list sites, and as a group they are ranked number eight on the  <dig> comprehensive environmental response, compensation, and liability act  priority list of hazardous substances
 <cit> . these chemicals pose a significant risk to human and animal health due to their carcinogenic properties; research in aquatic organisms has described their equally damaging role as teratogens
 <cit> . the pah concentrations in the sediments collected at the elizabeth river site are some of the highest in the world
 <cit> , averaging 200– <dig> ug/g. these pahs include carcinogens, such as benzopyrene , chrysene, and dibenzo anthracene
 <cit> .

cardiovascular malformations, resulting in significantly higher mortality rates, are well documented in fishes exposed to pah mixtures
 <cit> . some of these effects are thought to be mediated by the aryl hydrocarbon receptor 
 <cit> . studies of cardiovascular effects using model pahs show synergistic interaction between pah-type ahr agonists and cyp1a-inhibitors. typically, the ahr pathway is induced by pahs and activates expression of cyp1a
 <cit> . in f. heteroclitus, embryos exposed to the pah-type ahr agonist β-naphthoflavone  and the cyp1a inhibitor α-naphthoflavone  had decreased levels of cyp1a activity and a synergistic increase in the occurrence of cardiac deformities as measured by heart elongation and pericardial edema
 <cit> . bnf and anf are synthetic flavonoids commonly used as surrogate model pahs: bnf acts as an ahr agonist and anf acts as a reversible competitive cyp1a inhibitor that can bind to either the active site or the ferric heme
 <cit> . agonists and inhibitors often co-occur in typical pah mixtures, and although the current risk assessments of pahs assumes an additive model of pah toxicity, this synergy may be an important outcome for risks posed by pah-exposure.

fundulus gene-environment interaction studies include both natural and anthropogenic environmental effects on anatomy, physiology, development, molecular biology, and recently a genome
 <cit> . consequently, natural fundulus populations have become a preferred model to study teleost evolutionary adaptations to a range of selective pressures. the effects of pollution on fundulus’ genetics have been studied in some populations
 <cit> ; however, little is known about functionally important variation in embryo gene expression underlying resistance mechanisms. to explore the response differences between reference and resistant populations to pollution at the genomic and molecular level, we exposed embryos of parents from king’s creek, va  and elizabeth river, va  to a defined surrogate mixture of pah pollutants, which are routinely found in the contaminated sediment extracts. by correlating multiple phenotypes to changes in gene expression patterns, we provide additional evidence for acquired resistance among embryos whose parents live at heavily contaminated sites.

we chose to study late organogenesis of fundulus development due to its high metabolic activity, observable phenotypes, and likely cumulative effect of chemical exposure on organ anatomy and physiology. hence, we compare survival rates, time-to-stage, morphology, cardiac physiology, and gene expression profiles of individual fundulus embryos from pah-reference and resistant natural populations exposed to a mixture of two model pahs at environmentally relevant concentrations
 <cit> . our study demonstrates important contrasts in responses between reference and resistant embryos to synergistic effects of this defined mixture of pollutants. altered phenotypes and significant changes in gene expression reveal evidence for acquired resistance among embryos from heavily contaminated sites. however, while the phenotypic alterations are comparable to embryo responses to polluted sediment extracts , a surprisingly few number of significant genes reflect differences in severity of synergistic effects between the two embryo populations.

RESULTS
embryo survival, hatching success, and developmental delays
during fundulus late organogenesis , survival rates were not significantly different between populations for all treatment groups , while the highest survival rate was among resistant embryos  treated with bnf  + high anf . all of the embryos that hatched survived to the final embryonic stage characterized by complete yolk consumption and free-swimming larvae.

at stage  <dig>  all of the reference embryos failed to hatch and did not survive either the lower or higher anf/bnf co-exposure . a 2-way anova  indicated significant differences in hatching success among embryo treatment groups. bonferroni’s post-test revealed significant differences between reference and resistant embryos for both bnf + low anf , and bnf + high anf  treatment groups.

although most of the embryos reached stage  <dig> within the expected time period, significant developmental delays were noted among reference embryos exposed to both low and high anf + bnf treatments . bonferroni post-test analysis of developmental stage at 144–150 hours post fertilization revealed significant differences among reference embryos and between reference and resistant embryos in both combined treatments , while embryo development in discrete treatments did not significantly differ. reference embryos were on average  <dig> stages behind  when compared to resistant embryos from the same combined treatment group .

heart rate
heart rate results at stage  <dig> mirrored developmental delay data: significantly slower heart rates  were noted among sensitive embryos in combined treatment groups. bonferroni post-test revealed statistically significant differences in reference embryos exposed to bnf + low anf  and bnf + high anf  when compared to all other treatment groups in both reference and resistant embryo populations.

embryo morphology
severe and extreme morphological abnormalities were noted among all reference embryos in combined treatment groups . these deformities included pericardial edema, hemorrhaging, cranio-facial malformations, tail shortening and bleeding, and general loss of pigment . the most severely affected reference embryos in bnf + high anf treatments were characterized by overall smaller size, loss of cranial ridges, cranium size reduction with diminished eye distance, aggregation and reduction of body pigmentation and hemorrhaging throughout the entire caudal region; these morphologies were only observed among the reference embryos in higher co-exposure treatment group. their hearts  failed to differentiate, resulting in a “tube-heart” structure, which appears as a barely-visible long tube through which transparent fluid slowly trickles . the average score for the bnf + low anf treatment group was  <dig>  and was  <dig>  for the bnf + high anf treatment group. any embryo with a score >  <dig> failed to hatch. statistical differences  were noted between reference and resistant embryos in 4/ <dig> treatments, with reference embryos being significantly more deformed at low anf , high anf , bnf + low anf , and bnf + high anf .

the relationship between heart rates and in vivo morphological deformities is presented in figure 
2c-e. combined data of reference and resistant embryos show a strong correlation between heart rate and morphology : as the deformities progress among reference embryos throughout treatments, the bradycardia becomes more pronounced, reflecting the impaired heart function among reference embryos. a similar trend is apparent among reference embryos only  showing the strong correlation  between the progression of deformities and bradycardia among reference embryos. however, this is not the case for resistant embryos , as progression of deformities does not correlate with the decrease in heart rate . moreover, the resistant embryos show a slight increase in heart rates  as deformities progress. notably, none of the exposed resistant embryos were scored higher than  <dig>  while all of the reference embryos in co-exposures with bnf and anf were scored between  <dig>  and  <dig> .

gene expression
of the  <dig>  genes analyzed for altered expression patterns, expression of  <dig> genes  is significantly different . the combined effect of population and treatment analysis reveals  <dig> significant genes . expression of  <dig> genes is significantly different due to the effect of treatment alone , while  <dig> genes are differentially expressed due to differences between reference and resistant embryo populations . we found no significant genes when a false discovery rate  correction is applied at p <  <dig> .

expression of  <dig> genes  is significantly different  due to the effects of embryo morphology among reference and resistant embryos . while gene expression appears similar among embryos scored for no deformities , mild  and moderate , the most differences in gene expression patterns are among severely deformed  and extremely deformed  embryos. notably, all of the reference embryos exposed to bnf + low anf and bnf + high anf were found to be either severely or extremely deformed, while none of the resistant embryos were found to be more than moderately deformed in any treatment.

discussion
increased mortality rates among adults and embryos, decreased fecundity, and impairment of physiological performances are likely effects of chronic exposure to pollution among populations
 <cit> . such effects may lead to a decrease in effective population size and genetic variability
 <cit> . however, individual responses vary, and while some individuals are sensitive to the pollutants, others survive and reproduce, therefore establishing resistant populations. this acquired resistance is associated with fitness costs so that resistance genes are rarely fixed in natural populations
 <cit> ; counterbalancing selection pressure decreases the frequency of resistance genes in the absence of inducer, such as a chemical pollutant.

embryos are highly sensitive to pollution and exposure to contaminated water and sediments can result in altered development and growth and can affect survival. when exposed to highly polluted sediment extracts, f. heteroclitus embryos from reference sites show significantly higher numbers of developmental abnormalities and do not survive, while most of the embryos from polluted sites are resistant and develop normally
 <cit> . what changes contribute to this resistance? adaptation to a new environment, such as a polluted one, often involves large modifications of the previous phenotype and changes in gene expression and regulation during critical developmental stages may explain these phenotypic changes. notably, altered gene regulation can affect development, resulting in different morphological or physiological characteristics
 <cit>  that are potentially critical for developing resistance.

differences in survival and development between reference and resistant embryos
our study demonstrates important differences between reference and resistant embryo responses during one distinct developmental stage  to a defined mixture of pollutants found in the sediment extracts. we exposed reference and resistant embryos to surrogate model pahs to better understand physiological, morphological, and gene expression changes underlying development in a polluted environment. by correlating multiple phenotypes to changes in gene expression patterns, we provide additional evidence for acquired resistance among embryos whose parents live at heavily contaminated sites.

combined treatments of β-naphthoflavone  and α-naphthoflavone  were lethal to the reference embryos, while the resistant embryos were largely unaffected: all of the reference embryos failed to hatch and died, while 70% of the resistant embryos reached the free-swimming larval stage . in all of the phenotypes assessed – survival, developmental delays, cardiac physiology , and embryo morphology, the reference embryos were significantly more affected than the resistant embryos: while most treatments caused very little effect on development of resistant embryos, the same exposures caused significant developmental delays, impaired cardiac function, severe morphological alterations and failure to hatch, ultimately causing the death of reference embryos.

development of reference embryos was significantly delayed among reference embryos  in the high anf exposures and both bnf-anf co-exposures, indicating embryotoxic effects of anf alone
 <cit>  and in synergy with bnf. on average, reference embryos lagged almost two days  behind resistant embryos given the same exposure. importantly, exposed resistant embryos developed within the expected time period of both resistant and reference control embryos.

effects of pollutants on morphology, cardiac anatomy, and physiology on reference and resistant embryos
prior to hatching, reference embryos became severely and/or extremely deformed , resulting in altered physiology evident by impaired cardiac performance  and failure to hatch. although the average heart rate increased slightly among co-exposed resistant embryos, the overall cardiac function did not statistically differ between reference and resistant control embryos. we noted the most profound abnormalities in cardiac morphology among reference embryos co-exposed to bnf and anf: the heart chambers of these embryos failed to differentiate and ultimately resembled elongated transparent tubes  with very limited contracting ability. we observed significant bradycardia among reference embryos co-exposed to bnf and anf when compared to control embryos of both populations and resistant embryos exposed to the same co-exposures. other deformities included pericardial edema, severe hemorrhaging, tail shortening, cranio-facial shrinkage, reduced eye distance, and gross loss of pigmentation . in a few cases, the extreme deformities among reference embryos made identifying structures difficult. in contrast, none of the resistant embryos co-exposed to bnf and anf were more than moderately deformed. most  of the resistant embryos developed fully differentiated heart chambers, capable of delivering blood throughout the embryo. abnormal morphologies among resistant embryos included slight cranio-facial alterations, loss of pigment, mild to moderate pericardial edema, and tail hemorrhaging. importantly, overall cardiac function of exposed resistant embryos was not affected and did not significantly differ from both reference and resistant control embryos.

we report a strong correlation  between the severity of morphological deformities and cardiac physiology  among reference embryos. as heart rates significantly decrease and become inefficient in delivering blood to the tissues due to bnf-anf co-exposures, reference embryos become severely and extremely deformed. their malformed hearts are unable to support development and embryogenesis ceases before hatching. such is not the case among resistant embryos, and there is no relationship between the morphology score and cardiac function: heart rates remain unaffected in all resistant embryo treatment groups, demonstrating the ability of resistant embryos to cope with the synergistic effects of bnf-anf co-exposure.

gene expression differences between reference and resistant embryos
among the differentially expressed genes in embryos from elizabeth river and king’s creek, expression of  <dig> genes differs significantly due to treatment alone , and hierarchical clustering of these genes groups most treatments of reference and resistant embryos together. expression of  <dig> genes differs significantly because of differences between reference and resistant embryo populations . although our previous comparison of five independent fundulus populations using the same arrays revealed  <dig> genes that significantly differ between king’s creek and elizabeth river embryos at stage 31
 <cit> , there is no gene overlap with this data. this lack of overlap may reflect the fact that the current comparison examined embryos treated with pahs while the previous experiment examined untreated embryos collected from parents from king’s creek and the elizabeth river. some of the changes in gene expression noted in our present study may be simply due to changes in embryo morphology due to specific chemical exposures, which do not represent other pollutants present in the complex mixtures found in heavily contaminated sites. also, the spatial and temporal variation associated with chemical exposure among natural populations in the wild may contribute to changes in gene expression not observed in our study.

expression of  <dig> genes differs significantly due to the treatment-by-population interaction . these expression patterns reveal similarities between reference embryos exposed to the higher synergy treatment and resistant embryos exposed to the lower synergy treatment. interestingly, resistant embryos treated with the highest co-exposure of bnf and anf group with reference and resistant controls and reference embryos exposed to low anf, while exposure to bnf alone does not seem to be a determining factor in the cluster analysis.

there is a striking relationship between the morphology score and differential expression of genes . as synergistic treatment concentrations increase among reference embryos, the severity of deformities observed among embryos increases, causing significant overall reduction in embryo size, bradycardia, disproportional size reduction of cranium including diminished distance between eyes, complete loss of cranial ridges, reduction of eye and body pigment, hemorrhaging along the entire shortened caudal region, cardiac edema, and complete loss of cardiac muscle integrity characterized by the absence of heart chambers and formation of a thin-walled, translucent “tube heart”. expression patterns of genes that correlate with morphology are similar among normal to moderately deformed embryos , while severely deformed embryos  show different patterns of gene expression. gene expression differences become more pronounced between extremely deformed embryos when compared to normal to moderately deformed and severely deformed embryos. importantly, only reference embryos were scored > <dig> in both lower and higher bnf-anf co-exposure treatments, providing further evidence of pah-resistance in the elizabeth river  embryo population.

several genes listed in table 
 <dig>  whose expression is correlated with observed morphological abnormalities, are known to play an important role during organogenesis. although most differences in expression are between  <dig> - <dig>  fold, relatively small changes in transcript levels may contribute to the morphological and physiological alterations observed among developing embryos. for example, cytochrome c oxidase iso-1/iso- <dig> and complement factor h-related protein  <dig> have  <dig>  fold and  <dig>  fold higher transcript levels, respectively, among severely deformed reference embryos in bnf + high anf treatment group. both genes are linked to cardiovascular deformities of libman-sacks endocarditis and antiphospholipid syndrome , marked by mitral and aortic valve lesions. such abnormalities can cause severe valvular insufficiency, infective endocarditis, stroke
 <cit>  and cerebrovascular complications
 <cit> . we noted severe morphological alterations in cardiac tissue in the form of a “tube heart”
 <cit> , with significant bradycardia among reference embryos co-exposed to bnf and anf, suggesting that differences in expression levels of these two genes among both reference and resistant embryo populations may contribute to their cardiac deformities. myosin light chain isoform  <dig>  and growth arrest and dna damage-inducible protein gadd <dig> beta gene are upregulated  in severely deformed reference embryos relative to all other treatment groups in both embryo populations . elc/rlc overexpression leads to increase in cardiomyocyte size and number resulting in large ventricular chamber volume
 <cit> . relatively higher expression of these genes may explain severe cardiac abnormalities observed in reference embryos caused by synergistic effect of bnf and anf in bnf + high anf treatment group. moreover, both knockdown and over expression of gadd <dig> beta genes cause somite defects with different consequences for marker gene expression, suggesting that regulated expression of gadd <dig> beta genes in the anterior psm is required for somite segmentation
 <cit> . overexpression  of gadd <dig> in severely deformed reference embryos may contribute to synergistic effects if bnf + high anf treatment and contribute to skeleto-muscular abnormalities linked to heart abnormalities during late embryogenesis.
fundulus heteroclitus
embryos  during late organogenesis stage due to the effect of embryo morphology

the expression pattern of genes for each morphology score group is presented in figure 
3b. while gene expression appears similar among embryos scored for no deformities , mild  and moderate , most differences in gene expression patterns are among severely deformed  and extremely deformed  embryos. notably, all of the reference embryos co-exposed to anf and bnf were either severely or extremely deformed, while none of the resistant embryos were found to be more than moderately deformed in any treatment.

several other genes whose significant changes in expression correlate to morphology are implicated in metabolism and cns development. the atp synthase subunit s gene, which is > <dig> fold overexpressed in severely deformed reference embryos relative to moderately-deformed reference embryos  is a critical enzyme in the cell’s energetic pathways, producing the majority of cellular atp and energetics of the heart which are integrally involved in the causes and phenotypes of heart failure
 <cit> . inositol polyphosphate multikinase  plays a critical role in nuclear functions including mrna export, transcriptional regulation, and chromatin remodeling. ipk-2-deficient mice die around embryonic day  <dig>  with multiple morphological defects, including abnormal folding of the neural tube
 <cit> . ipmk displays a similar overexpression pattern as elc/rlc and gadd <dig> in severely deformed reference embryos, likely contributing to observed severe morphological abnormalities among reference embryos exposed to anf + high bnf treatment.

notably, significantly lower expression of two genes among reference embryos exposed to bnf + high anf treatment may contribute to severe morphological deformities. phosphatidylinositol phosphate kinase  <dig>  beta, which is expressed in the mouse embryo brain , plays a role in the formation of cerebral ventricular and mantle zones and gray matter during normal development
 <cit> . deficiency in fumarate hydratase , a gene expressed in human fetal tissues
 <cit>  is linked to a fetal brain and severe neurologic abnormalities, poor feeding, failure to thrive, hypotonia, encephalopathy
 <cit> , severe mental retardation, unusual facial features, brain malformation, and epileptic seizures
 <cit> . we noted significant reduction in head size and complete loss of cranial ridges in severely deformed reference embryos.

due to severe morphological abnormalities oberved among reference embryos, it was often difficult to accurately stage the embryos, which likely confounded some of our gene expression analyses. significant changes in gene expression that corelate with morphology are similar among normal to moderately deformed embryos, while severely deformed embryos show different patterns of gene expression . moreover, the gene expression differences become more pronounced between extremely deformed embryos, when compared to both normal to moderately deformed and severely deformed embryos. importantly, synergistic effects of bnf and anf were only evident among severely and extremely deformed reference embryos, providing further evidence of pah-resistance in the elizabeth river  embryo population.

few genes contribute to large phenotypic changes between embryo populations
despite the striking differences in embryo morphology between reference and resistant embryos, a relatively low percentage of genes  showed statistically significant differences in transcript levels . this percentage is less than the percentage of genes significantly differentially expressed between pcb treated embryos from another resistant fundulus population and a nearby reference site. at 15 days post-fertilization,  <dig> % of genes differ with an fdr p-value of < <dig>  between embryos from new bedford harbor, which are resistant to pcbs, and embryos from a reference population treated with pcbs
 <cit> . previous results comparing untreated embryos from parents collected from polluted resistant and reference populations also found a surprisingly small number of significantly differently expressed genes . one possible explanation for this finding was that differences would only manifest in the correct environment . given the data presented here, this explanation appears not to be true . considering the large variation in gene expression reported within and among multiple reference and resistant adult f. heteroclitus populations
 <cit> , this low percentage of genes whose expression significantly differs between both treated and untreated reference and resistant embryo populations is unexpected.

this small percentage of significantly differentially expressed genes may be due to several factors. relatively small changes in gene expression not detected by our analysis may be biologically important during late organogenesis. we did not test all of the genes expressed during development, so some of the important gene expression differences were likely missed. also, some of the significant gene expression differences may be masked by large changes in gene expression that occur between stages during normal fundulus development
 <cit> . our analysis was performed on whole embryos, thus potentially masking some tissue-specific gene expression differences. critical differences in gene expression may occur at earlier or later developmental stages than the one we examined . however, a recent transcriptome comparison of pcb-exposed reference and resistant fundulus embryos at two time-points during embryogenesis  and one larval stage  revealed a stage-specific response and cumulative pollutant effect reflected by the increase of significantly expressed genes at later stages
 <cit> . arguably, more robust tissue-specific changes in gene expression occur during early development, particularly during early cns  and cardiovascular organogenesis .

finally, increasing a relatively small biological sample size per treatment  and statistical power in our microarray analysis could have revealed more statistically significant genes. previous tissue-specific studies on fundulus adults using only one more individual  from these same populations have reported up to 40% of genes that differ due to treatment 
 <cit> . however, our recently published study comparing eight resistant and twelve reference, untreated embryos during late organogenesis using the same microarray platform revealed less than 1% of significant differently expressed genes
 <cit> . although we identified significant changes in gene expression and correlated them with multiple phenotypes, other factors not considered in our study, such as post-translational modifications and changes in protein expression and enzyme activity are likely contributors to observed differences between resistant and reference embryo populations.

CONCLUSIONS
our study demonstrates important contrasts in responses between reference and resistant natural embryo populations to synergistic effects of surrogate model pahs that may be important in adaptive mechanisms mediating pah effects during fish embryo development. while the reference embryos become severely deformed and none survive anf/bnf co-exposures, the absence of moderate and severe deformities, lack of significant changes in heart rates and developmental delays, and >70% survival among resistant embryos co-exposed with bnf and anf relative to reference and resistant control embryos clearly demonstrates the resistant embryos’ ability to adapt and survive. by analyzing multiple phenotypes and linking them to gene expression patterns of reference and resistant embryos, we provide additional evidence for acquired resistance among embryos whose parents live at heavily contaminated sites: while most treatments caused very little effect on development of resistant embryos, synergistic effects of a pah-type representative ahr agonist and cyp1a inducer caused developmental delays, impaired cardiac function, morphological alterations, and mortality of reference embryos. these phenotypes mirror embryo responses observed during exposure to complex mixtures of pollutants found in elizabeth river sediment extracts, but in contrast to exposure to sediment extracts that significantly altered expression of many genes , we found a surprisingly small percentage of significantly differentially expressed genes  upon treatment with a mixture of two model pahs, α-napthoflavone and β-napthoflavone. these results suggest that relatively few genes contribute to the large phenotypic changes seen among reference and resistant populations upon exposure to pah pollutants.

