BACKGROUND
the human immunodeficiency virus type- <dig>  has been classified in  <dig> groups . the latter accounts for 99% of the infections and is divided in nine different subtypes , more than  <dig> circulating recombinant forms  and thousands of unique recombinant forms  <cit> . all approved inhibitors  currently in use were developed for the b-subtype . however, this subtype accounts only for 10% of the infections worldwide whereas non-b subtypes are prevalent in regions with the higher incidence of infections   <cit> . among those targets, the protease  is one of the most important in the antiretroviral therapy context. pr is responsible for the processing of gag and pol polyproteins, allowing virions maturation. pr inhibitors have been developed over the last  <dig> years, and their utilization has brought a considerable benefit for infected patients  <cit> .

there are around  <dig> experimentally determined available structures of this enzyme and this vast structural knowledge allows a survey of a huge number of conformations of pr complexes, with both inhibitors and substrates. structurally, pr functions as a symmetric homodimer , consisting in topologically different domains, as shown in figure 1: flaps ; ear-flaps ; cheek-turn ; cheek sheet ; eye ; nose  and the whiskers  <cit> . structural and dynamical studies of pr normally focused on its more flexible region, the flaps, since they control the entrance/stabilization of ligands in the active site  <cit> .

pr can recognize and cleave more than  <dig> different substrates that share no conserved motif. however pr is a symmetric dimer, this enzyme is able to recognize asymmetric substrates  <cit> . crystal structures of pr complexed to six different substrates showed that their shape rather than their sequence is the main guide for the substrate recognition. the six peptides present specific hydrogen bond interactions, mainly taking place between the backbone of pr and that of the substrates  <cit> .

despite all the structural knowledge accumulated through the last decades, mainly for the b-subtype, there is a clear lack of information concerning interactions between non-b proteases and their ligands. several pr polymorphisms are currently known and their effects mainly rely on reducing drug susceptibility. among these polymorphisms, m36i is widely found in non-b proteases  <cit> ; some authors suggest that it might be considered a genetic marker for hiv- <dig> group m non-b subtypes  <cit> . although this residue is far from the pr active site, mutations in this site are often related to resistance to inhibitors such as ritonavir, nelfinavir, indinavir and atazanavir  <cit> . using molecular dynamics simulations, our group has previously elucidated the molecular mechanism responsible for differences in affinity of pr from different  subtypes against ritonavir  <cit> .

a previous study investigated the role of the pr m36i polymorphism on the interaction with the inhibitor nelfinavir  <cit> . in this paper, the authors performed  <dig> ns molecular dynamics  simulations of pr and proposed that this mutation regulates the size of the pr binding site and thus affecting the ligand binding. since those simulations explore a very short timescale, they would barely explore relevant conformational changes   <cit> . therefore, there is still a need for structural studies evaluating the impact of the pr m36i polymorphism regarding its interaction with natural substrates. recently, based in structural analysis and computational predictions, alvizo et al. designed a pr variant  with altered specificity for one of the substrate-cleavage sites, showing that understanding protein-protein specific contacts one is able to engineer a more stable complex  <cit> .

herein, we performed a set of molecular dynamics simulations  to better understand the interactions between pr  and six different natural substrates. the sequences of these six substrates  correspond to the substrate cleavage sites: i. within the gag polyprotrein: matrix-capsid , capsid-p <dig> , p2-nucleocapsid  and p1-p6); and ii. within the pol polyprotein: reverse transcriptase-rnaseh  and rnaseh-integrase .

* substrate cleavage site

binding free energies calculated from the md trajectories with mm-pbsa revealed that for the majority of complexes, the m36i proteases have a decreased affinity against the substrates when compared to the wt  pr. nonetheless, there are two exceptions: the complexes with rt-rh, with equivalent affinity, and the rh-in substrate, with an increased affinity for the m36i pr. essential dynamics  and structural analyses allowed us to identify motions that could be related to binding affinities differences and evaluate the impact of this single polymorphism in the interaction of the pr with their substrates.

RESULTS
pr complexes
from the six crystallographic structures of b-subtype pr complexed with different substrate  available in the pdb , we performed comparative modeling in order to built the m36i pr complexes, using each structure independently as template . subsequently, solvation, ions insertion, energy minimization and consecutive md simulations  were conducted for the  <dig> systems . after an extensive equilibration, , we carried out production simulations with explicit solvent for  <dig> ns, which yielded a cumulative simulation time of  <dig>  μs.

global structural parameters of pr
first, we monitored the time evolution of the root mean square deviations  of the protein backbone, as a measure of the stability of the trajectories . this analysis clearly revealed a similar stable behavior for all simulated systems, with deviations ranging from  <dig>  to  <dig>  nm. this is consistent with other studies reporting md simulations of ligand bound forms of pr and also with the observation that generally ligand binding restricts the conformational space of proteins  <cit> .

next, to obtain further information of possible structural transitions occurred during the trajectories we performed a cluster analysis, as previously described  <cit> . briefly, if during a simulation numerous clusters  are visited, the system may be considered more flexible than otherwise if few clusters  are observed. herein each cluster contains conformations within an rmsd of  <dig>  nm from its cluster center structure.

as displayed in figure 3a this analysis shows that independently of the m36i polymorphism, pr stayed in the same cluster during the whole time-trajectory for all systems, except for the wt-pr - rh-in system. in the latter, as opposed to the m36i - rh-in system, which was stable, we clearly observed after  <dig> ns a shift towards a distinct pr conformation, which remained stable until the end of the  <dig> ns period. to confirm this result, we compared the pairwise distribution of the rms during md . this analysis allowed us to distinguish two different populations in the pr-wt contrasting with the narrower normal distribution for the m36i pr. we also conducted the same analysis for the other simulated systems and observed a single-population distribution, independently of the presence of the m36i substitution .

next, we compared the root mean square fluctuations  of pr backbone for each simulated system . overall, the profile and the magnitude of atomic fluctuations were similar in all simulated systems. interestingly, after inspection of the flap hinge region, which comprises residues 34- <dig>  for the rh-in complexes, we noticed higher fluctuations in the wt compared to the m36i-pr; while other regions presented a similar behavior .

based on crystallographic data, sanches et al. proposed that changing a long methionine residue to a shorter isoleucine  would lead to the adoption of a distinct conformation of the pr ear , which would be displaced toward the 76- <dig> loop  <cit> . this rearrangement would be responsible for a local stabilization of the flap hinge region , which would make this region more rigid than in the wt enzyme. however, according to our rmsf analysis, we only observed such a stabilization of the flap hinge on the mutant m36i-pr when it is bound to rh-in. for the other substrates, this effect is not observed with the m36i substitution. however, this phenomenon could require the presence of other non-b subtypes polymorphism mutations to occur.

the flap region  was more flexible for some m36i pr . this corresponded to a less stable behavior of these substrates during the simulations.

global structural parameters of the substrates
we compared the rmsf of the substrates' backbone during the trajectories with the same procedure as for the enzymes. to facilitate visualization of the results, we displayed the average substrate md structures with colors indicating the rmsf of each residue . we observed similar profiles for each substrate bound to wt or m36i pr. for all the substrates, the central region  is very stable. the terminal groups were less stable for the m36i-complexed substrates .

we also conducted a cluster analysis to examine the behavior of the backbone of each substrate throughout the md trajectories. clusters were defined here by conformations within a rmsd of  <dig>  nm of its center structure. the substrates ma-ca, p2-nc and rt-rh were very stable during both wt and mutant pr trajectories , as also observed in figure  <dig>  meanwhile, the ca-p <dig>  p1-p <dig> substrates were more stable when bound to wt pr, since we observed the occurrence of a structural transition in each m36i system: around  <dig> ns and  <dig> ns, respectively. in contrast, the rh-in substrate was more stable when bound to the mutant enzyme, which is in agreement with the rmsd and cluster distribution observed for the protein .

to investigate the substrate conformations sampled during the trajectories we compared the pairwise distribution of rms . as expected, the rms distributions of ma-ca and p2-nc substrates presented narrower normal distributions with an average value of ~ <dig>  nm, in agreement with the results of the cluster analysis. although for the rt-rh substrate, we observed broader distributions . it was possible to identify a very densely populated cluster centered at  <dig>  nm in the wt pr simulation, contrasting with the roughly three-population distribution observed in the mutant. based on this result, we suggest that this substrate is more stable when bound to the wt pr. concerning the p1-p <dig> and rh-in substrates, we observed one narrow distribution and one wider, bimodal one. for p1-p <dig> binding to the wt appeared more stable than on the mutant form. for rh-in, by contrast, binding appeared more stable with m36i-rt.

a recent publication proposed the existence of folding preferences for the pr cleavage sites affecting kinetic parameters such as km and kcat  <cit> . using a simple regression analysis on pr/substrate crystallographic structures where the dihedral angle o  - c  - c  - o  ranges from  <dig> ° to  <dig> °, they disclosed an inverse correlation between the magnitude of the dihedral angle and kcat. considering that: i. a crystallographic structure is a single conformation representative of a states average; ii. only few complexes were evaluated and; iii. even in the bound state the peptide is not frozen, we decide to investigate the relevance of the assumption made in that publication. for this reason, we measured how often the dihedral angle o - c - c - o was in the  <dig> ° to  <dig> ° range. the sampling of several conformations during the trajectories presumably allows a more robust and statistically relevant analysis. we obtained frequencies below 10% for most of the substrates, except for: rt-rh  and ma-ca when bound to the mutant enzyme . the low values obtained suggest that such correlation is not likely to be taken as a good predictive factor to relate the substrates structure and kinetics.

essential dynamics analysis
convergence and significance of the essential subspace
several studies have demonstrated that most of the time, large amplitude motions, which are frequently implied in protein functions, involve few degrees of freedom  <cit> . we applied essential dynamics  analysis to characterize the large amplitude motions present in the trajectories. first, it is necessary to access the quality of data, to avoid misinterpretations of the results. for that, we checked the cosine content of the first principal components , as previously described  <cit> . briefly, if the cosine content is close to  <dig>  the motions observed are likely to be representative of a random diffusion or drifting behavior. on the other hand, low values are related to correlated or equilibrated motions. we obtained very low values of cosine content for the first two pcs in all trajectories, thus indicative of genuine motions .

to check the statistical significance of the motions captured by the first pcs it is important to measure the convergence of the essential subspace  <cit> . we divided the trajectories in increasing time window , then divided the current window in two equally sized sub-windows and performed a principal component analysis  in each one. next, we evaluated the root mean square inner product  between two halves of the trajectory as previously described  <cit> . the rmsip values were about  <dig>  in all simulations and window, similar to those reported in other ed studies   <cit> . additionally, we measured the rmsip between sequential parts of the simulation, which revealed a stable behavior during the entire simulations, thus confirming the convergence of the essential subspace .

comparing the extent of sampling in wt and m36i forms
we inspected the pr conformational space described by the first two principal components, pc <dig> and pc <dig> to check whether the polymorphism affected the most relevant motions present on the trajectories. we stress here that we measured the overlaps between the eigenvectors obtained for the wt and mutant for each substrate complex considered  for the first two components only. in all cases, the values were extremely high ranging from  <dig>  to  <dig> . this was expected since the behaviors of the wt and m36i forms bound to the same substrate were similar . regarding the directions of the motions, we identified high mobility mainly in the cheek-turn and ear regions .

additional file  <dig> depicts the projections of the md trajectories of both forms onto the first two pcs. in this representation, each point is associated to each analyzed conformation of the enzyme backbone during the md simulations; while the different colors highlight the temporal sequence of frames. interestingly, the projection of the wt trajectories revealed a smaller extent of sampling as compared to their respective counterparts from the m36i trajectories . remarkably, the only exception was the rh-in complexes , in which the m36i form explored a smaller region than the wt one.

a free energy landscape  analysis of the wt projections revealed that the access to the lowest energy conformer at approximately  <dig> ns . this structure resembles the starting conformation, differing solely on the ear and cheek region. thereafter, the enzyme still explored a large portion of the conformational space, thus indicating an absence of conformational stabilization. by contrast, after oscillations during the first  <dig> ns, the m36i form reached a close region of the conformational space and remained there until the end of the simulation. the lowest energy conformers were accessed during the second half of the simulation .

these results are indeed interesting since they demonstrate that despite the similar stable behaviors revealed by rmsd analysis, pca projection can differentiate the wt and m36i forms in terms of the stabilization of large amplitude motions. however, it is not shown yet that the modulation of the binding affinities is due to the differences in the dynamical behavior of the wt and m36i forms.

understanding the structural determinants of binding affinity
several previous studies have investigated the binding free energies of inhibitors and substrates to pr  <cit> . in general such type of analysis is performed in short trajectories , in which conformational changes rarely occur. we conducted here mm/pbsa analyses in the last nanosecond of the  <dig> ns trajectories, allowing the substrates to freely deviate from the starting structures and reach stable conformers. table  <dig> displays the values of each contribution to the binding energy , as well as the difference between the energy obtained for the wt and mutant . it is important to state that we are interested in the relative energy values for each considered substrate, since the analysis of the absolute values would require a more precise free energy calculation method. interestingly, our results were consistent with the work of hou and collaborators in which the binding energies of wt pr and its substrates were calculated  <cit> .

athe entropic contribution " -tΔs", is not included 

bdifference from the wt binding energies 

in general, the m36i-complexes presented lower affinity than the wt for the majority of substrates, yielding negative values for ΔΔgb. they also presented higher flexibility in the terminal residues of the substrate during the simulations .

for the rt-rh substrate, m36i substitution did not change the binding affinity . by contrast, rh-in substrate, is the only one for which we clearly see an increased binding to m36i pr .

because of the sequence differences of the substrates, various reasons seem to explain changes in binding affinities. in some cases, structural modifications introduced by the mutation were sufficient to explain the results; but in most of the cases, dynamics appeared to play a decisive role. the results of each substrate will be analyzed separately for sake of clarity:

ca-p2: the mutated enzyme presented weaker interaction in comparison with wt probably due to the decreased contact surface between the p <dig>  p <dig> and p3' groups  and to the higher flexibility of these terminal groups of the substrate . consequently, electrostatic interactions were weakened leading to the difference in Δgele.

ma-ca: table  <dig> revealed stronger van der waals interactions in the wt enzyme, which probably result from the higher stability of this form as compared with the m36i pr. our ed analysis revealed a higher extent of sampling along the two principal components, which are related to motions on the ear to cheek region . considering that the strength of van der waals interactions depends on the proximity between residues, the wider motions of the mutated enzyme might be the main explanation for the changes in binding affinities.

p1-p6: similarly to the ma-ca complexes, the m36i pr presented more mobility along its two first principal components , which may be related to the decrease in van der waals contributions . in addition, these motions led to the exposure and to the decrease of the contact area of the non-polar proline at p <dig> position of the substrate , thus leading to weaker solvation energies if compared to the more stable wt.

p2-nc: in this system, structural and dynamical elements explain the differences in binding energies. again, the m36i form was more mobile along the high amplitude motions described by the first pcs. this behavior led to a considerable loss of contacts from the p <dig> to the p2'subsite, resulting in weaker van der waals interactions and further exposing the non-polar residue at p <dig> similarly as observed in the p1-p <dig> complex.

rh-in: this system was the only for which the wt presented weaker interaction between pr and the substrate . here dynamics seemed to play the central role since, as previously discussed, this was the only substrate, which was more stable when bound to the mutant . this higher stability led a stronger interaction with the residue at the p <dig> position , therefore increasing Δgele and Δgvdw absolute contribution. in addition, the mean contact area with this substrate was higher in the m36i form, which explains the increase in Δgsol/np.

rt-rh: here binding energies were practically the same. accordingly our ed analysis, the mutated enzyme was more flexible than the wt . however, we could observe that the conformational state reached at the end of the trajectory was similar for both systems.

substrate contact-area, volume and cavities calculations
ode et al suggested that the role of m36i mutation was to reduce the volume of the binding cavity in the inhibitor-bound state  <cit> . although large deviations were already observed in that study despite short dynamics , we wondered if this behavior would be present in longer trajectories as we considered here . thus, we calculated and detected the protein cavities. figure  <dig> shows the average structure and the average detected cavities in the trajectories. then, we compared the main cavity, which corresponded to the active, for the wt and the mutant pr on all the systems by calculation of their overlap . the overlap values range from  <dig>  to  <dig> , revealing very similar cavities and almost identical correspondence. we also compared the average active site of each protease  in complex with the different substrates .

the examination of the active site cavity volume along the md time revealed variations during the time course of the simulations for both wt and mutant, but the average volumes observed were equivalent . this was in contradiction with the observations made in the previous study, and did not allow us to observe any significant variation of the binding cavity volume or surface-contact area between the substrate and pr . analysis of the contact-surface for each residue of the substrate, reveal some differences, as already discussed in the previous section, but no striking trend emerged.

CONCLUSIONS
in this study we systematically analyzed structural and dynamical features related to the impact of the m36i mutation on the interaction of pr with six of its natural substrates. the most recognizable feature related to changes in binding affinities was the increased mobility of the ear to cheek region, as revealed by essential dynamics analyses and mmpb/sa calculations. they were correlated to increased mobility of the substrate peptide. by contrast, we observed that global structural parameters such as the cavity volume or the solvent accessible surface were mostly unaffected by the presence of the mutation. noticeably, however, the presence of the m36i mutation seems to influence the interactions pattern and mobility at the peptide ends.

considering the catalytic efficiency of proteases carrying mutations far from the active site, velazquez-campoy et al suggested that while binding of small molecule inhibitors was very sensitive to subtle changes of the enzyme geometry, linear peptides substrates were able to undergo conformational changes and adapt to modified cavities  <cit> . thus, the observed binding energy differences are consistent with that hypothesis. a possible explanation for the differences observed for the rh-in system, may be the gain of contacts between one or more subsites with the mutation. indeed, we noticed a decrease of contact area between the ca-p <dig>  ma-ca, p1-p <dig>  p2-nc substrates and the mutant pr, in particular, interactions between the p <dig> and p <dig> groups, which were the most impacted by the presence of the mutation. by contrast, analysis of the rh-in substrate showed that the interaction between the residue at the p <dig> and p <dig> positions and the m36i enzyme was considerably over that of the wt enzyme . interestingly, this analysis is in agreement with the results obtained from the binding energy analysis, since a higher contact is directly related to a gain in van der waals contribution.

these affinity differences could influence in the long-term co-evolution of drug resistance-related mutations from both pr and substrate cleavage sites  <cit> , since some of them impact in its dynamics. however, if one maintains the average substrate form , that it known to guide the substrate binding/recognition, the pr will still performing its functions. in the case of inhibitors, the more specific interactions could be drastically changed, resulting in drug resistance.

