BACKGROUND
in adult rodents, neuronal stem cells  divide in the subventricular zone , and then migrate tangentially as neuroblasts along the rostral migratory stream  to the main olfactory bulb . upon reaching the olfactory bulb, these cells migrate radially throughout the laminar structure of the mob eventually coming to rest in the granule cell layer  and glomerular layer   <cit> . in rodents, neurogenesis results in ongoing addition of cells to these two layers throughout life. simultaneously neurons in these same areas undergo apoptosis, suggesting that existing neurons in the bulb are replaced by the newly generated neurons  <cit> . once in the mob, approximately 50–70% of the new neurons within the gcl die by day 40– <dig> after neuronal birth  <cit> . after this period the number of new neurons decreases much more slowly, suggesting that a fraction of the initial population of new neurons integrates in a relatively permanent fashion into the functional circuitry  <cit> . this functional integration involves developing adult-like morphology  <cit>  and physiology  <cit>  and presumably connectivity.

here we describe another aspect of the maturation of neuroblasts into adult neurons: the differentiation of newly generated neurons into immunohistochemically-defined neuronal subtypes. the gcl consists primarily of granule cells, although other cell types have been described  <cit> . the gll contains an even greater diversity of cell types that are distinguished by morphological  <cit> , physiological  <cit>  and immunohistochemical  <cit>  properties. neurons in both the gll and gcl express a diversity of immunohistochemically defined biochemical subtypes such as calbindin , calretinin , n-copine , parvalbumin , and gaba  <cit> . these markers are expressed by many cells in these layers. in some cells the markers are individually expressed, and in other cells a combination of various markers may be expressed  <cit> . the functional role of different interneuron subtypes is not clear, but expression of these markers is differentially regulated by activity  <cit>  and associated differences in morphology and connectivity. moreover physiological differences in periglomerular cells have been observed  <cit>  although very limited information is available on whether there is any correlation between physiological classes and immunohistochemical markers in the olfactory bulb. the expression of many of these markers by adult-born neurons has been recently characterized indicating that several major classes of pg cells are generated from subventricular zone precursors  <cit> .

brdu labeling of dividing cells shows that the vast majority of adult-born cells become neurons and that these neurons begin to appear in the mob within a week after their last division  <cit> . between  <dig> and  <dig> days after brdu injection the number of brdu positive cells in the mob decreases substantially, and this decrease can be regulated by changes in neuronal activity  <cit> . here we examine the specification of neuronal phenotype in new neurons and report that adult-born neurons gradually develop adult distributions of immunohistochemical markers in the period between 14– <dig> days after brdu injection, suggesting that there may be a critical period during which neuronal subtype is specified.

RESULTS
brdu immunohistochemistry
using brdu as a marker for adult generated neurons, we first examined the final destination of the migrating new neurons within the olfactory bulb at  <dig> days after brdu injection. brdu positive nuclei had a circular morphology, not elongated as seen for migrating cells. as reported previously  <cit> , brdu positive cells were seen in both gll and gcl layers  with the majority of positive labeling occurring in the gcl. within the gll a smaller number of brdu positive cells were observed whereas little or no brdu staining was observed in the mitral cell layer .

cb, cr, gaba, nc, and th immunohistochemistry
we next stained olfactory bulb sections with antibodies against a panel of marker proteins that have previously been shown to have unique expression patterns within the gll and gcl of the mob. olfactory bulb sections  from mice  sacrificed  <dig> days after final brdu injection were examined to determine the expression patterns of calbindin , calretinin , gaba, n-copine , and tyrosine hydroxylase  . the labeling we observed for these markers was in agreement with previous studies  <cit> : cb labeling was perisomatic and primarily observed in the gll region with few gcl and mcl positive cells . cr labeling was perisomatic and seen in gll and mostly in the superficial gcl . dense gaba labeling was cytoplasmic and seen throughout the gll and gcl . th labeling was perisomatic and punctate in dendrites, and observed principally in the gll with very few gcl positive cells . for this reason, in subsequent experiments, counting of th positive cells in the gcl was not performed. nc labeling was cytoplasmic with some labeling of proximal dendrites, and occurred primarily in the gcl with less intense and sparse labeling in the gll .

new neurons express markers of several different neuronal subtypes
the expression patterns of each of the subtype markers are distinctive while new neurons observed  <dig> days after brdu injection reside fairly uniformly throughout the gll and gcl. thus, we tested whether the new neurons may represent a variety of immunohistochemically-defined neuronal subtypes or whether a few subtypes are selectively replaced by new neurons. to assess this quantitatively, we determined the fraction of brdu-positive cells that co-expressed each of the immunohistochemical markers described above. adult mice  were injected with brdu and then perfused  <dig> days after the final brdu injection. sections were stained for brdu and one other marker . we identified brdu positive cells in the gll and then determined the number and percentage of these cells that were also positive for cr , cb , th , gaba , and nc . the ssame analysis was performed on the brdu positive neurons in the gcl , except that, as stated above, th-positive cells were not analyzed. the numbers and percentages of gcl neurons expressing the different markers are as follows: cr , cb , gaba , and nc .

these data indicate that the new neurons in both the gll and gcl express several of the major immunohistochemical markers previously found in the cells of these layers. we next wanted to compare the fraction of brdu positive cells expressing these markers to the fraction of all neurons in these layers expressing these markers. we evaluated two neuron-specific markers for this purpose.

neun does not label all neurons in the gll
neun is a marker of adult neurons that has been used previously to identify brdu positive cells as neurons   <cit> . however, certain cell types, notably cerebellar purkinje cells and olfactory bulb mitral cells do not consistently stain for neun  <cit> . in initial studies, we observed that relatively few gll cells seemed to express neun, consistent with a recent report  <cit> . thus we compared the staining of neun and another potentially neuron-specific marker, the fluorescent nissl stain neuro trace . nt and neun both showed the same robust labeling in the gcl, but in the gll many cells that were labeled by nt were not stained for neun, indicating that neun does not label all pg neurons . of the cells stained by nt, greater than 95% in the gcl and only 15% in the gll also express neun. in contrast, all neun positive cells express nt. based on these observations we further tested nt as a candidate label for the total population of neurons within the gcl and gll of the mob. sections were stained with nt and for the glial marker s-100b to determine how specific nt staining was for neurons vs glia. we found that only about 2%  of nt labeled cells in the glomerular layer were also positive for s-100b. this is comparable to the fraction of neun positive cells that were identified as being s-100b positive in this same layer in tissue from the same animals . similar fractional overlap was found for the granule cell layer .

nt stains new and old neurons
we next analyzed the population of cells expressing nt to determine whether this represented a population of mature neurons or whether nt stained all neurons regardless of their age. adult mice   were injected with brdu to label dividing cells and then sacrificed  <dig> hours after the final brdu injection, in order to examine recently divided cells early in migration . sections were stained for brdu and nt and we examined neurons labeled with anti-brdu to determine whether these cells also were stained by nt at this early time point. we observed most brdu-positive cells in the area of the svz  and the proximal rms  . in these experiments nearly all  of the cells in both the svz and rms that were brdu positive were also stained by nt. these results indicate that nt labels neurons very early in their development; therefore all neurons within the adult mob are likely to be labeled by nt. in addition, this supports previous observations that new neurons begin their differentiation early in their migration even as early as within the svz and proximal rms  <cit> .

the neuronal subtypes expressed by new neurons reflect those expressed by existing mob neurons
having shown that new neurons express different immunohistochemical markers, we next asked how the rates at which new neurons express these markers compare to those of the total neuronal population in the gll and gcl of the mob. to examine this question, we determined the fraction of new neurons  that also expressed the immunohistochemical markers described above and also the fraction of all neurons  that expressed these same markers. tissue from adult mice  sacrificed  <dig> days after brdu injection was labeled with nt and each of the subtype markers . in the gll, the percentages of nt positive neurons that co-labeled with one of the subtypes are nc , cr , gaba , th , and cb  . in the gcl, the percentages of nt positive neurons co-labeled with one of the subtypes are nc , cr , gaba , and cb  . when compared with the percentage of brdu cells co-expressing each subtype, the only significant difference  was observed in the gll for gaba: a greater fraction of  <dig> day old neurons  expressed gaba than did nt positive neurons . these results indicate that the subtypes of the new neurons at  <dig> days post brdu injection are similar to that of existing neurons within the gcl and gll, with the exception that more new neurons in the gll also express gaba.

new neurons show increased expression of subtype-specific markers over the period 14– <dig> days after their birth
having examined the neuronal subtypes expressed by the new neurons after their migration/differentiation was presumed to be complete we next wanted to compare these expression rates with those of earlier time points in the differentiation process. adult mice  were injected with brdu and groups of mice  were sacrificed at  <dig>   <dig>   <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> days after the final brdu injection. sections were labeled with brdu and one of the biochemical subtype markers . the percentage of brdu cells co-labeled with each subtype was determined in the gcl and gll for each time point. the expression of all these immunohistochemical markers by the new neurons in the gcl and gll increased almost monotonically over the period 14– <dig> days after brdu injection, except for cb in the granule cell layer which showed no significant change . the time course of expression increase was appeared slightly delayed in the gll, relative to the gcl, but this effect did not reach significance . staining of new neurons for gaba increased between  <dig> and  <dig> days post brdu injection  but then decreased in the gcl between days  <dig> and  <dig> . interestingly this decrease brings the fraction of new neurons staining as gaba positive closer to the fraction of all neurons that stain for gaba. these results show that the new neurons differentiate into their subtypes over the period from 14– <dig> days post brdu with separate time courses within the gll and gcl.

discussion
here we have shown that adult-born neurons in the olfactory bulb differentiate into all of the major immunohistochemically-defined subtypes of granule cell layer and glomerular layer neurons examined, and the fractions of adult-born neurons differentiating into each of these immunohistochemically-defined biochemical subtypes is very similar to the fractions of neurons in the total population of each subtype. additionally we have shown how the expression of these markers by new neurons changes over the period from the arrival of new neurons from the rms to their incorporation into the mob circuitry .

previously, brdu injections into neonatal rats have shown that the fraction of brdu-positive neurons  <dig> days post brdu injection expressing gaba in the gcl  and gll , and expressing th in the gll  are similar to what we find at  <dig> days post injection: for gaba  <dig> ± 6% in gcl and  <dig> ± 2% in gll, and for th  <dig> ± 2% in gll  <cit> . moreover, two recent studies on the diversity of neuronal types in the mouse olfactory bulb have concluded that the fractions of neurons in the gcl and gll that express cb, cr and th are very similar to what we report here as being double labeled with nt  <cit> . one of these studies also concluded, based on staining for gad <dig> and the use of gad65-gfp mice that about 53% of gll neurons were gabaergic and that nearly 100% of gcl neurons were gabaergic. our data show that about 60% of gcl neurons are immunopositive for gaba. this difference may indicate that our gaba immunostaining underestimates the fraction of gabaergic neurons or that there is diversity in the amount of gaba contained in granule cells. similarly, our data are consistent with and complementary to another recent paper by whitman and greer  <cit>  which concluded that the fates assumed by adult-born virally-labeled pg neurons between  <dig> and  <dig> days post injection roughly matches the fates of the existing population of mostly mature neurons. in addition to the subtype markers we chose, this study examines the parvalbumin  expressing subtype. none of these current studies examine the nc expressing subtype. however, one of the few papers on nc  <cit>  indicates that its expression may be regulated by synaptic strength. thus the increase in nc expression in adult-born neurons may reflect the degree to which neurons are ir integrated into the olfactory bulb circuitry rather than being a marker for a truly different subtype of neurons.

to date, clear functional roles for cells expressing these different markers have not been defined. expression of these markers may in some cases be correlated with anatomical or physiological features of these cells, and thus they may be good markers of cell "fate". in other cases, expression of these markers may be indicators of neuronal activity or other transient neuronal features. th-positive neurons are an interesting example of these two interpretations of these staining results. th-positive neurons are believed to arise from a specialized precursor population, and yet th expression levels are also activity-dependent  <cit> . since our animals were housed under very similar conditions, it is most likely that the major factor in regulating the expression of these markers are the normal processes of cellular development.

these results suggest that the differentiation of olfactory bulb interneurons into subtypes is regulated in a way that is uniform across postnatal development. this conclusion is somewhat at odds with data in which cells harvested from embryonic, neonatal or adult mice were transplanted into the svz of neonatal and adult recipients  <cit> . this study concluded that different fractions of transplanted neurons integrated into the glomerular layer, depending on the age of the cell donor and cell recipient animals. however, consistent with our data, these authors concluded that the fractions of pg cells expressing a set of immunohistochemical markers did not systematically vary for different ages of donor or recipient animals. these data suggest two possibilities as to how biochemical subtype specification is regulated in newly generated neurons. newly generated neurons may be genetically specified very early on to express different biochemical markers. this idea is supported by the observations that olfactory bulb neurons may be generated from multiple pools of neuronal precursors, one in the svz and a second in the rms which may preferentially generate neurons expressing different markers  <cit> . in another study, genes expressed under the nestin promoter were localized to gll and not gcl neurons, supporting the idea that there may be different subpopulations of neuronal precursors. this idea that multiple precursor pools exist also was recently supported by a very elegant study in which progeny of specific populations of stem cells were labeled and shown to generate specific subtypes of adult-born neurons  <cit> . in this case, neurons from different precursor pools containing unique genetic factors may differentiate into diverse subpopulations of olfactory bulb neurons, and preferentially end their migration in different layers.

conversely, a second explanation is that factors present in the local environment of the olfactory bulb regulate subtype specification. in this case, the reason the population of new neurons resembles the population of mature neurons is because both have been subject to the same cues. interestingly, the precursor pool for many olfactory bulb neurons born neonatally is different from the pool for adult-born neurons  <cit> , and in rats many of these early proliferating cells survive in the granule cell layer into adulthood. in this way, the distribution of biochemical subtypes of adult-born neurons and that of the existing population would remain similar despite these cells having completely different origins. in addition, the fact that the expression of subtype-specific markers occurs mostly after neurons have arrived in the bulb and migrated to the appropriate layer is consistent with the idea that local regulation might occur. this regulation could take place either at the time of differentiation into various neuronal subtypes via selective survival of certain neuronal subtypes after final differentiation, or via a switch in expression of particular markers. experiments to determine which of these mechanisms accounts for the regulation of neuronal subtype specification will be critical to understanding the functional role of adult neurogenesis.

CONCLUSIONS
adult-born neurons in the olfactory bulb differentiate into all of the major subtypes of interneurons examined in this study. this differentiation occurs over a time period from 40– <dig> days, at the end of which the distribution of subtypes in the population of new born neurons is very similar to the distribution in the population of existing neurons.

