BACKGROUND
induced and localized tissue injury is a powerful tool widely used to study biological processes, such as regeneration and inflammation. a wide range of tissue injury approaches have been employed both in regeneration and inflammation studies. injury techniques used previously include surgical methods, such as transection and crush injury , laser-based wounding
 <cit> , two photon microscopy
 <cit> , and nanoknives for microscale axon cutting
 <cit> . despite the high accuracy of laser and two photon-based wounding methods, these techniques have drawbacks such as requiring sophisticated equipment, and being labor-intensive and time-consuming. other tissue injury approaches involve injection of toxins , tissue specific expression of toxins
 <cit> , and tissue specific expression of an enzyme, which converts a nontoxic prodrug into a cytotoxic agent
 <cit> . the main disadvantage of genetic approaches and other high precision techniques is the fact that in contexts like inflammation or even regeneration, such experimental models seem unrealistic considering recent evidence obtained on single axon axotomy
 <cit> .

in contrast, electrical injury provides a simple and inexpensive method for tissue injury, which also allows modulating the extent of damage produced by modifying current intensity and number of pulses. thus, in contrast to surgery based methodologies, the extent of damage produced by electrical injury and its reproducibility across different experiments does not rely entirely on the skill of researcher, but also on the selected parameters for the electrical pulses.

electrical damaging of tissues involves thermal, electroporation, and electrochemical interactions
 <cit> . once an electrical pulse is applied to a tissue, all its components are affected, however cell membranes appear to be the most vulnerable structure. intense electric fields drive reorganization of lipids, which results in membrane permeabilization, a process called electroporation. depending on many physical variables, electroporation can be transient or permanent
 <cit> . while electroporation leads to the formation of transient pores in the cell membrane, joule heating destabilizes the entire lipid bilayer
 <cit> . since cell membranes are composed of a lipidic bilayer held together by hydration forces, even small increments in cell membrane temperature result in complete loss of lipid bilayer integrity
 <cit> . in addition, strong electrical fields alter the conformation of membrane proteins, as they undergo conformational changes in order to orientate their dipole moment in the direction of the field
 <cit> . this effect, called electroconformational denaturation, is especially strong in voltage gated ion channels
 <cit> . since the force of an electric field drops off quadratically with distance from the focal point, electrical injury is a suitable approach circumscribing the damage to a small area of tissue
 <cit> .

electrical injury has been widely used to induce damage in the adult nervous system
 <cit> . however, despite the advantages offered by electrical injury to investigate the molecular and cellular basis of regeneration and inflammation in vivo, these studies are hampered in most cases by the opacity of the tissue. thus, most of our current knowledge of these events comes from in vitro assays and analysis of fixed tissues. the optical transparency of zebrafish during embryonic and larval stages, and the availability of transgenic lines labeling different cell types, make it possible to study the behavior of almost any cell type during regeneration and inflammation in vivo. in this animal model, it was discovered that tissue injury induces the generation of a tissue-scale gradient of hydrogen peroxide that is required for leukocyte recruitment to wounds
 <cit> . furthermore, recent work in zebrafish shows that hydrogen peroxide generated upon tissue injury promotes axon growth after skin damage
 <cit> . furthermore, zebrafish cells and tissues regenerate robustly, a feature that allows the study of regeneration and inflammation processes in the living animal.

our laboratory has been studying cell death, regeneration and inflammation in neuromasts of the posterior lateral line  of zebrafish larvae. the zebrafish lateral line is composed of sensory organs called neuromasts, which are distributed on the body surface. neuromasts consist of a core of mechanosensory hair cells surrounded by support cells. hair cells of neuromasts are innervated by neurons that form the pll nerve which are localized in a cranial ganglion just posterior to the ear
 <cit> . one of our goals involves the study of regeneration in a single neuromast and to examine the relationship between mechanosensory cell regeneration and innervation by the pll nerve. since previous approaches involved the use of heavy metals
 <cit>  or aminoglycosides
 <cit>  that cause damage by toxicity to cells, all lateral line neuromasts are damaged, hampering the study of localized damage and regeneration in a single isolated organ.

in the present work, we developed an electrical based method for neurectomy and tissue ablation, which allowed us to precisely sever nerves and to ablate small areas of tissue in a simple and reproducible way in both larvae and adult fish. the protocol can be adapted to study inflammation induced by damage, degeneration of axons and cells, and their regeneration after damage. we foresee that it will also be of utility in other model organisms where it is of interest to damage a small area of tissue in order to observe the cellular dynamics that accompany the wounding and/or regenerative process.

RESULTS
a simple methodology for electrical tissue injury
our aim was to develop a simple protocol for inducing localized tissue damage for the study of inflammation and regeneration of different cell types in zebrafish. we have taken advantage of the numerous transgenic lines available that label organs and tissues with fluorescent proteins, and that these can be readily visualized in the live zebrafish due to the optical transparency of the embryos and larvae.

in order to induce tissue damage, we modified procedures for delivering precise current pulses developed previously for iontophoresis of neural transport tracers
 <cit> . in our experimental setup, a precision current source  was configured to deliver electrical pulses of the desired amperage, and they were applied to zebrafish larvae with a microelecrode held by a micromanipulator . during the process, zebrafish are mounted  and visualised under a fluorescence microscope to be able to see the cells or tissues of interest by virtue of their fluorescent protein expression . this allows placing the microelectrode tip at the desired location. since the surface of the microelectrode is completely insulated with exception of the tip, it is possible to apply a pulse of current at a single point. the diameter of the microelectrode is less than 1 μm at the tip, which, together with the positioning offered by the micromanipulator, minimizes the tissue damage derived from placement of the microelectrode.

zebrafish larvae are mounted in a drop of low melting point agarose dissolved in e <dig> medium  in an acrylic plate  that has a central depression. the microelectrode enters in the agarose through one side  while the ground wire is immersed in the agarose on the opposite side  to generate an electrical field through the larva. similarly, adult zebrafish  are positioned in an acrylic plate with a larger depression , without the need of agarose, and a small amount of e <dig> is added to allow current conduction. the microelectrode is positioned over the target tissue  and the ground wire is immersed in the e <dig> medium .

to analyse the effect of pulse amperage on cell death in electroablated tissue we applied pulses of different amperages in the trunk of zebrafish larvae and performed acridine orange staining. as shown in figure 
1d-f, the application of pulses ranging from 5 μa to 25 μa produced cell damage in skin cells and progressive destruction of deeper tissues. quantification of acridine orange staining reveals that higher amperages induced death in a larger number of cells compared with that induced by electroablation at lower amperages . thus, pulse amperage can be used to calibrate the extent of damage inflicted to tissues by electroablation.

electroablation as a tool for neurectomy in zebrafish
to test electroablation as a suitable methodology for neurectomy, we used the tgbac transgenic fish that express the enhanced green fluorescent protein  in the posterior lateral line  nerves
 <cit> . the tip of the microelectrode was brought into contact with an anesthetized larva embedded in low melting point agarose and then a current pulse of 17 μa was applied for  <dig>  seconds. electrical injury based neurectomy of the pll nerve had no effect on survival of larvae after seven days . pulses of lower amperage  were unable to completely sever the pll axons, while higher amperages  induced extensive tissue damage. the pulse duration was also important, as 2 second-long pulses elicited aberrant trajectories in regenerated nerves . for this reason, proper calibration of the experimental protocol is recommended in order to determine the lowest amperage and pulse times necessary to achieve complete neurectomy in all larvae while preserving the integrity of surrounding tissues.

neurectomy by electroablation completely severs all axons of the pll nerve leaving a gap of 85 ± 5 μm  at the site of the lesion . to examine the behavior of pll nerve axons after neurectomy, we captured time-lapse images of the trunk of tgbac fish five hours after pll nerve electroablation . the detached  part of the pll nerve begins to disintegrate from  <dig> to 11 hours post injury, hpi , while the proximal part of the electroablated nerve retracts towards the ganglion in a process similar to acute axonal degeneration. time-lapse imaging of axotomized larvae at later times  shows growth of the pll nerve through the site of injury and further caudally once the remaining fragments are completely cleared. note that degeneration of the distal part of the pll nerve is still ongoing when the regenerating nerve crosses the site of axotomy. regeneration of the pll nerve is completed by approximately  <dig> hpi. interestingly, the dynamics of regeneration of an neurectomized pll nerve by using electroablation are similar to those reported previously for two-photon axotomy
 <cit> .

electroablation applied to pll neuromast injury
our laboratory is interested in understanding the mechanisms involved in neuromast regeneration
 <cit> . previous studies have shown that mechanosensory hair cells in neuromasts are able to regenerate, while tools used to damage neuromast hair cells have been based on exposure to heavy metals
 <cit>  or aminoglicosides
 <cit> . these approaches have proven to be useful for regeneration studies but they have the drawback that they involve widespread exposure of other larval tissues to the toxicants. unlike chemical based approaches, electroablation allows the induction of a localized damage to a neuromast, making it feasible to study single neuromast regeneration.

as a proof of principle for localized single neuromast ablation, we applied two 8 μa pulses for 2 seconds each in the l <dig> pll neuromast of tg transgenic larvae, in which pll neuromasts and interneuromastic cells express the red fluorescence protein
 <cit> . as figure 
3a shows, intact neuromasts have a rosette-like structure  and are connected to each other by interneuromastic cells . figure 
3b shows the trunk of the same larva shown in figure 
3a at  <dig> hpi. complete disappearance of the l <dig> neuromast is observed  while adjacent neuromasts, l <dig> and l <dig>  as well as most of the surrounding interneuromastic cells, remain intact. neuromast electroablation leaves a  <dig>  ±  <dig>  μm  gap among interneuromastic cells.

to further analyze the degree of damage to the surrounding tissues at the injury site, we used a contrast dye  in tg transgenic larvae
 <cit>  that express egfp in all cell types of the lateral line and epithelial cells of the skin . optical sections of the electroablated area , compared to control fish , show that electroablation generates tissue disruption that can be detected between the epidermis and underlying cells up to 28 μm deep, including some muscle cells. in spite of the damage inflicted by electroablation to cells beyond the lateral line cells, we observed regeneration of the ablated neuromasts . while, by  <dig> hpi, none of the electroablated larvae exhibit regeneration of damaged neuromasts, by  <dig> hpi these values increase to  <dig>  ±  <dig> %  and by  <dig> hpi to  <dig>  ±  <dig> % . these results demonstrate that electroablation can be used to inflict localized damage to sensory organs and to study their regeneration.

tissue electroablation as a method to induce inflammation
since it is well described that tissue injury induces inflammation
 <cit> , we aimed to apply electroablation as a suitable method to induce leukocyte recruitment to focally damaged tissues. we used the neurectomy and tissue electroablation protocols described above but now using transgenic lines in which immune cells express fluorescent proteins. thus, we could now visualize the behavior of leukocytes during inflammation and resolution of inflammation in these contexts. moreover, we aimed to quantify the resulting inflammation, as electroablation could be used for genetic or drug screens that use inflammation as a readout. our results  indicated that direct quantification of the number of leukocytes recruited to the site of nerve and neuromast electroablation were not feasible due to the great number of leukocytes clustering at the injury site. thus, the degree of inflammation was instead measured as the average intensity of fluorescence of immune cells in a circular area of 50 μm radius around the injury site.

to examine the inflammatory response induced by neurectomy of the pll nerve, we used a tg compound transgenic line, labeling the pll nerve in green
 <cit>  and myeloid leukocytes  in red fluorescence
 <cit> , respectively. in these fish, we observed that pll nerve neurectomy induces recruitment of leukocytes to the site of electroablation, forming a cell cluster at the electroablation site within the first  <dig> hpi . at  <dig> hpi, the number of leukocytes recruited to the site of neurectomy decreases as inflammation resolution proceeds . the number of localized leukocytes further decreases as degeneration of the neurectomized nerve proceeds , and is still decreasing by  <dig> hpi, when the regenerating nerve has reached the third neuromast of the pll  . to quantify the degree of inflammation elicited by neurectomy, we acquired images and measured mean red fluorescence intensity in a circular area centered at the electroablation site . as is shown in figure 
5g, myeloid leukocytes accumulate at the site of neurectomy during the first 3 hours and then their number decreases for the next 9 hours as inflammation resolution takes place. concomitant with the infiltration of neutrophils into the site of neurectomy, macrophages are also recruited to the site of injury during the first 2 hours after damage . compound transgenic fish, tg, which harbor macrophages that express gfp
 <cit>  and a pll nerve labeled with red fluorescent protein, were subjected to pll neurectomy by application of a 17 μa pulse for  <dig>  seconds. a time series of macrophage infiltration dynamics into the area surrounding the electroablation site shows accumulation of a large number of macrophages as a result of the induced damage.

similarly, it is also possible to examine the inflammatory response induced by the electroablation of a pll neuromast. we used tg compound transgenic fish labeling pll neuromasts in red
 <cit>  and neutrophils in green fluorescence
 <cit>  to study neutrophil inflammation. in these fish, we observed that pll neuromast electroablation induces potent recruitment of neutrophils to the site of electroablation . recruited neutrophils form a cell cluster at the site of electroablation by 2 hours after the injury . seven hours after neuromast electroablation, the number of leukocytes recruited to the site of damage has decreased, suggesting that resolution of neutrophil-mediated inflammation has taken place . in vivo time lapse imaging of an electroablated larva , shows how neutrophils migrate interstitially, mostly from the caudal hematopoietic tissue , to the damaged neuromast. there are also neutrophils migrating from the dorsal ridge to the site of electroablation. interestingly, those neutrophils in the cht that are close to the damaged neuromast, exhibit directional migration to the wound, while those neutrophils which are farther away from the ablation site show low or no motility at all. accordingly, quantification of neutrophil-mediated inflammation  shows a rapid increment in the number of recruited neutrophils during the first 2 hours after neuromast electroablation, and a decrease to values similar to those of control larvae over the next 5 hours.

electroablation applied to other tissues
we further aimed at applying our electrically based tissue injury method to other tissues and also in adult fish. our results with pll nerve neurectomy led us first to test electroablation in the central nervous system. we developed a spinal cord injury protocol which allowed us to completely sever the spinal cord in zebrafish larvae. at  <dig> hpf, tgbac transgenic fish, which express egfp in spinal cord neurons and axons, were anesthetized and mounted in agarose dissolved in e <dig>  and a 25 μa pulse of 1 second was applied in their spinal cord. an intact larva before electroablation is shown in figure 
7a. figure 
7b shows the same larva after spinal cord electroablation. this protocol eliminates nervous tissue leaving a gap  of  <dig>  ±  <dig>  μm  and rendering larvae paralyzed . the same larva at  <dig> dpi is shown in figure 
7c; it exhibits robust regeneration as new fibers have crossed the ablation site and the larvae show recovery of mobility .

next, we used electroablation to induce superficial tissue injury in adult fish. the application of electroablation in adults involved the use of acrylic plates larger than those used with larvae . adult transgenic fish were anesthetized and positioned in acrylic plates, and a 25 μa pulse of 2 seconds was applied on their caudal fin. as done before in larvae, we wished to determine if localized tissue damage inflicted by electroablation in caudal fins of adult fish elicited neutrophil recruitment to the site of injury. adult tg transgenic fish, in which neutrophils are labeled in green, were subjected to electroablation in the caudal fin . before tissue injury, neutrophils are scattered in the caudal fin . local tissue injury was applied  and 2 hours later, a cluster of neutrophils has formed at the lesion site . in order to quantify neutrophil recruitment, we acquired images of electroablated caudal fins in the same transgenic fish immediately after electroablation and two hours later. quantification of mean fluorescence intensity in a circular area with a 100 μm radius surrounding the damage point shows a significant increase  in electroablated vs control fish .

likewise, we induced tissue damage using two transgenic lines that label other tissues in the caudal fin of adult fish. figure 
7g shows the caudal fin of a tg transgenic fish, in which blood vessels are labeled in green
 <cit> . the electrode was placed precisely on a vessel to sever it . the result shows that electroablation allows specific damage to a single blood vessel , leaving a gap of  <dig>  ±  <dig>  μm  while adjacent vessels remain intact. similarly, electroablation allowed neuromast ablation in the caudal fin of adult fish . the caudal fins of adult sqet <dig> transgenic fish harbor green-labeled neuromasts
 <cit> , which are distributed regularly in several lines along the fin . in this case, electroablation allowed specific damaging of two adjacent neuromasts . the microelectrode was positioned on the neuromasts  and a 25 μa pulse of 2 seconds was applied, destroying both neuromasts  with no observable alterations in adjacent neuromasts. these experiments illustrate how transgenic lines and electroablation can be easily combined to induce local damage in a tissue of interest, allowing the study of regeneration and inflammation in adult fish.

discussion
we describe an electrical injury method, electroablation, which will contribute to regeneration and inflammation research by providing a simple and versatile method for neurectomy, tissue ablation and inflammation induction. the transparency of zebrafish larvae and availability of fluorescent tags in specific tissues in transgenic fish, combined with the advantages of an electrical injury method , will now facilitate in vivo analysis of regeneration and inflammation. moreover, electroablation can also be applied to adult fish, making it possible to carry out regeneration and inflammation studies in this context.

while other methodologies allow single cell ablation with high precision or even to sever a single axon
 <cit> , our approach allows localized tissue damaged without cell type specificity. we think this can be an advantage rather than a limitation, since nerve and tissue injury generally involve non-specific damage to several cell types. therefore, we propose electroablation as a relevant model for inducing tissue injury in a way that reflects all of the non-specific tissue damage related events. this aspect is critical for regeneration studies, since it has been reported that tissue regeneration depends on hydrogen peroxide production
 <cit> , which is induced by tissue damage but does not occur in response to single cell ablation
 <cit> .

our laboratory is particularly interested in the regeneration of both the pll nerve and neuromasts. we believe that electroablation will be of value for the study of the molecular mechanisms and the roles of different cell types involved in regeneration in both models. in spite of the high resistence of nerves and their surrounding tissues, we show successful pll nerve neurectomy by electroablation, as a cheap and simple alternative to more sophisticated approaches, such as two-photon axotomy
 <cit> . similarly to previous studies performed by two-photon axotomy on the pll nerve
 <cit>  we observed wallerian degeneration of the detached axons after electroablation and, later, pll nerve regeneration. in addition to pll nerve regeneration studies, this methodology will allow the study of the mechanisms involved in hair cell re-innervation, as well as the role of inervation on hair cell regeneration in this organ system.

using electroablation we show, for the first time, the complete ablation and regeneration of a single neuromast. since electroablation allows single neuromast ablation, we foresee that this method will make it possible to study the mechanisms involved in single neuromast regeneration as well as the role of different cell types, such as interneuromastic cells, schwann cells, neutrophils and macrophages in this process.

furthermore, we show that electroablation can be adapted to be used in adult fish, allowing the study of regeneration and inflammation in adult animals. this advantage could be used to investigate the effects of chronic conditions, such as exposure to toxic compounds, on regeneration and inflammation, for example.

other potential applications of electroablation
in addition to peripheral neurectomy, neuromast ablation, spinal cord injury, inflammation induction and tissue damage in adult fin tissue, we foresee additional applications using this methodology. first, electroablation can be modified for use in regeneration studies as a general strategy for ablation of different tissues. tissues and organs where electroablation should be feasible include the liver, olfactory rosettes, blood vessels, muscles, eyes, brain, and ganglia. furthermore, electroablation could be used as a reproducible method for injury to almost any superficial tissue with the aid of the appropriate transgenic fish labeling the tissue of interest. our method should be of use even in deep tissues with the aid of simple surgery protocols, making it possible to inflict damage in internal organs in adult fish.

second, since electroablation allows localized tissue damage and modulation of the degree of damage, this approach can be used for inflammation studies. different methods have been used to induce inflammation in zebrafish, which include techniques involving physical methods, such as manual tail transection
 <cit>  and laser induced wounds
 <cit> , or a genetically induced chronic inflammatory condition
 <cit> . our approach takes advantage of small microelectrodes and electrical pulses to induce a localized tissue injury that induces immune cell recruitment. thus, the main advantages of this method for inflammation studies are its robustness and versatility. since our methodology relies on electrical pulses, it allows different degrees of tissue damage, which can be achieved by means of controlling current intensity, and the number and duration of the pulses applied. this advantage could be used to investigate possible relationships between the extent of tissue damage and the inflammatory response, and furthermore, to study the mechanisms of resolution of inflammation involved in each case.

furthermore, this approach allows repeated localized tissue damage, a useful approach for the study of the dynamics of immune cells. since this method can be easily combined with in vivo time lapse imaging of immune cells  and with cell tracking tools, leukocyte navigation could be studied in an inflammatory context in vivo, knowing exactly where the inflammatory signals will be produced. thus, questions regarding signal integration, receptor desensitization and immune cell fate after successive inflammatory stimuli, aspects that remain unknown, could be addressed with the aid of this methodology.

finally, electroablation is a powerful tool for neuroinflammation studies, as it allows nervous system injury or neurectomy as well as inflammation induction. the aforementioned advantages of this approach could be used to investigate the molecular mechanisms of immune system involvement in axon or neural regeneration.

CONCLUSIONS
in conclusion, electroablation is a versatile tool that will facilitate the study of regeneration and inflammation in a variety of tissues in larvae and adult fish, as well as providing a simple model for neurectomy and new tools to investigate regeneration, dynamic aspects of leukocyte recruitment to wounds, and immune system involvement in regeneration.

