BACKGROUND
currently some of the best methods for detecting relationships between protein sequences below the so-called twilight zone of sequence similarity are offered by iterative search algorithms such as psi-blast  <cit>  which, in effect, compare sequences to a profile. more recently profile-profile matching protocols  <cit>  have been shown to offer considerable benefits over sequence-profile matching.

here, we examine how the performance of remote homolog detection by profile-profile methods varies between particular superfamilies. since superfamilies are believed to constitute sets of remote homologs, detection of same-superfamily relationships is an important task for bioinformatics, and with the increasing number of structures becoming available, improvement in this area will help build a complete structural map of sequence space. in this paper, we use a set of superfamilies that are very sequence diverse to benchmark profile-profile methods. by sequence diverse, we mean that the superfamily has many domains that show no detectable sequence similarity to each other; this lack of detectable sequence similarity means this set is a difficult benchmark for remote homolog detection methods.

previous work has shown that the performance of profile-profile methods is chiefly determined by the width and diversity of the profiles. by profile width, we mean the number of sequences in the profile, defined in contrast to profile length and by diversity we mean the degree of sequence variation within positions in the profile. in particular, panchenko suggested that there may be an optimum level of profile diversity  <cit> , whilst grishin suggested that the inclusion of as many related sequences as possible gives maximum performance  <cit> .

we examine the performance of profile-profile matching with regard to specific superfamilies with both the full profiles generated from a psi-blast search, and with profiles that are trimmed to similar width and diversity. significant differences in recognition performance exist between superfamilies for both the full and trimmed profiles. this suggests that performance of profile-profile matching is not simply a function of profile width and diversity. we examine how the performance relates to the structural diversity of superfamilies and find that structurally conserved superfamilies are recognised more successfully than structurally diverse superfamilies.

RESULTS
width and diversity of profiles
superfamily specific performance of remote homolog detection
for the full profiles, the alpha/beta-hydrolases, cytochrome c and s-adenosyl superfamilies perform well, all having with roc <dig> values ≥  <dig> , the fibronectin, thioredoxin-like, glycosidases, immunoglobulin and fad/nad-binding have roc <dig> >  <dig>  and the remaining  <dig> superfamilies all perform poorly, having a performance less than  <dig> .

after trimming, although performance is reduced, the overall pattern of performance still remains. all the well recognised superfamilies glycosidases and thioredoxin-like) still show roc <dig> values greater than  <dig> , while the rest are still less than  <dig> .

the fact that the performance varies greatly between superfamilies despite the trimming of the profiles indicates that the profile generation is not the only limiting step in the performance of profile-profile methods. one might have thought that, for instance, the bad recognition of 4-helical cytokines is due to the small number of homologs drawn from the profile-building stage. whilst this still may be true, it is not necessarily true: the cytochrome c superfamily still shows a roc <dig> of  <dig>  when using trimmed profiles despite having, on average, less than  <dig> sequences in the profile.

structural diversity
relation between structural diversity, sequence conservation and recognition performance
it may be the case that despite the absence of any discernible global sequence similarity within our dataset some local patterns of conservation do exist. these patterns may be present more strongly in some superfamilies than in others. in order to examine this possibility we constructed multiple structure based sequence alignments for each of the  <dig> superfamilies and then looked down the columns of the multiple sequence alignments to examine the extent of conservation at each position .

discussion
our results suggest that profile profile methods can detect remotely related sequences for some superfamilies significantly better than for others. in our dataset the sequence identity between domains in all the superfamilies is low . although the mean width and diversity of the profiles varies across the superfamilies this does not appear to be the only factor contributing to the differences in detection.

the effect of the trimming varied depending on superfamily. for the best performing profile  the trimming reduced the performance by about 50%  but the effect on the rank was small dropping from first place to second. similarly the trimming impacted significantly on the performance of the s-adenosyl methyl transferases with roc <dig> dropping from  <dig>  to  <dig> . however trimming had no effect on performance for the fad/nad-binding superfamily, and only resulted in a small reduction in performance for the immunoglobulins and the cytochrome c superfamilies. importantly the membership of the top ranking superfamilies in terms of performance did not change after trimming.

although the overall level of sequence similarity within our dataset is low  the different superfamilies exhibit different levels of conservation at positions within the multiple structure based alignments. these conserved positions may facilitate recognition. the extent to which they constrain the structures leading to less diverse alignments is unclear. we recognise also that our measure of conservation and also the use of rmsd as a measure of structural diversity both have their shortcomings. it would be interesting to identify and extract a conserved core and represent structural profiles as combination of core profiles separated by regions of variable length.

CONCLUSIONS
there exist large superfamily specific differences in the performance of profile profile matching for the detection of remote sequence relationships. some superfamilies can be detected far more successfully than others. the width and diversity of the profiles are important factors in successful recognition. however these are not the only factors that contribute to these superfamily specific differences.

