BACKGROUND
the cell is a three-dimensional space separated into different compartments. these cellular compartments have different function and physicochemical environment. the cell’s functional machinery - proteins - need to be present at specific cellular compartments so that cells can function properly. wrong localization of proteins may lead to disease and cell death  <cit> . therefore, subcellular location is a key-feature in the functional characterization of proteins  <cit> .

currently, most protein sequences in databases are the result of translation of hypothetical transcripts derived from genomic sequencing data  <cit> . therefore computational prediction of protein features from their sequence is often used for designing strategies for experimental characterization of proteins and is also important for genome annotation and drug target identification  <cit> .

in particular, the computational prediction of subcellular location from protein sequence information has been attempted mainly using three approaches. one approach tries to identify motifs recognized by the sorting proteins and receptors of the protein transport machinery to move protein products from the cytosol to other subcellular locations  <cit> . this approach is limited by our knowledge of these signals; absence of detection of known motifs cannot be used to imply that a protein remains in the cytosol. a second approach uses sequence homology to proteins of experimentally verified localization under the assumption that similar proteins end up at similar subcellular locations  <cit> . while this is true in general terms, there are many known exceptions for this rule , which is itself better than location predicted on the basis of protein composition alone. however the existence of many proteins without known signals, known predicted domains associated to protein locations, or without homology to proteins of experimentally verified protein location, leaves room to make the prediction of protein location from composition alone a relevant objective.

while composition-based methods of prediction of location have not been extremely successful  <cit> , we believe that these can be improved by using amino acid exposure. we previously studied how amino acid exposure influences the amino acid composition of proteins in different compartments and inferred that using this property should improve location prediction  <cit> . the rationale was that differently exposed residues have different evolutionary pressures to mutate towards specific amino acid types whose side chains have physicochemical properties that agree to the subcellular location where the protein performs its major activity. since the publication of this previous work, much data on protein structures and experimentally verified protein locations have been deposited in public databases. here, we present a novel analysis of the relation between protein amino acid exposure, residue type and subcellular location, which takes advantage of recent experimental data and methods for pattern-based classification and prediction of protein amino acid exposure.

as in  <cit> , we will focus here on eukaryotic proteins and three locations: nuclear, cytoplasmic and extracellular. in addition, we will consider the necessity of introducing a fourth class and demonstrate that this can be predicted: proteins of nucleocytoplasmic localization. this class is not generally taken into account by methods of prediction of location, despite the fact that a large number of proteins are known to shuttle between nucleus and cytoplasm and perform functions in both compartments  <cit> . failure to consider this abundant class might lead to mediocre performance in subcellular location prediction  <cit> .

therefore, in this manuscript we present a hybrid method that uses a support vector machine  and an artificial neural network , trained on proteins of known location and structure for the prediction of the four locations mentioned above: nuclear , nucleocytoplasmic , cytoplasmic  and extracellular . study of the training set and of the ranges of exposure with better prediction performance gave us insight into the relationship between amino acid exposure and environment, showing that predicting class y improves the general prediction performance, but also suggesting unexpectedly that buried residues carry location information that is different from the information carried by exposed residues.

our method was adapted for use on sequences of unknown structure by using predicted amino acid exposure values with reasonable performance. application of the method to pairs of homologous proteins with different experimentally known location  indicated that the method can find the appropriate location in cases where methods using homology would make a wrong inference. finally, we implemented the method as a web tool accessible at http://cbdm.mdc-berlin.de/~amer/nyce.

RESULTS
we developed an algorithm for protein location prediction that uses amino acid type and exposure to predict protein location. our method benefits from the fact that there is evolutionary pressure for the selection of mutations that result in protein residues with side chains that have characteristic physicochemical properties according to the exposure of the residue and to the subcellular location of the protein. our method does not use protein homology and accordingly can distinguish homologous proteins with different subcellular locations.

to generate a training dataset we first selected proteins annotated to occur in three major locations: nuclear , cytoplasmic  and extracellular , and not in other locations . given the significant amount of proteins that shuttle between nucleus and cytoplasm  we considered an extra category . to obtain reliable information on amino acid exposure, we then selected proteins of known structure for each of these four categories . we obtained values of residue accessibility for all amino acids of the sequences in this dataset that were covered by 3d-structural information .

we then studied the distribution of exposure values for the  <dig> different amino acids. we observed that residues with side chains belonging to the same physicochemical property group show similar frequency distributions . for example the hydrophobic residues isoleucine , valine , leucine  and alanine  show very similar distributions with a very high frequency in the low accessibility region and fewer residues in the high relative accessibility region. principal component analysis  of these data shows this more prominently .

we then compared the distribution of exposure values for the  <dig> different amino acids in each of the four protein classes and observed variation for particular amino acids and protein locations . for example, when we compare the distribution of exposure values for glutamine  in different location classes we can see that glutamines in extracellular proteins are more buried than in intracellular proteins . conversely, cysteines in extracellular proteins have a distinct peak at high exposure values, which is absent from intracellular proteins . these differences imply that exposure values can be used to predict protein location.

svm classification using vectors of amino acid composition in selected ranges
next we separated the values of amino acid exposure in six percentiles  and tested different vectors of amino acid composition for combinations of these six ranges. initially we tried vectors with  <dig> components  describing the composition of residues found within a particular range of exposure values. for example, the range “1” composition vector for a protein would be defined by the distribution of amino acids of this protein with exposure values in the most buried category. the range “ <dig> 6” would be defined by the amino acids in the two most exposed categories. the range “ <dig>  <dig>  <dig>  <dig>  <dig> 6” would be the amino acid composition of the entire protein and so on.

we then trained an svm on such amino acid composition vectors for proteins from each of the four localization categories . the accuracy of the classifier was distinctively better for extracellular proteins and worst for nucleocytoplasmic proteins . interestingly, for nuclear proteins, and less so for nucleocytoplasmic and cytoplasmic proteins, the middle ranges of exposure  seem to contain less signal about the localization of the protein. for extracellular proteins, buried residues contain more information on the localization of the protein than exposed residues. in any case, the complete protein amino acid composition  was a better predictor than each of the six individual ranges, with composition from multiple ranges, e.g. , , close.

the bad performance of vectors of residues in smaller ranges may be due to the fact that we are dealing with proteins with an average size of  <dig> amino acids and the resulting range-specific amino acid composition vectors may be based on small numbers of amino acids. this effect is obviously reduced when the full range or a combination of ranges are used.

since combined ranges seemed to perform next to full-range we wondered if combining these vectors could outperform full-range vectors. therefore, we next tested svm classifications using as training 40-component vectors that combined two different 20-component vectors. in particular, the 40-component vector combining the 20-component vector for residue composition in the three most buried categories with the 20-component vector for residue composition in the three most exposed categories  provided on average better predictions than the full-range vector for the four location categories . generally, this vector produced better results than other combinations excluding some ranges ) or using scrambled residue ranges , see below).

since from each one-vs.-rest svm model we obtain a probability of being in a location class, it is possible to evaluate the accuracy of the model using a threshold for this probability. that is, we can compute the recall and precision of the predictions above various cut-offs of probability. the plot of these values as roc  curves confirms that the extracellular class is predicted the best and that the 40-component vector  provides better predictive power than full composition . to rule out the possibility that the superiority of the 40-component vector would be due to the higher amount of components, we tested a 40-component vector with scrambled ranges , which performed poorly .

to combine multiple svm predictions into a single one we applied a simple “winner-takes-all” strategy, that is, the prediction with best score is selected. roc curves indicated that the 40-component vector  performed best against other 40-component vectors ) or the full range 20-component vector  .

we then applied the “winner-takes-all” strategy to the three svm sets mentioned above , but this did not improve performance significantly .

combining class probabilities with an artificial neural network
we wondered if combining svm scores for different localizations and ranges using an artificial neural network , as opposed to just taking the best score prediction, could improve the accuracy of the method. to combine multiple svm predictions for different locations we used an ann with three layers: an input layer with one neuron for each of the one-vs.-rest svms used, a hidden layer, and an output layer with four neurons, one for each location class. the ann was trained with svm-calculated values and was required to produce an output of  <dig> for the correct class and  <dig> for the others . the number of neurons in the hidden layer was optimized for maximum accuracy, as well as the type and number of svms using as input . for example, we tried using four svms as input, one for each location class, but also tried using svms for two types of ranges , three types of ranges , and four ranges .

the best result was obtained for  <dig> hidden-layer neurons and  <dig> input-layer neurons; the inputs were obtained from four svms using 40-component vectors for ranges  <dig>  <dig>  <dig> and  <dig>  <dig>  <dig>  four svms using 40-component vectors for ranges  <dig> and  <dig>  <dig>  <dig>  <dig>  <dig>  and four svms using 20-component vectors of full protein composition . increasing the number of svms used as input eventually decreased accuracy, probably due to over-training of the ann. the final number of connections in the optimal ann,  +  =  <dig>  is well below the number of examples used for the training .

roc curves for the ann classifications indicate that they improve the predictions over the svms used as input, and confirm that the ann selected performs the best . this combination of svm inputs and ann architecture was therefore selected for further work and finally for implementation as a public tool .

predicting location of proteins without known structure
our next goal is to apply the predictive architecture optimized above to protein sequences. our method uses as input the composition of residues of a protein in six different ranges of exposure. however, generally, a given protein sequence has no 3d-information and therefore no known exposure values. thus, we first need a method to provide predicted exposure values for the residues in the protein sequence whose localization has to be predicted.

to obtain predicted exposure values alone from sequence we have used a method that predicts exposure based on residue type and similarity to other sequences and that has high reliability . the scoring system in sable is a scale of integer values from  <dig>  to  <dig> . in principle, such a scale does not necessarily correspond directly to the scale of values of exposure that we obtained from proteins of known structure. after analysis of the distribution of sable values for the proteins of known structure used as training set, we equated sable scores  <dig> to  <dig> to our 3d-derived ranges  <dig> to  <dig>  respectively, and the sable ranges of  <dig> and above  to range  <dig>  which was not perfect but approximated best the percentile distribution . the accuracy of the predictions with the optimal architecture svm-ann method was of 62%, which, as it could be expected, was lower than the value of 68% obtained when using the obviously more accurate 3d-derived values.

since the method was trained exclusively on proteins from four locations, we wondered if it would misclassify proteins present in other locations. to test this we ran the method on a set of  <dig> eukaryotic proteins randomly selected from proteins with experimentally verified location but not assigned to nuclear, cytoplasmic or extracellular locations. we observed that more than 75% of these proteins not present in nyce locations received scores below  <dig>  . this threshold is used in the web tool to inform of the reliability of the predictions.

predictions for  <dig> human proteins without location annotation in uniprot are available as additional file 2: table s <dig> 

predicting location of paralog protein pairs
as mentioned in the introduction, one of the main problems of protein subcellular location prediction methods based on homology is that there are very similar proteins that act in different subcellular locations. for example, the two well-known protein-tyrosine kinases bmx and frk are cytoplasmic and nucleocytoplasmic, respectively; however they share 25% identity along over 60% of their sequences, mostly due to their two n-terminal domains . homology is therefore not necessarily the best criteria to assign location to proteins. to test that our method can evaluate proteins independently of their homology, we collected and analysed pairs of paralogs experimentally known to be in different nyce locations such as the two tyrosine kinases mentioned above . from a total of  <dig> such pairs our method predicted the same location for both proteins in only  <dig> cases, indicating that the method does not have a dependency on homology. the proper localization was correctly predicted for both sequences in  <dig> cases, which was significant compared to random tests where the pairs were assigned each of four localizations with equal probability .

using the paralog pair data set, we compared nyce to four other state-of-the-art subcellular location prediction tools: yloc  <cit> , hum-mploc  <cit> , sherloc  <cit>  and psort-ii  <cit>  . for this set of protein pairs nyce outperforms all other tools. all of these tools except psort-ii use homology for location analysis.

CONCLUSIONS
our study demonstrated that the distribution of amino acids at different levels of exposure have signal about the location of proteins. whereas exposed residues might have to adapt to the physicochemical properties of the environment and to interactions with particular macromolecular entities such as dna, rna, etc.  <cit> , buried residues might also have location dependent roles; for example, extracellular proteins might have to have more stable cores to increase the stability of proteins exposed to conditions more variable than in intracellular regions  <cit> . while localization signals that guide protein sorting mechanisms are possibly the best predictor of a protein’s location, protein amino acid composition can be a useful predictor of location if such signals are absent or unknown.

on a technical note, our method illustrates how a multi-class problem can be approached by using a two-step approach where first svms of different types score class membership for each one of several classes and in a second step an artificial neural network  integrates the data and reassigns membership considering all scores from the svms. this approach could be especially useful for other classification tasks in cases like ours where the number of test cases is relatively small and limits the number of input and outputs of the ann. for example, we could not have trained the ann directly on the 20- and 40-component vectors used as input for the svms with the few hundreds of examples of eukaryotic proteins of known location and structure available. in this respect, the svm step can be considered as a kind of data compression prior to the use of an ann. a bayesian approach might also be feasible for this second step.

we note that our method depends on the quality of the predicted exposure values. although sable has already high accuracy in the prediction of protein amino acid exposure  <cit> , further developments in this field could eventually be used to improve our predictions towards accuracy values close to those obtained when using 3d-derived values of amino acid exposure.

applying our approach to other protein location prediction problems, for example, for prokaryotic proteins, or for additional eukaryotic locations, is certainly possible but results will depend on the amount and quality of experimental data on protein location and on the amount of signal for each location present in the sequences of experimentally verified location. expanding our method will thus require careful selection of training datasets considering new taxonomic divisions and locations in a case by case basis. we expect that the development of novel techniques for high-throughput characterization of protein location might eventually facilitate such development.

