BACKGROUND
hop is an important agronomic commodity, used mainly in the brewing industry. rich in secondary metabolites, hop cones  are an essential raw ingredient in beer, contributing the distinctive bitterness, flavour and aroma, as well as preservative activity
 <cit> . traditional breeding methods have made significant progress in increasing the yield of hops and altering hop secondary metabolite profiles to improve bittering, flavour and aroma potential. traditional breeding in hop is based on phenotypic selection of superior genotypes within segregating progenies obtained from crosses. as is the case with many perennial crops, this is a complex and lengthy process. molecular breeding methods, such as marker assisted selection , have the potential to complement conventional phenotypic-pedigree based selection methods by providing a sophisticated, direct and precise selection system, with the capacity for higher throughput
 <cit> . the successful application of mas relies on understanding the genetic architecture underlying variation in the phenotype of traits
 <cit> . more specifically, mas requires the identification of molecular markers closely associated with trait variation
 <cit> . among other techniques, quantitative trait loci  analysis can be used to identify marker-trait associations. the genetic information acquired in qtl analysis, such as the number, location and magnitude of effects of genetic regions associated with a trait, also contributes significantly to the overall understanding of trait heritability
 <cit> .

linkage maps are a prerequisite for qtl analysis and must be of high quality to ensure accuracy, resolution and reproducibility in the qtl identified
 <cit> . when constructing linkage maps, transferrable markers, such as microsatellite or diversity arrays technology  markers, are preferable to less transferable markers, such as amplified fragment length polymorphism  and random amplified polymorphic dna  markers, as they are easily employed in different mapping populations, thus facilitating direct comparison between maps and qtl verification
 <cit> . this validation of qtl is crucial for the broad success of mas, since qtl can be restricted to the pedigree, environment and ontogenetic stage in which they were discovered
 <cit> . in hop, only a small number of qtl studies have been undertaken. linkage maps have been constructed in four pseudo-testcross populations
 <cit>  and with the exception of one
 <cit> , these are dominated by aflp and rapd markers, with a small proportion of transferable markers
 <cit> . a few studies have identified qtl
 <cit>  and other marker-trait associations
 <cit> ; however, only twelve traits have been examined and no validation has so far been reported. further linkage analyses are required to gain a better understanding of loci influencing important hop traits and ultimately to enable mas for these traits across different breeding programs. three key areas of economic significance targeted for the genetic improvement of hop are: expedited plant sex identification, increased yield capacity and improved secondary metabolite profiles. the identification of qtl related to these targets would aid hop breeding programs in their efforts to meet the needs of the brewing industry.

hop is a predominantly dioecious species, with male and female flowers produced on separate plants. only female plants have economic value, producing cones containing lupulin, the secondary metabolite-packed resin, which is the commercial product. hop has a genome size of  <dig>  pg 
 <cit> , similar to the average for all eudicots 
 <cit> . cytogenetic studies have demonstrated that hop is diploid , with nine autosomal  chromosome pairs and two sex chromosomes 
 <cit> . sex determination is dependent on an x/a balance, a system found in a few other plant genera, such as cannabis and rumex <cit> . a ratio of the number of x chromosomes to the number of sets of autosomes of  <dig>  gives rise to a female plant; a ratio of  <dig>  gives rise to a male plant; and intermediate ratios give rise to monoecious plants 
 <cit> . under the x/a balance system for determination of sex phenotype, the y chromosome is not essential to the development of the male phenotype, but is required for pollen maturation
 <cit> ; sex expression may be regulated by genes on the autosomes or may be x-linked. definitive determination of the sex phenotype requires two seasons of growth. sex determination at the seedling stage, using molecular markers, would drastically reduce hop breeding program costs and optimise utilisation of available land. a number of sex-linked molecular markers have been identified in hop, including rapd markers
 <cit> , inter simple sequence repeat  markers
 <cit> , microsatellites
 <cit>  and cytogenetic markers
 <cit> . most markers are associated with the y chromosome and are thus linked to maleness. however, the use of these markers has had mixed success in breeding, as the majority remain unverified across second or multiple populations. for some of these markers there is also evidence for incomplete linkage to the male sex
 <cit> . the best described male sex-linked marker is a microsatellite, hlaga <dig>  being completely linked to the male sex in two slovenian populations and on a representative sample of male hop genotypes
 <cit> . although hlaga <dig> provides a robust sex-linked marker for use as a screening tool in hop breeding programs, further research may detect additional polymorphic loci located on autosomes which affect gender in a broader range of genetic material.

increasing the yield of commercial product is one of the main goals of hop breeding programs and is largely based on two methods:  directly increasing the content of commercially important secondary metabolites  in hop cones; or  indirectly increasing secondary metabolite yield, by increasing flower number and subsequently cone production. in most cultivated plant species, the inheritance of yield is complex; influenced by a multitude of integrated physiological and biochemical processes, each with their own genetic basis
 <cit>  and hop is no exception
 <cit> . yield may also be influenced by a number of environmental factors, including water supply
 <cit> , nutrient availability, day length
 <cit> , irradiance
 <cit> , temperature
 <cit> , agricultural practice
 <cit>  and infestation of pests and diseases
 <cit> . the identification of qtl influencing yield and their utilisation for mas would greatly assist breeding for increased hop yield, by eliminating confounding environmental influences as well as allowing assessments of yield potential at the seedling stage, several years before maximal cone yields, or in non-yielding male plants. an earlier study has identified putative qtl for cone yield traits, including microsatellite and aflp markers linked to cone harvest index and dry cone weight
 <cit> . however, given the genetic complexity of yield in other plants, there are potentially further regions of the genome associated with yield traits for which qtl could be identified.

the secondary metabolite profile of hop is diverse, consisting of three broad chemical groups:  hop acids , divisible into the subgroups α-acids and β-acids;  essential oils ; and  polyphenols
 <cit> . alpha-acids impart the characteristic bitter taste to beer, while essential oils are responsible for flavour and aroma
 <cit> . beta-acids also contribute to beer bitterness, as well as functioning as preservative agents, possessing anti-microbial properties
 <cit> . the influence of polyphenols in beer brewing are not thoroughly understood, but several polyphenol compounds have been found to have potential pharmaceutical applications, particularly 8-prenylnarigenin as a phytoestrogen
 <cit>  and xanthohumol as a cancer chemopreventative agent
 <cit> . secondary metabolites accumulate in high concentrations in lupulin glands, which are peltate glandular trichomes found in great density on the bracteoles in hop inflorescences 
 <cit> . there is evidence to show that the lupulin glands may also be involved in the biosynthesis of the secondary metabolites
 <cit> . in hop, differences in secondary metabolite composition are genotype-specific, with different cultivars having characteristic secondary metabolite profiles and subsequently unique bittering potentials and distinct flavour profiles
 <cit> . chemical profiles also vary with the maturation of the hop cone
 <cit>  and the effects of environmental stimuli. the secondary metabolite profile of kiln-dried hop cones consists of up to 30% hop acids, dominated by humulones  and lupulones 
 <cit> . polyphenols and tannins comprise  <dig> to 6% of the hop cone weight, while essential oils are found at levels between  <dig>  and  <dig>  ml per 100 g
 <cit> . typically, 90% of essential oils are terpenoids, dominated by myrcene, humulene, caryophyllene and farnesene
 <cit> . the composition of hop essential oil is diverse, with around  <dig> compounds currently identified and suggestions that around  <dig> compounds might be present
 <cit> . the biosynthesis of secondary metabolites is complex and not completely understood, with many of the enzymes involved yet to be identified. the three secondary metabolite chemical classes present in hop are derived from pathways of terpene metabolism, following the 2-c-methylerythritol 4-phosphate  pathway
 <cit> . the biosynthesis of these hop secondary metabolites involve common precursors, including isopentenyl pyrophosphate , dimethylallyl diphosphate  and malonyl coenzyme a
 <cit> . consequently, the synthesis of the different components may be competitive and common loci are likely to influence the concentration of each compound.

due to the complexities of hop secondary metabolite composition and the effects of both maturation and environmental stimuli, mas could be a useful method for breeding hops with improved brewing characteristics; allowing direct selection of hops with improved content and quality of bitter acids and essential oils in the cone. however, deployment of mas requires a deeper understanding of the complex genetics underlying the synthesis of secondary metabolites that influence bitterness, flavour and aroma of beer. to date, qtl have been identified for a small number of important hop chemical components. in the case of hop essential oils, qtl have been identified for caryophyllene and farnesene
 <cit> ; for polyphenols, qtl have been identified for xanthohumol and desmethylxanthohumol
 <cit> ; and for hop acids, qtl have been identified for α-acid, β-acid, cohumulone  and colupulone 
 <cit> . five chalcone synthase genes  encoding enzymes directly involved in the biosynthesis of hop acids and polyphenols
 <cit>  have been cloned; these candidate genes have been mapped in one hop population
 <cit> . these studies have barely scratched the surface of the hop secondary metabolite profile, warranting further analysis to identify qtl for secondary metabolites key to beer bittering, flavour and aroma.

in this study, we performed comprehensive qtl analyses, encompassing  <dig> traits related to three key targets in the genetic improvement of hop: expediting plant sex identification, increasing yield capacity and improving secondary metabolite composition. in order to identify qtl, male and female linkage maps were constructed from two mapping populations using a number of marker systems, including transferable dart markers developed in this study. in one population we performed qtl analysis on two yield traits and α-acid content, with the goal of identifying environmentally and ontogenetically stable qtl. in the second population we analysed α-acid content and an additional  <dig> traits related to yield and secondary metabolites, the majority of which have not been previously assessed in hop qtl analyses, in order to identify qtl from single-year data. both populations were screened for known sex-linked markers and used to search for new ones. through the analysis of multiple traits over numerous years, this work contributes to our understanding of the genetic basis underlying phenotypic variation in hop, an essential prerequisite for future genetic improvement programs in hop.

RESULTS
marker discovery and linkage analysis
in this study, dart marker discovery identified  <dig> new polymorphic markers in hop, from  <dig>  dart clones, resulting in a frequency of polymorphism of  <dig> %. a total of  <dig> dart markers  were polymorphic in at least one of the two mapping populations and subsequently used for genotyping. the quality of the  <dig> dart markers was assessed through several parameters. the average polymorphism information content  value was  <dig>  . scoring reproducibility, call rate and q values averaged at  <dig> % ,  <dig> %  and  <dig> % , respectively. the new zealand population was genotyped with an additional  <dig> microsatellite markers, four rapd markers, three sequence-tagged site  markers and one marker based on a microsatellite within a candidate chalcone synthase gene . the analyses of the slovenian population included an additional  <dig> microsatellite markers,  <dig> aflp markers and five markers based on microsatellites within candidate chalcone synthase genes that were genotyped in a previous study of the population 
 <cit> .

linkage analysis of the new zealand maternal ‘nugget’ population included  <dig> markers  and resulted in a total of  <dig> markers  placed on the map at  <dig> unique positions . eleven linkage groups were formed, comprising a total map length of  <dig>  cm . linkage analysis of the new zealand paternal slovenian breeding line  3/ <dig> population included  <dig> markers  and resulted in a total of  <dig> markers  placed on the map at  <dig> unique positions . eight linkage groups were formed, comprising a total map length of  <dig>  cm . through comparison between the maternal and paternal linkage maps, and to linkage maps of the slovenian mapping population  constructed in this study, several homologous linkages were identified . where there were markers in common within these homologous linkage groups, the marker order was mostly conserved. there was evidence from homologous linkage groups to show that two of the linkage groups of the maternal ‘nugget’ map are likely to be from the same chromosome, thus forming a total of ten linkage groups . these ten linkage groups formed in the maternal ‘nugget’ map are equal to the haploid number of chromosomes in hop ; however, only eight linkage groups were resolved in the paternal ‘s.b.l. 3/3’ map.

linkage analysis of the slovenian maternal ‘hallertauer magnum’ population included  <dig> markers  and resulted in  <dig> markers  placed on the map at  <dig> unique positions . fourteen linkage groups were formed, comprising a total map length of  <dig>  cm . linkage analysis of the slovenian paternal s.b.l. 2/ <dig> population included  <dig> markers  and resulted in  <dig> markers  placed on the map at  <dig> unique positions . eleven linkage groups were formed, comprising a total map length of  <dig>  cm . through comparison between the maternal and paternal linkage maps, and to a previously reported map of the family ‘hallertauer magnum’ × ‘s.b.l. 2/1’
 <cit>  , several homologous linkage groups could be identified. where there were markers in common within these homologous linkage groups, the previously established marker order was mostly conserved. there was evidence from homologous linkage groups to show that several of the linkage groups within both the maternal and paternal maps were likely to be from the same chromosomes, thus forming a total of ten linkage groups in both the maternal and paternal map . this is equal to the haploid chromosome number in hop.

the marker derived from the candidate chalcone synthase gene that was included in the linkage analysis of the new zealand mapping population  was polymorphic and mapped to lg  <dig> of the paternal ‘s.b.l. 3/3’ map . of the five markers derived from candidate chalcone synthase genes that were included in the linkage analysis of the slovenian population, four were polymorphic , and also mapped to lg  <dig> on the maternal ‘hallertauer magnum’ map , following the same marker order as previously established
 <cit> .

extensive clustering of markers was observed in the linkage maps of both the new zealand and slovenian mapping populations . all marker types included in linkage analyses exhibited clustering within and between marker types. before qtl analysis, superfluous markers within each cluster were eliminated to leave only one marker at each locus. in the new zealand population, a total of  <dig> and  <dig> markers were removed from the maternal and paternal linkage maps, respectively; and a total of  <dig> and  <dig> markers were removed from the maternal and paternal linkage maps of the slovenian population. in this study, a significant proportion of markers demonstrated a departure from expected mendelian segregation ratios . significant segregation distortion was found in all marker types and on all linkage maps constructed . markers with segregation distortion were frequently found close together on the linkage maps, such that the observed marker clusters consisted of markers either with or without segregation distortion. this phenomenon often resulted in entire linkage groups of exclusively distorted or non-distorted markers, or linkage groups divided into these regions .

phenotypic measurements
sex was assessed as a binary trait; with  <dig> female and  <dig> male plants identified in the new zealand population, giving a sex ratio of  <dig> : <dig> . eighty-seven female and five male plants were recognised in the slovenian population, giving a sex ratio of  <dig> : <dig> . all other traits assessed in this study were quantitative . of the three traits assessing hop cone yields, dry cone weight showed the smallest phenotypic variation ; followed by cone harvest index ; with green cone weight showing an eight-fold difference in variability  compared to dry cone weight . the yield of essential oil was also assessed; on average  <dig>  ml  of essential oil was obtained from 100 g of dried hop cone tissue .

the secondary metabolite profile of hop was examined in the progeny of a new zealand mapping cross through a total of  <dig> traits from all hop secondary metabolite groups . quantitatively, the hop acid component of the secondary metabolite profile of the new zealand mapping population was dominated by α-acid , the largest component of which was the humulone + adhumulone fraction  . the essential oil component of the secondary metabolite profile was dominated by the sesquiterpenes humulene , caryophyllene  and farnesene ; and the monoterpene myrcene  . a single polyphenol was assessed, xanthohumol, which comprised an average of  <dig> % of the dry cone weight . correlations were evident between a number of the secondary metabolites, both within and between the major structural groups . the strongest correlations were exhibited within the hop acid groups, where the six secondary metabolite traits measured  all shared very strong positive correlations  . very strong positive correlations were also observed between several of the other secondary metabolite traits, although many of these correlations did not form cohesive patterns either within or between major chemical groups . the highest phenotypic correlations were between the two hop acids, cohumulone  and colupulone  ; the polyphenol and hop acid, xanthohumol and cohumulone ; the polyphenol and hop acid, xanthohumol and colupulone ; the two monoterpenes β-pinene and myrcene ; and the ketone and sesquiterpene, 2-undecanone and farnesene  . no very strong negative correlations  were observed between the secondary metabolites . one secondary metabolite trait, α-acid, was examined in the slovenian population, measuring an average of  <dig> % of dry cone weight. alpha-acid was not strongly correlated with any other trait measured in the slovenian population.

qtl analysis
sex trait
one sex-linked marker was detected in this study, identified for the first time in the new zealand population and confirming its previous identification in the slovenian population . in both cases, the microsatellite marker hlaga <dig> segregated from the male parent and showed complete linkage to the male character. while highly significant in both populations, differences in the level of significance were apparent, with a higher significance observed in the slovenian population  than in the new zealand population .

a seg. indicates the segregation of the qtl from either the maternal  or paternal  parent.

b lod indicates the peak lod score for the qtl at the genome-wide significance level.

c % exp. indicates the percentage of the phenotypic variation of the trait explained by the qtl.

d additive indicates the estimated additive effect of the allele / <dig> 

yield traits
of the four yield traits assessed in this study, qtl were identified for two: one qtl for essential oil content  and one qtl for dry cone weight . both qtl segregated from the female parent, explaining  <dig> % and  <dig> % of the phenotypic variation, respectively . qtl were not identified for cone harvest index or green cone weight.

secondary metabolite traits
a total of  <dig> putative qtl were identified for hop secondary metabolite traits, above the genome-wide significance level  . for  <dig> of the  <dig> assessed secondary metabolite traits, between one and four qtl were identified, each explaining an estimated  <dig> % to  <dig> % of the phenotypic variance . qtl were not identified for  <dig> essential oil components . qtl were also not identified for α-acid in the slovenian population.

the  <dig> putative qtl identified for hop secondary metabolite traits mapped to  <dig> discreet regions  on six linkage groups . five of the qtl regions were unique to specific traits, these being humulene  on ‘nugget’ linkage group   <dig> ; cadinene   on ‘nugget’ lg <dig> ; terpinene  on ‘s.b.l. 3/3’ lg <dig> ; ρ-cymene  on ‘nugget’ lg <dig> ; and lupulone + adlupulone  on ‘nugget’ lg <dig>  . qtl region  <dig>  affecting lupulone + adlupulone, was also found to affect, by extension, the traits β-acid and α-acid:β-acid , as lupulone + adlupulone is equivalent to β-acid. qtl region  <dig>  affecting humulene was found to affect, by extension, humulene:caryophyllene , showing that the humulene:caryophyllene ratio is biased towards humulene. the remaining eight qtl regions affected multiple traits . two of these  were found to influence compounds from all three groups of secondary metabolites , affecting three and  <dig> different components, respectively . the other six qtl regions influenced compounds from one or two different secondary metabolite classes:  qtl region  <dig> influenced four traits, three α-acid compounds and a sesquiterpene ;  qtl region  <dig> influenced eight traits from the hop acid and essential oil groups;  qtl region  <dig> influenced three traits: an ester, a ketone and a sesquiterpene ;  qtl region  <dig> influenced three traits: two from the β-acid group and one sesquiterpene;  qtl region  <dig> influenced  <dig> traits from the hop acid and essential oil groups ; and  qtl region  <dig> influenced two traits, both esters . each of the qtl regions identified in this study were sex-specific;  <dig> of the  <dig> qtl regions segregated from the female parent ‘nugget’ , a significant bias .

comparisons between qtl identified in the new zealand and slovenian populations were made using markers found in common between linkage maps constructed from the two populations. the qtl for dry cone weight that was identified in the slovenian population  co-located with qtl region  <dig>  on ‘nugget’ lg <dig>  of the new zealand population, influencing the three traits α-acid:β-acid, caryophyllene and xanthohumol . of the five markers based on candidate chalcone synthase genes  included in linkage analysis of the slovenian population in this study, four were mapped, in the maternal ‘hallertauer magnum’ lg <dig> of the slovenian population. although these genes encode enzymes involved in the biosynthesis of hop acids and poloyphenols, no qtl for α-acid was identified in the slovenian population, associated with these chalcone synthase genes or on any other marker. two qtl were, however, identified for α-acid in the new zealand mapping population , as well as an additional  <dig> qtl for other hop acid traits and two qtl for xanthohumol . none of the qtl identified were associated with the marker based on a candidate chalcone synthase gene  that mapped to ‘s.b.l. 3/3’ lg <dig> of the new zealand population.

discussion
marker discovery and linkage analysis
although linkage maps derived from four hop mapping populations have been published
 <cit> , a highly saturated linkage map is still to be constructed for this species. the high resolution of such a map is an essential component for the identification of accurate and reproducible qtl, particularly those with small effects. the goal of this study was to construct linkage maps for a new mapping population from new zealand and to build upon a pre-existing linkage map from a slovenian mapping population
 <cit> , through the addition of transferable dart markers. the  <dig> new dart markers identified in this study were found to be of a similar high quality  to those identified in a previous hop study
 <cit>  and in other plant species
 <cit> . the use of these new dart markers in linkage analysis of the slovenian population, along with dart, aflp and microsatellite markers previously identified
 <cit> , increased the number and density of markers, allowed the clear identification of ten linkage groups  and increased the transferability of the maps between mapping populations. our study used a conservative approach; accepting only markers within designated parameters . this method, in combination with factors such as the amalgamation of some of the smaller groups and the exclusion of terminal markers, resulted in shorter map lengths compared with cerenak et al.
 <cit> . where there were markers in common between the linkage maps of the slovenian population constructed in this study and previous maps, marker order was mostly conserved and homologous linkage groups were identified . linkage group homology and marker order was also consistent between linkage maps constructed using the slovenian population and the new zealand population, and between maternal and paternal linkage maps of both populations . while ten linkage groups were identified in the maternal linkage map of the new zealand population , only eight were resolved in the paternal map . the maternal linkage map also contained nearly double the number of markers of the paternal linkage map. these factors suggest that further addition of markers is required to achieve genome coverage in the paternal linkage map of the new zealand population.

in this study, a large number of markers demonstrated significant departure from expected mendelian ratios . significant clustering of the markers was also observed . these phenomena have been previously identified in other species and were attributed to biological factors, rather than experimental limitations
 <cit> . several factors indicate that this was also the case in this study. both clustering of markers and segregation distortion  was not limited to one marker type, but was evident in all marker types used, suggesting that they are not artefacts of genotyping error. marker clusters were associated with regions of segregation distortion, such that they were composed of either all distorted markers or all non-distorted markers. clustering of markers is typically symptomatic of saturation of markers on the linkage map
 <cit> , yet marker saturation in this study is unlikely, for several reasons. intervals of greater than 10 cm exist ; and in one of the four linkage maps the number of linkage groups identified was fewer than the number of hop chromosomes, while in the other three linkage maps several of the hop chromosomes were split into two or more linkage groups because of insufficient linkage. these factors indicate that the linkage maps do not contain the maximal density of markers and suggest that additional markers are required if smaller sub-groups are to coalesce into a single linkage group. also, marker saturation in clustered groups may indicate low levels of recombination in hop, for which there is no reported evidence. all of these factors suggest that marker clustering, as well as the segregation distortion of markers, shorter map length and lower marker density of the maps constructed in this study have a biological basis for which further investigation is required.

the linkage maps constructed in this study provide a valuable resource for qtl analyses in hop. the large number of qtl identified in this study  provide an excellent starting point to begin to understand the complex genetic architecture underlying variation in hop secondary metabolite composition, which is critical to the ultimate use of hop to provide bitterness, flavour and aroma in beer. comprising a large number of transferable markers, mapped with a conservative methodology, these linkage maps will provide a basis for further comparative mapping, facilitating the identification and validation of qtl that may ultimately be applied to successful application of molecular methods in selection programs.

qtl analysis
sex trait
in this study, the microsatellite marker hlaga <dig> was linked to the sex phenotype . the association of this marker with sex has been previously reported in two mapping populations grown in slovenia
 <cit> , one of which was the same as the mapping population used in this study. in this study the segregation of this sex-linked marker was detected for the first time in a new zealand mapping population , extending the utility of this marker. in both the new zealand and slovenian populations this sex-linked marker segregated from the male parent and showed complete linkage to the male sex phenotype. this is consistent with the specificity of the y chromosome to the male sex, male plants with the heteromorphic xy configuration and female plants with homomorphic xx
 <cit> . in both populations the significance of association of the hlaga <dig> marker with sex was very high ; however, a greater level of significance was identified in the slovenian population. the greater significance in the slovenian population is likely to reflect differences such as greater map length and number of markers on the linkage group of the slovenian population  as well as the smaller size of the slovenian population, since inflation of qtl effects increases with decreasing population size
 <cit> . sex-linked molecular markers have been identified in hop previously
 <cit> ; however, the hlaga <dig> marker is the most definitive sex-linked marker identified in hop to date, having now been verified in multiple populations. this study has confirmed the potential for the hlaga <dig> marker to be used for routine screening, allowing for the rapid identification of sex in hop breeding programs in diverse environments and populations. further studies are required, however, to understand the influence of autosomal regions on gender differentiation, as no sex-linked markers were identified on autosomes in this study. this may be due to the existence of numerous regions, each with small effects of too low significance to be detected by this qtl analysis, or the autosomal regions may not contain polymorphism linked to gender differentiation.

yield traits
three traits related to hop cone yield were examined in this study. of these, dry cone weight was the only trait for which a qtl was identified. one qtl, stable over the five year period, was detected, segregating from the female parent of the slovenian population, explaining 35% of the phenotypic variation . qtl were not identified for either green cone weight  or cone harvest index . the potential reasons for the failure to detect qtl differ between these two yield metrics. quantification of green cone weight is a method used for the rapid experimental assessment of hop yield. the lack of detectable qtl influencing this trait may be due to the variable moisture content of green cones  compared to dry cones . moisture content of harvested commercial product varies in other species
 <cit>  and where this is the case, most suggest that it should be corrected for. the lack of qtl for this trait suggest that caution should be applied to using green cone weight as a metric for informing yield.

harvest index is likewise commonly used to evaluate crop yields and a number of qtl have been identified in various crop species
 <cit> . although heritability of cone harvest index has not been directly examined in hop, the heritability of another hop yield trait has been found to be high
 <cit> . the high phenotypic variability for harvest index  suggests that there should be potentially enough power to detect qtl in this study. however, despite the high variability and potentially high heritability, no qtl, stable over the five year period, were detected for cone harvest index. this suggests that, unlike dry cone weight for which a strong qtl was detected, harvest index is influenced by multiple loci, each with small effects, which individually did not have high enough significance to be detected by this qtl analysis. further investigations are required to elucidate the heritability and genetic basis to variation in this commercially important trait.

qtl for cone yields have been identified in a previous study in the slovenian population
 <cit> , for both dry cone weight and cone harvest index. that qtl analysis, designed to maximally exploit qtl potential, was based on phenotypic measurements of single years  and identified more than  <dig> qtl across the years. these qtl were found to be highly variable across the different years, probably due to seasonal variation. the present study had the goal of identifying qtl with significant effects detectable over the entire five-year experimental period. using data averaged over five years, only a single qtl was identified for dry cone weight that was stable across the five-year experimental period . this qtl is adjacent to a marker  identified as a putative qtl for dry cone weight in a previous study of the slovenian population
 <cit> . this qtl, based on five-year average data, is less likely to be affected by environmental conditions or horticultural practice  than other putative qtl identified in the previous study
 <cit> . this qtl is an excellent candidate for mas and warrants further investigation outside of the slovenian growing region.

hop essential oils are thought to be the primary contributing factors influencing the flavour and aroma of beer and as such, total essential oil content is an important yield trait. particular essential oil profiles have historically been targeted in the genetic improvement of hop
 <cit> . while it has long been understood that hop essential oil profiles have a genetic basis
 <cit> , the genetic control of total essential oil content has not been previously established in hop. qtl have been previously identified for only two individual essential oil components, caryophyllene and farnesene
 <cit> , but not for total essential oil content. this study is the first to report an underlying genetic basis to variation in the accumulation of essential oils in the hop cone, via the identification of a putative qtl for essential oil content . the qtl identified segregated from the female parent of the new zealand population, explaining a sizeable proportion  of the phenotypic variation. the loci underlying variation at this qtl has great potential for hop mas, in situations where particular levels of essential oil are the target of genetic improvement efforts. validation outside the pedigree and experimental environment of new zealand could provide the scope for definitive and heritable increases in yield of total essential oils.

secondary metabolite traits
although specific secondary metabolites constitute the commercially important hop commodity, our understanding of the genetic basis underlying their variation is in its infancy, with qtl identified for only eight traits related to the control of secondary metabolite content. in this study, we performed an extensive qtl analysis of hop secondary metabolites, investigating  <dig> hop secondary metabolite traits,  <dig> of which were found to have a significant genetic basis to their phenotypic variation. a total of  <dig> putative qtl were identified . between one and four qtl were identified for each of the  <dig> traits, varying in both their significance  and the proportion of phenotypic variance of the trait explained , suggesting that the composition and concentration of secondary metabolites in hop is influenced by both mendelian and quantitative inheritance. this is consistent with the genetic studies of secondary metabolites in other genera, such as mentha, thymus and eucalyptus <cit> . for example, the occurrence of a single highly significant qtl for individual compounds, such as cohumulone  and colupulone  , may be indicative of the influence of major loci with mendelian inheritance; whereas a greater number of qtl of lesser significance were detected for other compounds, such as humulene, which is consistent with quantitative control . no qtl were detected for  <dig> of the secondary metabolite traits. these secondary metabolite traits all contributed a very low percentage of the secondary metabolite profile and as such may have been subject to inaccuracies in quantification.

two qtl were identified for α-acid content  in this study, explaining  <dig> % and  <dig> %, respectively . although α-acid was also examined in the slovenian population in this study, we were unable to detect these qtl for α-acid. there may be several reasons for this, including a lack of polymorphism in this population, variable loci effects in different genetic backgrounds , instability of the qtl over varying ontogenetic stages or seasonal conditions, or confounding environmental influences. evidence of environmental influence on the accumulation of α-acid in hop glandular trichomes has been found in a previous study of the slovenian population
 <cit> , where qtl analysis based on phenotypic measurements of five single years identified  <dig> qtl for α-acid, but none of these qtl were identified in more than three years, possibly due to seasonal variation. this study re-examined qtl for α-acid in the slovenian population, conducting qtl analysis on phenotypic data averaged over the five years, with the aim of identifying ontogenetically stable qtl. however, such a qtl was not identified. these results highlight how different ontogenetic stages and seasonal environmental conditions influence the identification of reliable and reproducible qtl and reinforce the requirement for further validation in alternate populations and different environmental conditions to improve our understanding of the genetic basis to variation in this important agronomic trait.

the qtl identified for α-acid in the new zealand population in this study, as well as the qtl identified for other hop acids and polyphenols, may correspond to regulatory factors rather than genes encoding biosynthetic enzymes. one marker based on a candidate chalcone synthase gene  encoding an enzyme involved in the biosynthesis of hop acids was mapped in the new zealand population in this study, but none of the qtl identified were associated with this gene. our findings were consistent with those of cerenak et al.
 <cit> , who identified qtl for α-acid, but not associated with chalcone synthase genes. this observation may support the conclusions of matoušek et al.
 <cit> , that variation in regulatory factors rather than chalcone synthase genes may have a greater effect on variation in hop acids and polyphenols.

this study identified a gender bias in the inheritance of hop secondary metabolite phenotypes. a total of  <dig> qtl regions were identified in this study, influencing the  <dig> secondary metabolite traits. each of these qtl regions were sex-specific, with  <dig> qtl regions associated with the female parent and three associated with the male parent . this significant partiality towards inheritance from the female parent may be due to several reasons. firstly, inheritance of the maternal phenotype may be due to dominance of the female parent at these loci; for each of the secondary metabolite traits, segregation may have occurred in the female parent while the corresponding locus in the male parent was homozygous recessive. secondly, the bias towards maternal inheritance of secondary metabolite traits may be due to epigenetic effects, where inheritable modifications to the activation of genes have occurred to promote the natural selective advantage of a female parent with a favourable secondary metabolite profile; the maternal control over the secondary metabolite profile is maintained in the offspring, passing on the advantage
 <cit> . thirdly, the bias towards inheritance from the female parent may be due to artificial selection, where hop breeders have shown selection bias towards the commercially-relevant female plants. artificial selection has not, however, been conducted as extensively in the male parents, which often perform as unknown pollinators  in the traditional crossing process
 <cit> ). further research is required to understand the underlying genetic basis for this gender bias in inheritance of secondary metabolite variation.

co-location of many of the putative qtl identified for secondary metabolites was a striking feature of this study. thirteen distinct qtl regions were detected, across six linkage groups in the new zealand population . of these  <dig> qtl regions, five displayed specificity for individual compounds . as hop secondary metabolites are derived from pathways of terpene metabolism and involve common precursors
 <cit> , the specificity of the qtl identified for single compounds suggests that these qtl may affect genes, transcription factors or enzymes involved in later stages of biosynthesis and modification of these compounds. specific qtl for compounds arising from the same biosynthetic pathway have been identified amongst co-locating qtl in several other genetic analyses of secondary metabolites
 <cit> . the remaining eight qtl regions detected were found to affect multiple traits . although several strong correlations existed between many of the secondary metabolites in these seven qtl regions , in most cases there were no clear patterns amongst these correlations to coincide with the co-locating qtl or functional grouping of secondary metabolites . two of these qtl regions influenced compounds from all three groups of secondary metabolites , affecting three and  <dig> individual compounds, respectively . the other four qtl regions had a less extensive influence, affecting two to eleven traits and only some of the secondary metabolite groups at one time . through comparisons between the new zealand and slovenian linkage maps, the qtl for dry cone weight identified in the slovenian population was matched to one of the qtl regions on the new zealand linkage map . further research is required to elucidate the genetic basis of variation in these traits and the relationships between them.

there may be an underlying genetic basis for the co-location of qtl observed in this study, reflecting pleiotropic effects of single loci influencing multiple secondary metabolite compounds. pleiotropy is consistent with the conclusion that all of the secondary metabolites of hop lupulin glands are derived from common precursors and pathways of terpene biosynthesis
 <cit> . alternatively, the co-location of these qtl may be due to linkage between the loci associated with the secondary metabolite traits. loci influencing secondary metabolites often exist in gene families; secondary metabolite diversity is thought to have arisen by gene duplications and consequently, the genes responsible for significant effects on variation in secondary metabolites are likely to be located very close together on the genome
 <cit> . duplication events in secondary metabolite genes, resulting in genetic linkage, have been found in a diversity of species, including vitis vinifera <cit> , arabidopsis thaliana <cit> , avena sativa <cit>  and also hop
 <cit> . therefore, the co-location of qtl identified in this study is likely to reflect the influence of both pleiotropic and linked loci, consistent with the findings of genetic studies of secondary metabolites in other taxa
 <cit> . the detection of pleiotropy/linkage on the scale determined in this study would not have been possible without the simultaneous examination of an extensive number of traits. characterising the polymorphism and effects of pleiotropic/linked loci in diverse lineages of hop will be essential for effective application of markers linked to qtl in mas.

the occurrence of pleiotropic or linked loci in the genetic control of secondary metabolites may have played an important ecological and evolutionary role in hop. the global hop population has been found to encompass limited levels of genetic diversity
 <cit> . prior to artificial selection of hop, the existence of pleiotropic or linked loci may have provided an adaptive strategy, assisting in the selective adaptation of hop, as a defensive mechanism against pathogens, for example. mutations in single genes from pleiotropic loci could affect the biosynthesis and profile of a large number of secondary metabolites, enabling a rapid diversification of secondary metabolite profiles and a broader defence response, compared to changes to single secondary metabolites by compound-specific genes. alternatively, the occurrence of pleiotropic or linked loci may also be an artefact of selection during and since hop domestication. artificial selection of hops for particular brewing characteristics and distinct chemical profiles may have resulted in the inheritable linkage of particular combinations of secondary metabolites. the effect of artificial selection on the genetic linkage of a number of different traits has been reported previously in a range of species
 <cit> .

the results obtained from these extensive qtl analyses have potentially significant implications for hop breeding. the patterns of qtl co-location observed in this study  suggest that there are separate qtl regions influencing both early and late stages of secondary metabolite biosynthesis. the detection of qtl involved in the early stages of the biosynthetic pathways, either linked or with pleiotropic effects on numerous secondary metabolites, suggests that there is potential for rapid change in the levels of multiple compounds simultaneously; however, the use of these qtl in molecular hop breeding programs may have undesirable consequences. it may be difficult to select for specific secondary metabolites or combinations thereof, without causing a cascade of unpredictable changes to other secondary metabolites. where the same qtl affects different secondary metabolites relating to opposing objectives, mas is unlikely to succeed
 <cit> . however, greater confidence can be placed in the specificity of the qtl identified in this study found to influence only a single trait . being compound-specific amongst a large number of secondary metabolites included in this study, these qtl may offer potential to molecular breeding of hop, after validation in further pedigrees and a range of environmental conditions. all of the putative qtl identified present a resource to further our understanding of the genetic basis of variation in traits that influence hop quality  in beer.

CONCLUSIONS
the qtl analyses conducted in this study revealed several important findings relating to the genetic basis of variation in three issues of relevance to hop breeding programs: expedited plant sex identification, increased yield capacity and improved secondary metabolite profiles, with important implications for the future use of molecular selection methods in hop. we verified a sex-linked marker in a third pedigree; and on the basis of its perfect association with the male sex in this and previous studies
 <cit>  the hlaga <dig> marker would be an effective tool for gender identification of hop plants, a key component of early stage selection in hop breeding programs. we identified an ontogenetically stable qtl for a trait associated with cone yield . however, for two other metrics of cone yield  currently used in routine screening of hop, no qtl were identified. the results for these traits highlight the difficulties of qtl detection for traits which may be controlled by many loci with small effects and for traits under a significant environmental influence. we identified qtl contributing towards explaining the observed phenotypic variation in secondary metabolite accumulation in hop cones through the identification of a qtl for essential oil content. we investigated a total of  <dig> secondary metabolite traits in this analysis and identified putative qtl affecting  <dig>  the broad range of secondary metabolite traits included in this study provided the first demonstration of extensive pleiotropy/linkage affecting many of these compounds in hop, including many which are apparently unrelated. pleiotropic/linked loci may present significant complications for molecular breeding, impeding the selection of specific traits without causing undesired alterations to others. in this study, we identified a number of qtl besides the pleiotropic/linked qtl that appeared to be specific to individual secondary metabolites. these qtl potentially offer a direct path to a locus influencing the phenotypic variation of specific secondary metabolites. the linkage maps constructed in this study incorporated a large number of new dart markers. as dart markers are transferable, these linkage maps can be employed in other mapping populations, facilitating the identification and validation of further qtl, a crucial step for the broad success of molecular breeding methods in hop. furthermore, dart markers can be sequenced to develop more informative co-dominant markers. this study greatly expands our understanding of the complex genetic architecture underlying variation in hop secondary metabolite composition and yield related traits and presents a step forward in hop molecular breeding.

