BACKGROUND
a recent study, based on phylogenetic and phenotypic analyses, showed that the organism previously named "leptotrichia sanguinegens" should be reassigned to a separate genus. thus, the genus sneathia was described, and the species was formally named sneathia sanguinegens  <cit> . species of this genus are long, gram-negative, non-motile rods that sometimes exhibit bulbous protrusions  <cit> . a novel bacterium that is closely related to s. sanguinegens was isolated from amniotic fluid and published as "leptotrichia amnionii"  <cit> . the species was not validly named and no type strain was designated. subsequently, 16s rdna phylogenetic analysis showed that "l. amnionii" is better assigned to the genus sneathia  <cit> . herein, we describe a vaginal isolate that phenotypically and phylogenetically resembles this bacterium. our genomic and phenotypic data clearly support the reclassification of this species to the genus sneathia, and we propose the designation sneathia amnii sp. nov. the type strain of s. amnii is sn <dig> 

sneathia species have been associated with serious obstetric complications including spontaneous abortions and preterm labor  <cit> . while the uterine cavity and amniotic fluid are usually sterile, bacterial infection can occur and is frequently associated with preterm labor and preterm premature rupture of fetal membranes  <cit> . sneathia is one of the most common genera detected in amniotic fluid, and its presence can lead to inflammation, histological chorioamnionitis, and/or amnionitis  <cit> . two recent studies investigated the rates of bacterial invasion of the amniotic cavity. amniotic fluid samples were analyzed for the presence of bacteria, and of samples from women with preeclampsia that were positive for bacteria, 50% contained sneathia while in samples from women presenting with preterm labor that were positive for bacteria, 25% contained sneathia  <cit> . these findings suggest that sneathia has the pathogenic capacity to invade the uterine cavity and the amniotic sac and thereby cause pregnancy complications. sneathia has also been implicated in both infant and maternal post-partum bacteremia  <cit> . more recently, a case of septic arthritis in a healthy, non-pregnant woman was reported, demonstrating that this opportunistic pathogen has the potential to cause infections outside of the reproductive tract as well  <cit> .

sneathia has also been associated with bacterial vaginosis , the most common vaginal disorder in women of reproductive age worldwide  <cit> . bv is thought to be a clinically significant disorder because it is associated with increased risk for preterm labor and increased rates of transmission of hiv and other sexually transmitted infections . bv is characterized by a decline in the number of healthy vaginal lactobacilli , and an increase in number of short rod-shaped and coccoid anaerobic bacteria. the overall bacterial load and species diversity are both drastically elevated in bv. the etiology of the disorder is poorly defined, complicating therapy, and bv tends to be recurrent  <cit> . recent culture-independent techniques that comprehensively identify bacterial taxa associated with bv have been employed in an effort to better understand its etiology. although these studies have revealed an association between bv and the presence of sneathia sp., the role of these bacteria in the etiology and pathology of the disease remains undefined  <cit> .

a recent study of the microbiome of the male urogenital tract found that men can also be colonized with sneathia, and that there is a significant correlation between colonization with sneathia and other sexually transmitted pathogens, suggesting that these bacteria can be sexually transmitted  <cit> . another study investigated the rate of sneathia colonization in female subjects with human papillomavirus , and while there was not a positive correlation between hpv and sneathia, there was a significant correlation between colonization with s. amnii  and cervical cancer in hpv-positive subjects  <cit> .

in summary, sneathia appears to be a significant, emerging opportunistic pathogen that may play a significant role in vaginal and reproductive health. however, due to its fastidious nature, very little is known about the genus. our analysis of mid-vaginal microbiome profiles from over  <dig> women who were recruited as part of the vaginal human microbiome project  <cit> , revealed that sneathia species, and especially s. amnii sp. nov., commonly inhabit the human vagina. in an effort to better define this microorganism, we cultured a vaginal isolate of sneathia, analyzed its genetic virulence potential, and characterized its virulence properties in vitro. herein, we describe s. amnii sp. nov. as a novel species that closely resembles isolates formerly designated as "l. amnionii," and designate the type strain as s. amnii sn <dig>  furthermore, we sequenced and analyzed the genome of this strain, which represents the first genome for the sneathia genus.

RESULTS
sneathia species are a common component of the vaginal microbiota
we collected mid-vaginal samples from  <dig> women visiting urban outpatient clinics in virginia  <cit>  for a variety of reasons . to identify the diversity of species present in these samples, we targeted the v1-v <dig> region of the 16s ribosomal-rna-encoding gene. we applied a deep-sequencing approach that generated an average of ~ <dig>  reads per sample , and therefore were able to detect taxa present in low abundance. sneathia species were found in  <dig> %  of these samples using an abundance threshold of  <dig> % of total reads . using a more stringent abundance threshold of 1% of total reads , we still detected sneathia in  <dig> % of samples. notably, in three mid-vaginal samples, more than half of the total reads classified to sneathia. thus, organisms in the genus sneathia are common members of the vaginal microbiome, and they are occasionally identified as the predominant taxa.

s. amnii in mid-vaginal microbiome profiles
the reference sequences of the v1-v <dig> regions of the 16s rrna genes of s. sanguinegens and s. amnii sp. nov. are only 91% identical, permitting clear separation of the 16s rdna metagenomic reads from these two species. although we detected both s. sanguinegens and s. amnii in the mid-vaginal samples, the majority of sneathia reads  classified to s. amnii . moreover, both s. amnii and s. sanguinegens often co-occur in mid-vaginal samples. using a  <dig> % abundance threshold for presence, both s. amnii and s. sanguinegens were detected in  <dig> % of mid-vaginal samples containing at least one of the two sneathia species. however, approximately 6% of all reads classified as sneathia do not clearly classify to one of the two known sneathia species. our preliminary results indicate that there is likely a third, less-abundant vaginal sneathia that has yet to be described. reads classified to the novel putative sneathia taxon were detected in  <dig> % of samples using a  <dig> % abundance threshold, representing  <dig> % of all reads classifying to sneathia at the genus level. the v1-v <dig> rdna sequences from these bacteria are ~91% and ~93% identical to corresponding rdna sequences from s. amnii and s. sanguinegens, respectively, and these differences do not appear to be due to sequence errors or chimeras . thus, our results suggest that at least three related sneathia types are found in vaginal samples. herein, we focus on characterizing the s. amnii isolate, which we have successfully cultured and cloned, although we are continuing to attempt to culture and clone vaginal isolates of s. sanguinegens and the third, as yet unnamed, putative sneathia.

phylogenetic analysis of the 16s rdna of s. amnii
to better define the role of s. amnii sp. nov. in vaginal health and disease, we isolated a clone from a mid-vaginal sample taken from an african american woman in her early 20's presenting with symptoms of preterm labor at  <dig> weeks of gestation. the 16s rrna gene of this isolate was sequenced in its entirety and aligned with the 16s rdnas from other members of fusobacteriaceae family  to assess their phylogenetic relationships . this alignment showed that the 16s rdna of our isolate is  <dig> % identical to the 16s rdna of the isolate first described as "l. amnionii" . this result, along with phenotypic characteristics, suggests that the sneathia isolate described herein is very similar to the bacterium previously described by shukla et al.   <cit> . furthermore, the 16s rdna of our sneathia isolate exhibited  <dig> % overall sequence identity to s. sanguinegens , but only  <dig> % overall sequence similarity to leptotrichia buccalis , the type species of the genus leptotrichia. phylogenetic analysis of the 16s rdna gene, are consistent with the classification of this bacterium to the genus sneathia, as previously proposed by eribe et al.  <cit>  for the bacterium termed l. amnionii. therefore, we propose s. amnii sp. nov. as the name for the species. our analyses also confirm, as previously shown  <cit> , the close relationship  between sneathia and streptobacillus moniliformis, the causative agent of rat bite fever  <cit> .

the genome of s. amnii sp. nov
general features of the s. amnii genome are shown and compared to the genomes of the related bacteria s. moniliformis, l. buccalis, and sebaldella termiditis in table  <dig>  the genome was sequenced to ~ <dig> fold coverage using roche  <dig> flx titanium technology, and this sequence assembled into one scaffold of  <dig> , <dig> bases . this initial assembly was interrupted by  <dig> sequence gaps ranging from ~ <dig> to  <dig> nucleotides. gaps within the scaffold were filled by pcr ampliflication and capillary sequencing of the amplicons. although mate pair sequencing permitted the assembly of the genome into a single circular scaffold, the final  sequence gaps represent a very small fraction of the genome  and therefore are unlikely to impact our analyses.

s. amnii
s. moniliformis
l. buccalis
s. termiditis
1open reading frames predicted as described in the materials and methods;

2average orfs sizes shown herein were calculated using protein-coding sequences available at genebank: s. moniliformis , l. buccalis  and s. termiditis ;

3clusters of orthologous groups as described in the materials and methods;

4genes assigned to general functional prediction only  and function unknown  were not included.

the genome of sneathia amnii is approximately  <dig>  mbp and has a gc content of ~28%. thus, this organism exhibits the smallest of the fusobacteriaceae family genomes sequenced to date. a representative from each of the most closely related genera; i.e., s. moniliformis , l. buccalis , and s. termiditis , was selected for genomic comparisons. the s. amnii genome exhibits  <dig>  putative protein-coding genes, with an average gene length of  <dig> bp , constituting 92% of the genome. thus, the coding density of the genome is quite high. s. amnii intergenic regions have an average length of  <dig> bp, very similar to the  <dig> bp average intergenic size of s. moniliformis. the genomes of l. buccalis and s. termiditis have slightly larger intergenic regions, averaging  <dig> and  <dig> bp, respectively . however, several studies have found no significant correlation between bacterial genome size and average intergenic region lengths  <cit> . we found that the differences in the gene composition account for the difference in the genome sizes of these related organisms. although the genome of s. amnii is relatively small, its gene density  is higher than the average gene density of related members of the fusobacteriaceae family, including s. moniliformis, l. buccalis and s. termiditis. this high gene density of s. amnii seems to be attributable to numerous overlapping genes. our evidence also suggests that the s. amnii genome contains at least  <dig> overlapping genes. the compact genome of this organism supports a hypothesis that it is subject to selective pressures that attribute high cost to genome size and replication.

of the  <dig>  predicted genes of s. amnii,  <dig>  clustered into cog orthologous groups  <cit>  and could be associated with a putative function. a comparison of cog functional groups for the selected fusobacteriaceae genomes revealed a correlation of gene content with genome size . as observed previously  <cit> , among the four taxa that we examined, gene contents for cog classes j, l, d and f are generally inversely correlated to genome size, whereas classes k, n, t, and q are generally positively correlated. cog groups j, l, d and f generally deal with dna replication, cell cycle regulation and protein translation, whereas cog groups k, n, t and q are associated with transcription, signal transduction, cell motility and the biochemistry of secondary metabolites . there is a rationale for this in that as the genome size becomes compressed, functions of cell motility and signaling, which are dispensable or can be 'outsourced' to the host, are lost, while essential functions like dna replication are maintained. as the total number of genes is reduced, the less important functions become a lower percentage of the remaining genes, and the more important functions become a higher percentage of the total. this trend was also apparent among genes not characterized in cog, which is probably not surprisingly since these genes are likely to be involved in more specialized processes and may not be essential for growth and survival. interestingly, whereas a positive correlation between genome size and cog class c  has previously been reported, we did not observe this correlation in our analysis of these four genomes . thus, the general characteristics of this genome are fairly typical of a pathogen under pressure to tailor its genetic capabilities to the bare essentials while taking maximum advantage of a close relationship with its mammalian host.

central metabolism
analysis of the metabolic potential of s. amnii provided insight into the biochemical reactions underlying the complex growth requirements of this fastidious organism. our genome-wide metabolic reconstruction analyses suggested that s. amnii is able to metabolize a limited variety of carbohydrates, including glucose, maltose, glycogen and glucosamine. in contrast, sneathia would be unable to ferment starch, mucin and mannose. the key enzymes; i.e. hexokinase, fructokinase, galactokinase, mannokinase and rhamnulokinase, needed for these conversions of the latter carbohydrates are missing in the genome of s. amnii. fermentation assays confirmed that, as predicted, s. amnii ferments glycogen, maltose, and glucose, but not starch, galactose, mucin, mannose, sucrose or fructose. in addition, lactic acid was produced during fermentative metabolism as predicted by metabolic analyses. since s. termiditis, l. buccalis and s. moniliformis, which clearly arose from a progenitor common to s. amnii, maintain these capabilities, these results support the hypothesis that s. amnii sp. nov. has lost many of the capabilities of its progenitors .

glycogen is produced by vaginal epithelial cells in women of reproductive age, and many known vaginal colonizers  utilize this carbohydrate source. therefore, it was not surprising that s. amnii, with its "reduced" metabolic capabilities, still effectively utilizes glycogen but can ferment only a few alternative carbon sources. glycogen and glucose are the most abundant carbohydrate sources in the vagina, but fructose, mannose, glucosamine and starch are also present in lower amounts  <cit> . maltose is an intermediate of glycogen metabolism and it is possible that s. amnii acquires this nutrient source from other bacteria that share the niche.

in silico analysis of the s. amnii genome revealed complete phosphotransferase systems  for mannose, galactitol and cellobiose. since we have empirically shown that s. amnii cannot metabolize mannose or galactose, the role of these systems is unclear. in contrast, the majority of the sugar transporter pts systems, including those for beta-glucosides, d-glucosamine, fructose, glucose, lactose, mannitol and sucrose, are incomplete. for these systems, genes for an eiia component  are present, but no genes encoding putative permeases were identified. thus, the functions of these incomplete pts systems are currently unknown. some studies suggest that, instead of carbohydrate transport, some of the enzymes in these systems may be involved in regulation of other biochemical pathways  <cit> .

gene function
energy metabolism
genes encoding enzymes of the non-oxidative branch of the pentose phosphate pathway , including the genes for transaldolase and transketolase, were identified in the genome. these enzymes link the ppp with glycolysis by catalyzing the conversion of dietary  <dig> carbon sugars into both  <dig>  and  <dig>  carbon sugars, which can then be utilized by the pathways of glycolysis. it has been suggested that some human pathogens turn to gluconeogenesis to sustain growth when faced with limited sugar substrates  <cit> . however, our analyses suggest that s. amnii cannot use this strategy, since fructose bisphosphatase, an essential gene for gluconeogenesis, is apparently not present in its genome. since the organism is anaerobic , although moderately aerotolerant, it was not unexpected that enzymes for oxidative phosphorylation  were absent from the genome. additionally, the tricarboxylic acid  cycle of s. amnii appears to be absent, since only one of its required enzymes, dihydrolipoamide s-succinyltransferase, was detected in the  <dig>  mbp genome of the bacterium.

amino acid and nucleotide biosynthesis
loss of genes required for biosynthesis of amino acids is common among opportunistic pathogenic bacteria  <cit> , and we found that s. amnii also lacks the enzymes required to synthesize most amino acids. in contrast, however, the enzymes needed to convert l-aspartate to fumarate, l-asparagine, and oxaloacetate appear to be present in the genome. in addition, many of the required enzymes that convert l-amino acids to d-amino acids were identified. as for genes required for amino acid biosynthesis, the genes required for de novo synthesis of purines and pyrimidines were not identified in the genome of s. amnii. however, several components of the salvage pathways for purine and pyrimidine biosynthesis were present. thus, s. amnii apparently relies on the purine nucleotide salvage via adenosine and hypoxanthine. adenosine is likely to be imported from host cells and converted into inosine by purine nucleoside phosphorylase. hypoxanthine also appears to be derived from the host cell and then converted to inosine-5'-monophosphate  by hypoxanthine-guanine phosphoribosyltransferase. imp serves as the precursor for both amp and gmp, which are further converted to triphosphates. as part of the purine salvage process, the enzymes purine-nucleoside phosphorylase and xanthine-guanine phosphoribosyltransferase are also encoded in this genome, and they are responsible for the conversion of the xanthosine to either xanthine or guanine to xmp or gmp, respectively. in addition, there are two alternative salvage pathways by which bacteria convert uridine to ump. one is catalyzed by uracil phosphoribosyltransferase, the other requires the sequential enzymatic reactions of uridine phosphorylase and uridine kinase. uridine kinase also converts cytidine to cmp. these key components of the pyrimidine salvage pathway are encoded in the s. amnii genome. thus, despite the lack of many enzymes required for amino acid and nucleotide synthesis, s. amnii seems to be able to scavenge what it needs from its hosts.

dna repair and exchange
a number of genes predicted to encode proteins involved in dna modification and repair were also detected. thus, we identified a putative dna restriction-modification system. there are two genes encoding putative competence related proteins, but a complete system for genetic competence is apparently lacking, since the complex named recbcd, composed of three different subunits called recb, recc, and recd, was not found. genes encoding apparent recombination proteins, including reca, recg, recx, recf, recr, ruvabc, and viral rect, were present. the genome contains a uvrd homolog, but, like other pathogenic bacterial species with minimal genomes  <cit> , other genes involved in uv-induced dna repair, including uvrabc, were not found and seem to be absent.

the s. amnii genome bears a complete temperate prophage genome in addition to several individual phage-related genes dispersed throughout the genome. the prophage consists of a  <dig>  kbp sequence containing both a lysogeny module, including putative integrase and repressor genes, and a replicative module, including genes encoding terminase, portal and tail proteins. other phage-related genes encoding integrases, a replisome organizer and a capsid are distributed throughout the genome. two identical  <dig>  kbp insertion sequences are also present in the sneathia genome. this insertion sequence has 99% identity to is <dig>  which was previously reported in the bv-associated clostridiales species bvab <dig>  suggesting a possible cross genus transmission.

in brief, s. amnii exhibits the capacity for general dna recombination and repair and while it does not appear to have the capacity for high-level natural competence, it has clearly acquired exogenous dna, possibly through phage transduction and/or other mechanisms.

transport
few genes encoding known secretion systems were found; however, several genes predicted to encode homologs of the type ii protein secretion machinery  were detected. normally, components of t2ss are encoded within an operon located at a single genomic locus, although single genomes can contain multiple, discontiguous t2ss  <cit> . s. amnii contains genes homologous to both pulf/pilc and gspd proteins in a single locus. a second locus encodes a gspe homolog, hypothesized to be the atpase that energizes type ii secretion, and a seca homolog is located at a third locus. taken together, these observations suggest that s. amnii has functional sec and type ii secretion systems, although other protein secretion systems that were not identified by our analyses may also be present. in addition, there are many genes apparently related to small molecule transport, including ~ <dig> abc-type transporter genes, ~ <dig> genes involved in ion transport, and ~ <dig> multidrug/lipid/protein pumps. apparent homologs of the f1f <dig> atpase were also detected. in brief, s. amnii seems to be well equipped to obtain vitamins, cofactors and other nutrients from its environment.

growth requirements
s. sanguinegens reportedly requires blood for growth  <cit> . in contrast, s. amnii did not require blood for growth, but its growth rate was enhanced by the addition of human serum . s. amnii grew well on chocolate agar. colonies appeared after  <dig> h, and by  <dig> h the colonies were flat, ~ <dig> mm in diameter, and crystalline. s. amnii did not grow on brucella sheep's blood agar but colonies on bhi agar containing 10% fresh human blood were mucoid, raised, amorphous, ~ <dig> mm in diameter, and displayed alpha hemolytic activity. consistent with our predictions from the genome analysis, s. amnii was catalase-negative and grew only under anaerobic conditions. however, it was able to tolerate transient exposure to air and was positive for superoxide dismutase activity. interestingly, the genome did not contain an obvious gene encoding superoxide dismutase, and maximum identity to superoxide dismutase proteins, as detected using blastx, was 30%.

morphology
scanning electron microscopy of s. amnii  revealed variable morphology including long  gram-negative rods as well as short, amorphous rods and cocci. similar short morphotypes have been reported for s. moniliformis  <cit> , and other bacteria, and are referred to as "l forms". the l forms of s. moniliformis are reportedly deficient in cell walls and thought to be non-pathogenic. s. amnii l-forms were more common in older cultures, although actively growing cultures were predominated by the bacillary form. tandem electron microscopy revealed that the long rods were actually chains of 1- <dig> μm long bacilli with rounded ends . s. amnii did not appear to be motile, the genome does not contain genes predicted to encode pilin or flagellar proteins, and neither sem nor tem revealed structures that resemble pili or flagella.

antibiotic sensitivity
we performed sensitivity assays for a number of antibiotics . s. amnii displayed high resistance to nafcillin, as is common for other gram-negative organisms. the standard therapy for bv is metronidazole, but this therapy is suboptimal, and it is not known whether all bv-associated organisms are sensitive to this agent. interestingly, s. amnii was more sensitive than gardnerella vaginalis, another common bv-associated organism, to metronidazole. in contrast, s. amnii was more resistant than g. vaginalis to every other drug tested  <cit> . gram-negative bacteria are generally resistant to the glycopeptide, vancomycin, because the large compound is unable to pass through the gram-negative outer membrane. in fact, vancomycin sensitivity is often used as an alternative test to gram staining and more than 99% of gram-negative clinical bacterial isolates, including leptrotrichia species, are vancomycin resistant  <cit> . thus, it was surprising that s. amnii was vancomycin-sensitive. this finding may suggest that the cell envelope of s. amnii differs from that of typical gram-negative bacteria, or it may be related to the large number of permeases and transporters predicted to be within the s. amnii envelope. finally, s. amnii exhibited relatively high levels of resistance to antibiotics such as tetracycline  and ciprofloxacin . the genome encodes two apparent mate efflux family homologs. members of this family are frequently involved in drug export and single or multi-drug resistance and could be involved in resistance to these antimicrobial agents.

although bv is associated with a greater than 2-fold increased risk for preterm birth, treatment with metronidazole during pregnancy does not reduce the risk for preterm birth  <cit> . bv involves the formation of a bacterial biofilm on the vaginal epithelium and the bacteria within these biofilms appear to be recalcitrant to metronidazole therapy, leading to a high rate of relapse  <cit> . thus, even though s. amnii was sensitive to metronidazole, it may exhibit antibiotic tolerance if it occurs within the bv-associated biofilm. therapeutic intervention strategies that target both the biofilm and the causative species may need to be developed in order to reduce the rate of bv-associated preterm birth.

hemolytic activity and cytotoxicity
consistent with the observation of alpha hemolysis on blood agar, s. amnii exhibited weak hemolytic activity. s. amnii induced the release of ~9% of the hemoglobin from human red blood cells while an e. coli strain without hemolytic activity lead to the release of less than  <dig> %. the genome encodes a putative hemolysin of approximately  <dig> kda that could be responsible for the hemolytic activity. it also encodes a large protein  with homology to both hemagglutinins and hemolysins. however, hemagglutination of human red blood cells was not observed. s. amnii was cytotoxic to me- <dig> human cervical cancer cells. thus, after  <dig> hours of exposure, the cervical epithelial cells exhibited rounding and other cytopathic changes associated with cytotoxicity , suggesting the existence of a toxin that causes damage to these cells. although a cytotoxin was not annotated in the genome, one of the hemolysins discussed above could be responsible for this activity.

adherence to cervical epithelial cancer cells
s. amnii adhered to me- <dig> human cervical cancer cells . the image also reveals apparent perforations in the epithelial cells near the site of bacterial adherence that were not present in untreated cells , suggesting that the bacteria may be causing local membrane damage. the duration of the adherence was minimized to prevent major cytopathogenic changes; however, it is likely that cytotoxic effects were starting to manifest. the s. amnii genome contains only one apparent adhesin homolog, but three apparent homologs of the hia family cell surface protein and a number of yada domain-containing proteins are present  <cit> . the hia and yada families are autotransporters often implicated in adherence to host tissues and cells. there is also a gene encoding a putative fibronectin-binding protein, which could play a role in adherence to host tissues.

other genetic components with potential roles in virulence
we did not detect any putative quorum-sensing systems. however, only a few systems including the luxs system are highly conserved and it is possible if not likely that a quorum-sensing system would be difficult to detect. a putative toxin-antitoxin cassette was found. these cassettes can play a role in the stabilization of foreign dna, such as plasmids  <cit> . they have also been shown to contribute to stress resistance and the persister phenotype  <cit> . sneathia has been isolated from amniotic fluid and therefore presumably has the capacity to invade the uterine cavity and traverse the fetal membranes.

very little is known about virulence factors that promote uterine and intra-amniotic invasion although it has been speculated that enzymes including sialidase that hydrolyze sialic acid residues or enzymes that degrade sialylated proteins plays a role in traversal of the cervical mucus  <cit> . sneathia encoded a protein with 63% identity and 77% similarity to a o-sialoglycoprotein endopeptidase that could be involved in the degradation of sialylated proteins. evidence suggests that listeria crosses the gestational membranes through villous syncytiotrophoblasts, and that the invasin, internalin is required for this process  <cit> . sneathia encoded a number of potential invasins. the yada-like surface protein mentioned as a putative adhesin has also been implicated in invasion. it also encodes a protein with 22% identity and 37% similarity to internalin f from clostridium perfringens.

clustered regularly interspaced short palindromic repeats  are hypervariable sequences that are widely distributed in bacteria and archaea and play critical roles in the adaptation and persistence of a microbial host in a particular ecosystem by providing acquired resistance against viruses  <cit> . using crispfinder  <cit>  we identified one crispr locus with nine  <dig> bp direct repeats  located adjacent to the putative cas gene. these finding suggest the presence of a functional crispr system in s. amnii.

CONCLUSIONS
sneathia is one of the most frequently detected organisms from amniotic fluid in cases of preterm labor, suggesting an important role in obstetric health. we detect sneathia species in over 40% of mid-vaginal samples in our ongoing study. the fastidious nature of sneathia makes cultivation somewhat difficult, and consequently, very little is known about its biology or its pathogenic potential. the first genomic sequence of an organism in the genus sneathia provides a starting point for the detailed study of these organisms and their role in obstetric and gynecologic health. the genome is small, approximately  <dig>  mbp, and highly reduced, which may be the basis of its fastidious nature. metabolic reconstructions of the genome revealed capacities that largely reflect the known metabolic, energy, and anaerobic phenotypes of the bacterium. we did observe an increased growth phenotype in the presence of human serum, which was not reproducible using fetal bovine serum , reaffirming the highly specialized nature of this organism for the human niche. our results indicate that s. amnii is able to adhere to, and has high cytotoxic potential for, cervical epithelial cells. analysis of the genome sequence revealed a hemolysin, which could exert this cytotoxic activity. while s. amnii was sensitive to metronidazole in our assay, bv-associated biofilms may confer antibiotic tolerance to species that appear sensitive in vitro and have been shown to be involved in the high rate of relapse. in summary, the genome of this emerging pathogen reflects its phenotype and begins to shed light on the reveal its pathogenic potential and likely role in the gynecologic and obstetric complications associated with s. amnii.

description of sneathia amnii sp.nov
sneathia amnii  consists of long gram-negative rods as well as short, amorphous rods and cocci. closer examination suggests that the long rods are chains of short rod-like bacteria. colonies on blood agar plates after  <dig> hours were flat, ~ <dig> mm in diameter, and crystalline. colonies on bhi agar containing 10% fresh human blood were ~ <dig> mm in diameter and displayed alpha hemolytic activity. cells were catalase-negative, aerotolerant, and optimal growth occurred under anaerobic conditions. fermentation of glycogen, maltose, and glucose were demonstrated. lactic acid was produced during fermentative metabolism. strains have been isolated from human clinical specimens . the type strain of s. amnii, sn <dig>  has a %g+c of ~28% and a genome of ~ <dig>  mbp.

