BACKGROUND
studies on the free-living nematode caenorhabditis elegans have provided a wealth of information on metazoan biology and development. however, being a member of the nematoda has periodically engendered erroneous assumptions that c. elegans is a measurable representative of other nematodes within this phylum. more recent studies on the genomes and transcriptomes of other nematodes have demonstrated the extensive diversity within this group and the need to look more closely at individual genera to begin addressing questions related to nematode parasitism and host-parasite relationships.

cooperia oncophora and ostertagia ostertagi are two parasitic nematodes of the order strongylida that belong to the same phylogenetic clade as c. elegans <cit> . both species are parasites of bovids in more temperate regions of the world. the diseases caused by these nematodes are among the most costly to the cattle industry where hundreds of millions of dollars are lost each year in lower productivity and higher management expenses. treatment of cattle infected with these strongylid nematodes commonly involves anthelmintic drugs; however, similar to what has been observed in many microorganisms, drug resistance has become a significant problem within this group of parasites  <cit> . in spite of their economic impact, a dearth of information is available on their molecular biology.

parasites of the genera cooperia and ostertagia as well as other strongylida exhibit similar life cycles that begin with fertilized eggs being passed in the host feces. like c. elegans, the first three larval stages  are considered free-living because they are environmentally-exposed but with no host dependency. the infective l <dig> has a protective sheath  that allows for movement on pasture while protecting the parasite from ecological pressures. upon ingestion, however, the nematodes become host-dependent i.e. parasitic; the l <dig> exsheath , develop to the fourth larval stage  and continue development to adults in the abomasum  or the intestines . despite their biological similarities, infection by o. ostertagi does not confer strong immunity against reinfection except in cattle which have been infected for extended periods of time  <cit> . cattle which have been infected by c. oncophora, on the other hand, attain resistant to reinfection more readily  <cit> . furthermore, even though cattle are often found simultaneously-infected with both species, anthelmintic resistance has only been documented in cooperia spp.

deciphering the underlying biological differences between these two similar organisms may open the path for more holistic hypotheses on host-parasite relationships, host immunity, and the development of drug resistance. detailed and comparative explorations of their transcriptomes and genomes would not only provide insights into fundamental biological processes, but underpin the discovery of new treatments and control methods that may be broadly applicable to other less similar nematodes. although limited transcriptomic information is available for two developmental stages of o. ostertagi,  <cit>  this falls woefully short of representing the entire life cycle and providing insights into what differentiates the free-living and parasitic stages. currently, no transcriptomic data are publicly available for c. oncophora. analysis of transcriptome data and their comparison with genomic data is well known to provide useful information about an organism  <cit> . this approach has led to studies on identifying new drug targets , understanding nematode biology  <cit> , and detecting parasite protein-specific indels and evaluating their importance in parasitism and evolution  <cit> , to name a few.

the present study has generated extensive, stage-related information on the transcriptomes of c. oncophora and o. ostertagi. the comprehensive comparative transcriptomic analysis of stages representing the entire life cycles of these animals established gene expression patterns which characterize and delineate among each of the stages investigated. in addition, transcripts which are unique to free-living or parasitic stages have also been discovered. the resources and results in this study provided molecular insights that improve our understanding of parasite biology and development, and identified differential transcripts among stages/sexes. in broader terms, these analyses will be extremely useful for annotating their upcoming genomes  <cit>  and could enable the development of new methods to control infections by these parasites.

RESULTS
transcript reconstruction and homologs in other nematodes
sequencing of the transcriptomes of c. oncophora and o. ostertagi resulted in  <dig> , <dig> and  <dig> , <dig> reads and  <dig>  and  <dig>  assembled transcripts and corresponding peptide translations, respectively . these transcripts represent an estimated 81% and 74% of the complete transcriptomes  wherein  <dig> and  <dig> cegs were detected in these two species, respectively. the transcript consensus sequences are available at http://nematode.net <cit> . the number of transcripts likely over estimates gene discovery, as one gene could be represented by multiple non-overlapping transcript fragments. such ‘fragmentation’  <cit> , was estimated at 21% for c. oncophora and 22% for o. ostertagia.

sequence homologues for 68% of the predicted peptides of c. oncophora and 73% of those of o. ostertagi were found in at least one other nematode species . approximately half of these homologues were common to sequences in all nematodes examined . strongylids had the largest subset of group specific homologues, while non-strongylid parasite species had the fewest . peptides predicted to be species-specific were significantly shorter in length, on average, than peptides with matches in other species . this explains in part, the perceived sequence specificity in lieu of finding homologs as reported previously  <cit> .

transcript profiles throughout the c. oncophora and o. ostertagi life cycle stages
on average, 35% of the transcripts of a given stage are constitutively expressed in that specie, and this was true for both species . in c. oncophora, 21% are found in all stages, whereas 24% are found in all stages of o. ostertagi. the kegg pathways analysis suggests that the majority of these transcripts are involved in genetic information processing and in particular, transcription and translation ; the interpro  domains encoded by these transcripts confirm their associations with these functions . one of the most prevalent domains in constitutively-expressed transcripts in both species is ubiquitin-associated/translation elongation factor .

while some of the peptides encoded by constitutively-expressed transcripts may not contain identifiable domains, most of them exhibit homology with other proteins. the majority of these peptides  had homologs in at least one specie from the three phylogenetic databases to which they were compared, whereas 79% and 75% have homologs in all three databases suggesting that constitutively-expressed transcripts are involved in core cellular processes. as expected, peptides in c. oncophora and o. ostertagi had higher numbers of homologs among the strongylida parasites  than any other group; the fewest number were shared with the non-strongylida nematodes.

the number of transcripts expressed in only one stage was small . in general, transcripts expressed in the later stages i.e. adult, had a high number of homologs  in other species, whereas those expressed in the earlier stages i.e. egg, had fewer . the parasitic stages including the l3sh exhibited a higher number of homologs in the strongylid parasites than in the other two groups of species, whereas more of the transcripts expressed in the free-living stages showed similarity with organisms in the two non-strongylida groups than with those in the strongylida group with the exception of the l3sh.

comparing stage-specific transcript expression within species revealed that the majority of transcripts expressed in each stage are not differentially-expressed ; ~20% of transcripts in both species are up-regulated in any given stage whereas ~26% are down-regulated. comparative values for up- and down-regulated transcripts are shown in figure 2c and 2d. on average 74% and 68% of up-regulated transcripts have homologs in at least one nematode group to which they were compared; up-regulated transcripts had a higher number of homologs to strongylida parasites only . as with the constitutively-expressed transcripts, translation is the most prevalent kegg category in both c. oncophora and o. ostertagi. most transcripts  are up-regulated in more than one stage likely resulting from carryover between consecutive stages.

there was a total of  <dig> transcripts identified as encoding putatively-secreted peptides of which  <dig> were enriched in at least one stage. it was determined that free-living stages tended to have more of these transcripts in common with each other than with the parasitic stages. parasitic stages tended to have a common pool of secreted peptides as well. the exception to this was c. oncophora l <dig> which shared more secreted peptides with the free-living stages than with the other parasitic stages. the 5% of domains most prevalent in the secreted peptides were very similar between the two species. transthyretin-like, metridin-like shk toxin, saposin b, and cap domains were among the most prevalent for secreted proteins in both species. two insulin domains were among the most prevalent in secreted peptides of c. oncophora but were absent from o. ostertagi. ves allergen was found in  <dig> secreted peptides of o. ostertagi but was found in only one secreted peptide of c. oncophora.

differences in gene expression and associated functions between free-living and parasitic stages
pfam domains were identified in 41% of the peptides in both c. oncophora and o. ostertagi matching  <dig> and  <dig> different domains, respectively. in both organisms the most prevalent domain was rna recognition motif  .

an examination of transcripts expressed in the free-living  and parasitic  stages of development revealed that some pfam domains are abundant in both phases of development while others are unique to a single stage or phase. the most abundant pfam domain  in the free-living stages of c. oncophora was expressed solely in this phase of development while two of the top three domains  in the parasitic stages were not expressed in any of the free-living stages . domains like the rna recognition motif were found equally in both phases.

a total of 35% of c. oncophora peptides and o. ostertagi peptides could be associated with go terms categorized as ‘biological process’, ‘cellular component’, and/or ‘molecular function’ . examination of go terms associated with the peptides reveals significant differences between parasitic and free-living stages . significantly-enriched molecular functions in the parasitic stages of o. ostertagi and c. oncophora included binding , protein binding , and catalytic activity . in the free-living stages, sodium:potassium-exchanging atpase activity  and aspartic-type endopeptidase activity  were enriched in c. oncophora while oxygen binding  and sequence specific dna binding  were enriched in o. ostertagi.

a total of  <dig>  and  <dig>  unique interpro domains were detected in 46% of c. oncophora and  <dig> % of o. ostertagi peptides with the most prevalent domain being ‘nad -binding’ domain . in the free-living stages, globin, zinc finger domains, and chromo domains were among the most prevalent . in the parasitic stages, metridin-like shk toxin, cap domain, and c-type lectins were among the most prevalent motifs . clustering based on the number of ipr domains found in up-regulated peptides revealed that consecutive stages tend mainly to cluster together with the exception of peptides from the egg . in both species, the domains found in these peptides tend to be linked to the adult stage, which is likely due to the presence of fertilized eggs in the adults.

c. elegans had  <dig>  proteins with rnai phenotypes in the stages analogous to free-living c. oncophora and o. ostertagi, and  <dig>  proteins in the parasitic stages . c. oncophora had  <dig> polypeptides from the free-living stages and  <dig> from the parasitic stages with homologs to the c. elegans genes with available rnai phenotypes, whereas o. ostertagi shared  <dig> homologous polypeptides from free-living stages and  <dig> polypeptides from the parasitic stages, with c. elegans genes of known rnai phenotype. for most rnai phenotypes inferred, there were no significant differences between the numbers of polypeptides in the two species and the numbers of proteins in c. elegans that exhibited those phenotypes. c. oncophora had significantly more peptides with predicted rnai growth phenotypes  in the parasitic stages when compared to c. elegans. in contrast, o. ostertagi exhibited a significantly greater number of peptides with larval lethal phenotypes  in the parasitic stages  relative to c. elegans.

comparison of the up-regulated transcripts to the kegg pathways revealed an increase in the number of transcripts involved in metabolism of cofactors and vitamins in the parasitic stages of c. oncophora . in the free-living stages of o. ostertagi, there were significantly  more transcripts involved in energy metabolism when compared to the parasitic stages .

discussion
the gastrointestinal parasites studied here exhibit numerous biological similarities. they begin their lives as eggs that are passed in the feces from the host. they remain as free-living organisms up to and including the l3sh at which time they are ingested by the host, ex-sheath and then continue their development as parasitic organisms within the host. examination of transcripts in both species revealed that  <dig> % in c. oncophora and  <dig> % in o. ostertagi have sequence homologues in the other species examined in this study  and that ~60% of strongylid genes have homologs in c. elegans <cit> . while we have identified few peptides  that share homology only to non-strongylida species , mainly ascaris. suum and brugia malayi, these are likely homologous peptides not yet identified in other stongylida species because of the incomplete nature of their genome sequences. our study showed similar results in that blast searches identified homologous sequences in  <dig> % of c. oncophora and  <dig> % of o. ostertagi polypeptides when compared with free-living nematodes. the slightly higher percentages observed in this study can be attributed to the better coverage of the cooperia and ostertagia transcriptomes using pyrosequencing relative to the coverage obtained from conventional est libraries in previous investigations . because of differences in the environments and living requirements between the free-living and parasitic stages, it is expected that some pathways and enzymes will be unique to these two phases of development and coincide with the requirements and challenges imposed by the different environments. comparisons of domains and pathways present in the free-living stages to those in the parasitic stages revealed many of these differences.

given the similarities between c. oncophora and o. ostertagi, it was not unexpected that there would be significant overlap in the domains found in up-regulated peptides in the various stages. for example, among the  <dig> most abundant domains in all stages, ten were identical in both organisms. the domains that were prevalent in the free-living vs. parasitic stages may provide clues to the lifestyles and environments in which these organisms live. in the free-living stages, domains previously implicated in growth and development tended to dominate. in c. oncophora three different chromo domains  and the madf domain  were enriched . chromo domains are often found in association with heterochromatin protein  <dig>  which functions in germline and vulval development in c. elegans <cit> . the madf domain is a transcription factor in drosophila that activates genes necessary for development  <cit> . chromo domains and madf domains were found in proteins that predominate in the egg as would be expected . interestingly, the chromo domain  and madf domain  were also found elevated in adult o. ostertagi. two domains identified as basic leucine zippers  <cit>   were up-regulated in the free-living stages of o. ostertagi.

as the organisms transition to l <dig>  the domain prevalence shifts as well. in c. oncophora, the most prevalent domain was ef-hand-like domain . this domain tends to be found in calcium binding proteins  <cit> . in contrast, the most prevalent domain in o. ostertagi was globin . globin and saposin domains were prevalent in the l <dig> of both species. both of these domains were found in secreted peptides of both species. saposin domains are expressed in all stages of ancylostoma caninum <cit> . while they were not found in enriched peptides in every stage of c. oncophora or o. ostertagi, these domain containing peptides were expressed in all stages.

during the l3sh, the worms both protect themselves from environmental stress as well as prepare for uptake by and development within the host. among the most prevalent domains in the l3sh were protease inhibitor i <dig>  and late embryogenesis abundant  protein  in c. oncophora and o. ostertagi, respectively. among the multitude of roles played by protease inhibitors, it has been suggested that they are also involved in protecting invading organisms from host molecules, in particular, those derived from the gastrointestinal tract, such as pepsin. in this way gastrointestinal nematodes can safely navigate and survive within the host digestive tract  <cit> . late embryogenesis abundant proteins have been shown to play a role in protection from the environment. in aphelenchus avenae , lea proteins help protect other proteins from aggregating during times of low water and possibly play a role in preventing desiccation  <cit> .

during the parasitic stages beginning with the l3ex, it is expected that transcriptional profiles will shift towards host interaction while maintaining those profiles associated with worm development. zinc finger domains  which are important in cell differentiation and development  <cit>  were indeed among the most prevalent domains in the l3ex of c. oncophora and in o. ostertagi adults possibly resulting from additional rapid growth as the worms emerge from the gastric glands. in o. ostertagi l3ex, the most prevalent domains found in the greatest number of peptides, were duf <dig> and metridin-like shk toxin. the metridin-like shk toxin domain  was up-regulated in o. ostertagi parasitic stages and was the most prevalent domain in the l <dig> stage. noteworthy is that the metridin-like shk toxin domain is often found near the c-terminus of c. elegans metallopeptidases. it is suggested that these domains are important in parasitic interactions  <cit> . cap domains  were also among the most prevalent domains in c. oncophora l <dig> and o. ostertagi adults ; however, among putatively-secreted peptides, cap domains were observed in c. oncophora l3sh, l <dig>  and adults, and in o. ostertagi l <dig>  in mammalian species, proteins harboring cap domains are divided into nine subfamilies which encompass cysteine-rich secretory proteins . similar crisp domains  were up-regulated in ostertagia  and have recently been identified in the lethenteron japonicum   <cit>  which secretes a crisp containing protein from its buccal glands once it has attached to the host. it is believed that this crisp protein enhances vasodilation and feeding  <cit> . it should be noted that the concept of “secretory proteins” is defined as a cellular event and not necessarily a function related to parasites secretions. as such, there need not be a direct relationship between crisp proteins and “extraorganismal” functionality i.e., parasite secretory products. case in point, in mammals, crisp proteins are well known to be associated with cell signaling, reproduction, fertilization and the maturation of spermatozoa. as such, it may not be coincidental that in parasites, an abundance of crisp proteins is associated with the later larval and adult stages of worm development. crisp domains have been found associated with proteins with immunomodulatory activity  <cit>  and have been studied in few parasitic nematode species including the hookworm a. caninum <cit>  and the murine strongylid nematode, heligmosomoides polygyrus <cit> .

it is well known that proteins such as chymotrypsin, trypsin, and peptidase  <cit>  are involved in the breakdown of proteins into constituent parts. chymotrypsin  domains were up-regulated in the parasitic stages of c. oncophora and found only in the parasitic stages of o. ostertagi ; trypsin-like domains  were up-regulated in c. oncophora, and; peptidase s1/s <dig>  was one of the most prevalent domains in female c. oncophora . given their abundance in the later stages of development , it is possible that proteins associated with these domains collectively play a role in the feeding process  <cit> . this is supported in part by the observation that these domains are present in nine secreted peptides in c. oncophora and  <dig> in o. ostertagi. it is possible that a subset of these is not only secreted from the cell but also from the parasite. given that the adult diets of these parasites vary based upon either abomasal  or intestinal  contents, these secreted proteases may also participate either in countering the host immune responses  by hydrolyzing antibodies, or in establishment in the host  particularly as it relates to ostertagia and its need to enter the gastric glands and keep inflammation at bay.

the three c-type lectin domains  were the most prevalent domains in male c. oncophora  and were up-regulated as well in o. ostertagi . as expected, all three of these domains are found in putatively secreted peptides in both species predominantly because evolutionarily, the superfamily of proteins containing c-type lectin domains is comprised of extracellular metazoan proteins with diverse functions. in general, these domains are involved in calcium dependent carbohydrate binding. however, it should also be noted that not all proteins containing c-type lectin domains can actually bind carbohydrates or even ca2+. indeed, most of the proteins containing this domain and referred to as c-type lectins are not lectins. nonetheless, those with functionality have been implicated in innate immune responses in invertebrates, and have been linked to proteins involved at the host-parasite interface which may assist in evading the host immune response  <cit> . as such, differences in the levels of these domains between c. oncophora and o. ostertagi may in part be associated with the observed variation in host immunity as well as distinction in the predilection sites of the respective l4s and adult worms. a closer investigation of sequence similarity to c-type lectins from free-living and parasitic nematodes and an analysis of the locus to which these proteins are eventually translocated might shed light on physiological functionalities as they relate either to sustaining life within the organism or controlling the host-pathogen interface. some nematode c-type lectins have been linked to the parasite surface i.e., the epicuticle. among other things, the nematode cuticle is comprised of collagen proteins and these proteins exhibit stage specific expression  <cit> .

examination of kegg categories demonstrated significant associations between life cycle stages and peptides involved in energy metabolism in o. ostertagi where  <dig> peptides were found in the free-living stages and only four in the parasitic stages . further analysis of these  <dig> polypeptides provided clues about environmental adaptation. from the egg stage through l <dig>  the worms are present in the fecal pat. upon developing to l3sh they become more motile and migrate from the pat to better position themselves for ingestion by the host. of the  <dig> peptides involved in energy metabolism in the free-living stages of development,  <dig> are associated with methane metabolism. as the free-living stages of both species are found in the fecal pat and the fecal pat is a methane rich environment, this is not surprising. only one of the  <dig> peptides is up-regulated in the l3sh and classified as an enzyme involved in oxidative phosphorylation rather than methane metabolism. it is possible that this becomes more functional as the worm distances itself from the fecal pat and readies itself for ingestion by the host. it is also interesting to speculate that environmental queues i.e. host gi tract, may down-regulate transcriptional activity of the proteins involved in methane metabolism and in turn induce exsheathment and worm development.

in c. oncophora, the kegg category “metabolism of cofactors and vitamins” was significantly more abundant in the parasitic stages than in the free-living stages . the specific enzymes involved are associated with pantothenate and coa biosynthesis  <cit> , and thiamine metabolism. all three peptides were up-regulated only in adult females. inasmuch as these enzymes were not observed in abundance in fecal eggs, their functions are likely related specifically to females or to egg development in utero.

while many of the transcripts were stage specific, others were expressed in all stages. these constitutively-expressed transcripts are likely involved in core molecular processes used to sustain life, as shown by the domains found within them. this conclusion is also bolstered by the embryonic lethal phenotypes predicted for the majority of the constitutively-expressed transcripts that link to an rnai phenotype in c. elegans. these transcripts and their encoded proteins should make attractive drug targets provided sufficient variation can be found between parasite and host proteins.

CONCLUSIONS
control of parasitic nematodes is routinely accomplished through anthelminthic drugs. resistance to these drugs is increasingly becoming a problem especially in livestock hosts. to date, resistance has surfaced to nearly all commercially available drugs  <cit> . in an effort to better understand this resistance and help combat the higher production costs associated with the lack of efficacy, a detailed study of these parasites at a molecular level was conducted. to this end, we have generated comprehensive data on the transcriptomes of all discernible life cycle stages of these two organisms. the genome sequences for c. oncophora and o. ostertagi have been initiated in an effort to complement and complete this work   <cit> . the cdna sequences generated in this study will enable better annotation of these genomes upon completion. in the current study, many differences were revealed between the free-living and parasitic stages of these nematodes when examined at the domain, process and pathway levels. during the free-living stages of development, peptides and pathways involved in growth and development were more prominent. in contrast, peptides, domains and pathways that traditionally function in the degradation of proteins were more prevalent during the parasitic stages. these differences are likely associated with host adaptation and therefore parasitism. further in-depth examination of the differences in domain prevalence and expression between the free-living and parasitic stages may reveal conservation in genes linked to infection, host recognition, immune response and disease. equally important is understanding the similarities between evolutionarily related organisms in the hope of detecting biological and molecular threads that link the parasitic stages. in this way, we may better identify targets for the development of new classes of nematocides. holistic approaches such as this could extend new treatments to human pathogens as well.

