BACKGROUND
phosphorylation and dephosphorylation of proteins are major mechanisms mediating signal transduction throughout the cell and are intimately involved in the regulation of cell growth, physiology, differentiation, and death. phosphorylation is accomplished by means of kinases which when stimulated by an afferent signal transmit the signal via phosphate transfer to the next site in a pathway. in some cases phosphoprotein-protein interactions take place that modulate signal transduction, e.g. by revealing previously sequestered phosphoacceptor sites in one or both of the interacting proteins, thus creating branch points in pathways. critical questions exist regarding the identification of the true in vivo substrates of kinases, identification of phosphotyrosine interaction domains, and mapping the radiation of these protein interactions throughout extremely complex networks. clearly new technologies capable of accelerating the processes for defining the interactions between kinases and their substrates and modulators would be of great value.

two highly productive approaches have been the determination of optimal substrate motifs favored by individual kinases, by various combinatorial peptide library approaches and, the use of antibodies to study phosphorylated peptide motifs . synthetic peptides have played a long and useful role in characterizing kinase substrate sequences, particularly for the ser/thr family, which is now seen to consist of a few distinct category types, basophilic, acidophilic and proline directed. protein tyrosine kinases, on the other hand, are less well defined by their natural substrates but make more use of docking intermediaries to perform the task of substrate recognition. nevertheless, optimal substrates have been found which can then aid in the search for the identity of natural or in vivo targets and inhibitors of the kinase  <cit> . while capable of assessing mixtures of very large numbers of random peptides, combinatorial methods require deconvolution strategies, which can be time-consuming, and technically demanding.

a second search strategy for functional peptides employs arrays of spatially addressable peptides that can be tested in situ, accelerating the deconvolution process when the number of combinations is, or becomes more limited. peptide arrays capable of displaying diverse functions including kinase substrate activity have been successfully produced by two methods: in situ synthesis on planar membranes or arrays of pins  <cit> , or attachment of preformed peptides as performed in a variety of microarray printing procedures. while the existing synthetic methods are capable of producing large numbers of peptides in good purity, none are fully automatable. they require manual intervention between each synthesis cycle and thus are not totally automatable. peptide synthesis in microtiter plate wells would allow the use of fully automated robotic handlers. further, arrays of peptides produced in a microtiter plate format, which is an industry standard for numerous types of high throughput analytical procedures, could also be tested in automated multiplex fashion.

we present data here demonstrating the applicability of an automated system for peptide design and synthesis in microtiter plates to the production of peptides and phosphopeptides. we further demonstrate the capability of these peptide arrays to be recognized correctly by specific phospho-motif antisera and to serve as kinase substrates.

RESULTS
peptide synthesis method
previous work led to the development of a system for the automated synthesis of peptide arrays on the inner surfaces microtiter plate wells  <cit> , . however, direct characterization of the synthesized peptides did not become realizable until the recent availability of modern high-sensitivity mass spectrometers. in this method polymethylpentene  microtiter plates are activated by oxidation with nitric acid, and made functional for peptide synthesis by condensation with poly , which serves as a free-floating support or polymeric handle containing an extended array of amino groups. each lysine side-chain then serves as an initiation point for synthesis. the synthesized peptides are extended from the well surface by their attachment through their peptide carboxyl-termini, on a molecular tether of average estimated length of  <dig> lysine subunits. this simply assumes that each polylysine molecule is attached to the surface through one bond at its midpoint. it is expected that multiple attachment bonds between the surface and a single polylysine chain can also form but would be minimized by the 2000-fold molar excess of polylysine over attachment capacity used during the polylysine coating step. model experiments have shown that the polylysine helical structure would be maintained in solution  <cit>  for most, if not all cases. if multiple attachment bonds were formed then distal ends would prefer the helical form while the sequences between attachment points should also prefer the helical form up to the limits imposed by torsional constraints, and depending on the closeness of the attachment positions. thus, the peptides are well positioned spatially, to interact with a variety of macromolecules such as antibodies and structures as large as a cell surface. the lengths and sequences of the peptides are programmable; the total elapsed cycle time to extend each peptide by one residue for all  <dig> wells is  <dig> hour. the process has been optimized with respect to activation conditions, length and composition of the polymeric tether and conditions for the handling and storage of the pre-diluted amino acid derivatives and condensing agents. stabilities exceeding two years have been achieved for all reagents used. the capability of these peptides to be recognized by antibodies, leading to the identification of sequences and structures of the immunoreactive domains of viral proteins and biological response modifiers has been previously been demonstrated  <cit> .

reproducibility and quality of synthetic peptides
to evaluate the fidelity and reproducibility of peptide syntheses and ability of the synthetic peptide arrays to serve as specific targets in sequence defined molecular affinity interactions, a model system was chosen to provide known test parameters. the egf receptor system was selected since it provided commercially available monoclonal antibodies with documented specificity for an activation state associated autophosphorylation site  and known sequence . testing was begun with the monoclonal antibody 9h <dig> produced against a peptide containing the naepylrv sequence. an array of alternating naeylrv and naelrv peptides was prepared in a microtiter plate consisting of  <dig> 8-well strips. monoclonal 9h <dig> antibody elisa was performed using three of the strips from the middle section of the plate. it was found that the antibody reacted strongly with the peptide wells containing phosphorylated tyrosine but not with the non-phosphorylated peptide wells or control wells without peptide . for the three strips elisa means and  for the phosphotyrosine peptides were  <dig> ,  <dig> ,  <dig>  and for the tyrosine peptides were  <dig> ,  <dig> ,  <dig> . for wells containing no peptide, the values for all three strips were  <dig> . the coefficients of variation for all replicate sets ranged between 5% and 8%.

for evaluation of the fidelity and authenticity of phosphorylated and non-phosphorylated peptide products wells containing naeylrv and naepylrv were prepared as before except that a cleavable linker was added to the polylysine matrix before peptide synthesis. the synthesized peptides were then cleaved from the surface with tfa using conditions under which the protecting groups were removed from the amino acid side-chains but not from tyrosine phosphates. when the released peptide products were concentrated and analyzed by maldi-tof-tof mass spectrometry it was found that both peptides yielded essentially monodisperse m/z of the predicted molecular weights,  <dig>  for naeylrv and  <dig>  for naepylrv phosphono]-tyrosine species shown). these data demonstrate high coupling efficiency at each step of synthesis and stability of the activated amino acids throughout the process.

redundancy of an autophosphorylation site antibody epitope in the egfr cytoplasmic domain
since many of the twenty tyrosines found in the egfr cytoplasmic domain are known to serve as substrate or sh <dig> binding site for other tyrosine kinases, it was decided to test the specificity of the 9h <dig> antibody. to examine this question, overlapping peptide arrays covering the transmembrane and cytoplasmic domains of the egf receptor were prepared. one array contained only phosphotyrosine and the other only tyrosine. the arrays consisted of  <dig> peptides, each of which was  <dig> amino acids in length and overlapped by  <dig> amino acids. in the egfr sequence arrayed, there are  <dig> unique occurrences of tyrosine-containing peptide sequences. in the array, each such sequence appears three to four times in progressively overlapping fashion. clone 9h <dig> antibody showed high reactivity  with eight out of the twenty phosphotyrosine-containing sequences . in general, each reactive peak was associated with three to four appearances of the identifiable tyrosine as its position moved progressively along the overlapping peptide sequences, suggesting consistent reliable synthesis throughout the synthetic process. none of the non-phosphorylated tyrosine-containing peptides showed any comparable reactivity with the monoclonal antibody 9h <dig> although a barely detectable level of antibody reactivity with all peptides containing tyrosine could be seen. there was no detectable reactivity against peptides not containing tyrosine . steric hindrance by the attachment matrix did not appear to be a significant problem in the recognition of reactive peptide sequences separated by just one, and two amino acids from the peptide carboxyl terminus 

to assess the significance of these primary cross-reactivities a consensus table was constructed from 9h <dig> antibody reactive and non-reactive sequences . a strong preference for hydrophobic amino acids in the y+ <dig> position is readily apparent with leucine the most preferred appearing in  <dig> of  <dig> peptides, followed by isoleucine and valine, both appearing once. at the y- <dig> position glutamic acid was the most preferred, appearing in  <dig> of  <dig> peptides, followed by arginine, asparagine, aspartic acid, and glutamine with one appearance each. thus the preference appears to be primarily for glutamic acid but other hydrophilic amino acids were also accepted. there did not appear to be any discernable pattern of preference at the remaining peptide positions. the least common denominator among positive peptides therefore appears to be e/-py- l/, or e-py-l in its predominant form. peptide sequence #  <dig>  which lacked an acidic or hydrophilic amino acid at the py- <dig> position was still strongly reactive demonstrating the strong contribution of a hydrophobic amino acid in the y+ <dig> position. however, since the peptide at position y <dig> containing av was not reactive , 9h <dig> binding appears to involve more than the py-hydrophobic sequence alone.

three of the 9h <dig> cross-reactive phosphotyrosines are clustered within the c-terminal end of the receptor , are known autophosphorylation sites and are known to be recognized by proteins containing group iii sh <dig> binding domains  <cit>  , that similarly recognize phosphotyrosines with hydrophobic amino acids at the y+ <dig> position. since some of the 9h <dig> cross-reactive epitopes are not associated with phosphoacceptor activity it suggests that the phosphoacceptor site specificities are more stringently controlled than the 9h <dig> epitope or that phosphoacceptor activity simply has not been demonstrated yet. a similarity in the processes for recognition of specificity determinants within the deduced epitope of the 9h <dig> autophosphorylation site antibody and optimal substrate motif found for the egf receptor  <cit> , eeeeyfelv, may also exist.

twelve of the twenty tyrosines present in the egfr cytoplasmic domain were not reactive with 9h <dig>  none of the twelve conformed to the deduced 9h2-epitope motif, although six out of  <dig> were involved with other aspects of kinase signal transduction . as confirmation that this was not a result of failure to incorporate phosphotyrosine in the negative peptides a plate array containing all of the egfr phosphotyrosine peptides was constructed and tested against a group of commercial phosphotyrosine antibodies prepared in various ways. these results are shown in figure  <dig>  antibodies 4g <dig>  ab <dig>  and pt101l were prepared using immunogens which were chemically modified or haptenized and not known to be sequence restricted and all reacted strongly with all of the egfr phosphopeptides. antibody rdi-egfract- <dig> was prepared against the activated egf receptor and known to be activation specific but not known to be active against linear peptides. these results add support to the specificity of the epitope deduced above and contribute additional useful information and reagents, namely confirmation of the pan-specific nature of the phosphotyrosine antibodies as used in the microtiter plate peptide array system

tyrosine kinase activity on synthetic peptide substrates in microtiter plate arrays
to characterize the quantitative aspects of substrate phosphorylation by c-src kinase, a panel of peptides based on known substrate specificities of c-src and related enzymes were synthesized in microtiter plate wells. each peptide extended from the polylysine backbone by an ε-amino side-chain and by an additional c-terminal cys unit. thus, all of the peptides were equally available to the enzyme, with reduced steric hindrance and a uniform presentation. subsequently,  <dig> μl of reaction buffer containing varying amounts of c-src kinase were incubated for  <dig> min at 30°, according to the manufacturer's instructions. the wells were then washed with distilled water and assayed for the presence of phosphotyrosine by elisa using a mixture of the broadly cross-reacting phosphotyrosine antibodies previously described in figure  <dig>  the peptide substrates eeiygeff  <cit>   and yiygsfk  <cit>   have been shown separately by somewhat different combinatorial methods to have relatively potent activity for protein tyrosine kinases and are shown to be reactive here as well .  was phosphorylated to a greater extent than  and showed no decrease of reactivity even at  <dig>  unit of enzyme, the lowest concentration used. the  variant peptides were chosen so that validation could be made by direct comparison with the highly oriented peptide chip system recently described  <cit> . the  variant peptide  made by truncation of the n-terminus still showed good reactivity, although much lower than the longer  peptide, and the  peptide in which tyrosine was exchanged for phenylalanine showed no reactivity as expected and required. the slight c-abl tyrosine kinase substrate peptide iyaapkkk  <cit>  reactivity at the highest c-src input and negative protein kinase a substrate peptide lrraslgc  <cit>  activity are consistent with the level of cross-reactivities expected between familial and nonfamilial kinases. three of the peptide substrates showed dose-response characteristics conforming, by nonlinear regression, to a one site binding model for , , and , with r <dig> equal to  <dig> ,  <dig> , and  <dig> . activity of the most reactive peptide,  was greater than expected based on quantity of enzyme used in previously published work  <cit>  and was at least  <dig> times more reactive than its truncated form   <cit> . by extrapolation, c-src activity would be detectable at concentrations as low as  <dig>  units of enzyme using the  substrate.

CONCLUSIONS
the method for production of synthetic peptide solid-phase arrays in microtiter plates described here is capable of making high quality peptides, as seen by mass spectrometry of the released unfractionated products. the peptide synthesis method is completely automated and has been greatly simplified by the use of standard automated liquid handlers and the use of activated amino acid solutions that may be prepared and stored in advance and added just once at the beginning of the synthetic process. in the present demonstration,  <dig> well microtiter plates were used; but,  <dig>   <dig>  or containers of any well density compatible with the solvents and liquid handler may be used. the solid phase peptide arrays produced on a polylysine backbone were found to be of very high density, provide very low levels of nonspecific binding and steric hindrance, and participate effectively in a variety of biochemical reactions.

the strategy described here for the preparation of solid phase synthetic peptide arrays in microtiter plate wells for use in multiplexed assays offers many advantages in the study of protein kinases, particularly in a research environment. in a research environment combined cycles of hypothesis generation and testing, with assay flexibility, speed, quantitative accuracy and precision are of greater concern than in large scale screening applications of large numbers using limited, previously selected variables. the industry standard microtiter plate format ensures compatibility with a vast number of assay platforms and the polylysine backbone with its extended three-dimensional display provides a highly efficient, sterically unhindered, and extremely low background display of the peptide products.

using 96-member peptide arrays of 21-mers created in less than  <dig> hours, we have shown that the peptide array synthesis provided a highly reproducible model for a tyrosine peptide, egfr y <dig> and its phosphorylated counterpart. using a monoclonal antibody prepared against a synthetic peptide representation of the y <dig> egf receptor autophosphorylation site, we have provided evidence that, unexpectedly, the deduced epitope, e/hl-py-l/hb  is highly redundant within the cytoplasmic domain. three of the eight antibody reactive sites have been previously identified as autophosphorylation sites and are recognized by group iii sh <dig> domain proteins  that have similar specificity patterns. furthermore, the egfr substrate sequence eeeeyfelv, derived by combinatorial peptide optimization  <cit> , resembles the e-y- motif found in these studies. thus there is a consistent linkage between a subset of egfr phosphotyrosine sequences recognized by the 9h <dig> antibody, a subset of sequences autophosphorylated by egfr kinase, and egfr autophosphorylation sites recognized by the group iii sh <dig> domain. there is a clear parallel between the 9h <dig> peptide epitope and the peptide substrate specificity of the egfr catalytic activity  <cit> . songyang has further suggested that the catalytic and sh <dig> domains of ptks may have converged to recognize similar sequences. so, questions regarding which site  the antibody actually recognizes on stimulated egf receptor molecules and what other parallels might exist between 9h <dig> binding, sh <dig> binding, and catalytic substrate selection become of interest. at the cell protein level, 9h <dig> is specific by western blot for the stimulated egf receptor. furthermore, there are preliminary data  suggesting that pdgf peptide sequences conforming to the 9h <dig> binding sequence of -py- deduced from egfr phosphotyrosine peptides, appear to be recognized differently by 9h <dig>  while nine of the twenty-seven pdgfr phosphotyrosine sequences satisfied the -py- sequence definition, and could be expected to be as reactive as those in egfr, only one showed comparable reactivity. thus, the binding determinants of 9h <dig> are more complex than the simple epitope deduced from figure  <dig>  an intriguing possibility is that the 9h <dig> epitope may be a fairly simple one but that its appearance, or access to it has been limited or distorted in specific ways by spatially adjacent sequences or structures that have evolved to create opportunities for exploitation in biologically specific processes.

we have also successfully demonstrated the use of microtiter plate peptide arrays in faithfully reproducing the known substrate phosphorylation specificities of c-src protein kinase. in these studies a broadly reactive phosphotyrosine antibody elisa detected phosphorylation. although a mixture of antibodies that were not known to be sequence restricted was used, the possibility exists that some tyrosine-containing peptides could become phosphorylated and be recognized less well than others. therefore in studies where the need for precise quantitation outweighs the convenience and safety considerations of elisa, incorporation of radioisotopic phosphate would provide an alternative. the microtiter plate format with reactants bound to the well surface would provide a well-contained and safe vehicle for washing and subsequent measurement of radioactivity.

thus, the microtiter plate array system is well suited to the study of protein kinase substrates, antigens, related binding molecules, and inhibitors since these all can be quantitatively studied at a single uniform, reproducible interface. for applications requiring larger numbers of solid phase peptides, the synthetic process can easily be transferred to more powerful workstations such as the biomek fx platform in which many plates with higher well densities can be synthesized simultaneously and conventional particle based substrates for peptide synthesis can be manipulated using filter plates or magnetic devices available for this system. moreover, the current capacity of approximately 150– <dig> pmoles/well can be considered large enough for preparative or analytical applications coupled with mass spectrometric analyses, such as affinity-based proteomic screening for ligand-protein interactions. in this and other applications, such as assessment of protease activity where strict isolation of adjacent components is required, microtiter plate wells enjoy a significant mechanical advantage over two-dimensional spotting or other synthesis methods.

