BACKGROUND
methionine adenosyltransferase  is a cytosolic ubiquitous enzyme that synthesizes s-adenosyl-l-methionine , a molecule that is one of the most important metabolites in living cells. sam serves as the major methyl donor to phospholipids, dna, rna and other small molecules and is the second most widely used enzyme substrate after atp  <cit> . mat is a well-conserved enzyme that is encoded in the genomes of most eukaryotes, eubacteria, and archaebacteria  and has been well studied at the primary, secondary, and tertiary structural levels  <cit> . except for the mammalian mat ii, which is a hetero-oligomer  <cit> , members of the mat family are homo-oligomers that usually form tetramers consisting of four identical subunits; the two active sites are located between the subunits in each dimer  <cit> . mammalian mat iii and archaeal mats form dimers  <cit> .

multiple sequence alignments of mat genes from a wide diversity of eukaryotes demonstrated a paralogue of mat, named matx, with distinctive features that are absent in all other eukaryotic mats. these features include four specific insertions and a large number of unique substitutions  <cit> . the recombinant matx from euglena gracilis has been found to function as a homo-dimer with activities comparable to mats from other eukaryotes  <cit> . molecular phylogenetic analyses clearly showed that matx is related to other eukaryotic mats, but it forms a long branch in the eukaryotic subtree  <cit> . the majority of matx paralogues occur in four distantly related groups of photosynthetic eukaryotes: haptophytes, photosynthetic euglenids, diatoms, and dinoflagellates. matx was also detected in a pelagophyte alga aureococcus anophagefferens <cit> . all organisms possess either the mat or the matx form of the gene, with the exception of five diatom species that have both paralogues and a. anophagefferens that harbors two different homologues of mat in addition to matx  <cit> .

a similar punctate distribution of two paralogues with the same function was reported for “elongation factor 1-alpha”  and its paralogue “elongation factor like” , which are highly conserved members of a gtpase superfamily involved in translation. like mat/matx, the ef-1α/efl paralogues have a patchy distribution across the tree of eukaryotes and rarely occur together in the same organism. efl has been localized so far in eight groups of unrelated organisms: dinoflagellates, haptophytes, cercozoans, green algae, choanoflagellates, fungi, diatoms, and radiolarians  <cit> .

the punctate distributions of mat/matx and ef-1α/efl across the tree of eukaryotes can be explained by two scenarios:  a deep paralogy, whereby both paralogues were present in an ancient common ancestor followed by differential loss of one or the other paralogue in descendant lineages; and  a horizontal  gene transfer , whereby a more recent origin of one paralogue  in one lineage of eukaryotes is followed by the spread of this paralogue to other distantly related lineages via horizontal transfer.

these scenarios differ in their assumptions. the first scenario hypothesizes coexistence and probably co-expression of both paralogues in one cell for a long time without negative effects on the organism. this scenario explains the distribution purely by vertical transmission. in this case, matx must have originated by gene duplication from the mat already present in the common ancestor of all matx containing taxa. this organism was very ancient and not very distantly related, maybe identical, to the most recent common ancestor of eukaryotes. since that time, mat and matx must have been propagated side by side in the genomes of the descendants to much more recent nodes of eukaryotic evolution and in some cases  even to extant organisms.

the second scenario assumes that one  can be horizontally transferred and is capable of functional replacement of the mat form soon after the transfer. our previous work on the model systems of euglena gracilis and trypanosoma brucei indicates that matx fulfills the assumptions for both of these scenarios, because this paralogue can be co-expressed with mat and can immediately take over its function  <cit> . by contrast, efl was capable of long-term co-expression, but was not able to functionally replace ef1-α. based on these results, neither of the two evolutionary scenarios can be refuted for mat/matx. however, in the case of ef1-α/efl, hgt is apparently more difficult and likely played a less important role in the evolutionary history of this paralogue couple  <cit> .

there are several questions associated with the putative hgt explanation for the origin and distribution of the matx paralogue that remain unanswered. for instance, under what circumstances would the highly divergent matx evolve within one recent group of eukaryotes and in which lineage could it happen? one hypothesis posits that matx evolved during a secondary endosymbiotic origin of plastids from the endosymbiont copy of the mat gene, which was released from purifying selection and underwent accelerated sequence evolution  <cit> . therefore, an analysis of the distribution of mat/matx in euglenids provides an opportunity to evaluate this possibility.

the euglenida is a large group of marine and freshwater eukaryotic flagellates with diverse modes of nutrition, including phagotrophy, osmotrophy, photoautotrophy, and a recently discovered example of mixotrophy   <cit> . photosynthetic and secondarily osmotrophic euglenids  form a monophyletic group that is the sister lineage to the mixotrophic rapaza viridis and is nested within a paraphyletic assemblage of phagotrophic euglenids. it is inferred that the secondary chloroplast was gained through secondary endosymbiosis in the most recent common ancestor of all photosynthetic euglenids, including r. viridis <cit> . the marine flagellate pyramimonas  is inferred to be the closest known relative of the euglenid chloroplasts . in this study, we investigated the distribution of mat and matx in euglenids and pyramimonas in order to evaluate whether the origin of matx occurred simultaneously with the secondary endosymbiotic origin of the euglenid chloroplast. these data were also expected to provide insights into whether euglenids were the first group of eukaryotes to evolve the matx paralogue.

RESULTS
mat and matx phylogeny and distribution of matx in euglenids
we generated six new sequences of mat and  <dig> new sequences of matx. the mat sequences were obtained from heterotrophic euglenids , the mixotroph rapaza viridis, two photoautotrophic euglenids  and the prasinophyte alga pyramimonas parkeae. the matx sequences were obtained from all investigated photoautotrophic euglenids, except rapaza viridis . the sequences retrieved from transcriptome projects were complete; sequences amplified from cdna  were partial . we found additional so far unnoticed partial matx homologues in genbank from the haptophyte prymnesium, the plant lactuca serriola and the beetle dendroctonus frontalis. further database searches revealed that lactuca and dendroctonus also contain the mat paralogue. the presence of the matx paralogue in the single species of plant and metazoa is highly suspicious, and we treat this data with caution because we cannot exclude the possibility of contamination by foreign rna in the lactuca and dendroctonus transcriptome data sets. the mat sequences of rhodomonas sp., rhodomonas salina, thalassionema sp. and peranema trichophorum and the matx sequence of karenia brevis retrieved from genbank were also incomplete. despite their incompleteness, all mat and matx sequences were suitable for determining the paralogue type and for phylogenetic analyses; therefore, all sequences were added to the alignment with published mat/matx sequences for phylogenetic analysis .

the sequences downloaded from genbank are marked by *; sequences obtained by sanger sequencing method in this study are marked by ▲, sequences obtained from transcriptome projects sequenced by roche  <dig> sequencing were marked by † and are available in supplement.

in the phylogenetic tree , matx paralogues formed a well-supported clade that was separated from the mat paralogues by a long stem. the tree was rooted by five bacterial outgroups within the mat paralogues, with trichomonas vaginalis mat being the most basal branch. however, the backbone topology of the mat tree was weakly supported, and the matx branch was situated only one node apart from prokaryotes. we used kishino hasegawa , weighted kh , shimodaria hasegawa  and weighted sh  tests to evaluate whether the root position between mat and matx paralogues is significantly worse than the suggested root on the t. vaginalis branch. the tests showed that this root position cannot be excluded .

the matx sequences from photoautotrophic euglenids formed a well-supported subclade  within the more inclusive matx clade and branched as the sister group to a clade consisting of lactuca, dinoflagellates and dendroctonus. the mat sequences from the heterotrophic euglenids clustered together with kinetoplastids; the mat sequence from p. parkeae branched together with other green algae; and the mat sequences from m. pyrum and p. orbicularis clustered with ciliates and aureococcus, respectively.

we also performed an independent analysis of matx sequences that enabled us to use more alignment positions to reconstruct the phylogenetic relationships within the matx clade . the tree was rooted with the branch of diatoms, haptophytes and aureococcus according to figure  <dig> 

comparison of matx and ssu rrna gene phylogeny
we investigated whether or not the phylogeny of the matx paralogues differs significantly from the species phylogeny. significant differences would indicate that matx has not evolved vertically but instead experienced hgts between the matx containing taxa. as “species trees”, we have used topologies inferred from small subunit  rrna gene sequences and also manually constructed topologies reflecting current view of species relationships. the ssu rrna gene tree and manual species topologies differed in minor details and they are reported in additional file  <dig> and in additional file 2: figure s <dig> and additional file 3: figure s <dig>  we used the kh and sh tests to compare the species topologies with the best matx topology and the set of  <dig> bootstrap topologies calculated from matx alignment . the tests showed that the “species topologies” are strongly rejected . to be sure that the conflict with the ssu rrna gene tree topology is not caused only by the lactuca, dendroctonus and aureococcus matx sequences, whose origin is dubious, and prymnesium, the sequence of which is very incomplete, we repeated the tests after exclusion of these four taxa. the “species topologies” were again rejected . the “species topologies” were significantly excluded also if we compared topologies rooted by trichomonas and escherichia, although the significance was lower .

-6
-4
/2*10
-4
-5
/4*10
-6
-6
-5
-5
-4
-4
/2*10
-4
the p-values of significance for differences between likelihoods of matx gene tree vs. likelihoods of species trees. in each cell are given p-values using species tree inferred from phylogeny of ssu rrna/species tree based consensus from a literature. the tests were performed for five sets of taxa:  full matx data set,  matx excluding aureococcus, prymnesium, lactuca and dendroctonus ,  rooted full matx data set,  rooted matx excl. apld and  matx of euglenids. four tests were used: kishino hasegawa , weighted kishino hasegawa , shimodaria hasegawa , weighted shimodaria hasegawa . p-values = <  <dig>  are given in bold.

similarly we compared the matx topology  with the ssu rrna gene tree  and manual species topologies  of the subclade of photosynthetic euglenids. in this case, the tests showed that the euglenid “species topologies” cannot be rejected .

discussion
distribution of mat and matx paralogues in euglenids
some genes are dispersed across the tree of eukaryotes in a punctate pattern, which means that they are present in unrelated taxa and absent in interspersed lineages. this observation suggests that the evolution of these genes was complicated and may involve events like gene duplications , horizontal gene transfers, and gene losses. deciphering the history of such a gene is often difficult. two of the most enigmatic examples are  elongation factor 1-alpha  and its paralogue elongation factor-like  and  methionine adenosyl transferase  and its paralogue matx  <cit> . in both cases, these essential genes come in two paralogues that exhibit a patchy distribution among eukaryotes and are mutually, almost strictly, exclusive in their occurrence. we considered two scenarios to explain the possible evolution of the distribution of mat and matx:  a deep paralogy scenario and  a horizontal gene transfer scenario. mat and matx gene histories in euglenids according to these two scenarios are shown in figure  <dig> 

we detected matx only in photoautotrophic euglenids. rapaza viridis, which contains secondary chloroplasts and represents the earliest diverging lineage within the photoautotrophic clade, apparently possesses only the mat form of the gene; the same holds for the heterotrophic euglenids  and pyramimonas parkeae, which contains the closest known relative of the euglenid chloroplast. therefore, our results suggest that matx is specific for the clade of photoautotrophic euglenids after the split of rapaza. we also found two exceptions within the clade of photoautotrophic euglenids; p. orbicularis and m. pyrum both possess the mat and matx paralogues in their cdnas, so both genes are transcribed in these species. the matx form in these two species is located within the matx clade with other photoautotrophic euglenids, while the mat form is unrelated to euglenid mats; the mat of p. orbicularis branches together with the mat sequences from aureococcus, and the mat in m. pyrum branches together with the mat sequence from ciliates. these facts are most likely explained by two independent horizontal gene transfers of mats from two different sources into two different lineages of euglenids.

evolution of the mat and matx paralogues
we will focus on how well the observed data fit within the context of the two alternative hypotheses for the evolution of mat and matx in euglenids in particular and eukaryotes in general:  the deep paralogy scenario and  the horizontal gene transfer scenario . let us first suppose that the deep paralogy scenario  is correct. this scenario requires at least four independent losses of the matx gene to explain its distribution in euglenids and many more losses of matx to explain its distribution within the tree of eukaryotes. gene losses are frequent events and many losses are not in themselves unlikely. slightly suspicious, however, is the discrepancy in the number of mat losses versus the number of matx losses in this scenario. mat was lost in euglenids  only once, while matx was lost at least four times only within euglenids. a similar disproportion of losses is present in the tree of eukaryotes. if we compare the mat/matx history to the case of ef-1α/efl, the discrepancy is not as significant in the ef-1α/efl case; the occurrence of efl is more fragmented not only in euglenids but also in other eukaryotic groups  <cit> . to our knowledge, it is impossible to evaluate the significance of the observed disproportion between the number of losses of one paralogue compared to the other, so we must conclude that in this respect our observations do not contradict the deep paralogy scenario.

moreover, if the deep paralogy scenario is correct , then we would expect both paralogues mat and matx to be present in the most recent common ancestor of all matx-containing taxa, which is likely identical to the most recent common ancestor of eukaryotes. if so, then we would expect that the root of the tree in figure  <dig> will be positioned between the mat and matx lineages. this is true for ef-1α/efl tree  <cit> . in the case of mat/matx, the bacterial outgroups form the sister branch to mat of trichomonas vaginalis, and the matx clade is positioned within the mat lineages. however, the bootstrap values supporting the backbone of the mat/matx tree are very low , and the root position on the matx branch was not rejected by the statistical tests. in this respect our data do not contradict the deep paralogy scenario.

the deep paralogy scenario also assumes that the two paralogues can be co-expressed together in one organism. the observation that the two paralogues are simultaneously present in the transcriptomes of two different euglenids , five diatoms, and aureococcus <cit>  demonstrates that this is indeed possible. moreover, we have confirmed this fact experimentally on the model system of euglena gracilis and trypanosoma brucei <cit> . in this respect the data do not contradict the deep paralogy scenario.

finally, the deep paralogy scenario expects that the relationships between the eukaryotic groups in the matx part of the tree will correspond to the accepted eukaryotic phylogeny, because the gene, despite being lost in many lineages, has evolved vertically. this is apparently not true, because matx sequences in dinoflagellates form a relatively robust sister branch to matx sequences in euglenids , even though dinoflagellates are in fact more closely related to apicomplexans, ciliates, stramenopiles  and haptophytes. more importantly, the conflict between the global matx phylogeny and the species phylogeny of the matx containing taxa was significant in statistical tests. within the clade of photoautotrophic euglenids, the matx phylogeny also differed from species tree, but this difference was not significant. in this last respect, therefore, our data do contradict the scenario of deep paralogy followed by differential losses in its purest form. in order to explain this observation, we must invoke either horizontal gene transfers within the matx clade or at least two more gene duplications and subsequent differential losses of putative paralogues within the matx clade. the latter case would assume that some ancestral organisms would harbor at least four paralogues of this enzyme, which is inconsistent with the observation that most extant species contain only one paralogue ; therefore, we conclude that matx has not evolved vertically.

let us now suppose that the horizontal gene transfer scenario is correct. the first assumption of this scenario is that the matx paralogue is capable of horizontal transfer. the ability of the matx paralogue to substitute the function of mat has been proven experimentally in e. gracilis and t. brucei <cit> . in this study, we have also revealed two relatively clear cases of mat horizontal transfers from different sources into p. orbicularis and m. pyrum. in order to explain the distribution of matx in euglenids through hgt, we only require a single horizontal gene transfer shortly after rapaza viridis split from the other photoautotrophic euglenids ; only a few more horizontal gene transfers would be necessary to explain the distribution of matx in all eukaryotes. taken together, the data suggests that matx is capable of hgt and the number of required events is low. in this respect, the data do not contradict the horizontal gene transfer scenario.

the second assumption of the hgt scenario is that there was a eukaryotic group in which the matx first evolved and then subsequently spread into other lineages of eukaryotes. such a group would ideally appear as a paraphyletic assemblage near the very base of matx clade. at the same time, the root of the mat/matx tree would be situated inside the mat paralogues. the data collected so far do not suggest any source group, because the taxa with matx either form monophyletic groups  or have unclear phylogenetic positions . our working hypothesis that the matx originated during the secondary endosymbiotic origin of the euglenid chloroplast  is not supported by the fact that the matx paralogue is absent in both rapaza viridis and the closest relative of the euglenid chloroplast, pyramimonas. moreover, the matx paralogues in euglenids do not form a paraphyletic group, but instead form a robust clade within the more inclusive matx clade. the position of the root between mat and matx lineages cannot be rejected, and both paralogues might have been present in the common ancestor of all eukaryotes. the current data are in this respect not in direct conflict but, at the same time, they are also not supportive of the horizontal gene transfer scenario.

CONCLUSIONS
our data are not entirely consistent with either of the two scenarios for mat/matx evolution in their purest forms. the hypothesis of deep paralogy followed by differential losses is rejected by the fact that matx did not evolve purely by vertical transmission. the hypothesis of a more recent origin of matx followed by spread via horizontal gene transfers is complicated by the absence of a source of the first matx paralogue and the fact that both paralogues could be present in the most recent common ancestor of all eukaryotes. therefore, we infer that the matx paralogue spread among eukaryotes via hgt; however, the original source of matx is not yet known and it could originate by gene duplication from mat in the last eukaryotic common ancestor.

we also infer that euglenids were not the group in which the matx paralogue evolved. instead, a foreign matx paralogue substituted the ancestral euglenid mat paralogue in a single horizontal gene transfer event that occurred after the secondary endosymbiotic origin of the euglenid chloroplast . although the donor of the euglenid matx paralogue is not known, the matx paralogue, once established, may have evolved vertically within the clade of photoautotrophic euglenids. two photoautotrophic euglenids  regained a new version of the mat paralogue by recent horizontal gene transfers from two different eukaryotic lineages and now contain both paralogues. overall, the case study of mat/matx illustrates the complex evolutionary histories of some eukaryotic genes and highlights the prevalence of gene duplications, differential losses of paralogues, and horizontal gene transfer events during the course of eukaryotic evolution.

