BACKGROUND
in the post-genome era, comprehensive data from "omics" technologies  have been extensively analyzed to elucidate the underlying biochemical networks that elaborately regulate cellular mechanisms. recent contributions from metabolomics are particularly noteworthy; they offer insights into metabolism that complement information obtained from proteomics and transcriptomics  <cit> . correlation analysis of metabolic profiles has been used effectively to distinguish silent phenotypes or genetic alterations that are not noticeable superficially  <cit> . the systematic integration of metabolomic-, proteomic-, and transcriptomic profiles facilitates the unbiased, information-based reconstruction of underlying biochemical networks  <cit> . kohonen's self-organizing map  analysis  <cit>  was also an effective method to classify and monitor metabolic alteration patterns with time-series profiles  <cit> .

however, with the current technology, unbiased reconstruction from comprehensive and high-throughput data is challenging; statistical tools are immature and inherent measurement errors and biological noise continue to present problems  <cit> . moreover, two issues are relevant to the exploitation of metabolomics data. first, it is crucial to interpret metabolic profiles by focusing on a specific rhythm in an appropriate time range and interval, since plants have adapted their metabolism to different environmental fluctuations such as the slow and steady diurnal rhythm, whereas metabolic levels change dynamically. second, currently available metabolomics data are insufficient for the detection of new metabolic networks. even if non-target profiling were able to quantify thousands of metabolites, at present there is no method for estimating their reliability. as statistical inference requires large amounts of data measured under similar conditions in transcriptomics  <cit> , the verification of network dynamics for known pathways must precede attempts to identify unknown network structures. it appears that each metabolic profile is measured under method-specific, presumably biased conditions.

time-resolved target analysis is an effective way to observe biochemical dynamics. we systematically measured the level of  <dig> basic metabolites in rice leaves  at hourly intervals over a 24-hr period. our target and experimental conditions were strategically determined: 1) we focused on primary metabolic pathways consisting of carbon fixation/respiration- and nitrogen assimilation/dissimilation pathways, and comprehensively quantified related metabolites, 2) the photocycle was the sole environmental factor, and 3) measurements were made at 1-hr intervals to allow the observation of dynamic profiles.

high-throughput analysis was conducted with the capillary electrophoresis – mass spectrometry  technology we developed earlier  <cit> , and has been applied to metabolic profiling in bacillus subtilis extracts  <cit>  and monitoring of genetic and environmental perturbations in escherichia coli cells  <cit> . each employed ce-ms method was able to detect charged low molecular metabolites in less than  <dig> min without requiring derivatization. combined with diode array detection , our technology is also applicable to quantifying small sugar compounds. we previously developed a sample preparation protocol that could extract metabolites with possibly minimal metabolic turnover  <cit> . by using the ce-ms and ce-dad, we also succeeded in analyzing over eighty major metabolites  in rice foliage. the current work is our first systematic time-course measurements of rice foliage throughout a day.

we applied four information-based methods to analyze the diurnal fluctuation of metabolites: 1) metabolic pathways were classified with som to monitor the metabolic dynamics in each time-step, 2) a phenotypic linkage map was constructed from the classified pathways by sammon's 2d-network layout  <cit> , 3) unidentified metabolites were predicted based on som analysis and chemical structures, and 4) rate-limiting enzymes were identified by hierarchical clustering on a correlation matrix. here we show that combining metabolome analysis and information-based methods is an effective way to elucidate phenotypical metabolic network structures and underlying biological functions under diurnal rhythm fluctuations.

RESULTS
time-course data acquisition
we extracted target metabolites existing in the primary metabolism such as the glycolytic pathway, the reductive- and oxidative pentose phosphate pathway, and the photorespiratory pathway, the tricarboxylic acid  cycle, and the amino acid biosynthetic pathway. figure  <dig> presents the practical rice biochemical network that was constructed with our target metabolites based on annotated protein data from the kegg pathway database  <cit> , swiss-prot database  <cit> , or rice annotation project data base  <cit> . it shows the names of target metabolites and the ec number of enzymatic reactions; black dots are non-target metabolites. although nh <dig>  and co <dig> were non-target compounds, they are shown in green to demonstrate in and out of carbon and nitrogen.

we selected eight enzymatic proteins that have not been annotated at this stage to determine whether they function in the rice plant. these enzymes and the judgment criteria are shown in table  <dig>  on the map, their ec numbers and lines are presented in gray.

*1: rice annotation project data base  <cit> 

*2: uniprot knowledge base: swiss-plot and trembl  <cit> 

sedoheptulose  <dig> -bisphosphate  in the pentose phosphate pathway was not identified because the standard reagent was unavailable. xylulose 5-phosphate  is a stereoisomer of ribulose 5-phosphate  and their peak overlap in ce-ms analysis makes the identification even more difficult. glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate  and oxaloacetate  were not accurately determined too, because they were readily reacted or decomposed.

the seventy selected target metabolites were classified into four groups according to their chemical structure-based physiochemical characteristics . group a contained amino acids and amines, group b organic acids and sugar phosphates, group c nucleotides and coenzymes, and group d sugars. groups a, b, and c, consisting of ionic substances, were analyzed with three ce-ms methods for cationic, anionic, and nucleotide metabolites; analysis of group d was with a ce-dad method. for ce separation, we used conventional sample preparation with simple and universal procedures without any derivatization process. as common preparation procedures were applicable under the four analytical conditions, we were able to determine simultaneously a wide variety of chemical compounds.

plant seedlings were grown under a 13-hr light – 11-hr dark photocycle for  <dig> to  <dig> days. the level of the  <dig> metabolites was successfully quantified at hourly intervals over the course of  <dig> hr. we could identify the peak and determine the peak area for s7p but could not quantify its level, since the reagent was not available at the time of our ce-ms measurement; we later qualitatively identified its peak with the migration time ratio  of s7p to pipes . the other  <dig> metabolites were under the detection limit  < 3); their names were colored gray in figure  <dig> 

in the course of  <dig> hr, the metabolites exhibited various fluctuations . ru15p, the precursor of carbon fixation, manifested a variation synchronous with the photoperiod; its intracellular concentration increased under illumination and decreased in darkness. several metabolites exhibited similar light-dependent variations in the reductive pentose phosphate pathway , the glycolytic pathway , the tca cycle , and in sugars . citrate, on the other hand, manifested opposite fluctuation changes. in the amino acid biosynthesis pathway, major amino acids  accumulated during the light period. minor amino acids that are synthesized from specific organic acids through several reaction steps  accumulated during the dark period.

* <dig> adn = atp + adp + amp

* <dig> nic = nad + nadh + nadp + nadph

* <dig> the average of all data throughout the light period

* <dig> the average of all data throughout the dark period

self-organizing map and phenotypic linkage of metabolic modules
to visualize the functioning networks throughout a 24-hr period, we classified the metabolites according to similarities in their time-dependent behavior by using kohonen's self-organizing map  and sammon's 2d-network layout . the time-dependent levels of each metabolite were represented as a 24-dimensional vector. on the som, the  <dig> metabolites were classified into a  <dig> ×  <dig> lattice on the basis of vector similarity. the map was roughly divided into two major groups . metabolites with high levels in the light period are in the left area; those with high levels in the dark period are on the right in the map. on the som, each group was further classified and assigned to subgroups consisting of nitrogen- and carbon-assimilating compounds. certain amino acids were arranged near their precursor organic acids, e.g., glu/2og. gly, ser, and ala were grouped with synthetic pathway intermediates such as pyr and gce. the degree of similarity among metabolites was quantitatively visualized on the sammon map; it shows approximate distances between metabolites on the som according to the euclidean distance of the input vectors . when we merged neighboring metabolites on the sammon map we obtained  <dig> subsets of metabolites. each subset is composed of metabolites that exhibit synchronous, time-dependent fluctuations, a "metabolic module". metabolites in the same module were often neighbors in a traditional metabolic pathway network. products that accumulated during the light period were arranged in subsets m <dig> – m <dig>  they included the module for the reductive pentose phosphate pathway , the photorespiratory pathway , the latter half of the glycolytic pathway , the latter half of the tca cycle , sugars , and major amino acids . also included in this group were nadph and nadh , glutathione and spermidine . subsets m <dig> – m <dig> included the first half of the glycolytic pathway , the first half of the tca cycle , and minor amino acids ; also included were the nucleoside tri- and diphosphates . thus, our som analysis correctly reflected the phenotypic metabolic variations that indicate functioning biochemical pathways, and therefore represents a phenotypic linkage map .

the advantages of this analysis became even more apparent upon time-resolved analysis of metabolite levels , which allowed visualization of the dynamic activity of these metabolic modules .

discussion
estimation of unidentified metabolites with som analysis
although s17p could not be directly identified, we hypothesized that its peak could be identified in ce-ms data by combining som analysis with knowledge of the chemical structure. we identified a candidate peak among several peaks on selected ion electropherograms using a simple estimation method. as electrophoretic mobility is proportional to the ionic charge of the solute and inversely proportional to the size of the ionic molecule related to the hydrated ionic radius of a spherical molecule  <cit> , we used the cubic root of the molecular weight as a substitute parameter for the radius. indeed, the cubic root of molecular weights of  <dig> metabolites of similar chemical structure, ru5p, f6p and s7p, were linearly correlated with migration time ratios , when pipes was used as an internal standard .

*estimated value. mt/mtis was calculated by linear approximation

the estimate for s17p was performed using linear approximation with ru15p and f16p. the estimated migration time ratio  of s17p was  <dig>  . several peaks were observed at a mass-to-charge ratio  of  <dig>  a peak of mt/mtis =  <dig>   was identified within ±  <dig> % of the predicted values.

next, the absence of other metabolites with similar chemical structures was verified with the kegg ligand database  <cit> . note that except for s17p, metabolites were cyclic or non-anionic compounds.

finally, we obtained the normalized time-course of the putative s17p by calculating the ratio of the peak area of putative s17p to pipes. integration of these data into the som analysis showed that this putative s17p marker was near metabolites in the reductive pentose phosphate pathway  or the metabolic module m <dig> in plm.

unfortunately, the above result includes some speculation; most peaks of putative s17p were below the detection limits  and the peak was not detected in the dark period. in the som analysis, the peak area of such undetected metabolite was calculated as zero. nevertheless, the proposed estimation method seems to be effective in identifying unknown metabolites.

detection of metabolic bottlenecks by pair-wise correlation analysis
in previous studies, peason's correlation coefficients of metabolite pairs  were applied to construct a metabolic correlation network  <cit> . a correlation coefficient is an index of co-linearity between two variables. if two metabolites, a and b, are always equilibrated, i.e., / = keq , then their relationship is linear and shows a high correlation. although real metabolic pathways are dynamic and constantly regulated by their influx and/or efflux, the pathway components that are blocked by rate-limiting enzymes should exhibit approximate linearity. for example, 3pg, 2pg, and pep in the glycolytic pathway are positioned between two rate-limiting enzymes, phosphoglycerate kinase  and pyruvate kinase , both of which are regulated by the atp/adp ratio . the correlation coefficients among these three metabolites throughout a 24-hr period were over  <dig> , whereas the correlation coefficient between pep and pyr, limited by pk, was under  <dig> . thus, pair-wise correlation analysis is effective for the identification of metabolic modules that are regulated by rate-limiting enzymes.

we used a hierarchical clustering algorithm, ward's method  <cit> , to classify metabolites in the glycolytic pathway  on the basis of their correlation matrix that was computed using all data throughout the 24-hr period. indeed, a dendrogram identified the steps regulated by the atp/adp ratio . on the other hand, it did not identify phosphofructokinase i  as a rate-limiting enzyme. although it is regulated by the atp/adp ratio in animal cells, another enzyme, pyrophosphate fructose 6-phosphate 1-phosphotransferase , seems to be active in plant cells and may be independent of the atp/adp ratio  <cit> .

the same cluster analysis was also applied to the tca cycle intermediates , and the dendrogram revealed the rate-limiting enzymes in the cycle again : citrate synthase , and nadp-dependent isocitrate dehydrogenase . this suggests that the classification of metabolites along enzymatic steps can help to reveal bottleneck enzymes.

time-resolved carbon/nitrogen metabolomics
inspection of the time-course of metabolic modules allowed us to better understand the carbon and nitrogen  assimilation/dissimilation process and their underlying function during a 24-hr period .

in the first half of the light period, some accumulation emerged for carbon-fixed products: pyr, 2og, and photorespiratory pathway intermediates . this coincides with carbon fixation by activation of several light-dependent enzymes including rubisco  at the start of light exposure  <cit> , as shown by the accumulation of ru15p, gce and triose derivatives at the beginning of the light period . the slow accumulation was partly attributable to the very slow metabolic turnover of rubisco  <cit> . likewise, major amino acids and amines including glu and gln, the source compounds of nitrogen assimilation as amino-group acceptor/donor  <cit> , also accumulated in the first half of the light period . this coincides with the diurnal metabolic dynamics and the activities of key enzymes in tobacco plant  <cit> . for example, nr activity is known to remarkably increase immediately after the start of light exposure and decrease at midday.

on the other hand, the glycolytic pathway and the reductive pentose phosphate pathway intermediates reached their highest levels  at midday, and sugars peaked at the end of the light period .

we can hypothesize that carbon fixed in the first half of the light period moves down the glycolytic pathway and the tca cycle, and amino acid biosynthesis progresses using generated glu, pyr, and 2og. in the latter half of the light period, the flow of fixed carbon leads to the accumulation of the intermediates in the pentose phosphate pathway and to sucrose synthesis by inhibiting the production of ammonia, pyr, and 2og.

from the end of the light period through the first half of the dark period, we noted an increase in sugar phosphates from the first half of the glycolytic pathway . around midnight, the accumulation of a few organic acids in the first half of the tca cycle  was observed, suggesting the activation of the tca cycle.

in the latter half of the dark period, the level of minor amino acids was increased , although they are synthesized from diverse biochemical pathways. the good correlation among these minor amino acids, also reported in potato and wheat  <cit> , is attributable to the fact that the ratio between gln and 2og regulate minor amino acids in bacteria and fungi through the reaction glu + 2-oxo acid ↔ amino acid + 2og  <cit> . under our experimental conditions, the glu/2og ratio was much higher in the dark- than in the light period  and the amino group can easily transferred to 2-oxo acids to produce amino acids.

adenine nucleoside and nicotinamide coenzyme status
atp and adp were placed in the dark-activated group in plm ; they were accumulated at the end of the dark period, and decreased by illumination . on the other hand, amp was placed in the light-activated group peaking at midday. the reason for fluctuations of adenylate is unknown. previous observations also do not coincide in the adenylate levels during the light- and dark period. in sugar beet leaves, all adenylate levels increased in the light period  <cit> . in spinach leaves and wheat leaf protoplast, atp increased but adp and amp decreased under light  <cit> . in crassulacean-acid metabolism  species, on the contrary, atp decreased but adp and amp increased  <cit> . such differences may result from different dynamics in cytosol, chloroplasts, and mitochondria  <cit> .

we extrapolate that the lower atp ratio during the light period was caused by an excess demand of atp by intra- and extra cellular processes for carbon fixation and nitrogen assimilation against atp supply from photosynthesis. in theory, the amount of atp consumption in the reductive pentose phosphate pathway and the photorespiratory pathway is more than atp production in the photophosphorylation  <cit> . beside this, nitrogen assimilation process, intracellular transport of the assimilation products, and sucrose synthesis and its translocation are also accompanied by atp. therefore the dark respiration makes a considerable contribution to produce atp even in the light. however, granted that atp supply is insufficient in the light, high metabolic turnover of adenylate kinase  would immediately work to reproduce atp from adp that leads to increase of amp. further investigation is necessary to clarify the adenylate dynamics among cell compartments.

in our analysis, nadph and nadh behaved similarly , whereas nadp and nad did not. as nadph and nadh were respectively generated by their unique reaction of reducing nadp and nad, dependence on the intracellular oxidation-reduction state shifted the formation of oxidation and reduction. in plm, however, nadp was placed in the light-activated- and nad in the dark-activated group. this suggests that highly concentrated nad in the dark is converted to nadph via nadp in the light period. it was reported that the nadph/nad ratio is the inverse of the atp/adp ratio in guard cell protoplast, which indicates that atp phosphorylates nad in the light period by nad kinase  and the generated nadp is reduced to nadph in the course of photosynthesis  <cit> .

the ratios of nadh to nad and nadph to nadp were  <dig> – <dig>  and  <dig> – <dig> . the observed difference in the tendency of oxidized- or reduced form indicates their different cellular roles. nadh is used for oxidative phosphorylation, and a low nadh/nad ratio constrains this process. on the other hand, nadph is used for the reductive biosynthesis of metabolites, and the high ratio of nadph/nadp favors the reduction of metabolites.

environmental stress response
it is remarkable that glt  and spe exhibited similar fluctuation patterns . both peaked at the end of the light period and again just after midnight, suggesting the existence of common regulatory factors. gsh plays a central role in the antioxidant defense by eliminating harmful peroxide during photosynthesis and oxidative phosphorylation  <cit> . polyamines, including spermidine, are also effective antioxidants under various environmental stress conditions  <cit> . during photosynthesis, gsh is converted to oxidized dithiol  to eliminate oxidative stress, and upon the reduction of nadph, gssh can be converted back to gsh by glutathione reductase . our finding that nadph reached its highest level at a few hours before the end of the light period is consistent with the above observation , although the connection remains speculative. the relative contribution of nadph and nadh to the generation of gsh and spermidine requires further investigation.

CONCLUSIONS
we intended to analyze the rice plant metabolism and to reconstruct its phenotypic networks in an effort to explain underlying biological functions. our ce-ms technology provided a comprehensive high-throughput system with easy sample preparation and facilitated the generation of high-resolution metabolic time-courses. data mining with statistical techniques and som analysis revealed synchronous dynamics in metabolic modules downstream of c and n assimilation and dissimilation processes and stress responses. our system was able to discriminate unidentified metabolites and identify bottleneck enzymatic steps. in a comprehensive approach such heuristics become increasingly important because with current technology, the determination of all network components is virtually impossible. for a more precise investigation of biochemical networks, expansion of target metabolites and determination of metabolite levels in each cellular compartment may be suggested. there are technical hurdles, however, in separating organelles without disturbing a wide range of metabolites inside them. without much technical advancement, therefore, it seems difficult to repeat our time-course measurement for any single cellular compartment although there are reports for such a challenge  <cit> . finally, for the analysis part, it is necessary to couple biological information with computer simulations based on large-scale time-resolved measurements of metabolites, proteins, and mrnas.

