BACKGROUND
higher plant genomes contain considerable amounts of satellite repeats which make up to 20% of nuclear dna in some species  <cit> . satellite repeats occur in a genome as continuous arrays of tandemly arranged basic repeated units . although the monomers are usually only tens to hundreds of nucleotides long, they can accumulate into millions of copies, forming megabase-sized clusters distinguishable as heterochromatic regions on mitotic chromosomes or in interphase nuclei. satellite repeats undergo rapid evolutionary changes of their sequences and abundance, leading to the frequent occurrence of genus- or species-specific families of satellite dna  <cit> . contrary to this diversification observed between various taxa, the repeat monomers are usually well-homogenized within a species. this process of intra-specific sequence homogenization, generally referred to as 'concerted evolution', is supposed to arise from a concurrent action of various molecular mechanisms including unequal crossing-over and gene conversion  <cit> . although some of these mechanisms have been characterized in detail, their overall contribution to satdna evolution remains elusive. moreover, theoretical models and computer simulations suggest that these mechanisms alone cannot account for efficient amplification and long-term persistence of satellites within genomes  <cit> . therefore, it is supposed that other processes capable of efficient sequence amplification probably act on satdna. it has been proposed that they involve extrachromosomal circular dna  molecules, arising from intra-strand recombination between monomers within satellite arrays and subsequently serving as a template for rolling-circle replication. this process would result in the synthesis of linear dna fragments composed of multiple copies of the circular template molecules and their reintegration into the genome, thus providing an efficient mechanism for amplification and eventual sequence homogenization of satdna.

although eccdna has been reported from a wide range of eukaryotic organisms including yeast, drosophila, xenopus, mouse and human  <cit> , there are only a few studies focusing on its formation from satellite repeats  <cit> . in plants, eccdna derived from centromeric repeats in arabidopsis  <cit>  and repetitive element bdm <dig> in brachycome dichromosomatica  <cit>  have been detected. in spite of this progress in eccdna research, its formation from a wider range of plant satellite repeats and different species has not been studied so far. consequently, there is only a little known about the structure of circular dna molecules in plant genomes and mechanisms of their formation. there is also an interesting question concerning the role of eccdna in the evolution of monomer size of satellite repeats. similar to other groups of eukaryotes, plant satellites show a clear preference for monomer sizes in ranges between  <dig> –  <dig> bp and their multiples  <cit> . although the correspondence of this length with the length of dna wrapped around nucleosome particles has been pointed out  <cit> , there is no mechanism known to explain this phenomenon. it has been demonstrated that nucleosomes constrain accessibility of enzymatic apparatus to certain regions of associated dna  <cit> . thus, recombination-based sequence homogenization or excision of eccdna may be more frequent in more accessible regions , leading to the emergence of the nucleosome-sized repeated units.

in this study, we addressed some of the questions raised above by investigating the occurrence and properties of eccdna molecules derived from satellite repeats in a range of species from three genera of higher plants . the repeats to be studied were selected based on their various monomer lengths and eventual presence of higher-order repeats, in order to follow the importance of these properties for formation and size of eccdna molecules. our results demonstrated that formation of eccdna from satellite repeats is a common phenomenon in higher plants, and that it is strongly dependent on sequence similarity.

RESULTS
we employed two-dimensional  agarose gel electrophoresis  <cit>  followed by southern blot hybridization to examine the presence of eccdna in extracts of total genomic dna from selected plant species. in addition to separating dna molecules based on their size, 2-d electrophoresis also allows resolution based on their structure, resulting in formation of separated arcs on the gel representing linear and various conformations of circular dna molecules . in our initial experiments we performed 2-d electrophoresis in  <dig> % agarose in the first dimension, and in 1% agarose supplemented with ethidium bromide in the second dimension, which provided efficient resolution of linear and circular molecules from over  <dig> kb down to  <dig> kb as assessed from migration of linear and supercoiled or open circular marker molecules . these conditions were then used to analyze dna samples of vicia faba, a species containing highly abundant satellite repeat foki  <cit>  . a strong arc of linear dna and a weaker one corresponding to open circular molecules were revealed after hybridization with foki probe. we used this species further for investigating foki eccdna levels in different tissues including young/developing or old leaves and root meristems , and also in leaf tissues stressed by wounding . however, we did not observe significant differences in eccdna signals between these samples, suggesting that there are comparable levels of circular molecules derived from foki satellite in all investigated v. faba tissues and that these levels are not significantly affected by stress conditions. as only open circular molecules were detected and there was no hybridization signal corresponding to covalently closed circular dna, we tested whether this could be a result of damaging closed circles during dna isolation. however, including supercoiled control plasmid dna into tissue samples at the beginning of the procedure revealed that the isolation does not lead to significant nicking or other degradation of this dna, and thus that open circles are the predominant form of satellite eccdna in the examined tissues.

 positions of signals on chromosomes. c, centromeric; p, pericentromeric; i, intercalary; t, telomeric.

 victr-a family in v. pannonica is located in telomeric chromosome regions  <cit> , but chromosome localization and copy numbers of its specific sequence variants represented by the clones c <dig> and c <dig> were not determined.

following these initial experiments, we performed a detailed survey of the presence of eccdna derived from nine satellite repeats and three subfamilies in ten plant species . however, as eccdna was found to occur at relatively low levels, we improved our isolation protocol by including treatment with plasmid-safe atp-dependent dnase, which specifically degrades linear dna while leaving covalently closed and nicked circular molecules intact. removing the majority of linear fragments by this treatment allowed loading of equivalents of up to  <dig> μg of original undigested genomic dna onto the gel. we also increased the discriminatory power of the technique towards efficient resolution of short circular molecules in order to exactly determine size differences of circular molecules derived from satellites with shorter monomers. this was achieved by increasing agarose concentrations to  <dig> % and 2% in the first and second dimension, respectively, which led to improved resolution of circular dna from linear fragments  and to resolving circular molecules differing by at least  <dig> bp. size estimations of eccdna molecules were done using a mixture of specifically designed markers including open circular molecules produced by cre/lox recombination and nickase treatment of larger plasmid templates . this is demonstrated in figure  <dig>  showing detection of victr-a satellite in v. narbonensis. although the size of victr-a monomers is  <dig> bp, its eccdna was found to occur in size steps of about  <dig> bp, thus corresponding to multiples of  <dig> bp. moreover, there was an alternating pattern of stronger and weaker spots, suggesting more frequent excision of circular molecules differing in multiples of  <dig> bp.

extrachromosomal circular molecules were detected for all nine satellite families and three subfamilies tested, and in all cases they occurred as open circles . the size of the eccdna molecules ranged from over  <dig> kb down to  <dig> bp and in most cases their hybridization signals formed discrete spots corresponding to multiples of monomer or higher-order unit lengths . however, there was often a continuous smear underlying these spots, as shown on fig. 3a for sc <dig> satellite of s. cereale. treating the samples with mung bean nuclease, which specifically degrades single-stranded but not double-stranded or nicked dna almost completely removed the smear, resulting in more round and discrete spots , thus suggesting that the smear was composed of partially single-stranded circular molecules. in addition to the arcs representing circular and linear dna molecules, in some cases we encountered hybridization signals forming a relatively fuzzy arc that could not be assigned to linear, covalently closed supercoiled or open circular molecules by co-migration with the respective markers. the signal was reproducibly detected for satellites from secale cereale, vicia sativa and oryza sativa . as it was present even in mung bean nuclease-treated samples, its composition from single-stranded dna or rna could be ruled out. thus, we tested whether it could be affected by treatment with rnaseh or rnaseh followed by mung bean nuclease. however, these treatments had no effect, implying that the extra arc did not include hybrid dna:rna molecules .

the series of discrete spots representing open circles differing in size by the monomer length of the respective satellites were detected for all repeats with monomers ranging from  <dig> bp  down to  <dig> bp . v. faba foki repeats  and all other satellites with shorter monomers produced continuous arcs of hybridization signal , which could also be made up of the monomer-spaced spots that, due to the limited resolution of agarose gel electrophoresis, were fused into a continuous smear, even when  <dig> % agarose was used in the first dimension instead of  <dig> % . however, there were also several repeats showing more complex patterns of eccdna signals. in the case of the o. sativa cento repeats, the signals formed short smears instead of focused spots , which could be explained by the presence of monomer variants differing in sequence length  interspersed within the arrays of predominant  <dig> bp monomers, as reported by lee et al.  <cit> . victr-b repeats of v. grandiflora produced a continuous smear consistent with their short monomer length ; however, there were also faint spots detected on the smear differing by  <dig> bp . further investigation using specifically selected probe and stringent hybridization conditions revealed that the discrete spots represented a minor sequence subfamily vg-v reported by macas et al.  <cit>  which is homogenized as a  <dig> bp higher-order repeat derived from five monomers .

the victr-a satellite of v. narbonensis was found to produce eccdna in size steps corresponding to dimers  and more frequently tetramers  of the basic repeated unit of  <dig> bp . in the related species v. pannonica, initial investigation of the victr-a repeats, using probe amplified in a pcr reaction with genomic dna as a template, revealed a different hybridization pattern for their eccdna, consisting of the smear with spots spaced by about  <dig> bp which could not be derived from multiples of the monomer length . as there was only limited information available about sequence variability of victr-a satellites in v. narbonensis and v. pannonica, we constructed whole genome shotgun libraries from these species and screened them for victr-a clones which were subsequently sequenced and analyzed. the analysis of  <dig> v. narbonensis victr-a clones  using nucleotide autocorrelation functions  <cit>  revealed that their sequences are well-homogenized with a basic periodicity of  <dig> bp. however, some preference for homogenization of the tetramer-based units was also revealed by the increased height of the  <dig> bp peak . this is consistent with the observed preferential formation of the tetramer-based eccdna, although it is not clear why similar correlation was not observed for the dimer periodicity, which was detected in eccdna sizes but not by the sequence analysis.

in contrast to v. narbonensis, analysis of  <dig> v. pannonica clones  showed that they are considerably less homogenized, as revealed by much lower peak heights . their basic periodicity was also  <dig> bp, however, there was one v. pannonica clone  with periodicity of  <dig> bp and high sequence similarity  between the  <dig> bp repeated units. comparative analysis with other victr-a sequences  revealed that this repeat most probably originated by recombination between at-rich regions resembling the caaaa motif, which is supposed to be involved in breakage-reunion of repeated sequences  <cit> . using this clone as a probe confirmed that this victr-a subfamily gives rise to the  <dig> bp-spaced signals on the blots of extrachromosomal circular molecules , while the other subfamily with 69/ <dig> bp periodicity  produces weak signals of continuous smear . southern blots of restriction enzyme-digested genomic dna hybridized with the probes differentiating the two subfamilies confirmed that the  <dig> bp subfamily occurs in the v. pannonica genome along with the previously reported victr-a repeats with 69/ <dig> bp repeated units  <cit>  .

discussion
our results show that all the plant satellite repeats that we investigated are prone to the formation of eccdna. these results complement similar findings described for insects and animals  <cit> , and significantly broaden our knowledge about plant satellite repeats  <cit>  by detection of satellite-derived eccdna in a total of ten species. investigated satellites differed in their monomer length, proportion in the genome and chromosomal localization . since eccdna was detected for all of them, it can be concluded that these features do not have a crucial impact on the formation of circular molecules. a common feature of all investigated satellites was that their eccdna occurred in the form of open circles, the double-stranded circular molecules relaxed due to the presence of singe strand nicks. the possibility that these findings resulted from dna damage during sample preparation was excluded by detection of intact supercoiled control plasmid added to the samples at the beginning of the isolation procedure. similar control was used for eccdna isolation from xenopus embryos which was also found to occur as open circles  <cit> .

in yeast, eccdna formation requires chromosomal replication as it originates from stalled replication forks  <cit> . on the other hand, eccdna production in xenopus is supposed to be uncoupled from dna replication, although some synthesis requiring replicative polymerases was detected on the newly formed eccdna  <cit> . the experiments that focused on foki repeats in v. faba revealed comparable levels of eccdna in mature leaves and young  leaves or root meristems, thus indicating that foki eccdna formation is also not tightly linked to dna replication. we did not observe a significant increase of eccdna concentration in mechanically damaged leaves, suggesting that its formation is not induced by this sort of stress or dna degradation processes. it should be noted, however, that due to generally low levels of eccdna in the investigated tissues and the only semi-quantitative nature of the assay, we could not detect subtle changes in eccdna concentration.

our experimental results, together with previous reports  <cit> , support the hypothesis that eccdna is produced by homologous intra-strand recombination between satellite repeat units  <cit> . this process is supposed to result in eccdna molecule sizes corresponding to the multiples of monomer length, which is consistent with our observations. moreover, the eccdna patterns detected for different victr-a and victr-b subfamilies or higher-order repeats suggest that relatively long regions  of high sequence similarity are required for efficient recombination. it has been reported that efficiency of homologous recombination depends on similarity of involved sequences  <cit>  and is proportional to the length of the similarity  <cit> . if the length or degree of sequence similarity is decreased, the rate of recombination is reduced rapidly. in yeast, a divergence of only 1% between  <dig> bp substrates caused a 5–23-fold reduction of mitotic and meiotic recombination, and divergence of 15% led to a 700-fold reduction  <cit> . in plants,  <dig> % and  <dig> % sequence heterogeneity was found to decrease the frequency of intrachromosomal recombination by  <dig>   <cit>  and  <dig> -fold  <cit> , respectively, and the recombination between  <dig> bp inverted repeat substrates was reduced by about 4– <dig> fold when the level of divergence increased from  <dig> % to 9%  <cit> . a similar adverse effect of decreasing similarity on the efficiency of eccdna formation was also evident in the case of hor units of the subfamily vg-v of v. grandiflora victr-b repeats. the  <dig> bp hors have significantly higher average similarity  than the individual monomers from which they are composed   <cit> . consequently, the eccdna was detected only in sizes corresponding to multiples of the hor lengths but not in multiples of the  <dig> bp monomers . other victr-b subfamilies from the same species that are homogenized at the level of the monomers produced eccdna with corresponding size distributions . thus, homologous recombination seems to be the major mechanism of eccdna origin from plant satellite repeats. other possible recombination mechanisms such as the nonhomologous end joining  repair pathway probably do not contribute significantly to eccdna production  <cit> . this conclusion is also consistent with previous studies on yeast, which demonstrated the requirement for rad52-dependent homologous recombination in the formation of eccdna from rdna repeats  <cit> .

as the eccdna size distributions of satellites corresponded to multiples of monomer or higher-order repeat lengths we did not find any direct evidence of eccdna production reflecting the periodicity of nucleosomal structure of chromatin. nevertheless, it cannot be ruled out that a minor subpopulations of circles arise via this recombination pathway and were not detected under our experimental conditions. such a mechanism could explain the origin of the vg-v subfamily, which represents a clear example of evolutionary shift from  <dig> bp monomers to the pentamer-based  <dig> bp hors. moreover, the recombination-based elimination of specific sequence regions was likely involved in the formation of the  <dig> bp victr-a subfamily in v. pannonica  which could represent another case of evolution towards the nucleosome-sized monomers. the constraints imposed on the formation of eccdna by chromatin could also explain some discrepancies observed when comparing sequence periodicity of v. narbonensis victr-a satellite  to the size distribution of its eccdna spots detected on 2-d blots . while the periodicity of the sequenced victr-a clones was found to be based on a monomer-sized repeated units, the eccdna was found to occur in multiples of dimer and preferentially tetramer units. interestingly, the tetramer peak  on the periodicity plot is higher that the one corresponding to the trimer , suggesting emergent tetramer-based periodicity. thus, this satellite might be in a transition stage towards hor periodicity driven by preferential formation of dimer/tetramer-based eccdna. on the other hand, we can not exclude that the observed eccdna pattern could arise from some unknown, less abundant subfamily of victr-a repeats with already developed hor periodicity which we did not detect among the cloned sequences.

the observed common occurrence of eccdna is important for proving its role in satellite repeat evolution, but it remains to be investigated to what extent it participates in the processes of satellite repeat amplification and sequence homogenization. in the simplest case, recombination-based excision of eccdna may only represent a deletion mechanism reducing copy numbers of satellite repeats in the genome. alternatively, open circular molecules can be further utilized as a replication template, leading to production of long linear stretches on newly synthesized dna fragments composed from multiple copies of the original circular sequence. thus, this mechanism would provide both amplification as well as sequence homogenization of satellite dna. in drosophila, specific circle-with-tail structures of tandemly arranged genes corresponding to stellate, suppressor of stellate and histone genes were observed on 2-d gels, suggesting the occurrence of rolling circle replication of these eccdna. such rolling circle intermediates  of satellite eccdna molecules were not, however, observed due to the methodological constraints of 2-d electrophoresis  <cit> . nor did we find rcis of satellite eccdna in our experimental system. this obstacle could be overcome in future experiments by visualizing the content of samples under the electron microscope, as already successfully done for rcis of mitochondrial plasmid mp <dig> in chenopodium album  <cit>  and rdna rolling circles in xenopus  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
this work demonstrated the existence of eccdna molecules derived from various plant satellite repeats, providing strong support for theoretical models predicting eccdna as an intermediate in satellite dna evolution. however, it is yet to be seen to what extent and how the eccdna is utilized in these processes. future detailed examination of the molecular basis for recombination events and analysis of replication intermediates should provide a better understanding of the biological principles and constraints involved in these processes.

