BACKGROUND
over the past decades, kiwifruit  has developed into an important horticultural crop. the genus actinidia belongs to the family actinidiaceae within the ericales order, contains  <dig> species originating mainly in china  <cit>  and consists of perennial, climbing or straggling, deciduous plants. all members of actinidia genus are functionally dioecious, with male and female flowers carried on different plants, typically at the basal end of the shoot  <cit> . female flowers undergo androecial development but lack functional pollen and male flowers cease gynoecial development upon initiation of stigma. the reproductive cycles of kiwifruit commence after a juvenile period required for establishment of flowering competence. in mature kiwifruit plants, growth and flowering are spread over two growing seasons. during the first growing season, a number of phytomers and axillary meristems are initiated in latent shoot buds at the distal end of the shoot, which enter a dormant state and develop into inflorescence-bearing shoots early in the second growing season, at spring budbreak  <cit> . kiwifruit inflorescences are compound dichasia, but lateral flowers in most female cultivars cease development soon after their initiation and only terminal flowers develop  <cit> .

conflicting reports are available on the timing of floral commitment, ranging from the spring of the first growing season  <cit>  or late summer of the first growing season  <cit> , to the spring of the second growing season, immediately before flower differentiation  <cit> . in addition, flower development during the second growing season depends on environmental conditions, most importantly winter chilling; insufficient chilling results in unsynchronized budbreak, low flower numbers and subsequent low fruit yields. actinidia species differ significantly in their timing of budbreak, winter-chilling requirements, lengths and numbers of nodes per shoot, indicating a genetic control of shoot growth and flowering.

current research on kiwifruit is mainly focused around consumer-driven traits such as fruit flavour and fragrance, appearance, healthful components and convenience  <cit> , but the knowledge of the genetic regulation of growth and development, flowering and sex-determination is very scarce, yet essential to accelerate breeding and aid our understanding of flowering control in kiwifruit and woody perennial species in general.

molecular and genetic regulation of flower development has been subject to detailed analysis in various plant species. specification of floral organ identity in model plants arabidopsis and antirrhinum has been explained by the classical abc model  <cit> . identity of floral organs is determined by three classes of function, a, b and c, each consisting of one or more genes  <cit> . further research resulted in the revised abce model  <cit> . in addition, the a class gene apetala <dig> , together with other members of the ap1/ful-like gene family and sep gene family, have a role in specification of floral meristem identity  <cit> ; another a class gene apetala <dig>  is also implicated in the control of floral transition  <cit> , seed size  <cit>  and maintenance of the stem cell niche in the shoot meristem  <cit> . with the exception of ap <dig>  all the floral organ identity genes are members of the mads-box family . they all belong to the plant-specific mikc type mads-box genes  <cit> , orthologs from different plant species generally belong to the same mads-box gene subfamilies  <cit>  and their function is well correlated with expression patterns  <cit> .

in general, the abc and abce models are widely applicable to non-model plants, with a few caveats. whereas the b, c and e functions are regarded to be broadly conserved, the a function in specification of the perianth is not widely observed and questioned in antirrhinum  <cit> , as well as other plants  <cit> . in addition, this model fails to explain floral diversity seen within flowering plants, and additional models have been proposed  <cit> . evolutionary developmental biology of mads box genes in a range of angiosperms has been instrumental in the development and testing of these models  and further broad comparative studies, including normal and aberrant flowers in a range of species, will aid understanding of the mechanisms underlying the variation in angiosperm floral morphology.

the objective of this study was to functionally characterize genes required for development of kiwifruit flowers. specifically, this study aimed to:  identify genes that specify floral meristem and floral organ fates in kiwifruit;  identify if specific expression patterns may have led to the aberrant morphology of some kiwifruit flowers; and  develop molecular markers to monitor kiwifruit floral development. nine mads-box genes highly similar to class a, b, c, and e function genes were identified and further characterized using cultivars of the closely related kiwifruit species, a. chinensis and a. deliciosa and an a. deliciosa spontaneous mutant 'pukekohe dwarf' with an abnormal floral phenotype. we discuss kiwifruit flower development in the light of the existing flowering models.

RESULTS
identification of kiwifruit candidate genes
nine non-redundant kiwifruit mads-box genes were identified on the basis of similarity to arabidopsis floral mads-box genes, and named actinidia ful-like, ful, ap3- <dig>  ap3- <dig>  pi, ag, sep <dig>  sep <dig> and sep <dig> . for some genes, multiple near-identical sequences were recovered reflecting alleles, sequences from different genomes within polyploid genomes or orthologs from different kiwifruit species .

phylogenetic analysis further confirmed that the identified floral mads-box genes belong to appropriate mads-box gene families and subfamilies . all the predicted protein sequences of kiwifruit mads-box genes contain the conserved mik domains and a variable c-terminal region with conserved c-terminal motifs . none of the identified mads-box genes has the carboxyl-terminal cfat/a farnesylation motif characteristic of euap <dig> proteins. the predicted ag protein was clustered in the c lineage of the angiosperm ag subfamily , but the c and the d lineages are closely related and often difficult to distinguish. pcr amplification of the genomic dna identified an intron located in the last codon , which is characteristic of the c but not the d lineage  <cit> .

overexrpession phenotypes of kiwifruit flowering genes
to establish the potential role of identified genes in regulation of flowering, their cdnas were ectopically expressed in wild type arabidopsis. among the minimum of  <dig> kanamycin-resistant lines per each construct, three or more were chosen for detailed analysis. in general, two of the chosen lines displayed strong phenotypes and one line was chosen that displayed a weak to moderate phenotype .

flowering time was recorded as number of rosette leaves and days from germination when primary inflorescence stems were  <dig> mm long. three lines were chosen for detailed analysis, including two strong and a weak phenotype.

kiwifruit ful-like, when over-expressed in arabidopsis col- <dig> under the 35s promoter, promoted floral transition both in inductive long-day  conditions and in non-inductive short-day  conditions . high levels of transgene expression resulted in the terminal flower phenotype . no homeotic transformation of floral whorls was detected in transgenic plants.

kiwifruit ful, when over-expressed in arabidopsis col- <dig> under the 35s promoter, promoted flowering but less efficiently than ful-like and the flowers were indistinguishable from the wild type . the ability of this construct to induce precocious flowering was dependent on day length conditions . constitutive over-expression of kiwifruit sep <dig> also promoted floral transition . in addition, many of the plants had small and curled leaves . plants grown in short days often reverted to vegetative growth, producing aerial rosettes . constitutive overexpression of kiwifruit sep <dig> had only a mild effect on the timing of floral transition in inductive ld conditions . ectopic expression of kiwifruit pi and ap3- <dig> produced plants indistinguishable from the wild type . constitutive over-expression of kiwifruit ag resulted in plants with reduced height and curled leaves, which flowered significantly earlier than the wild type in non-inductive sd conditions . these plants displayed loss of inflorescence indeterminacy and homeotic modifications that resembled the phenotype of transgenic plants ectopically expressing arabidopsis ag  <cit> .

to confirm that the identified kiwifruit genes encode proteins capable of forming complexes between each other as predicted for floral mads-box genes  <cit> , a yeast-two hybrid analysis was performed. it established interactions between b class proteins ap3- <dig> and pi, as well as ful and sep4; weaker interactions were detected between ag and sep <dig> and sep <dig> and sep <dig>  no interactions were identified with ful-like and sep <dig> .

expression patterns in vegetative and reproductive organs
mads-box gene functions are well correlated with the expression patterns in a variety of plant species. to establish the role of identified genes in kiwifruit, their expression patterns in various vegetative and reproductive organs was interrogated by reverse transcription quantitative pcr , using two closely related kiwifruit species, a diploid a. chinensis and a hexaploid a. deliciosa, which exhibit differences in fruit characteristics, vine morphology, timing of budbreak and requirement for winter chilling. with the exception of ful-like and ful, expression of kiwifruit flowering genes was confined to flower and fruit tissues of both species chosen for analysis. kiwifruit ap3- <dig>  ag, sep <dig>  sep <dig> and sep <dig> were detected both in the flower and fruit tissue and pi was detected exclusively in flowers. kiwifruit ful-like was detected in leaf and flower tissues and was relatively highly expressed in the root. ful was not detected in the root, but was detectable in vegetative shoot organs  and was highly expressed in flower and particularly fruit. in general, the expression levels were relatively high compared with those of kiwifruit actin, with the exception of ful-like and ag .

expression domains in normal and aberrant flowers
to further investigate the role of identified genes in specification of floral organ fate in kiwifruit, floral organs of normal and aberrant a. deliciosa flowers were analysed by rt-qpcr. a. deliciosa pistillate  flowers consist of well separated whorls, with 5- <dig> ovate-oblong brown sepals, 5- <dig> convolute white petals , stamens that appear fully developed and a sub-globose, hairy ovary with numerous styles and ovules . the pedicel carries two small lateral bracts  that arise at very early stages of inflorescence development  <cit> . in some cases, lateral flowers can initiate and develop in the axils of these bracts. the staminate  flower is similar except for the stamens with longer filaments and larger anthers and underdeveloped ovary, which lacks styles and ovules .

in a a. deliciosa mutant 'pukekohe dwarf', which bares staminate but sterile flowers, floral organs are characterized by a transition from bracts to outer and inner perianth and underdeveloped reproductive whorls. most severely affected flowers have multiple, spirally arranged bract and perianth whorls , including intermediate floral organs . no reproductive organs are apparent and a new indeterminate flower is initiated instead . moderately affected flowers consist of better separated whorls, including bracts, sepals, petals, underdeveloped stamens and filamentous pistils , as well as intermediate organs between each whorl, such as sepaloid outer petals  and anther structures fused to the upper part of inner petals . because of the lack of sharp boundaries between 'pukekohe dwarf' floral organs, the samples collected were bracts, sepals, sepaloid petals, petals, stamens with petaloid characteristics and the pistil-like structure . leaf tissue was also included in the analysis.

the expression patterns are presented in figure  <dig>  in normal flowers, ful-like was expressed to high level in sepals, and moderate level in the leaf tissue. low levels of expression were detected in other flower organs. ful transcript accumulated in all tissues, but the highest accumulation was detected in the pistil tissue. ap3- <dig> was expressed in all floral organs, with higher accumulation detected in petal and stamen tissues, and pi was exclusively expressed in petals and stamens. ag accumulated in the reproductive flower organs, stamen and pistil. sep <dig> and sep <dig> were detected in all floral organs and sep <dig> accumulated in sepals and pistils, with low levels of transcript detected in stamens and almost no transcript detected in petals. no major differences were apparent between male and female flowers, with the exception of female stamen tissue that accumulated higher levels of ap3- <dig>  pi, ag and sep <dig> than those detected in male stamen tissues. similar expression domains of kiwifruit flowering genes were detected in a. chinensis flowers .

in aberrant 'pukekohe dwarf' flowers, the accumulation of kiwifruit flowering transcripts was similar to that in normal flowers, with some exceptions. ful-like transcript was particularly abundant in bracts. ful also accumulated in bracts to similar levels to those detected in leaves, sepals and stamens, but lower than pistil. pi expression domain extended across all flower organs, while being restricted to petals and stamens in normal flowers. ag expression was mainly confined to stamen and pistil tissue, with relative accumulation between that detected in male and female normal flowers. sep <dig> and sep <dig> accumulated from sepals to pistils but were absent from the leaf and bract tissue. on the other hand, sep <dig> accumulated in the bract tissue and was also abundant in aberrant flower pistils.

expressions in kiwifruit emerging shoots
expression of kiwifruit floral genes was further analysed in emerging shoots to address their role during budbreak and early stages of inflorescence and flower development. the timing and anatomical and morphological changes during shoot development are well described  <cit>  and the collected samples  represented developmental stages as described using light and scanning electron microscopy by polito and grant  <cit> . kiwifruit ful-like, ful and sep <dig> transcripts accumulated rapidly at the time of emergence of pubescent bud scales , a stage corresponding to early inflorescence development, when axillary meristem elongates and lateral bracts are initiated  <cit> . an increasing accumulation of pi and ag were detected from the bud scale emergence and leaf emergence stage, respectively , during rapid sequential floral organ development  <cit> . the accumulation of pi and ag was confined to the basal part of the emerging shoot where floral differentiation takes place, and was not detected in the vegetative shoot tip . the timing of ful-like and ful accumulation in the field-grown plants corresponded with initial stages of bud outgrowth in a. chinensis and a. deliciosa  and was similar to the accumulation pattern of a cell cycle gene cdkb <dig>  used as a marker of cell divisions  <cit> .

discussion
kiwifruit flowering genes specify floral meristem and floral organ fates
a kiwifruit flower belongs to the regular eudicot flower type in which the floral organ identity is determined by expression and interaction of floral organ identity genes. thus, a candidate gene approach was chosen for molecular analysis of kiwifruit flowering. putative orthologs of genes controlling flower development were isolated and characterized from the est collection comprising transcripts from a variety of tissues of several actinidia species, including flower, developing buds and fruit  <cit> . the est collection is biased towards fruit transcripts and many of the ests for floral organ identity were identified in fruit libraries: kiwifruit ful, ap <dig>  ag, sep <dig>  sep <dig> and sep <dig> were all represented with at least one sequence in a library derived from fruit transcripts . all these genes have been confirmed as expressed in the fruit, in addition to the flower. ful-like was identified from the leaf library and the presence of only one sequence correlated with its low expression levels as compared to actin. phylogenetic analysis and phenotypes obtained upon ectopic expression in arabidopsis suggested evolutionary and functional conservation of kiwifruit flowering genes.

these data taken together with expression patterns in normal and aberrant kiwifruit flowers confirmed that the identified b-, c- and e-class genes have a role in specification of kiwifruit floral organs. the floral promotion obtained upon overexpression in arabidopsis, elevated expression in 'pukekohe dwarf' bracts and accumulation at the earliest stages of bud development strongly suggested a role for kiwifruit ful-like, ful and sep <dig> in floral meristem specification. the mechanism of kiwifruit ful-like and ful action is unknown, but might be related to promotion or maintenance of cellular expansion and differentiation, as reported for ful in arabidopsis  <cit> . expression in vegetative tissues would support the role for ful-like and ful genes in general cellular function. while kiwifruit sep <dig> might perform a similar general function, it marks the inflorescence, flower and fruit development, based on the transcript absence from vegetative tissues. the increasing accumulation during shoot emergence and expression confined to reproductive organs suggested pi and ag as markers of flower differentiation.

is there an ap1-like gene in kiwifruit?
it is unclear if an ap <dig> orthologous gene exists in the kiwifruit genome. none of the candidate genes mined from the est database or described previously  <cit>  contained the carboxyl-terminal cfat/a farnesylation motif characteristic of euap <dig> proteins  <cit> . it is therefore possible that an unidentified kiwifruit euap <dig> protein is required for sepal and petal identity. on the other hand, the role of euap <dig> genes in specification of sepal and petal identity in plants other than arabidopsis is unclear and the concept of the a function in flower organ identity may not be universal  <cit> . in general, the role of a function genes in organ identity might simply be the result of their meristem identity function and the mutant floral organ phenotypes could be explained by incomplete transition to a floral meristem  <cit> . in addition, the numerous duplication events that gave rise to the angiosperm ap1/ful-like gene family  <cit>  make it difficult to identify the true orthologs across plant taxa. ful genes also perform the floral meristem identity function  <cit>  and possibly the a function  <cit> , and the ap <dig> conserved motif and protein modification may not be necessary  <cit> . a possibility exists that kiwifruit ful-like may have a role in sepal specification, based on its expression pattern in flowers. however, expression of ful-like failed to rescue the ap1- <dig> organ identity phenotype  and a yeast-two-hybrid assay failed to identify an interaction between ful-like and any of the kiwifruit sep proteins, that would have been predicted from the quartet model  <cit> . taken together with expression in vegetative kiwifruit organs, these data suggest against the a function of kiwifruit ful-like.

a. deliciosa 'pukekohe dwarf' mutant - a tool to study kiwifruit flower development
functional characterization of a gene typically includes analysis of phenotypes resulting from a mutation or ectopic expression of the gene. in kiwifruit, artificially generated mutations are difficult to generate and screen and genetic transformation is a difficult and lengthy process. however, natural genetic variants exist with altered floral development and morphology that can be utilized as a genetic tool to identify and characterize genes involved in flowering. a. deliciosa 'pukekohe dwarf' flower is characterized by numerous bracts preceding sepals. given the position on the pedicel, spiral phyllotaxis and morphology significantly different from that of both leaves and sepals, bracts can be seen as modified leaves produced during the early stages of the floral transition, that arise as a result of increasing activity of floral-promoting genes. thus, the significant up-regulation of kiwifruit ful-like, ful and sep <dig> in bracts further suggests their role in establishment of floral fate, consistent with floral promotion seen upon expression of these genes in arabidopsis. the other unusual feature of 'pukekohe dwarf' flowers is the presence of multiple perianth whorls with gradual transition between floral organs and the presence of intermediate organs with combined sepal and petal or petal and anther identity. accordingly, kiwifruit pi expression domain in 'pukekohe dwarf' is extended and resembles the 'fading border' model of floral gene expression  <cit> .

the molecular mechanisms involved in the generation of the mutation and the target genes affected in 'pukekohe dwarf' are unknown. 'pukekohe dwarf' is impaired in the specification of stamen/anther and pistil/carpel identity, but not in development of perianth organs, resembling the loss-of-function mutation in class c gene ag  <cit> . however, no major differences were detected in the expression pattern or sequence of kiwifruit ag between normal and aberrant flowers , suggesting that a different mechanism might underlie the 'pukekohe dwarf' phenotype. given that the mutation likely occurs in one copy of the target gene, it is highly probable that the phenotype is the result of a gain-of-function rather than loss-of-function mutation.

a model for kiwifruit floral organ identity
based on the relative accumulation of kiwifruit mads-box gene transcripts in the wild-type male and female flowers and 'pukekohe dwarf' mutant flowers, a model of kiwifruit floral organ specification was proposed . sharp gene expression boundaries combined with gradients of gene expression within the expression domains are responsible for the bce-like floral organ identity in the wild type, regular, four-whorled kiwifruit flower. the a function may require a yet unidentified ap1-like protein, or is derived from floral meristem specifying factors, e.g. ful-like, ful and sep <dig> proteins; their accumulation is sufficient to promote bracts as intermediates between leaves and sepals, but additional sep proteins  are required for true sepal-identity. extended pi expression in the mutant is the likely reason for extended petaloid features and multiple petal whorls.

CONCLUSIONS
over the past decades, kiwifruit has developed into an important horticultural crop, firstly in new zealand and subsequently in other countries. current research on kiwifruit is mainly focused around consumer-driven traits such as fruit flavour and fragrance, appearance, healthful components and convenience, but the knowledge of the genetic regulation of flowering is very scarce. this report provides a description of flower development in kiwifruit at the molecular level. it has identified genes that will be utilized as genetic markers for inflorescence and flower development and candidates that are expected to have an impact on kiwifruit growth, phase change and time of flowering.

