BACKGROUND
when one event or stimulus in the world reliably precedes and predicts another, animals readily learn the predictive relationship, exemplified by pavlovian conditioning. similarly, when an animal's own actions cause  some outcome, animals learn this relationship . frequently, however, antecedent and consequent events are separated in time. when animals act to obtain reinforcement, the final outcomes do not always follow the actions immediately; thus, animals must learn instrumental action-outcome contingencies using delayed reinforcement. delays can hamper both pavlovian and instrumental conditioning  <cit> : for example, although animals can bridge substantial delays to acquire instrumental responses, instrumental conditioning has long been observed to be systematically impaired as the outcome is delayed  <cit> . furthermore, individual variation in the ability to use delayed reinforcement may determine one aspect of impulsivity: an animal able to forgo short-term poor rewards in order to obtain delayed but better rewards may be termed self-controlled, whereas an animal that cannot tolerate delays to reward may be said to exhibit impulsive choice  <cit> .

there are several psychological reasons why action-outcome delays might impair learning or performance of an instrumental response  <cit> . instrumental responding is controlled by several processes  <cit> ; for example, rats work for outcomes that they value, using knowledge of the action-outcome contingencies in force to produce goal-directed actions. they also develop direct stimulus-response  associations, or habits. action-outcome delays might, therefore, reduce the instrumental incentive value of the goal: valuing the goal less, animals may work less for it. similarly, delays may hinder animals' ability to perceive the action-outcome contingency. delayed rewards may also be less effective at reinforcing s-r habits. it is presently not known whether responses acquired with delayed reinforcement are governed by a different balance of habits and goal-directed actions than responses acquired with immediate reinforcement. however, one important factor in learning to act using delayed reinforcement may be the role of the environmental context. the animal's task is to attribute the outcome to its actions; instead, it may erroneously associate the outcome with the context, since the context is a cue that is temporally closer to the outcome than the action. the longer the delay, the more this contextual competition comes to impair the learning of the action-outcome contingency. instrumental conditioning with delayed reinforcement can be enhanced if rats are exposed to the relevant contextual cues prior to instrumental training, and this enhancement is lessened if 'free'  rewards are given during the contextual pre-exposure periods  <cit> . these results are consistent with the theory that during the action-outcome delay, contextual cues compete with the action to become associated with the outcome; pre-exposing the animals to the context with no consequences reduces this contextual competition, by making the context a bad predictor of the outcome , and this in turn makes the action-outcome contingency more salient and easier to learn  <cit> .

little is known of the neural basis of instrumental learning with delayed reinforcement  <cit> . however, there is good evidence that the hippocampus contributes to the representation of context. lesions of the hippocampal formation  have been shown to impair pavlovian conditioning to a contextual conditioned stimulus , but not to a discrete cs, in rats  <cit> , at least for some processes involving contextual representation  <cit> . since context-outcome associations are thought to hinder instrumental learning with delayed reinforcement   <cit> , it follows that if h lesions impair the formation of associations involving the context, such lesions might reduce contextual competition and hence facilitate instrumental conditioning when there is an action-outcome delay.

to investigate whether the hippocampus contributes to learning with delayed reinforcement, we examined the ability of rats with excitotoxic lesions of the hippocampus to acquire instrumental responding with delayed reward, comparing them to sham-operated controls. each subject was allowed to respond freely on two levers, one of which produced reinforcement after a delay of  <dig>   <dig>  or  <dig> s . we report that h-lesioned rats were slightly impaired at learning the lever-press response in the absence of delays. delays retarded learning in sham-operated controls, but the delays did not impair the h-lesioned rats to the same extent. thus, as the delays were increased, h-lesioned rats became better at learning relative to controls, suggesting that the presence of delays had less of an effect on h-lesioned rats. to establish whether this relative improvement in learning with delayed reinforcement would also manifest itself as improved self-control, we also trained a different group of rats on a task in which they had to choose between an immediate, small reward and a delayed, large reward  and made excitotoxic hippocampal lesions before retesting the rats postoperatively. good learning with delayed reinforcement did not translate to self-controlled choice. we report that h lesions severely impaired rats' ability to choose the larger reward when it was delayed, but not when the delay preceding delivery of the large reward was removed, demonstrating that hippocampal lesions induce impulsive choice.

RESULTS
histology
in experiment  <dig>  there were five postoperative deaths. no rats were excluded after histological analysis; final group sizes were  <dig> ,  <dig> ,  <dig> ,  <dig> ,  <dig> , and  <dig> . in experiment  <dig>  there was one postoperative death , and one rat  fell ill five sessions after surgery and was killed. histological analysis revealed that the lesions were incomplete or encroached significantly on neighbouring structures in  <dig> subjects. these subjects were excluded; final group sizes were therefore  <dig>  and  <dig> .

a diagram of the rat hippocampus is shown in figure  <dig>  lesions of the hippocampus encompassed much of the dorsal and ventral hippocampal pyramidal cell  fields, the dentate gyrus, the subiculum, and the fimbriae. neuronal loss and associated gliosis extended in an anteroposterior direction from approximately - <dig>  mm to - <dig>  mm relative to bregma . damage to the dorsal and ventral hippocampal commissure was occasionally seen, but damage to the overlying cortex was minimal. schematics of the lesions are shown in figure  <dig>  and photomicrographs of a representative lesion are shown in figure  <dig> 

acquisition of instrumental responding 
as expected, response-reinforcer delays retarded the acquisition of instrumental responding in sham-operated rats . however, this impairment was lessened in h-lesioned rats . h-lesioned rats responded less than shams in the absence of a response-reinforcer delay , but responded as well as shams when delays were imposed ; h-lesioned rats were even facilitated numerically relative to shams in the  <dig> s delay condition , though this difference was not statistically significant on its own. these conclusions were reached statistically as follows.

an overall anova, using the model lesion <dig> × delay <dig> × , revealed a lesion × lever × delay interaction , justifying sub-analyses, in addition to effects of delay , lever , delay × lever , session , delay × session , session × lever , and delay × session × lever . the differences between the groups were in their responding on the active lever  rather than on the inactive lever . all six groups learned to discriminate between the two levers, responding more on the active lever than on the inactive lever .

delays reduced the rate of acquisition and the final level of responding on the active lever for sham-operated rats . delays also increased responding on the inactive lever somewhat . similarly, in h-lesioned rats, delays reduced responding on the active lever , although they did not significantly affect responding on the inactive lever .

at  <dig> s delay, h-lesioned rats responded significantly less than shams on the active lever . there were no differences in responding on the inactive lever . at  <dig> s delay, there were no differences between sham-operated and h-lesioned rats in responding on either the active or the inactive lever . at  <dig> s delay, there were also no significant differences on either lever , although the h-lesioned rats responded numerically more than shams on the active lever throughout.

inspection of figure  <dig> also suggested that delays had less of an impact on the final  rates of responding in h-lesioned rats than in shams. the sessions were divided by eye into an acquisition phase  and a 'stable' phase . responding on the active lever in the 'stable' phase was analysed; this revealed a lesion × delay interaction , with delays markedly reducing stable rates of responding in shams  but less so in h-lesioned rats .

experienced response-delivery and response-collection delays 
for every reinforcer delivered, the active lever response most closely preceding it in time was identified, and the time between that response and delivery of the reinforcer  was calculated. this time can therefore be equal to or less than the programmed delay, and is only relevant for subjects experiencing non-zero programmed response-reinforcer delays. the response-to-reinforcer-collection  delays were also calculated: for every reinforcer delivered, the response most closely preceding it and the nosepoke most closely following it were identified, and the time between these two events calculated. this time can be shorter or longer than the programmed delay, and is relevant for all subjects.

h-lesioned rats experienced slightly shorter response-delivery delays than shams when the programmed delay was  <dig> s or  <dig> s : there was a lesion × programmed delay interaction , and simple effects of the lesion when the programmed delay was  <dig> s  and when it was  <dig> s .

h-lesioned rats also experienced slightly shorter response-collection delays across all programmed delays  , though the difference was not significant at any one programmed delay .

these differences in the mean delay experienced by each rat were reflected in differences in the distribution of response-delivery and response-collection delays when the programmed delay was non-zero . all experienced delays for a given subject were aggregated across all sessions, and the proportion falling into different 2-s ranges were calculated to give one value per range per subject. for response-delivery delays, h-lesioned rats experienced slightly fewer long delays and slightly more short delays in the  <dig> s condition  and in the  <dig> s condition . for response-collection delays, there were no differences in the distribution of delays experienced by h-lesioned and sham rats in the  <dig> s condition . in the  <dig> s condition, h-lesioned rats experienced a slightly lower proportion of long response-collection delays and a slightly higher proportion of short response-collection delays . similarly, in the  <dig> s condition, h-lesioned rats experienced a slightly lower proportion of long response-collection delays and a slightly higher proportion of short response-collection delays than shams .

since h-lesioned rats experienced slightly shorter delays than sham-operated rats, it was necessary to take this into account when establishing the effect of delays on learning, as follows.

effect of delays on learning 
there was a systematic relationship between the acquisition rate and the programmed delay of reinforcement, and this was altered in h-lesioned rats, who were less impaired by delays  than shams were. figure 9a replots the rates of lever-pressing on session  <dig>  at the end of the initial 'acquisition' phase. despite the comparatively low power of such an analysis, lever-pressing was analysed for this session only, using the model lesion <dig> × delay <dig> × s. this revealed a significant lesion × delay interaction , which was analysed further. increasing delays significantly reduced the rate of responding in this session for shams  and h-lesioned rats . h-lesioned rats responded less than shams at zero delay , were not significantly different from shams at  <dig> s delay , and responded more than shams at  <dig> s delay .

since the h group experienced slightly shorter response-delivery and response-collection delays than shams when the programmed delay was non-zero , it is important to establish whether this effect alone was responsible for the lesser effect of delays on learning, or whether the effect of delays on h-lesioned rats was lessened over and above any effect to decrease the experienced delay. the mean experienced response-collection delay was calculated for each subject up to and including session  <dig>  the square-root-transformed number of lever-presses in session  <dig> was then analysed using a general linear model of the form lesion <dig> × experienced delaycov × s; unlike a standard analysis of covariance, the factor × covariate interaction term was included in the model. this confirmed that the detrimental effects of delay upon learning were reduced in h-lesioned rats, compared to controls, over and above the differences in experienced delay .

experienced delays and learning on the inactive lever 
no such delay-dependent lesion effects were observed for the inactive lever. experienced inactive-response-delivery delays  were much longer and more variable than corresponding delays for the active lever, because subjects responded on the inactive lever so little. means ± sems were  <dig> ±  <dig> s ,  <dig> ±  <dig> s ,  <dig> ±  <dig> s ,  <dig> ±  <dig> s ,  <dig> ±  <dig> s , and  <dig> ±  <dig> s . anova of these data showed that these experienced inactive-response-delivery delays depended upon the programmed active-response-delivery delay  but there was no effect of the lesion and no lesion × delay interaction . experienced inactive-response-collection delays were  <dig> ±  <dig> s ,  <dig> ±  <dig> s ,  <dig> ±  <dig> s ,  <dig> ±  <dig> s ,  <dig> ±  <dig> s , and  <dig> ±  <dig> s . again, anova that these experienced delays depended upon the programmed active-response-delivery delays  but there was no effect of the lesion and no lesion × delay interaction . when the square-root-transformed number of responses on the inactive lever in session  <dig> was analysed with the experienced delays up to that point as a predictor, using the model lesion <dig> × experienced inactive-response-collection delaycov × s just as for the active lever analysis, there was no lesion × experienced delay interaction; neither was there an effect of lesion or experienced delay .

choice between an immediate, small reward and a large, delayed reward 
preoperatively, subjects preferred the larger reinforcer less when it was delayed, and the groups remained matched following later histological selection . choice ratios  from the last  <dig> preoperative sessions were analysed using the model lesion intent <dig> × . while there was a strong effect of delay , no terms involving lesion intent were significant .

the choice patterns of the two groups diverged following surgery, with the h-lesioned rats choosing the large, delayed reinforcer less than sham-operated controls . comparison of choice in the last  <dig> preoperative sessions  to that in the first  <dig> postoperative sessions , using the model lesion <dig> ×  revealed a lesion × pre/post interaction . however, at this point, analysis of postoperative choice patterns on their own  did not reveal a significant difference between the two groups ; as it did not take account of preoperative choice patterns, this analysis was less powerful. later, h-lesioned rats diverged further from sham-operated controls and the difference between the two became significant even without taking account of preoperative information . both groups remained sensitive to the delay postoperatively .

there were no differences between h-lesioned and sham-operated rats in any other measures collected, including the rate of omissions, the latency to initiate trials, the latency to choose a lever, the latency to collect food, and the rate of nosepoking in the food alcove during delays to reinforcement. data from the  <dig> baseline postoperative sessions  were analysed. omissions were very infrequent  and there were no group differences in the rates of omission . initiation latencies did not differ between groups . neither did choice latencies: an analysis using the model lesion <dig> ×  revealed no significant terms involving lesion . food collection latencies were analysed using the model lesion <dig> × . predictably, rats were slower to collect the food following choice of the large, delayed reinforcer as the delays got longer  but this was not influenced by the lesion . the proportion of the delay spent nosepoking did not alter as a function of the delay, and was not affected by the lesion .

effects of removing and reintroducing delays to the large reinforcer 
both h-lesioned and sham-operated rats were sensitive to the removal of delays in alternating sessions, increasing their preference for the large reinforcer during sessions when it was not delayed . choice ratios from these sessions were analysed using the model lesion <dig> × . this revealed a delays/no delays × block interaction . additionally, there was a main effect of lesion , indicating a greater overall preference for the smaller reinforcer across these sessions in h-lesioned rats compared to controls, but there were no other significant terms involving lesion . in sessions when delays were present, both h-lesioned and sham-operated rats showed a within-session shift in preference as the delay increased , and h-lesioned rats chose the smaller, immediate reinforcer more often . in sessions when delays were not present, neither group showed a within-session shift in preference , though again the h-lesioned rats showed a stronger preference for the smaller reinforcer .

these analyses suggested that the h-lesioned rats' preference for the larger reward was less than that of shams even when it was not delayed. however, an alternative possibility is that the h-lesioned rats were loath to choose the large reinforcer when it was delayed, and that this generalized to affect preference even when it was not delayed  <cit> . consequently, subjects were given a further six sessions with no delays present; preference on the last of these sessions is shown in figure 10d. h-lesioned rats showed a strong preference for the large reinforcer when it was not delayed, just as shams did, with mean choice ratios >94% in all conditions. in this session, there were no group differences  and no within-session shift in preference .

when delays were reintroduced , preference for the larger, delayed reinforcer declined much more sharply in h-lesioned rats than in shams . preference for the large reinforcer declined first at long delays, then progressively at shorter delays, such that even responding in the zero-delay block was affected. in sessions 37– <dig>  h-lesioned rats chose the large reinforcer less often than shams , with this difference being significant for  <dig> s and  <dig> s delays  but not  <dig> s ,  <dig> s , or  <dig> s delays . in sessions 40– <dig>  the pattern was essentially the same , except that individual differences were now significant at all delays .

locomotor activity, body mass, and food consumption
h-lesioned animals were hyperactive compared to sham-operated controls in both experiments , as reported previously  <cit> . in experiment  <dig>  analysis of the square-root-transformed number of infrared beam breaks using the model lesion <dig> ×  revealed effects of lesion , reflecting hyperactivity in the h group, with additional effects of bin , reflecting habituation, and a lesion × bin interaction . in experiment  <dig>  hyperactivity was again observed .

in experiment  <dig>  h-lesioned rats remained the same weight as sham-operated controls throughout, though in experiment  <dig>  which lasted longer, they gained less weight than shams . there were no differences between groups preoperatively in either experiment . in experiment  <dig>  the groups gained weight at the same rate . data from two h-lesioned subjects in experiment  <dig> were lost. in experiment  <dig>  the h-lesioned rats weighed less at the end of the experiment .

h-lesioned rats consumed their maintenance chow more quickly and consumed more of it, but they did not differ from sham-operated controls in their consumption of the sucrose pellets employed as reinforcers in the behavioural tasks. in  <dig> minutes, h-lesioned rats consumed more chow  than shams  . however, there were no differences between the mass of sucrose pellets consumed in  <dig> minutes by h-lesioned rats  and by shams  . h-lesioned rats were quicker to consume  <dig>  g of chow  than shams  . however, although h-lesioned rats were also slightly quicker to consume  <dig>  g of sucrose pellets  than shams , this difference was not significant .

discussion
excitotoxic lesions of the dorsal and ventral hippocampus slightly retarded instrumental learning on a continuous reinforcement  schedule in the absence of response-reinforcer delays. however, h-lesioned rats were only impaired when reinforcement was delivered immediately, and not when it was delivered after a delay. h-lesioned rats were less sensitive to the deleterious effects of response-reinforcer delays on learning, to the extent that with long  response-reinforcer delays, h-lesioned rats showed numerically better discrimination between the active and inactive levers than shams . despite this delay-dependent facilitation of instrumental conditioning, h-lesioned rats were less able than shams to choose a delayed, large reinforcer in preference to an immediate, small reinforcer . that is, h-lesioned rats exhibited impulsive choice.

pavlovian and instrumental conditioning with delayed reinforcement
free-operant instrumental conditioning, and instrumental discrimination learning, have long been known to be impaired systematically by response-reinforcer  delays  <cit> . this might be for several reasons  <cit>  because instrumental responding depends on several processes, including knowledge of the action-outcome contingency, a representation of the instrumental incentive value of the outcome, s-r habits, and the influence of pavlovian css that have motivational significance through processes such as conditioned reinforcement and pavlovian-instrumental transfer  <cit> . action-outcome delays might affect several of these processes. for example, such delays may hinder the subject's ability to perceive the action-outcome contingency, so the subject is unaware that its actions will result in the outcome. delays might reduce the value of the goal, so the subject is less willing to work for it. delays might also impair the process by which s-r habits are reinforced; finally, they might affect the degree to which stimuli associated with reinforcement by pavlovian conditioning are capable of motivating behaviour. in the present experiment, we did not present explicit stimuli associated with either the response or the reinforcer, to minimize the possible contribution of processes such as conditioned reinforcement. nevertheless, it is largely an open question which processes contributing to instrumental learning and performance are the ones most affected by response-reinforcer delays; for example, it is not present known whether responses acquired with delayed reinforcement are governed by a different balance of habits and goal-directed actions than responses acquired with immediate reinforcement.

however, the environmental context has been clearly demonstrated to influence learning with delays. the effect of contextual factors on learning has been demonstrated using two pavlovian conditioning paradigms: delay conditioning and trace conditioning. when a cs is followed by a us and the two overlap and are contiguous in time, the paradigm is known as 'delay' conditioning . when a cs is followed by a us and the two do not overlap, so that there is a gap between the end of the cs and the start of the us, the paradigm is known as 'trace' conditioning   <cit> . 'trace' pavlovian conditioning, with a cs-us gap, results in poorer learning than 'delay' pavlovian conditioning, even if the interstimulus interval  is held constant  <cit> , just as insertion of an action-outcome gap retards instrumental conditioning  <cit> . several lines of evidence suggest that contextual competition is a cause of reduced responding to the discrete cs in trace conditioning. as the trace gap is lengthened, conditioned responses  tend to occur to the context instead of to the discrete cs  <cit> . trace conditioning can be improved by the addition of a 'filler' stimulus during the cs-us gap, which might decrease contextual competition or act as a secondary or conditioned reinforcer  <cit> . the smaller the ratio of the isi to the intertrial interval , the faster conditioning proceeds  <cit> , and one explanation of this is that long itis reduce the strength of context-us associations, making cs-us associations more salient. finally, pre-exposure to the context in the absence of any us improves subsequent conditioning to a discrete cs, as would be expected under the contextual competition account since pre-exposure should produce latent inhibition of the context .

the idea that reinforcing outcomes may be associated with either a discrete predictor  or the background context, and that the two compete in some way for such association, also explains observations concerning the effect of contextual manipulations on instrumental conditioning  <cit> . dickinson et al.  <cit>  trained rats on a free-operant, fr- <dig> schedule of reinforcement very similar to the one used in the present experiments. they found that the rate of learning, and the asymptotic level of responding, declined across groups as the response-reinforcer delay was increased from  <dig> to  <dig> s; rats trained with a 64-s delay failed to learn at all, compared to yoked controls. however, when rats were exposed to the training context prior to training  their learning was improved, and successful discrimination was seen even with a delay of  <dig> s. this is exactly what would be expected if a process of contextual competition was operating. the subject's task is to distinguish p from p, or, making the contribution of the context explicit, to distinguish p from p. pre-exposure to the context would be expected to produce latent inhibition to the context, reducing the strength of context-outcome associations. viewed another way, non-reinforced exposure to the context forces the subjects to experience a zero-response, zero-reinforcer situation, i.e. p =  <dig>  when they are then exposed to the instrumental contingency, such that p >  <dig>  this prior experience may enhance their ability to detect the instrumental contingency Δp = p – p. this interpretation is also supported by the demonstration that delivering 'free' rewards  during the contextual pre-exposure reduces the beneficial effect of this pre-exposure on instrumental learning  <cit> ; by increasing p, this reduces the subject's ability to detect the contingency  <cit> . thus, the formation of context-outcome associations may explain the ability of action-outcome delays to retard instrumental learning.

contribution of the hippocampus to instrumental conditioning with immediate reinforcement
in the present study, excitotoxic hippocampal lesions impaired instrumental conditioning on an fr- <dig> schedule in the absence of response-reinforcer delays. this contrasts with the findings of corbit et al.  <cit>  that electrolytic lesions of the dorsal hippocampus did not affect the acquisition of instrumental responding on a training schedule that progressed from a fixed-interval-20-s  schedule up to a random-ratio- <dig>  schedule, consistent with earlier results  <cit> . rats with excitotoxic nmda lesions of the dorsal hippocampus also responded at similar, or greater, rates than sham-operated controls in this training regimen  <cit> . obviously, the discrepancy between these findings and the present results might be due to the differences in the schedules used  or in the lesion . however, it is less likely that the impairment was due to a primary motivational difference: although the h-lesioned rats gained less mass than shams, the food consumption tests showed that they ate as many of the pellets used as reinforcers as shams, and as quickly, suggesting that the impairment observed was not due to reduced primary motivation for the food. it is, however, possible that it represents a rate-dependent impairment .

furthermore, electrolytic lesions of the dorsal hippocampus have previously been shown to render rats insensitive to changes in the instrumental action-outcome contingency, but in a very specific manner  <cit> . one way to test subjects' sensitivity to this contingency is to train them to respond on two levers for two different outcomes, and then to deliver one of the outcomes non-contingently, as well as contingent upon the response. subjects that are sensitive to the action-outcome contingency should selectively reduce their responding for the foodstuff being delivered non-contingently  <cit> . electrolytic dorsal hippocampal lesions impaired this ability, though not the ability to discriminate the two foodstuffs or to respond to changes in their value  <cit> . this may have been because the lesion affected contextual conditioning: if an animal cannot associate non-contingent rewards with the context, it may erroneously associate them with its own action. however, excitotoxic lesions of the dorsal hippocampus did not produce this effect, which was reproduced instead by excitotoxic lesions of the entorhinal cortex and subiculum  <cit> ; lesions of these structures have also been shown to impair contextual conditioning in pavlovian tasks  <cit>  .

contribution of the hippocampus to instrumental conditioning with delayed reinforcement
in contrast, when a delay was imposed between responding and reinforcement in an fr- <dig> schedule, h-lesioned rats were not impaired at instrumental conditioning, and were even somewhat facilitated in learning, relative to shams, when the reinforcer was delayed by  <dig> s. since h-lesioned rats were impaired in the absence of delays, this indicates a delay-dependent improvement in learning, relative to shams. furthermore, asymptotic rates of responding were reduced less by the delay in h-lesioned rats than in controls. the facilitation of learning after a lesion strongly suggests that the lesion has disrupted one process or strategy that normally competes with another process involved in solving the task . given the involvement of the hippocampus in contextual conditioning  <cit> , the most obvious explanation is that the lesions facilitated instrumental conditioning with delayed reinforcement by reducing competition from context-reinforcer associations that normally hinder the formation or expression of response-reinforcer associations.

certain simple explanations of the present results can be ruled out. the delay-dependent impairment makes an explanation in terms of differences in primary motivation for the food per se unlikely, and the use of a control  lever means that differences in responding were not attributable to differences in general activity levels, but instead to the contingencies in force on the active lever. our results also indicated that when there were programmed delays to reinforcement, h-lesioned animals experienced shorter response-reinforcer collection delays, partly because they collected the reinforcer more promptly than shams. this effect probably improved learning in the delay conditions. however, in addition to this effect, there was a further delay-dependent improvement exhibited by h-lesioned rats: even allowing for the shorter response-collection delays that they experienced, their instrumental learning was impaired less by delays than that of sham-operated controls.

the role of the hippocampus in learning an instrumental response with delayed reinforcement has been examined before, though in a very different way. port et al.  <cit>  found that aspirative lesions of the dorsal hippocampus did not impair appetitive instrumental conditioning with delayed reinforcement. numerically, lesioned rats were slightly faster to learn  than shams, but the difference was not significant. this is certainly consistent with the present results, in which a delay-dependent improvement was seen as a result of excitotoxic lesions of the dorsal and ventral hippocampus. however, direct comparison is difficult. firstly, the lesion extent was different. secondly, aspirative lesions destroy not just overlying cortex but also fibres of passage   <cit> . thirdly, the task used by port et al.  <cit>  was quite different to that used in the present study: lever presses led to the delivery of responses after a 5-s delay, while responses during the delay were not reinforced; thus, higher rates of responding inevitably reduced the action-outcome contingency. fourthly, no other delays were tested and no zero-delay condition was used, so any delay-dependent changes would not have been apparent. fifthly, no control lever was present, so that responding could only be compared across conditions . finally, an autoshaping procedure was used to train the rats, and autoshaping is itself known to be impaired by hippocampal lesions  <cit> , so this may have mitigated against finding an improvement in the lesioned group.

contrasting the effects of hippocampal lesions on instrumental and pavlovian conditioning involving delayed reinforcement
hippocampal lesions have also been found to affect pavlovian conditioning involving temporally non-contiguous stimuli. trace  conditioning, described above, is clearly analogous to the instrumental conditioning task with delayed reinforcement used in the present study, which had response-reinforcer gaps  <cit> . hippocampal lesions have been reported to impair trace conditioning to a discrete explicit cs, sparing delay  conditioning  <cit> . trace discrimination learning can also be impaired by hippocampal lesions  <cit> . thus, hippocampal lesions appear to impair the acquisition of a pavlovian cr when there is a gap between cs and us. indeed, it has been suggested that the hippocampus is particularly important for associating discontiguous events – that is, when there is a temporal, or indeed spatial, discontiguity or gap between two events to be associated  <cit> . in the current study, however, hippocampal lesions delay-dependently facilitated  the acquisition of an instrumental response when there was a gap between action and outcome. what accounts for these apparently contradictory results?

firstly, the neural differences between trace and delay conditioning may be not as great as it first seems. the fact that hippocampal lesions have often been shown to impair trace conditioning, but not delay conditioning, may be because trace conditioning is more difficult. if delay conditioning is rendered as hard as trace conditioning by extending the delay , the hippocampus is required  <cit> ; similarly, h-lesioned subjects can exhibit trace conditioning if pretrained in a delay conditioning paradigm  <cit> , some trace discrimination tasks are intact after hippocampal lesions  <cit> , and the hippocampus is not required for expression of the trace response after learning  <cit> .

secondly, it may be that a representation of context can help trace  pavlovian conditioning, while contextual associations only hinder instrumental responding in the present task, so a lesion that disrupts contextual processing has a differential effect on the two. for example, if the cs during trace conditioning acts as an occasion-setter, signalling that the ensuing context will be followed by a us , then hippocampal lesions, which can impair both feature-positive discrimination  <cit>  and contextual conditioning, might be expected to impair trace conditioning more than delay conditioning . yet in instrumental conditioning with delayed reinforcement, as examined here, context-outcome associations can only hinder the learning of response-outcome associations, so hippocampal lesions might be expected to improve learning in a delay-dependent fashion, as was observed. a study by desmedt et al.  <cit>  supports the hypothesis that trace and delay conditioning endow the context with qualitatively different roles and that the hippocampus contributes differentially to these roles . thus, although contexts clearly have several associative functions, the contribution to the hippocampus to these processes is by no means clear cut  <cit> .

effect of hippocampal lesions on choice involving delayed reinforcement
if lesions of the hippocampus reduce the normal deleterious effects of delays on the ability to associate actions with their outcomes, it might be expected that they would also improve subjects' ability to choose a delayed, large reward in preference to an immediate, small reward. instead, the opposite pattern of results was observed: postoperatively, h-lesioned rats made impulsive choices, preferring the immediate, small reward. this preference was flexible, responding to changes in the contingencies within the task, and all subjects readily reverted to choosing the large reward when all delays were removed, indicating that they could discriminate the large and small rewards and continued to prefer the large reward when it was not delayed. upon reintroduction of the delays, however, the preference for the large reward collapsed in the h-lesioned group much more prominently than in shams, indicating that they were less tolerant of delays to reinforcement.

the present results are also somewhat similar to those reported by rawlins et al.  <cit> , who examined choice between certain and uncertain rewards. normal rats preferred immediate certain reward to immediate uncertain reward, and also preferred delayed certain reward to immediate uncertain reward; however, rats with hippocampal or medial septal lesions were less tolerant of the delay , preferring immediate uncertain reward to delayed certain reward.

some simple explanations for this effect may readily be ruled out. it is unlikely that lesioned rats' impulsive choice was caused by lower motivation to obtain the food, for two reasons. first, there were no differences in the rate at which they consumed the sucrose pellets used as the reinforcer. second, the performance of h-lesioned rats was not similar in other respects to that of a subject with lower primary motivation, such as a sated rat  <cit> ; for example, they did not make more omissions than sham-operated controls. it is also unlikely that h-lesioned rats' preference for the small, immediate reward were the consequence of a positional bias away from the lever producing large, delayed reward: when the delays were omitted, all the h-lesioned rats readily and consistently chose the large reinforcer, only to prefer the small reinforcer again when delays were re-introduced. furthermore, it is difficult to see that impaired contextual conditioning could explain the pattern of results; as discussed above, the absence of context-reinforcer associations should help, rather than hinder, the ability to associate actions with delayed outcomes. likewise, although context-response associations may influence instrumental responding and contexts may act as occasion-setters , there is no a priori reason to believe that the context should differentially cue instrumental responding more when the outcome is delayed; neither is there conclusive evidence suggesting that hippocampal lesions impair such a process .

one obvious difference between the two experiments is that in experiment  <dig>  lesions were made before training, whereas in experiment  <dig>  lesions were made after training. hence it is possible that hippocampal lesions selectively impair the retrieval of a well-learned instrumental response or action-outcome contingency involving delayed outcomes, while sparing those involving immediate outcomes. however, there are two reasons why this scenario is unlikely. firstly, animals must be able to perform an action in order for that action to be conditioned instrumentally. experiment  <dig> demonstrated that h-lesioned rats were able to acquire instrumental responses for delayed reinforcement at least as well as, if not better than, sham-operated controls. therefore, it is unlikely that hippocampal lesions selectively impair the performance of instrumental responses for delayed outcomes. secondly, this idea would not explain why h-lesioned rats showed a reduced preference for the large, delayed reinforcer upon reintroduction of delays, after they had shown a strong postoperative preference for the large reinforcer when delays had been consistently omitted. this required new learning on their part, and since experiment  <dig> demonstrated that learning with delayed reinforcement is normal in h-lesioned rats, this would predict self-controlled rather than impulsive choice upon reintroduction of delays.

the task used does not determine whether h-lesioned rats exhibit altered sensitivity to reinforcer magnitude or delay, for either abnormality might produce impulsive choice  <cit> . although h-lesioned rats were able to discriminate in absolute terms between the large and the small reinforcer , it is possible that they discriminated between the reinforcer magnitudes to a lesser extent than shams. in this scenario, h-lesioned rats might have exhibited impulsive choice simply because the perceived value of the large reinforcer was not subjectively big enough to compensate for the normal effects of the delay. alternatively, h-lesioned rats may perceive reward magnitudes normally, and exhibit impulsive choice because they are specifically hypersensitive to  the effects of delays to reinforcement. such evidence as exists suggests that h-lesioned rats perceive reward magnitude normally  <cit> . experiment  <dig> indicated that h-lesioned rats are somewhat better than shams at instrumental conditioning with action-outcome delays of > <dig> s. this suggests that h-lesioned rats associated the action with the delayed outcome normally in experiment  <dig>  so if they also perceived its magnitude normally, then it is likely that they valued the delayed outcome less.

the present results may also be explained in terms of altered temporal perception. for example, a lesion that increased the speed of an 'internal clock'  <cit>  might affect choice prospectively in this task , or might affect retrospective choice . the evidence for the role of the hippocampus in temporal perception is inconclusive: some studies have found that aspirative hippocampal lesions did not affect timing behaviour  <cit> , whereas others have suggested that lesions of the hippocampus or fimbria/fornix speed up an internal clock, or reduce the estimation of time periods when a stimulus being timed is interrupted  <cit> .

finally, the hippocampus is heavily connected to a number of other structures known to play a role in subjects' relative preference between immediate, small and delayed, large rewards. lesions of the nucleus accumbens core , basolateral amygdala, and orbitofrontal cortex  have all been found to produce impulsive choice  <cit> . ofc lesions appear to alter the processing of reward magnitude as well as delay, and lesions here have produced both impulsive and self-controlled choice under different circumstances  <cit> . acbc lesions appear to have a more selective effect on the processing of delays, impairing both preference for, and learning with, delayed rewards in the absence of effects on reward magnitude processing  <cit> . although the hippocampal formation projects heavily to most of the nucleus accumbens   <cit>  and h-lesioned rats in the present study showed the impulsive choice known to be exhibited by acbc-lesioned rats, h-lesioned rats showed the opposite effect to acbc-lesioned rats in the simple instrumental learning task, being delay-dependently improved rather than impaired relative to shams.

CONCLUSIONS
we have demonstrated that excitotoxic lesions of the hippocampus ameliorate the deleterious effects of response-reinforcer delays on instrumental learning. hippocampal-lesioned rats responded slightly less than controls in the absence of delays, but they became better at learning  as the delays increased, in a delay-dependent fashion. this may have been because the lesion hindered the formation of context-outcome associations, promoting response-outcome association instead. in contrast, lesioned rats exhibited impulsive choice, preferring an immediate, small reward to a delayed, larger reward, even though they preferred the large reward when it was not delayed. thus, lesioned rats were better at learning with delayed reinforcement but worse at choosing it, suggesting that self-controlled choice and learning with delayed reinforcement tax different psychological processes.

