BACKGROUND
the pillar coral dendrogyra cylindrus ehrenberg  <dig>  was recently listed as a threatened species under the united states endangered species act  <cit> . as an uncommon species whose range is limited to the caribbean, this coral has been understudied by scientists  <cit> . the resulting lack of knowledge has hindered conservation  <cit> , inhibited research on reproduction and early life history, and limited options for restoration projects. as the only caribbean coral that forms tall vertical pillars, and as the only species in its genus, d. cylindrus warrants enhanced conservation concern because it is morphologically and evolutionarily unique . limiting studies of its early life history, the reproductive timing of d. cylindrus was unknown for many decades  <cit>  and then known only through histological inference  <cit>  until  <dig>  when a single male was observed spawning  <cit> . mass spawning of multiple males and females was first documented in august  <dig>  <cit> .figure  <dig> 
the threatened caribbean pillar coral
dendrogyra cylindrus
. the pillar morphology of d. cylindrus is unique among caribbean coral species. colonies can reproduce asexually by fragmentation of pillars, which re-attach to the reef and grow new vertical pillars .



despite progress in identifying the timing of reproduction, information on the developmental biology, larval biology, and juvenile recruitment ecology of d. cylindrus has remained elusive. these are particularly critical life history stages because, for unknown reasons, zero d. cylindrus settlers or recruits have been found in large-scale surveys across the caribbean, including in curaçao , the u.s. virgin islands , the florida keys , coastal colombia , and puerto rico . the absence of sexually-produced juveniles does not appear to be readily explained by simply a lack of adult colonies. for example, in curaçao, groups of approximately  <dig> to  <dig> d. cylindrus colonies occur in dense stands at multiple points along the leeward coast of the island. these stands typically occur at depths of 3–8 m, on prominent, rocky outcrops with high wave exposure. individual colonies also regularly occur on straight sections of the leeward coast with solid limestone basements and a consistent directional current, typically at 5–8 m depth . though isolated stands of adult d. cylindrus persist, there appears to be a severe population bottleneck during reproduction or dispersal. the cause and timing of this bottleneck remain unidentified.

prior to our study, the consistency of spawning times across years was not known, characteristics of gravid colonies had not been described, methods for propagation were not developed, settlement surfaces were untested, and no primary polyp settlers had been observed or photographed on the reef or in the laboratory. such a large knowledge gap slowed the study and possible conservation and restoration of this unique species. our goal was therefore to fill as many knowledge gaps as possible by applying methods from our coral spawning research to the study of d. cylindrus.

RESULTS
timing of spawning
in curaçao, over three separate years and over five separate lunar cycles in the months of august and september, we observed d. cylindrus colonies spawning on nights two to five after the full moon, from  <dig> to 147 minutes after sunset . across all nights and years, individual male colonies were observed spawning between  <dig> and 140 minutes after sunset. individual female colonies were observed spawning between  <dig> and 147 minutes after sunset. overall, the timing of spawning for this species was highly consistent from  <dig> to  <dig> and between the months of august and september. some individual colonies were observed spawning on consecutive nights or in consecutive years. omitting all such repeat observations from the data set, distinct male colonies were first observed spawning at  <dig>   <dig>   <dig>   <dig>   <dig>   <dig>   <dig>   <dig>   <dig>  and 126 minutes after sunset. individual female colonies were first observed spawning at  <dig>   <dig>   <dig>   <dig>   <dig>   <dig>  and 142 minutes after sunset. males therefore began spawning significantly earlier than females . across all nights, male spawning began between  <dig> and 29 minutes prior to the start of female spawning. females were never observed spawning unless males in the area had already been observed spawning.figure  <dig> 
spawning times of male and female
d. cylindrus
colonies in curaçao relative to local sunset time. blue rectangles depict the window of observation. blue lines denote the time period when males were seen spawning. yellow lines denote observations of females spawning. dotted lines indicate probable spawning that was not observed because a diver arrived at or departed from a colony while it was spawning heavily. all times are presented as minutes after sunset  relative to the willemstad, curaçao sunset time on the night of observation.



spawning behavior and appearance
before they released sperm, gravid males exhibited inflated tentacles that were extended away from their skeletons . individuals released sperm in multiple short pulses . during and immediately after spawning, tentacles were often pulled tightly into the skeleton . after spawning, tentacles no longer appeared inflated. after males began spawning, some female d. cylindrus colonies were observed with open mouths  and others were observed with bloated tissues surrounding the mouth . eggs were visible inside these tissues, either arranged around the mouth or along open slits radiating away from the mouth . in an extreme case, the ballooned tentacles of a female revealed that these openings in the tissue allow for extensive exposure to ambient seawater . females retracted their tentacles shortly after releasing eggs . a few minutes later, female colonies returned to their typical appearance with tentacles extended and mouths no longer easily visible .figure  <dig> 
characteristics of
d. cylindrus
colonies before, during, and after spawning. male d. cylindrus
 exhibited inflated tentacles prior to spawning . mouths were generally not visible. male colonies released sperm directly into the water column in multiple pulses . tentacles were often retracted into the skeleton during and immediately after spawning . after males began spawning, female d. cylindrus colonies  exhibited open mouths  and bloated tissues surrounding the mouth . eggs were visible prior to release  and were in some cases exposed to ambient seawater through openings in the tissue . tissue openings were most apparent in a female with heavily-ballooned tentacles shortly after spawning . after spawning, females often retracted tentacles into the skeleton , however they typically returned to a normal appearance quickly thereafter . all scale bars represent approximately 5 mm.



fertilization, development, and larval survival
in august  <dig>  gametes were collected on the reef and mixed onshore. embryos showed early signs of cell division but failed to complete development. in september  <dig>  gametes handled in the same manner did not show any signs of fertilization. in august  <dig>  fertilization was attempted on the reef. approximately  <dig> eggs were collected from a tented female that was exposed to sperm in situ. these eggs were combined on shore with additional sperm and approximately  <dig> additional eggs that were collected in a separate region of the reef without the underwater mixing step. with this gamete pool, three different incubation methods were attempted using different fertilization times and seawater types: 1) fertilization for 20 minutes, transfer to fresh sperm solution for 90 minutes, then transfer to gf/f-filtered seawater, 2) fertilization for 20 minutes followed by transfer to filter-sterilized seawater , and 3) fertilization for 100 minutes followed by transfer to ssw. overall, 45-48% of the eggs began cell division and successfully developed into larvae . seawater in the laboratory was held at ambient ocean temperature .

fertilized d. cylindrus embryos underwent holoblastic, equal cleavage through the 16-cell stage . developing embryos were positively buoyant. relative to the end of spawning, we first observed embryos at the 2-cell stage at 72 min, the 4-cell stage at 122 min, the 8-cell stage at 154 min, and the 16-cell stage at 182 min. these observations were made late in the 4-cell stage and early in the 16-cell stage; cell division therefore appears to occur at approximately regular 40-minute intervals during early development. we did not follow embryos overnight during subsequent divisions; we therefore did not observe gastrulation type or the timing of first movement.figure  <dig> 
early development of
d. cylindrus. shown are one unfertilized egg and three developing embryos at the eight-cell stage. fertilized zygotes underwent holoblastic, equal cleavage through the 16-cell stage. the mode of gastrulation was not observed. early cell divisions occurred at approximately 40 minute intervals. embryos developed into swimming larvae in less than 16 hours. scale bar represents approximately  <dig>  mm.



on the day after spawning , less than 16 hours after fertilization, embryos had developed into fully formed, swimming planula larvae. by this point, the majority of larvae were positively gravitactic, swimming in a directional manner at or near the bottom of the rearing containers, with occasional pauses. larval survival was scored on days  <dig>   <dig>   <dig>  and  <dig> after spawning. the numbers of larvae alive in treatments  <dig>   <dig>  and  <dig>  respectively, were as follows: day 1)  <dig>   <dig>  and 9; day 4)  <dig>   <dig>  and 4; day 16)  <dig>   <dig>  and  <dig>  no larvae were found on day  <dig> 

settlement and post-settlement survival
on the fourth day following spawning, the first d. cylindrus settler was observed in treatment  <dig> on the pre-cured surfaces . in treatment  <dig>  a settler was found on the pre-cured surfaces on day  <dig>  in treatment  <dig>  a settler was found on the plastic  rearing container on day  <dig>  no settlement occurred on the un-cured ceramic surfaces. despite the small numbers of settlers, this first achievement of d. cylindrus settlement in the laboratory nevertheless represents 8-14% of the starting number of larvae from the three incubation treatments.figure  <dig> 
settled primary polyps of
d. cylindrus
. a settled primary polyp 17 days after spawning  extends its characteristically large tentacles during the day, as do adults of this species. the same settler 77 days after spawning  shows growth of the tentacles and skeleton. this represents the first successful settlement and survival of d. cylindrus in the laboratory. scale bars represent  <dig>  mm.



notably, primary polyp settlers exhibited characteristics typical of adult d. cylindrus: large tentacles in proportion to corallite size and tentacles extended during the day. the skeletal cup also featured a prominently toothed edge. settlers were kept in containers in the laboratory for observation rather than being placed on the reef where they risked predation, bacterial attack, or trampling by small invertebrates. we assumed that they would not survive well under laboratory conditions. however, the settler attached to the plastic container survived for nearly two months. even more remarkably, the settlers on the pre-cured ceramic surfaces survived for over seven months and showed a clear increase in tentacle length  before eventually dying. no polyp division was observed in any of the settlers.

discussion
predictable spawning times across months and years
for the threatened caribbean pillar coral dendrogyra cylindrus, we report consistent spawning times across three consecutive years and across five total lunar cycles . as in other caribbean corals, spawning was closely synchronized with the lunar cycle and daily sunset times . only two prior observations of d. cylindrus spawning are published, both from florida: a single male colony was seen spawning at 112 minutes after sunset, three nights after the early august full moon in  <dig>  <cit>  and multiple males and females were seen spawning  <dig> to 110 minutes after sunset, three and four nights after the early august full moon in  <dig>  <cit> . our observations are consistent with these reports, though it appears that spawning in curaçao occurs slightly later relative to sunset. we did not conduct monitoring in other months, nor did we monitor outside of nights  <dig> to  <dig> after the full moon. this leaves the possibility that additional d. cylindrus spawning occurs outside of the window documented here.

asynchronous spawning times of males and females
by tracking individual colony spawning times, we found that males consistently and predictably spawned earlier than females , an observation reported by neely and colleagues  <cit> , but which was not yet confirmed with individual colony data and statistical support. on some nights of our study, all observable male spawning ceased before any female spawning was seen.

after males began spawning, we observed some females with open mouths , which is a rare behavior in corals. we also observed females exposing their eggs to ambient seawater though radial slits around the mouth . as d. cylindrus colonies do not release eggs and sperm in synchrony, it is possible that some or all eggs are fertilized in situ, prior to release. the release of recently-fertilized zygotes or embryos is one variant of so-called “spermcasting,” a term that encompasses any fertilization strategy in marine invertebrates in which free-spawned sperm are used for internal fertilization  <cit> . for example, in some dioecious coral reef gorgonian species, free-spawned sperm are used by females to fertilize oocytes internally; females either promptly release these newly-fertilized embryos into the seawater or brood them externally on their surfaces for a number of days  <cit> .

in scleractinian corals, researchers previously described males spawning before females in the dioecious caribbean species stephanocoenia intersepta  and montastraea cavernosa . we previously presented photographic evidence supporting the possibility of internal fertilization in s. intersepta  <cit> . further, when hagman and colleagues collected eggs from females of both m. cavernosa and s. intersepta, they found surprisingly high rates of fertilization without adding any sperm  <cit> . this led the authors to suggest that these two so-called “broadcast spawners” were fertilized internally. based on our observations, d. cylindrus appears to have both morphological and behavioral traits that would enable internal fertilization.

regardless of the precise location of fertilization, the asynchronous release of gametes by males and females has the potential to increase individual fitness. one of thorson’s rules is that, for dioecious marine invertebrates, males generally spawn before females  <cit> . by delaying reproductive investment until fertilization is likely, individual females may improve their overall rates of fertilization. individual males may also benefit from spawning early and therefore dominating the available gamete pool under conditions of sperm competition . the apparent benefits of asynchronous spawning are reflected in the wide diversity of dioecious marine animal taxa, and even four genera of green algae, in which male spawning is known to occur before female spawning .

in sum, d. cylindrus is one of many dioecious marine broadcasters that have adopted a fertilization strategy other than synchronous male and female spawning. for now, the precise timing of fertilization in d. cylindrus and the window of gamete viability in the water column remain to be determined. because there are currently no population genetic data from d. cylindrus, we cannot yet predict whether individuals of this species generally fertilize only their very close neighbors or whether gametes have the potential to survive dispersal and achieve fertilization over relatively long distances.

successful propagation of a threatened coral species
in the lab, we achieved the successful propagation of d. cylindrus larvae to the primary polyp settler stage. in the field, we documented physical characteristics for identifying gravid males and females on spawning nights. we also recorded the first cases of september spawning anywhere in this species’ range, thereby demonstrating that populations of this species can distribute reproductive effort across two consecutive months . the known, region-wide reproductive season for d. cylindrus now extends across three lunar cycles, from early august in florida to late august and late september in the southern caribbean.

in our propagation efforts, we only achieved successful larval development after we injected sperm underneath a watertight egg collection tent underwater. however, we could not determine the definitive timing of fertilization for these embryos because, once on shore, we combined approximately  <dig> eggs collected in this manner with additional sperm and with approximately  <dig> additional eggs collected underwater without this step. this was done to maximize gamete density and diversity in hopes that any egg would be fertilized. ultimately,  <dig> of these  <dig> eggs in total underwent cell division and developed into larvae. it therefore remains possible that we had nearly 100% fertilization from the tented colony underwater, and 0% fertilization from gametes mixed on shore. alternately, it is possible that lesser amounts of fertilization occurred both underwater and onshore. for researchers attempting to rear d. cylindrus larvae, we recommend collecting sperm underwater in syringes and transferring this directly to tented female colonies that either exhibit pre-spawning characteristics  or that have been observed spawning on previous occasions. it also remains possible that researchers will succeed with the traditional method of mixing gametes onshore.

the paradox of the missing juveniles
we found that rearing d. cylindrus larvae in the laboratory was relatively easy due to fast development and a short time to settlement competence. further, settlers were surprisingly robust in the laboratory setting relative to orbicella and acropora spp., two other genera of spawning caribbean corals that are listed as threatened. this presents a new paradox for the early life history of d. cylindrus: if settled primary polyps survive so well under relatively stressful conditions, why are sexually-produced recruits absent in all large-scale caribbean reef surveys published over the past three decades? given the fact that d. cylindrus extends its tentacles fully during the day, even small recruits  should be easily distinguished from other species in the meandrinidae family, including those whose juveniles are similar to one another in appearance such as eusmilia fastigiata and meandrina meandrites.

if d. cylindrus settlers are not likely to be misidentified by researchers, what explains their absence in surveys? are colonies experiencing low or failed fertilization ? are embryos or larvae highly sensitive to eutrophication or microbial attack in the water column? are competent larvae missing a critical cue for settlement? do settlers face a pathogen, predator, or competitor that causes extensive post-settlement mortality? locating this population bottleneck is an important next step for conservation. encouragingly, the advances we report here should help to make d. cylindrus a viable subject for research on coral early life history, and perhaps restoration, provided that gametes can be collected in sufficient numbers and that good fertilization rates are achieved. this is the first dioecious, spawning coral species in the caribbean for which larval propagation methods have been described.

population biology of a threatened coral
caribbean coral species suffer together through habitat destruction, overfishing, eutrophication, sewage, pollution, disease, and global climate change, yet d. cylindrus garners heightened concern because its particular life history characteristics, limited habitat preferences, and disease susceptibility together pose an additional threat to its viability  <cit> . its listing as a threatened species is not due to its historical rarity per se, but rather due to these species-specific factors that disproportionately threaten the continued persistence of individuals. the peculiar life history characteristics of d. cylindrus do partly explain its low historical abundance, but more worryingly, these traits then further magnify its conservation plight on modern reefs by limiting recruitment and population growth. as far back as  <dig>  szmant described the risk of local extinction for d. cylindrus due to its small population size, the rarity of small colonies, a limited geographic range, and the occasional occurrence of a lone colony in a vast area  <cit> . in addition, reproductive success is limited by dioecy  <cit> , which reduces the number of potential mates relative to hermaphroditic species. fragmentation  <cit> , slow growth  <cit> , and a long lifespan can create populations with many genetically identical individuals, among whom mating is impossible because fragments originating from one colony are all the same sex. over the long term, extremely low sexual recruitment rates  <cit>  also limit the introduction of new genetic diversity into a population.

we identified additional traits in d. cylindrus with potential consequences for population viability. rapid development and fast settlement competence may affect average dispersal distances  <cit> , thereby affecting population connectivity and local extinction risk. importantly, our observations of fast development were not due to unusually high temperatures. we conducted our experiments at approximately ambient august/september seawater temperature in curaçao. over the past eight years in curaçao, we have found that other spawning species such as acropora palmata and orbicella faveolata do develop slightly faster at warmer temperatures, but neither of these species have ever developed nearly as quickly as d. cylindrus did at the same temperature.

we observed some potential for long-distance dispersal in larvae that remained swimming for over four days. however, given the species’ virtually undetectable recruitment rates, this perhaps does more to explain the occurrence of lone colonies in vast reef swaths  than it provides evidence that populations can rebound from local extinction or near-extinction on timescales relevant to ecology and conservation.

the occurrence of split-spawning likely affords male colonies an additional lunar cycle to produce gametes. however, the gametogenesis cycle for d. cylindrus females is reported to be three months long  <cit> , meaning total annual population fecundity may not be increased by splitting reproduction over two consecutive months. rather, split spawning could potentially reduce population viability if this results in gamete concentrations below the density required for fertilization on a given spawning night  <cit> .

with d. cylindrus now officially listed as a threatened species by the u.s. government, a history of scientific neglect burdens the conservation planning process. we still have no data on its size at sexual maturity or the relative contribution of sexual versus asexual reproduction to population dynamics. it remains possible that many dense stands of d. cylindrus are in fact made up of very few, or even single genotypes . our knowledge gaps reduce the accuracy of population viability assessment, which is difficult even in well-studied corals due to their clonality, coloniality, fragmentation, and partial death  <cit> . given these life history characteristics, demographic surveys of d. cylindrus and the assumption of long-distance dispersal may easily contribute to overestimates of population viability. this warrants a precautionary approach to conservation.

CONCLUSIONS
over three years and five lunar cycles, we documented the predictability of spawning times in the threatened caribbean pillar coral dendrogyra cylindrus. we also showed that spawning occurs over two consecutive months, expanding the window of opportunity for research on this coral’s reproductive biology. we successfully reared d. cylindrus larvae to the primary polyp settler stage for the first time, allowing for possible re-seeding trials using sexually-produced juveniles. we documented rapid development and a short time to settlement competence, which will facilitate research, but which can also have important consequences for larval dispersal and population connectivity. we also showed that males spawn before females, raising the possibility that some or all fertilization could occur internally. however, it remains unknown how long d. cylindrus gametes remain viable, how far larvae can disperse, and therefore how isolated existing populations are from one another. with male and female individuals spawning at different times in an already-rare species, the potential also exists for allee effects to limit overall fertilization success, increasing the importance of protecting dense populations where they still occur. overall, our research raises a new paradox. d. cylindrus larvae and settlers were remarkably robust in the laboratory, yet recruits are virtually absent from modern day reefs. identifying the timing and cause of the underlying population bottleneck is an important next step. in the meantime, a precautionary approach to management is warranted. looking forward, we hope that our advances in natural history and propagation will enable a new era of research on this threatened, understudied, and unique coral.

