BACKGROUND
over the last decade, several compelling studies have shown that small rnas are involved in various cellular processes including maintenance of genome integrity, response to dna damage, biotic stress responses, and regulation of morphological and developmental processes in many organisms  <cit> . small rnas are defined as  <dig> -  <dig> nucleotides  long molecules derived from double-stranded rna  or hairpin-structured rna precursors via activity of proteins such as dicers, drosha, and argonaute   <cit> . a number of small rna classes have been described in plants and animals and include small interfering rnas , micrornas , and piwi-interacting rnas   <cit> .

recent efforts have expanded the eukaryotic small rna repertoire to include members from the fungal kingdom. in the budding yeasts, saccharomyces cerevisiae, s. castellii and candida albicans, a predominant proportion of the sequenced small rnas mapped to rrna loci and transposable elements  <cit> . in aspergillus fumigatus, a filamentous human pathogenic fungus, analysis of the small transcriptome  revealed that 23% of the sequences corresponded to trna or halves of mature trna   <cit> . similar trna-derived small rnas have also been reported in human tissues and cell lines  and in s. cerevisiae  <cit> . although the biogenesis of trna-derived small rnas remains to be determined in a. fumigatus, rny1p and angiogenin have been identified as the ribonucleases responsible for trna cleveage in s. cerevisiae and in humans, respectively  <cit> . in the filamentous fungus neurospora crassa, recent in depth studies revealed qde-2-interacting small rnas , microrna-like rnas  and dicer-independent sirnas   <cit> . with a length of  <dig> -  <dig> nt, qirnas are induced by dna damage, originate from both dna strands of ribosomal dna repeat clusters and interact with argonaute  <cit> . milrnas recruit different components of the rna silencing protein apparatus, depending on the milrna precursor locus, to generate distinct small rnas varying from  <dig> and  <dig> nt. disirnas have a peak distribution length of around 21/ <dig> nt and are not dependent on dicer proteins for biogenesis  <cit> . in the zygomycete mucor circinelloides, a novel class of small rnas, named exonic-sirnas , was recently reported. these rna-dependent rna polymerase  <dig> and dicer-like  <dig> derived molecules target and likely regulate mrnas of genes from which they are produced  <cit> . although knowledge of the small transcriptome in fungi is emerging, in depth studies examining differential accumulation, particularly in plant pathogenic fungi such as the rice blast fungus, magnaporthe oryzae, have not been reported.

m. oryzae is the primary plant pathogenic threat to rice production around the world as well as to other economically important cereal crops including wheat and barley  <cit> . infection is initiated by attachment of the conidium to the leaf surface. following germination, the germ tube tip develops into a specialized structure, called the appressorium, from which emerges a penetration peg that directly penetrates into plant tissues  <cit> . the fungus is highly tractable in the laboratory and appressorium formation can be induced by various chemical treatments or by a hydrophobic surface  <cit> . because of the considerable risk to food security and experimental malleability, this plant pathogenic fungus has been the focus of intensive investigation, including comprehensive genome studies  <cit> . several transcription data sets have been obtained including ests, sage, and mpss that provide support for many predicted coding genes as well as confirm the presence of non-coding transcripts  <cit> . recently, we identified a new class of methylguanosine-capped and polyadenylated small rnas   from mycelia tissue in m. oryzae  <cit> .

the genome sequence combined with expression data has greatly enabled characterization of many protein-coding genes  <cit>  as well as the molecular machinery required for rna silencing  <cit> . however, detailed knowledge of the small rna  repertoire remains to be elucidated. this information represents an important foundation to further understand small rna biogenesis, their roles in m. oryzae growth, development, and pathogenesis and possibly open new avenues for future disease control. here, we applied  <dig> sequencing technology to elucidate and characterize the small rna transcriptome  of mycelia and appressoria of m. oryzae.

RESULTS
small rnas characterization
to examine the small rna catalog in the plant pathogenic fungus m. oryzae, we isolated rna ranging from ~  <dig> -  <dig> nt and constructed small rna libraries from mycelia and appressoria tissues, corresponding to vegetative and specialized-infection stages, respectively . after  <dig> pyrosequencing, a total of  <dig>   <dig> and  <dig>   <dig> raw sequences were obtained from mycelia and appressoria, respectively . following linker removal, sequences ≥  <dig> nt long were mapped to m. oryzae genome version  <dig>  recent literature on rna sequencing highlights several posttranscriptional modifications and rna editing in many organisms, including m. oryzae, resulting in imperfect alignment of rnas to the reference genome  <cit> . therefore, in addition to small rnas  that mapped perfectly to the genome, we analyzed an imperfectly matching data set  in order to further investigate these modifications. a total of  <dig>   <dig> and  <dig>   <dig> sequences matched the genome sequence imperfectly and perfectly, respectively . a significant number of sequences from the appressoria library were shorter than  <dig> nt and were eliminated from further consideration. unless stated, the remainder of the small rna analysis refers to the data set corresponding to sequences perfectly matching the genome.

library
a total number of sequences containing both linkers and length ≥  <dig> nt

b total number of sequences containing both linkers with imperfect match  and ≥  <dig> nucleotides long

c total number of sequences containing both linkers with perfect match  and ≥  <dig> nucleotides long

d total number of distinct sequences that perfectly match genome ≥  <dig> 

mycelia and appressoria small rnas were mapped to the nuclear and mitochondrial genomes . although small rnas mapped throughout entire chromosomes, several genomic regions contained hundreds of alignments to both dna strands, and corresponded mostly to repetitive dna regions . figure 1b shows those reads that mapped only once in each library. this revealed a number of locations on each strand highly enriched for uniquely mapping reads. in contrast, many reads correspond to repetitive dna . to more thoroughly address the possible genomic feature origins of our small rna data sets, we used prorated counts  because it takes into account multiple alignments and different features associated with each alignment . overall, m. oryzae small rnas aligned to a variety of genomic features including protein coding genes, trnas, rrna, snrna, repetitive elements as well as intergenic regions . further analysis revealed that small rnas mapped to both the sense and antisense strand of several genomic features . approximately 60% of small rnas mapped to the sense strand of protein coding genes in both libraries, whereas small rnas mapping to repetitive elements mapped in nearly equal frequency to both strands. in contrast, small rnas mapping to rrna and trna were highly enriched for the sense strand. likewise, more than 90% of small rnas originating from the mitochondria genome mapped to the sense strand. although only a small fraction  of small rnas mapped to the mitochondrial genome, ~ 50% of the mitochondrial reads mapped to trnas and rrna in the mycelia and appressoria, respectively. the remaining mitochondrial reads mapped to protein coding genes, rrna and intergenic regions. analysis of m. oryzae small rna libraries also revealed a bias for u enrichment and c suppression at position  <dig>  especially on the antisense strand for repeats and protein coding genes  . this result is consistent with other observations. a number of classes of small rnas have been described with u at position  <dig> including 21u-rnas in caenorhabditis elegans and qirna, milrnas and disirnas in n. crassa  <cit> .

a alignment refers to the summation of small rna alignments to any genomic feature.

b read count represents the summation of distinct reads mapping to a given feature. noteworthy the values for each genome feature are generally less than the sum of its sub-features due to the small rnas mapping to multiple features .

c prorated apportions the weight of any small rna between alignments and features.

d features represent the proportion of genomic features mapped by small rnas where mapped indicates the number of members for each genomic feature mapped by small rnas among the total possible.

e values indicate number of small rnas that mapped to sub-features within gene models that are supported by ests  or have no est supporting evidence 

f trna entries include pseudo-trnas.

a alignment refers to the summation of small rna alignments to any genomic feature.

b read count represents the summation of distinct reads mapping to a given feature. noteworthy the values for each genome feature are generally less than the sum of its sub-features due to the small rnas mapping to multiple features .

c prorated apportions the weight of any small rna between alignments and features.

d features represent the proportion of genomic features mapped by small rnas where mapped indicates the number of members for each genomic feature mapped by small rnas among the total possible.

e values indicate number of small rnas that mapped to sub-features within gene models that are supported by ests  or have no est supporting evidence .

f trna entries include pseudo-trnas.

to further explore small rna classes potentially specific, or enriched, in each tissue, we analyzed the mycelia and appressoria small rnas in detail. first, we inspected the size distribution of small rnas in each library type. surprisingly, the mycelia library was enriched for small rnas of the size  <dig> -  <dig> nt compared to  <dig> -  <dig> nt for the appressoria library . furthermore, the mycelia library was enriched for small rnas derived from transposable elements and from intergenic regions whereas the appressoria library was enriched for small rna originated from trna loci . this is discussed in greater detail in the following sections. small rnas mapping to protein coding genes, rrna and snrna were present in roughly equal proportions between mycelia and appressoria libraries . regardless of tissue type, most of the small rnas mapping to protein coding genes aligned to 5'- and 3'-utrs . although small rnas matched to genes at roughly equal proportions in both libraries, some genes exhibited tissue-specific mapping of small rnas. small rnas originating from trna loci mapped predominantly to the mature trna sequence in both libraries . relatively few small rnas mapped to snrna . nevertheless, we identified several small rnas mapping to the sense strand of different snrnas  . finally, although only relatively few small rnas mapped to mitochondrial genomic features in each library, the mycelia library contained a greater proportion of mitochondrial mappings compared to the appressoria library.

overall, we identified small rnas mapping to a variety of genomic features including intergenic regions. moreover, we discovered evidence for enrichment of small rna classes in different fungal cell types.

mycelia enriched small rnas: intergenic- and repetitive dna-derived small rnas
small rnas mapping to intergenic regions were highly enriched in the mycelia compared with appressoria library. a total of  <dig>  small rnas from the mycelia library mapped to intergenic regions compared to  <dig>  from the appressoria library . to provide additional evidence for transcriptional activity for our intergenic small rnas, we mapped these small rnas against previous m. oryzae transcriptional data sets . a total of  <dig> mycelia and  <dig> appressoria intergenic small rnas overlapped with est or ess and to the genome sequence . for instance, a  <dig> nt region  on chromosome iii  contained  <dig> uniquely mapped small rnas. this region does not contain a predicted protein coding gene  but contained an intron-exon junction of a long fgenesh predicted gene model and a set of shorter ests. figure 4b shows a similar intergenic example on chromosome i , with uniquely mapped small rnas that are supported by est and/or ess evidence. in other instances, we found small rnas mapping to ests and precisely to the start of cpa-srnas  . overall, we believe these data confirm the presence of previously undefined transcription units.

a small rnas that overlap the sequence of ess and/or ests at the same genome or intergenic location.

b small rnas that map to transcriptionally  supported gene loci.

c number of small rnas that map to a given feature and containing ess and/or est transcriptional evidence.

d number of features containing ess and/or est evidence associated with small rnas.

e ess  are either mpss, sage or cpa-srna.

a small rnas that overlap the sequence of ess and/or ests at the same genome or intergenic location.

b small rnas that map to transcriptionally  supported gene loci.

c number of small rnas that map to a given feature and containing ess and/or est transcriptional evidence.

d number of features containing ess and/or est evidence associated with small rnas.

e ess  are either mpss, sage or cpa-srna.

the mycelia library was also enriched for small rnas that mapped to transposable elements. approximately 10% of the m. oryzae genome sequence corresponds to repetitive elements  <cit> . in this study, we identified a total of  <dig>  small rnas from the mycelia library that mapped to repetitive dna compared to  <dig>  from the appressoria library . in the mycelia library,  <dig>  small rnas mapped to the sense strand and  <dig>  mapped to the antisense strand. among the repetitive dna classes, small rnas mapped mainly to ltr retrotransposons and in particular to maggy . maggy, a well studied ltr-retrotransposon element in this fungus, contained a total of  <dig>  reads covering 99% of its sequence . maggy derived small rnas mapped in roughly equal frequency to both strands  and had a peak length around  <dig> -  <dig> nt long, which is characteristic of sirnas . therefore, we propose to name m. oryzae small rnas derived from ltr-retrotransposable elements as ltr-sirnas, a sub-class of endo-sirnas.

in previous work, we demonstrated the value of 3' race pcr to validate small rnas in m. oryzae   <cit> . here, we modified the protocol to validate maggy ltr-sirnas . a total of  <dig> maggy ltr-sirnas mapping to sense and antisense strands were randomly chosen for 3'race pcr . in addition to using rna from mycelia grown in rich medium, we included rna from mycelia following heat and cold shock. maggy ltr-sirnas were detected at the expected sizes based on a 3% agarose gel . all  <dig> candidates were detected across all  <dig> treatments except for ltr-sirna- <dig> . to further validate these findings, we repeated 3' race pcr for maggy ltr-sirna- <dig>  included two pcr controls , and used a 15% polyacrylamide gel to gain better resolution. as expected, there was lack of amplification for both controls . unexpectedly two fragments were observed for the small rna template  . nevertheless, one fragment corresponded to the expected size and no smear was observed as result of possible degradation. therefore, we suggest that the second amplified fragment is potentially a modified version of maggy ltr-sirna- <dig>  additionally, small rnas derived from repetitive dna also mapped to non-ltr retrotransposons such as mgr <dig> . it is noteworthy that in many instances throughout the genome, mgr <dig> is surrounded by a predicted pseudo-trna and est evidence suggests that they are transcribed together . although it remains to be experimentally tested, our small rna data is consistent with a role in rna silencing to limit possible transposition of ltr and non-ltr transposable elements.

appressoria are enriched for trna-derived small rnas
a variety of trna-derived small rnas have been reported in several organisms  <cit> . here, we discovered that m. oryzae trna-derived small rnas mapping to nuclear loci were enriched in the appressoria library . a total of  <dig>  small rnas from the mycelia library compared to  <dig>  from the appressoria library mapped to trna loci . from the mycelia library, small rnas mapped to all  <dig> trna types , selenocysteine  , pseudo  and undetermined trna genes  . in the appressoria library, we also observed small rnas mapping to all trnas types , pseudo , and undetermined , although none mapped to sec . recently, lee et al.  defined trna-derived rna fragments  as small rnas originated from a trna precursor which includes mature trna and its immediate ~  <dig> nucleotides 5' and 3' flanks  <cit> . in this study, a small number of rnas mapped to the 5' leader and 3' terminus of trnas, but most mapped to mature trna , thus we adopted this definition and named m. oryzae small rnas derived from trna loci as trfs. interestingly, in many instances trfs mapped disproportionally to either the 5' or 3' halves of mature trnas regardless of tissue type, although we observed an overall preference for mappings to the 3' half . for instance, trfs mapped predominantly to the 3' half of trnahis in the mycelia library . in contrast, trfs mapped to both halves of trnahis in near equal frequency in the appressoria library . in some instances, trfs mapped more abundantly to the 5' half such as for trnapro in the mycelia tissue . in other cases, such as trnalys and trnaala, reads mapped predominantly to the 3' half in both libraries . furthermore, we observed that some trfs mapped preferentially to a specific trna type within the same trna family such as for trnalys  and trnaala  . in most cases, this maybe a reflection of the number of members of a particular trna type within a trna family. to validate trfs, we designed primers complementary to 5' and 3' halves of trnas  and used them as probes for northern blots. we successfully validated 5' and 3' halves of trnathr   and showed that trfs were also highly enriched in spores and present in mycelia that had been subject to various stress conditions, such as for trnagly  .

posttranscriptional modification of trna has been shown to play an important role in development  <cit> . to explore possible posttranscriptional trna modification in our data sets, we analyzed a sub-set of our non-stringent small rna data set . not surprisingly, many of these imperfectly matching trfs were due to the presence of non-templated cca at the 3' end, which is added during trna maturation  <cit>  . in other instances, small rna reads mapping to trnas contained many nucleotides that did not match the genome sequences. most likely, these typically arise during reverse transcription due to the presence of a modified base  <cit> . for instance, manual examination identified likely posttranscriptional modifications on trfs nucleotides occurring at positions  <dig> -  <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> of a trnaleu, several of which have been reported previously in yeast   <cit> . for a comprehensive analysis, we grouped trna members into family types and inspected small rna alignments for mismatches. overall, we observed non-perfect trfs aligning to trnas at a total of  <dig> nucleotide positions . of those, mismatches at positions  <dig>   <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> of the mature trna were the most frequently identified . significantly, other small rna studies have found extensive evidence for mismatch at position  <dig>  which suggests that posttranscriptional modification at this position is common  <cit> . we found numerous cases where a given nucleotide position was likely modified in both libraries. conversely,  <dig> and  <dig> posttranscriptional modifications appeared to be specific to mycelia and appressoria, respectively . although posttranscriptional modification remains to be demonstrated as the source of our small rna mismatched nucleotides, modification of trnas is known to affect stability and possibly function  <cit> .

discussion
we have presented a detailed analysis of the small rna transcriptome from the filamentous fungus m. oryzae. because of its economic importance as a major plant pathogen of essential food staples such as rice and wheat and its molecular and classical genetic tractability, m. oryzae has emerged as seminal model for studying pathogen-host interactions  <cit> . over the past few years, numerous genome studies have been conducted including elucidation of the genome sequence and several in depth analyses of the transcriptome. recently, we discovered a new class of small rnas  from m. oryzae mycelia tissue that are methylguanosine-capped and polyadenylated   <cit> . in an effort to further expand the repertoire of small rnas in m. oryzae, we characterized small rnas  from mycelia and appressoria tissues by deep  <dig> pyrosequencing and discovered several important differences in small rna populations in these different tissues.

m. oryzae small rnas represent specific cleavage products
although we can not totally exclude the possibility that some of the small rnas were derived from random degradation, we have several lines of evidence to suggest otherwise. first, they exhibited a u enrichment at position  <dig>  this observation has been reported in other classes of small rnas from other eukaryotes, including fungi  <cit> . in n. crassa, it has been shown that at least three different classes of small rnas have a strong preference for u at position  <dig>  including qirnas, milrnas and disirnas  <cit> . second, our m. oryzae small rnas have a preference for c suppression at position  <dig> which, to our knowledge, is the first time such a feature has been observed. third, we found no correlation between small rnas mapping to exons and gene expression   <cit> . forth, northern blot and 3'race experiments provide evidence for a specific cleavage mechanism. taken together, the presence of unique structural features, lack of correlation with gene expression and evidence for specific cleavage strongly suggest m. oryzae small rnas are processed rather than products of random degradation.

unravelling novel intergenic small transcriptome
small rnas mapping to putative intergenic regions were highly enriched in vegetative mycelia compared to the appressoria library. regardless of the precise proportion of intergenic small rnas in m. oryzae, previous rna analysis including cpa-srnas, mpss, sage and ests provides compelling evidence for transcriptional activity of numerous non-coding loci . it is possible some of these alignments may correspond to other genomic features, particularly inaccurately annotated genes. similar to our previous work  <cit> , utrs were defined as  <dig> bp flanking the start and stop codons of protein-coding genes in instances where full length ests were absent. as a consequence, it is possible that some small rnas mapped to genes with utrs greater than  <dig> bp. alternatively, a number of predicted genes are likely inaccurately defined, or missed completely, potentially resulting in overestimation of intergenic derived small rnas. upon manual inspection, we identified examples where small rnas were classified as intergenic regions but overlapped other gene predicted models; thereby satisfying the two assumptions above .

in addition, many intergenic derived small rnas corresponded to non-coding loci or possibly to other novel classes of small rnas that remain to be discovered in m. oryzae. since mirnas are largely known to originate from intergenic regions in plants and animals, we analyzed our small rna sequencing data with the mirdeep algorithm  <cit>  as an approach for mirnas discovery in m. oryzae. our attempt resulted into no clear mirna identification; although the m. oryzae genome has three genes coding for argonaute proteins  <cit> . one explanation is that the mirdeep algorithm is biased to higher eukaryotes mirnas; therefore any potential m. oryzae mirna candidates slightly different from the canonical mirnas would have been missed. second, it is possible that they are expressed under specific stress conditions or different stages not examined here and/or are of low abundance. finally, to our knowledge, mirnas have not been identified in fungi and our findings are consistent with a recent review  <cit> . the precise identity and role these intergenic small rnas play during growth and development in m. oryzae remains an important question to be addressed.

potential role of ltr-sirna on genome integrity
in addition, we identified an enrichment of repeat-associated small rnas, mapping predominantly to retrotransposable elements. previous studies have shown that transposable elements likely play a significant role in the genome evolution of m. oryzae such as loss of synteny  <cit>  and deletion of avirulence genes  <cit> . small rnas derived from repetitive elements have been classified as endo-sirnas or pirnas in plants, humans and drosophila and act to silence te elements  <cit> . in our work, small rnas derived from repetitive elements mapped at roughly equal frequency to sense and antisense strands, which is a characteristic of the endo-sirna-mediated rna silencing mechanism  <cit> . we observed that most of the m. oryzae endo-sirnas were derived from retrotransposable elements and were defined as ltr-sirnas . among the tes mapped by ltr-sirnas, maggy, an extensively studied ltr-retrotransposable element found primarily in rice infecting strains, contained the highest number of small rnas . this is in contrast to pyret, a more ancient ltr retrotransposon, which is thought to be inactive and to which few ltr-sirnas mapped. others have shown that maggy remains active. ikeda et al  demonstrated that the maggy promoter is activated by heat shock, copper sulfate and oxidative stress in a rice infecting strain  <cit> . in subsequent work, which involved introduction of maggy into a wheat strain , it was demonstrated that a sirna-dependent mechanism that involves dicer  <dig> was required to suppress maggy transposition  <cit> . thus, our data are consistent with these previous findings that maggy is active at least to some extent. it remains to be determined whether other retrotransposable elements are suppressed by similar ltr-sirnas based mechanisms. although te transposition appears to be suppressed in rice infecting strains, we suggest that m. oryzae cellular machinery allows limited te movement enabling loss of avr genes, but at the same time utilizes small rna silencing machinery to ensure genome integrity and avoid excessive deleterious mutations.

trna-derived small rnas suggest trna cleavage based biogenesis
in contrast to the mycelia library, our sequencing data revealed that the appressoria library had a greater accumulation of small rnas mapping to trna loci , which were named trfs. similar to a recent study in humans and a. fumigatus where small rnas mapped to either the 5' or 3' halves of mature trnas and had predominant lengths of  <dig> -  <dig> nt, m. oryzae trfs also mapped mostly to either 5' or 3' halves of all trna types and were greater than  <dig> nt in length  <cit> . in s. cerevisiae and human, trna cleavage around the anticodon loop results in small rnas  <cit>  and has been proposed as a novel mechanism for down regulation of protein synthesis  <cit> . in m. oryzae, we identified two orthologs  of the yeast rny1p, which is required for trna cleavage, suggesting a similar trna cleavage mechanism exists in m. oryzae.

strikingly, trna cleavage is triggered by diverse stimuli such as oxidative stress, nutrient starvation, cell proliferation and development  <cit> . for instance, in the human pathogenic fungus a. fumigatus, trna cleavage is induced by conidiation and likely leads to interruption of protein synthesis by limiting availability of intact trna molecules  <cit> . in m. oryzae, our sequencing data and northern blots showed enrichment of trfs in conidia and appressoria tissues compared to mycelia. as in a. fumigatus, m. oryzae conidia are resting structures and reduced metabolism is expected in order to maintain nutritional storage for conidial germination. furthermore, conidial germination and appressorium formation in m. oryzae represent tightly regulated developmental stages and transcriptome analyses revealed that overall expression of genes involved in protein biosynthesis is significantly reduced  <cit> . thus, it is likely that m. oryzae cleaves trnas to restrict protein synthesis during appressorium formation in order to direct cellular metabolism towards infection.

identification of possible trna posttranscriptional modifications
recent work has shown that methylation of specific trna types at position c <dig> prevents trna cleavage in drosophila, suggesting that posttranscriptional modifications can influence the biogenesis of trna-derived small rnas  <cit> . in m. oryzae, we identified several possible posttranscriptional modifications sites. while some, such as positions  <dig>   <dig>   <dig>   <dig> agree with previous modification sites characterized in s. cerevisiae, the most frequent sites in m. oryzae trfs occurred at positions  <dig> and  <dig>  a recent study in arabidopsis reported position  <dig> to be posttranscriptionally modified  <cit> . knowledge of post-transcriptional trna modification in filamentous fungi is limited, thus it remains to be determined whether the sites we have discovered are common to other fungi. our discovery of possibly tissue-specific posttranscriptional modification sites in m. oryzae suggests they may play an important role in development. although this remains conjecture at this time, our findings warrant further investigation. for example, in m. oryzae what precisely are the trna modifications and what gene products are required for modifying trnas? moreover, are such gene products  essential for growth and development and what role do they play in the biogenesis of trfs?

CONCLUSIONS
we discovered that m. oryzae possesses a diverse catalog of small rnas, which exhibited different patterns of accumulation during growth and development. however, at this time, we found no evidence for canonical mirnas. future studies will also focus on examining small rnas populations in various pathogenesis mutants as well as during the infection process. further discovery and characterization may lead to practical outcomes. for example, tinoco et al.  showed that expression of dsrna in planta led to trans-specific gene silencing in fungal cells  <cit> . thus, we propose that a better understanding of key small rna players in m. oryzae pathogenesis-related processes may illuminate alternative strategies to engineer plants capable of modifying the m. oryzae small transcriptome, and suppress disease development in an effective and environmentally friendly manner.

