BACKGROUND
an enormous number of microorganisms, the vast majority of which are bacterial species, are known to colonize and form complex communities, or microbiota, at various sites within the human body  <cit> . microbial cells that thrive on and within the human body are approximately  <dig> times more numerous than our own cells and contain, in aggregate, approximately  <dig> times more genes, leading to the suggestion that humans and our microbial symbionts be considered “supraorganisms”  <cit> . the microbiota can be viewed as a forgotten “organ” exquisitely tuned to our physiology that performs functions that we have not had to evolve on our own  <cit> . a growing body of evidence suggests that the composition and function of microbiota in different human body habitats, including nasal passages, oral cavities, skin, gastrointestinal tract, and urogenital tract, play vital roles in human development, physiology, immunity, and nutrition  <cit> . with the advent of molecular techniques, especially the development of next-generation high-throughput sequencing techniques, more and more bacterial phylotypes, which were undiscovered by traditional microbiological techniques, were found in these habitats of the human body. prior studies have shown that the taxonomic composition of the microbial community may affect the propensity to develop obesity, inflammatory bowel disease, type  <dig> diabetes, cardiovascular diseases, bacterial vaginosis, dental caries and so on  <cit> . studies of healthy individuals, including the chinese population, have focused on particular body habitats, such as the gastrointestinal tract, nasopharynx, skin, and oral cavity, using high-throughput sequencing techniques  <cit> , and have revealed microbial communities with significant intra- and inter-individual variations  <cit> . however, the five microbial habitats in the human body mentioned above are not isolated from one another; instead, each person comprises a complex, yet interconnected landscape consisting of many body habitats harboring distinctive microbiota  <cit> . recently, the human microbiome project  has analyzed the largest cohort and set of distinct, clinically relevant body habitats from healthy adults of a western population to characterize the ecology of human-associated microbial communities using  <dig> pyrosequencing and illumina sequencing  <cit> . however, little is known about the overall structure of microbiota from different body habitats in healthy chinese individuals. a good definition of commensal microbiota in these habitats and an understanding of the relationship to health are essential in preventing and combating disease.

the purpose of the present study was to characterize the baseline bacterial communities from various human habitats, such as the nasopharynx, saliva, dominant hand and feces, of healthy male and female chinese junior undergraduates boarding at zhejiang university using parallel barcoded  <dig> pyrosequencing targeting the 16s rrna gene v <dig> hypervariable region to gain a “whole-body” view  <cit> . the bacterial profiles of these healthy undergraduates, with the same living environmental circumstances and nearly the same living habits, such as diet, rest, exercise, and hygiene in the university, could represent the real healthy microbiota prevailing in chinese undergraduates, which might be useful for human microbiota-related diseases analyzing the same age range.

RESULTS
distinct microbial diversity of different healthy human habitats
determining the role of our microbiota in disease predisposition and pathogenesis will critically depend upon first defining it in healthy states. previous studies have shown that there are fundamental differences in the composition and structure of bacterial communities in the same habitats within the subjects of different ethnic and racial backgrounds  <cit> . however, most of the studies investigating microbial composition within a specific habitat using deep sequencing analysis have focused on sampling people from the west and some asian countries  <cit> , and little is known about the overall structure and composition of the healthy chinese microbiota. this imbalance needs to be addressed to more fully understand the interactions between humans and their microbiota. human microbial communities were strongly affected by external factors, such as lifestyle, dietary patterns, antibiotic usage, and host genotype  <cit> . in china, undergraduate students, often boarding at the same university for  <dig> or  <dig> years, have adapted to the specific environmental circumstances of the university and formed almost the same lifestyle features, such as diet, rest, exercise, and hygiene after  <dig> years. thus, chinese undergraduate boarders might be an excellent model to explore the representative microbiota of the human body in the same age range. unlike previous studies, the well-controlled similar living environmental circumstances for these participants could reduce the influence of various environmental factors on the healthy human microbiota and minimize the variations between participants  <cit> . the present study characterized the composition and structure of the healthy microbiota of the nasopharynx, saliva, dominant hands and feces from chinese male and female boarding undergraduates, and established the baselines for human healthy microbiota, which might be useful in understanding the relationship between health and prevailing diseases in the chinese population in the same age range. because most of the undergraduates were not married, the vaginal microbiota from female participants was not included, as gynecologic examinations are not included in routine physical examinations for female participants in china. with nearly the same living environments and habits, as mentioned above, the diversity profiles of bacterial communities from these habitats could be considered as representative microbiota of healthy human bodies. samples were only collected from a single time point, our data are in agreement with the conventional sampling habits in other studies  <cit> . recent studies have also shown that within-subject variation over time is consistently lower than between-subject variation, and that the uniqueness of the microbial community in each individual appears to be relatively stable over time , which suggests that a set of microbiomes in a given healthy habitat can be considered a core microbiome  <cit> .

after removing sequences of insufficient quality and sequences that could not be adequately assigned, nearly  <dig>  sequences remained from the four human habitats, including  <dig>  reads from nasopharynx,  <dig>  reads from saliva,  <dig>  reads from dominant hands, and  <dig>  reads from feces respectively . the average length of the sequences was  <dig> bp after trimming the primers. these high-quality pyrosequencing reads  were classified using the rdp classifier to assign taxonomic classifications to the sequences for ecologic analysis. although the total number of sequences in each group was no more than in previous studies that mainly focused on a single human habitat  <cit> , the average number of nearly  <dig> sequences from each habitat in the same participant with a good’s coverage > 96% could represent the overall structure and composition of human microbiota in the specific healthy habitat. the indices of bacterial richness and diversity of otus at a 3% sequence dissimilarity level are summarized in table  <dig> and figure  <dig>  and indicate that the bacterial alpha diversity in these habitats is as follows : feces > dominant hand > saliva > nasopharynx. however, the established patterns of the bacterial diversity from healthy chinese undergraduates were not consistent with the results of the hmp, which showed that the oral and fecal communities were especially diverse in terms of community membership, while skin microbiota had less complex alpha diversity  <cit> . the disparity might be due to less chinese participant enrollment, fewer sampling sites in each habitat, different sequencing targets, and less sequencing depths in our study. in combination with our previous studies, the diversity of nasopharyngeal microbiota might be as low as vaginal microbiota from healthy chinese women of reproductive-age  <cit>  when compared with the other three major habitats. in fact, the number of phylotypes detected in a sample, or the number of microorganisms discerned at any given phylogenetic level, was strongly affected by the sequencing depth. with a relatively larger total number of sequences, previous studies have shown that the bacterial diversity in the oral cavity was much more complex than the skin  <cit> . however, costello et al. also claimed that several skin locations harbored more diverse communities than the gastrointestinal tract and oral cavity, which was consistent with the data herein  <cit> . the richness of total bacterial communities in the habitats was estimated by rarefaction analysis. the trend of the rarefaction curves also confirmed the differences in these habitats mentioned above; however, the unsaturated shapes of the rarefaction curves indicated that bacterial richness of the nasopharyngeal swabs, saliva, palmar swabs and feces was not yet completely sampled .

1the operational taxonomic units  were defined with 3% dissimilarity level.

2the coverage percentage , richness estimators  and diversity indices  were calculated using good’s method  <cit>  and the mothur program, respectively.

3the shannon index of evenness was calculated with the formula e = h/ln, where h is the shannon diversity index and s is the total number of sequences in that group.

we assessed the differences in overall bacterial community composition using a phylogeny-based metric   <cit> . a relatively small unifrac distance implied that two communities were compositionally similar, harboring lineages sharing a common evolutionary history. in turn, a large unifrac distance indicated a quite different structure of microbiota in the habitat. a clear clustering according to anatomic site was observed using unweighted unifrac, despite significant inter-individual variability . with the same living environmental circumstances and nearly the same living habits for these subjects, each anatomic location within a healthy individual would shape the composition of a microbial community specifically adapted to that site. principal coordinates analysis  was performed using weighted, normalized abundance data, demonstrating that primary clustering was by anatomic site, with the saliva, feces, dominant hands, and nasopharynx separate . the data herein were also consistent with the results of a large-scale study from the hmp  <cit> . the current study showed that microbiota from one human habitat was distinct from other human habitats in the same individuals, visually and directly. in spite of significant inter-individual variations, the healthy male and female students still shared a great number of otus, and the shared otus were represented by the overlapping areas of circles in venn diagrams, which could be used to understand the relative stable, consistent components across complex microbial assemblages . the results herein indicated that there might be a core microbiome in the specific habitat of the healthy human body. however, the venn diagrams showed that bacteria from the four different habitats of the healthy human body could not share a distinct core microbiome  in each individual , which was consistent with the results of hmp  <cit> .

taxonomic analysis of healthy microbiota in different habitats
the sequences collected for this study provide an overview of the healthy human microbiota. these sequences could be clustered into  <dig>  unique 16s rrna gene v <dig> tagged sequences, representing  <dig> known phyla or candidate divisions and  <dig> genera . in male or female students, the vast majority of sequences in the human body belonged to one of the five following major phyla: actinobacteria, bacteroidetes, firmicutes, fusobacteria, and proteobacteria .

in the nasopharynx,  <dig> phyla, including actinobacteria, bacteroidetes, cyanobacteria, deinococcus-thermus, firmicutes, fusobacteria, proteobacteria, tenericutes, and candidate division tm <dig> were found. however, most sequences  were related to the following four phyla: actinobacteria , bacteroidetes , firmicutes , and proteobacteria , which was consistent with a previous study  <cit> . the healthy nasopharyngeal microbiota was the only site in which actinobacteria predominated. it was unexpected that a great number of sequences  in the nasopharynx are still unknown. at the genus level, sequences from nasopharyngeal swabs represented  <dig> different genera . the most frequently detected genera  were corynebacterium , dolosigranulum , staphylococcus , lactobacillus , propionibacterium , gardnerella , unclassified actinomycetales , anaerococcus  and prevotella  , which were considered the predominant bacteria, and were also detected using pcr-dgge and cloning and sequencing techniques. the other  <dig> genera accounted for the remainder of the genus-level diversity , indicative of a low abundance. at this stage, it is difficult to predict the role bacteria present in low numbers, play in nasopharyngeal ecology. however, it would be an oversimplification to neglect their presence. laufer et al.  reported that members of the nasopharyngeal healthy microbiota, i.e., corynebacterium, dolosigranulum, staphylococcus, lactococcus, and propionibacterium, are protective against streptococcus pneumoniae colonization and otitis media  <cit> . streptococcus load is negatively correlated with corynebacterium and dolosigranulum, suggesting a competitive interaction between this potential otitis media pathogen and these two genera. surprisingly, the data herein showed that dolosigranulum  was only detected in male participants, and characterized the overall structure and composition of human nasopharyngeal healthy microbiota in a relatively deeper level with high-throughput sequencing techniques. this could be used to explore the relationship between nasopharyngeal microbiota and allergic diseases in the future  <cit> .

it is necessary to define the salivary microbiota of the healthy human body before determining the role of oral bacteria in diseases. nine phyla, including actinobacteria, bacteroidetes, firmicutes, fusobacteria, proteobacteria, spirochaetes, tenericutes, and two candidate divisions , were found  <cit> . the vast majority of sequences in saliva  belonged to one of the following five major phyla: actinobacteria , bacteroidetes , firmicutes , fusobacteria  and proteobacteria  . in fact, the diversity of salivary microbiota was quite different from those in different ages and ethnic groups  <cit> . when compared with the salivary microbiota from chinese undergraduates, bacteroidetes , fusobacteria , and proteobacteria  were overrepresented in healthy chinese children  <cit> , while firmicutes sequences were more abundant in adult. these disparities might be due to different hygiene habits, different dietary constitution, and different physiologic changes, which were clearly associated with age. when compared with healthy adult americans reported by keijser , a higher relative abundance of bacteroidetes  and proteobacteria , and a lower relative abundance of firmicutes  were found in salivary microbiota of americans, which might be ascribed to different lifestyles and different host genotypes  <cit> . at the genus level, sequences from saliva represented  <dig> different genera . the most frequently detected genera in saliva  were streptococcus , prevotella , neisseria , haemophilus , porphyromonas , gemella , rothia , granulicatella , fusobacterium , actinomyces , veillonella  and aggregatibacter  . the overall taxonomic distribution of the 16s rrna gene-based amplicons at the genus level mentioned above was in general agreement with previous findings  <cit> , although the relative abundance of several genera was not consistent with the data herein, especially the relative abundance of streptococcus. the higher relative abundance of streptococcus, an acid-producing cariogenic bacterium, was more abundant in the chinese population. the above-mentioned genera provide a framework for chinese healthy salivary microbiota diversity and investigations of the environmental, dietary, and genetic factors that influence salivary microbiota in individuals. the continuous flow of saliva made it impossible to obtain a stable salivary microbiota, but only captured the temporal stability of salivary microbiota at a single time point.

in the dominant hands,  <dig> phyla, including actinobacteria, bacteroidetes, chloroflexi, cyanobacteria, deinococcus-thermus, firmicutes, fusobacteria, proteobacteria, spirochaetes, tenericutes, verrucomicrobia, and three candidate divisions  were found. most of the sequences  were divided into one of the following five major phyla: actinobacteria , bacteroidetes , deinococcus-thermus , firmicutes  and proteobacteria  . interestingly, the healthy skin microbiota from chinese was the only site in which proteobacteria predominated when compared with other human habitats. one predominant phylum, deinococcus-thermus, was detected in healthy skin microbiota with a relatively high abundance, which has been recognized solely in this habitat. bacteria from the phylum deinococcus-thermus are known for their resistance to extreme stresses, including radiation, oxidation, desiccation, and high temperature. perhaps due to the special environmental conditions of the hand , deinococcus-thermus was found with a higher relative abundance in the skin microbiota. however, the phylum of deinococcus-thermus could not be recognized as the predominant bacteria in skin through conventional 16s rrna gene full-length cloning and sequencing technique  <cit> , which might be ascribed to the methodologic constraints, such as lower resolution  <cit> . at the genus level, sequences from skin represented  <dig> different genera . the most frequently detected genera in skin  were enhydrobacter , deinococcus , staphylococcus , propionibacterium , corynebacterium , lactobacillus , acinetobacter , chryseobacterium , streptococcus , finegoldia , sphingomonas , and prevotella  . compared with the study conducted by fierer et al. , the taxonomic composition of skin microbiota of healthy chinese undergraduates was quite different from healthy americans  <cit> . in the present study, the genus, enhydrobacter , was the most predominant bacteria; however, the role of enhydrobacter on skin microbiota is still unknown. other genera, as mentioned above, have previously been found to be abundant in other molecular surveys of skin bacteria  <cit>  and are considered to be common skin residents. a previous study showed that the male and female students harbored significantly different bacterial communities on the hand surfaces  <cit> . however, similar results between the two genders could not be obtained in chinese adults. our current pyrosequencing analysis of bacterial 16s rrna gene amplicons generated directly from superficial human palms raises the possibility of better understanding of the normal microbial ecology of the skin, and for studying the role of novel microbes or microbial communities.

with respect to the gastrointestinal tract, the composition and structure of the fecal microbiota has been recognized in a number of studies. in the current study, nine phyla, including actinobacteria, bacteroidetes, deinococcus-thermus, firmicutes, fusobacteria, proteobacteria, spirochaetes, tenericutes, and verrucomicrobia, were found. the two most abundant phyla, bacteroidetes  and firmicutes , constituted > 97% of the total number of sequences and should be considered as the predominant bacteria in this habitat . at the genus level, sequences from feces could be classified as  <dig> different genera . the most dominant taxonomic groups in fecal microbiota  were faecalibacterium , unclassified lachnospiraceae , coprococcus , blautia , pseudobutyrivibrio , bacteroides , roseburia , unclassified clostridiales , unclassified ruminococcaceae , ruminococcus , subdoligranulum , sporacetigenium , oscillibacter , dorea , phascolarctobacterium  and prevotella , which accounted for > 90% of the total sequences . except for bacteroides and prevotella , other predominant genera belonged to the order clostridiales. this community was very similar to that reported for the human ileum and likely represented the normal gastrointestinal microbial population  <cit> . as shown in previous studies, these resident bacteria constitute a healthy gastrointestinal microbiota and exert a conditioning effect on gastrointestinal homeostasis, delivering regulatory signals to the epithelium and instructing mucosal immune responses  <cit> .

there were some limitations to the current study. first, a relatively small number of healthy unmarried chinese undergraduates participated in the study, which would affect the comprehensive understanding of healthy human microbiota. the microbiota from healthy male and female urogenital tracts of chinese adults would effectively complete the framework of the human microbiome. second, only samples from these habitats at a single time point were included; samples from more time points would verify the representative healthy human microbiota. third, it still could not be ignored the wide variations observed among participants in present study. living in the similar conditions, the wide otu differences reported  might be due to the different sequencing depth and different host genotype. a much greater sequencing depth was needed for establishing a database of chinese healthy microbiota.

CONCLUSIONS
in summary, the framework of microbial communities from four healthy human habitats of the same participants has been established for chinese undergraduates for the first time. the overall structure of healthy microbiota from these habitats was quite different from each other, which might be due to the specific microenvironments of these anatomic locations. as commensal or symbiotic bacteria, these healthy microbial communities co-exist with their specific habitats in the long-term evolutionary process. hence, the data herein represent an important step for determining the diversity of the chinese healthy microbiota, and can be used for additional large-scale studies focusing on the interactions between healthy and disease states for young chinese adults in the same age range. in fact, the essential roles of microbiota in human health and disease, especially novel microbes, are gaining recognition. with an integrated “whole-body” view, many human complex diseases are associated with microbiota from more than one habitat, such as cardiovascular diseases  <cit> . the role of microbiota in such human diseases will provide new insights regarding pathogenesis and treatment, and can be utilized as a novel therapeutic target for antibiotics, prebiotics, and probiotics, which indicates that the maintenance or restoration of normal microbiota plays a vital role in human health.

