BACKGROUND
introns have been shown to stimulate gene expression in a wide range of organisms, including mammals, nematodes, insects, fungi, and plants . introns enhance gene expression by increasing the steady-state amount of mature mrna in the cell  <cit> , apparently without significantly changing mrna stability  <cit> . there are two general ways by which introns can elevate mrna levels: first, by acting as transcriptional enhancers or alternative promoters located within the introns, and second, by a process termed intron-mediated enhancement   <cit> .

the mechanism of ime is largely unknown, and several processes have been suggested as being involved . it was suggested that exon junction complex  proteins associated with spliced introns can facilitate mrna export to the cytoplasm  <cit>  and also promote ribosome association with the mrna, thus increasing translation efficiency  <cit> . as indicated by nuclear run-on transcription experiments, ime does not involve a change in the rate of transcription initiation  <cit> . different introns have different abilities to boost expression. splicing per se is not sufficient for enhancement, since some efficiently spliced introns have little or no effect while others stimulate expression to a great extent. most enhancing introns are first introns, and it was found that promoter-proximal introns are enriched in dispersed, redundant short sequences that elevate gene expression  <cit> . it was hypothesized that the signals present in introns render the transcription machinery more processive, increasing the likelihood that full-length mrnas will accumulate  <cit> . according to this model, in the absence of these signals, the polymerase may tend to dissociate and produce truncated, rapidly degraded transcripts  <cit> .

while splicing per se is not sufficient for ime , it is not clear yet whether splicing of the enhancing introns is essential for enhancement. intron splicing was reported to be essential for enhancement in the maize sh <dig>  <cit> , adh <dig>  <cit> , and hsp <dig>  <cit>  genes. however, when splicing of the arabidopsis trp <dig>  first intron was prevented, it was still able to enhance expression to about 50% of the enhancement mediated by the intact intron  <cit> . it was proposed that the difference between the observations with the maize sh <dig> and the arabidopsis trp <dig> introns might indicate a potential difference between the mechanism of ime in either these introns or these plants  <cit> .

the 5' untranslated region  of atmhx, an arabidopsis vacuolar metal/proton exchanger  <cit> , includes the first intron of the atmhx gene. this  <dig> nt leader intron  was shown to enhance expression 86-fold in transgenic arabidopsis  plants when compared to a reporter construct that included atmhx promoter without this intron  <cit> . it was pointed out that because different introns can affect expression by different mechanisms, a complete understanding of ime will require a detailed characterization of the phenomenon using multiple introns, genes, and species  <cit> . here we investigated whether the li of atmhx acts as a transcriptional enhancer and whether its splicing is essential for ime. we found that although almost no expression was seen in the absence of this intron, it did not act as a transcriptional enhancer and was unable to support expression in the absence of the enhancer elements of the promoter. while splicing was essential for substantial ime, the li was able to elicit low-level enhancement of expression in the absence of splicing. the internal li sequence played a crucial role in the low-level enhancement mediated by the unspliced intron.

RESULTS
the li does not act as a transcriptional enhancer or internal promoter
in a few cases, plant introns were shown to act as transcriptional enhancers or internal promoters . to distinguish whether an intron enhances expression by acting as a transcriptional enhancer or by ime, it is necessary to determine whether the intron can stimulate the expression of a gene that has only a minimal promoter, and whether the intron can enhance expression from outside the transcribed sequence  <cit> . to address this subject, the series of constructs shown in figure 1a was created. the basic construct  included gus under the control of the regulatory regions of atmhx - the promoter, 5'utr, li, and terminator. the -int  construct lacked the li. the promoter is composed of three regions :  a repetitive element  of  <dig> bp  <cit> ;  a unique sequence  of  <dig> bp; and  a minimal promoter of  <dig> bp, which includes the tata and caat boxes  <cit> . in construct mp+i, all the promoter regions were removed except the minimal promoter. thus, if the li acts as a downstream transcriptional enhancer or includes an internal promoter, this construct should be expressed. construct mp is a control that includes only the minimal promoter without the li. in the other constructs, the li was moved outside the transcribed sequence. in construct i+mp the li is upstream to the minimal promoter, in construct pia  the other promoter regions are also present upstream to the li, and in construct pib the li is localized between the re and us promoter regions.

all the constructs shown in figure 1a were stably transformed into arabidopsis thaliana ecotype col- <dig> plants. gus activity was determined in a mixture including an equal number of t <dig> seedlings from  <dig> independent transformants of each construct. we previously observed that there is no significant correlation between the number of transgene copies in independent transformants of the same construct and the level of expression  <cit> . thus, for each of the constructs created in this study,  <dig> to  <dig> independent transformants were utilized for expression analysis. compared to the wt construct, all the other constructs showed much lower gus expression . gus activity in plants with lower expression levels is shown on a smaller scale in the internal graph. the extent of enhancement gained by the li, that is, the ratio between the expression of the wt and -int constructs, was 272-fold in the transformed arabidopsis  plants . this calculation was valid since gus activity in the -int construct, although very low, was still higher than that of plants expressing the empty vector  .

the expression level seen after eliminating the li  was similar to that of construct mp+i, in which all promoter elements except the minimal promoter were removed . thus, the  <dig> bp upstream to the transcriptional start site of atmhx could not elicit expression higher than that of the minimal promoter in the absence of the li. still, the li was unable to support expression by itself in the absence of the enhancer elements of the promoter, as demonstrated by the low expression of construct mp+i. constructs i+mp, pia, and pib demonstrated that the li was not able to support expression when localized outside the transcribed region, even if the other promoter elements were present. the -re construct shown in figure 1b could serve as a control to construct pib. construct -re was not examined here but was previously shown to be expressed to about half the level of the full promoter  <cit> . this indicated that the regulatory regions downstream the li in construct pib  were sufficient as enhancer elements when the li was present in its native position. altogether, these data showed that the li of atmhx does not act as a transcriptional enhancer or internal promoter, and that its presence in the transcribed region is essential for expression. thus, this li acts by ime. although almost no expression was seen in the absence of this li, it was unable to support expression when the enhancer elements of the promoter were deficient.

the levels of gus transcript in plants expressing the -int construct were below the detection limit in northern blot analysis of the transformed plants . this confirmed that the enhancement resulted from an increase in the transcript levels, as typical for ime .

the li of atmhx enhances 3-fold the expression of the camv 35s promoter
since atmhx promoter shows almost no expression in the absence of its li, it was interesting to learn how this intron affects the expression of a promoter that is well expressed on its own. to address this, it was investigated if the li of atmhx can enhance the expression of the strong camv 35s promoter. the constructs used included gus under the control of the camv 35s promoter and nos terminator, as well as the 5'utr of atmhx that either included  or did not include  the li . the two constructs were stably transformed to arabidopsis  plants, and  <dig> independent transformants were collected and analyzed for each construct. figure  <dig> shows the results of a typical experiment. inclusion of the li resulted in a  <dig> -fold increase in gus activity . a  <dig> -fold increase was observed in gus transcript levels , indicating that the enhancement resulted from an increase in the steady-state transcript levels.

thus, the li of atmhx was able to enhance the expression mediated by the strong camv 35s promoter by about 3-fold. this was much lower than the extent of ime gained with the atmhx promoter, which was about 270-fold. the absolute values of gus activity in plants expressing constructs 35s  and wt  were  <dig> and  <dig> milli units . mg protein- <dig>  respectively. that is, even with its li, the atmhx promoter is much weaker than the camv 35s promoter . additional experiments were carried out in the context of the atmhx promoter in order to learn more about the requirements for ime in the natural combination of promoter and intron, in which almost no expression is seen in the absence of the intron.

splicing was essential for substantial enhancement whereas an unspliced intron mediated low-level enhancement that was dependent on the internal intron sequence
there were different conclusions with respect to the question if splicing is essential for ime . to investigate if splicing is essential for the enhancement mediated by the li of atmhx, the wm-s  construct was created . this construct included mutated 5' and 3' splice sites, as well as several other essential modifications . the wm  was a control construct whose sequence was identical to wm-s except the modifications at the vicinity of the splice sites. it was also desired to determine whether the internal region of the unspliceable intron plays a role in a potential enhancement. for this, the internal  <dig> nt of the wm-s construct were deleted to create the wmd-s construct . in the deleted construct, only the proximal  <dig> and  <dig> nt were left from the 5' and 3' borders, respectively, of the wm-s intron, thus creating a  <dig> nt intron  having mutated splice sites.

as mentioned, it was necessary to introduce several other modifications into the wm-s and wmd-s constructs . two point mutations were introduced to prevent cryptic splicing of the retained introns. it was also necessary to introduce seven point mutations that eliminated all internal atg codons. since the unspliced li will remain as part of the 5'utr, the presence of atg codons in it may inhibit the translation of the main orf  <cit>  and/or result in the formation of premature termination codons . such ptcs may lead to transcript degradation by the nonsense-mediated mrna decay  quality-control mechanism, which degrades transcripts bearing ptcs  <cit> . few other modifications were designed to maintain in the unspliced transcript the natural upstream open-reading frame  included in the 5'utr of atmhx. similar to the native atmhx transcript, in the wt, wm and -int constructs this uorf initiated in the first exon of the 5'utr and terminated in the second exon . in constructs with eliminated splice sites , the uorf terminated within the unspliced intron, which was mutated to encode an uorf identical to that of the other constructs. thus, all the constructs used in this study included an identical version of the uorf. few other mutations were designed to eliminate a hindiii site and to introduce two sacii sites for the creation of the wmd-s construct.

all these constructs were stably transformed to arabidopsis col- <dig> plants. to verify that the wt and wm constructs were spliced correctly while the wm-s and wmd-s remained unspliced, the transformed plants were subjected to reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction  analysis with the primers indicated in figure 5a. plants expressing the wt and wm constructs showed a product with the expected spliced size , which was smaller than the unspliced pcr product obtained from the plasmid including the wt construct . inevitably, plants expressing the -int construct showed a product with the expected unspliced size . the two -s constructs, in which splice sites were eliminated, showed a product with their expected unspliced size .

gus activity was determined in a mixture including an equal number of t <dig> seedlings from at least  <dig> independent transformants of each construct . gus activity in plants with lower expression level is shown on a smaller scale in the internal graph. eliminating the splicing ability of the li in the wm-s construct resulted in a significant reduction in expression as compared to the wm construct. still, the unspliceable intron of the wm-s construct mediated low-level enhancement of gus expression. this was evident from the fact that gus activity of plants expressing the wm-s construct was about 5-fold higher compared to the -int construct . statistical analysis  showed that the difference in expression between the -int and wm-s constructs was highly significant . figure 6b shows the results of northern blot hybridization with the gus probe of rna extracted from these plants. while gus transcript levels were below the detection limit in plants expressing the -int construct, a weak band was observed in the wm-s construct. the size of this band was somewhat higher than that of the wm construct since this transcript included the additional  <dig> nt of the li. thus, the retained intron was able to mediate low-level enhancement. these results indicated that while intron splicing was essential for substantial ime, low-level enhancement could be achieved in the absence of splicing.

interestingly, the loss of a significant part of the internal li sequence in the wmd-s construct resulted in a loss of ability to mediate low-level enhancement. the wmd-s construct included the proximal  <dig> and  <dig> 5' and 3' nt, respectively, of the wm-s construct, but lacked the internal  <dig> nt of the latter construct. the resulting  <dig> nt unspliceable intron mediated gus activity that was similar to that of the -int construct, and its gus transcript was below the detection limit .

discussion
the mechanism of ime is not well understood. to identify the rules that govern this process, it is important to obtain information from multiple introns. the results shown here indicated that the li of atmhx does not act as a transcriptional enhancer or internal promoter, and that its presence in the transcribed region is essential for enhancement. thus, this li acts by ime. although almost no expression was seen without this intron, it was unable to support expression in the absence of the enhancer elements of the promoter. previous work showed that histochemical gus staining was below the detection limit in plants expressing the -int construct, whereas staining could be clearly seen in specific tissues of plants expressing gus under the control of atmhx promoter together with the li . our current data suggest that the enhancers that determine the expression in these specific tissues are located in the promoter, while the li merely enhances expression above the detection limit.

even with its li, the atmhx promoter is much weaker than the camv 35s promoter . while in its natural position in the context of the atmhx promoter the li enhanced expression approximately 270-fold, only a 3-fold enhancement was seen in the context of the camv 35s promoter. this demonstrates the stronger contribution of this enhancing intron to a weak promoter.

while splicing per se is not sufficient for enhancement, the question whether splicing of enhancing introns is essential for enhancement is not clear at present . the combination of atmhx promoter and li provides an interesting system in which the intron is virtually essential for expression. it was reported that splicing of the first introns of the maize hsp <dig> and adh <dig> genes was essential for enhancement  <cit> . however, in these studies, as noted by rose and beliakoff  <cit> , the retained introns might have caused nmd due to internal atg or termination codons. in two other reports, the ability of the retained introns to cause nmd was eliminated. in the first of these studies, atg codons within the maize sh <dig> intron, which was located in the 5'utr, were eliminated by point mutations, and it was concluded that splicing of this intron was essential for enhancement  <cit> . in the second study, potential termination codons were eliminated from the retained arabidopsis trp <dig> intron, which was located in the coding sequence  <cit> . it was concluded that splicing of this intron was not essential for enhancement, since preventing splicing resulted in 50% of the enhancement mediated by the intact intron. it was suggested that the difference between the observations with the maize sh <dig> and arabidopsis trp <dig> introns might indicate a potential difference in the mechanism of ime between either these introns or these plants  <cit> .

however, considering the results presented for the maize sh <dig> and arabidopsis trp <dig> introns together with the results reported here, a general picture emerges. in the current study, the ability of the retained intron to cause nmd was eliminated by point mutations that eliminated its internal atg codons. the wt and wm-s constructs mediated a 270- and 5-fold enhancement of expression, respectively, compared to the -int construct. for the maize sh <dig> intron, there was a 25-44-fold enhancement with spliced introns, and a 2-fold enhancement when the splice sites were mutated  <cit> . for the arabidopsis trp <dig> intron there was an approximately 5- and  <dig> -fold enhancement with spliced and unspliced introns, respectively  <cit> . altogether, these data indicate that in the absence of splicing, low-level enhancement can be achieved while splicing is essential for substantial enhancement. in the three studies discussed, low-level enhancement in the absence of splicing ranged from 2- to 5-fold. the biggest value  was obtained in the combination of intron and promoter in which full enhancement was highest .

in the current study, achievement of low-level enhancement by the unspliced li was dependent on the presence of a significant part of the internal intron sequence. compared to the wm-s construct, which mediated 5-fold enhancement, the wmd-s construct, in which  <dig> nt of the internal intron sequence were eliminated, lost its ability to mediate low-level enhancement. for comparison, an internal deletion of  <dig> nt in the  <dig> nt arabidopsis trp <dig> intron that had a mutated 5' splice site did not abolish the ability of this unspliceable intron to mediate low-level enhancement  <cit> . an internal deletion of  <dig> nt in the same trp <dig> intron, which rendered it unspliceable due to its short size , also did not eliminate its ability to mediate low-level enhancement  <cit> . however, in the latter case the resulting intron had intact splice sites. the presence of intact splice sites as well as a potential branch point  was shown to be more important for low-level enhancement mediated by the trp <dig> intron than the presence of a significant part of the internal intron sequence  <cit> . based on these findings, it was suggested that the mechanism of ime requires that the splicing machinery will be at least partly assembled onto an intron, even if it is unable to complete its task  <cit> . interestingly, our results showed that the internal sequence of the atmhx li played a crucial role in mediating the low-level enhancement of the mutated intron that had abolished splice sites.

what could be the reason for these findings? it seems that besides elements such as splice sites and a potential branch point, other internal elements of enhancing introns can stimulate low-level enhancement in the absence of splicing. possible candidates for these internal elements are redundant, unspecified short sequences enriched in promoter-proximal introns, whose presence in spliced introns was shown to elevate gene expression  <cit> . it is possible that these elements contribute not only to the substantial enhancement mediated by spliced introns, but also to the low-level enhancement mediated by unspliced introns. according to this hypothesis, in the case of the enhancing-capable short  trp <dig> intron, omitting  <dig> nt  <cit>  of its internal sequence possibly kept enough of the sequences required for enhancement to allow low-level enhancement in the presence of the mutated splice sites. when  <dig> nt of this intron were deleted  <cit> , it is possible that, as previously suggested  <cit> , the retained intact splice sites allowed partial assembly of the splicing machinery that enabled enhancement to a limited extent. in the current study, omitting  <dig> nt of the internal atmhx li sequence apparently eliminated internal sequences that were essential for low-level enhancement in the absence of intact splice sites. to evaluate our suggestion about the contribution of promoter-proximal intron sequences to low-level enhancement in the absence of splicing or intact splice sites, we utilized the imeter algorithm  <cit> . this algorithm assigns an "imeter score", which indicates to which extent the sequence of a given intron resembles that of promoter-proximal introns in arabidopsis  <cit> . the imeter scores of the introns in the wm, wm-s, and wmd-s constructs were  <dig> ,  <dig> , and  <dig> , respectively. thus, the ime score, which was previously shown to correlate with the degree of substantial enhancement mediated by spliced introns  <cit> , correlated here with the ability of unspliced introns that had abolished splice sites to cause low-level enhancement. further experiments will be however necessary to determine whether the sequences required for low-level enhancement in the absence of splicing or intact splice sites actually match the redundant short sequences necessary for substantial enhancement activation by spliced introns.

CONCLUSIONS
although atmhx promoter shows almost no expression in the absence of its li, this intron does not act as a transcriptional enhancer and is unable to support expression in the absence of the enhancer elements of the promoter. it is also shown that the same intron can have different contributions to expression of different promoters. this work also demonstrates that while splicing is essential for substantial ime, in the absence of splicing low-level enhancement can be obtained. notably, it is shown that the internal intron sequence plays a significant role in mediating the low-level enhancement of unspliceable introns.

