BACKGROUND
butterflies and moths  have relatively small genomes compared to other eukaryotes, yet they display complex life cycles and diverse wing patterns. they are emerging as powerful models for genetic and evolutionary studies. a new paradigm that gene exchange between species being a driver in the evolution of adaptation in heliconius butterflies, has increased excitement in the field  <cit> . additional interest in the lepidoptera models has resulted from discovering molecular mechanisms responsible for complex traits, such as sexual dimorphism .

despite the wealth of life cycle, behavioral and morphological data available for butterflies , their phylogeny is uncertain. traditionally, the papilionidae , pieridae, nymphalidae, lycaenidae and riodinidae families were grouped into a single superfamily, papilionoidea, which represents typical butterflies. a sister superfamily hesperioidea contained a single family, hesperiidae  <cit> . hesperiidae are similar to many typical butterflies in the egg, larval and pupal stages, however, adults are morphologically distinct, and are characterized by reflexed antennal clubs, larger heads, and several moth-like characteristics such as stockier bodies, stronger wing muscles and darting flight with faster wing beats  <cit> . their ability to fly rapidly gained them the common name “skippers”. skippers were traditionally considered to be the basal branch of butterflies based on morphological characters  <cit> . phylogenetic reconstructions of  <dig> butterfly and skipper species combining dna sequences of three phylogenetic markers with morphological characters agreed with the basal placement of skippers  <cit> . however, a purely dna-based phylogeny presented in the same study contradicted this view and placed papilionidae at the base with hesperiidae as a sister to other butterfly families. similarly, a recent larger-scale study that included transcriptomes of  <dig> butterflies and skippers reported a highly confident  phylogeny with papilionidae in the basal position  <cit> . therefore, reconciliation of the discrepancy between these morphology-based and dna-based phylogenies requires further studies, and the phylogeny of major families of butterflies remains an open question.

decoding the skipper genomes could help the reconstruction of the lepidoptera tree and provide information that is essential for understanding the evolution of their moth-like morphological features, which are either inherited from their ancestor or are character reversals. here we report the assembly and gene annotations for the highly heterozygous genome of the clouded skipper, lerema accius , abbreviated as lac, shown on fig.  <dig>  lac belongs to the subfamily hesperiinae, commonly known as grass skippers, the most species-rich subfamily of skippers. caterpillars of most hesperiinae feed on grasses and sedges. hesperiinae adults typically hold wings erect over the thorax and abdomen when feeding and resting. they adopt a “jet plane” pose when basking: partially open the wings and hold the fore- and hindwings at different angles.fig.  <dig> photographs of lac specimens. the specimens were reared from caterpillars collected near the grapevine lake . a dorsal and b ventral aspects of a male specimen, eclosed on 31-jul-1997; c dorsal and d ventral aspects of a female specimen, eclosed on 29-sep-1997



comparative analysis of this first genome from the family hesperiidae with other lepidoptera genomes provides hypotheses about genetic bases for unique morphological traits of skippers, such as their fast flight. phylogenetic analyses of lac and other lepidoptera species with available complete genomes fail to resolve the position of hesperiidae. a maximum likelihood tree constructed by raxml  <cit>  using the most suitable evolutionary model  selected by the program places swallowtails at the base of the tree, consistent with published dna phylogenies, while bayesian inference  <cit>  with an evolutionary model that accounts for site-heterogeneity  <cit> , supports the traditional morphology-based phylogeny in which skippers are the basal branch of butterflies. more extensive taxon sampling and/or more advanced methods of phylogenetic analysis are needed to resolve the position of hesperiidae conclusively, and the first hesperiidae genome provides a starting point for these studies.

RESULTS
genome quality assessment and gene annotation
we assembled a 310 mb genome of lac and compared its quality with genomes  of the following lepidoptera species: plutella xylostella , bombyx mori , papilio glaucus , melitaea cinxia , heliconius melpomene , and danaus plexippus  . the scaffold n <dig> of lac is 513 kb, which is longer than several other butterfly genomes. the genome is among the best in terms of completeness measured by the presence of cegma  genes  <cit> , cytoplasmic ribosomal proteins and independently assembled transcripts. the residue coverage  of cegma genes  by single lac scaffolds is comparable to the residue coverage by the current bmo assembly with an n <dig> of about  <dig>  mb, indicating that the quality of the lac draft is sufficient for protein annotation and comparative analysis. this whole genome shotgun project has been deposited at ddbj/embl/genbank under the accession lgag <dig>  the version described in this paper is version lgag <dig>  in addition, the main results from genome assembly, annotation and analysis can be downloaded at http://prodata.swmed.edu/lepdb/.table  <dig> quality and composition of lepidoptera genomes

lac
pgl
dpl
hme
mci
bmo
pxy


n.a. data not available



we assembled the transcriptomes from two other lac specimens, a pupa and an adult. based on the transcriptomes, homologs from other insects, de novo gene predictions and repeat identification , we predicted  <dig>  protein-coding genes in lac genome . 79 % of these genes are likely expressed, as they fully or partially overlap with the transcripts. we annotated the putative function for  <dig>  protein-coding genes and the annotations are listed in additional file 2: table s3c.

comparison of lepidoptera genomes
we compared the composition of the lac genome with that of other lepidoptera . although the genome sizes of lepidoptera range from  <dig> to  <dig> mbp, the total lengths of coding regions are comparable. the reported repeat content of these genomes varies significantly, and it is positively correlated with the genome size. we identified orthologous proteins encoded by these genomes and detected  <dig> universal orthologous groups and  <dig> of them consist of a single-copy gene in each of the species . we compared two protein families: hox genes that are crucial for development and odorant receptors  that are particularly important for the feeding and mating behaviors of insects. lac had the same set of hox genes as other lepidoptera . all the lac hox genes that are expected to be linked are located on the same scaffold in the order typical for lepidoptera . the lac genome encodes  <dig> ors, which is comparable to pgl but less than hme, dpl and moths . the mci genome appears to encode the smallest number of ors , but this number is likely underestimated because of the poor continuity of the current mci genome assembly . clustering analysis  shows that ors in lepidoptera can be classified into several subfamilies, and the lac genome encodes ors from each of these subfamilies.fig.  <dig> comparative analysis of lepidoptera genomes. a number of different types of orthologs in each lepidoptera species with published genomes. 1:1:1: single-copy orthologs shared among all species; n:n:n: multiple-copy orthologs shared among all species, i.e. more than one copy in at least one species; obtectomera: orthologs specific to obtectomera, i.e. all other six species except pxy; rhopalocera: orthologs specific to rhopalocera, i.e. all other five species except bmo and pxy; nymphalidae: orthologs specific to nymphalidae, i.e. dpl, mci and hme; patchy: orthologs that are shared between more than one, but not all species ; species-specific: specific to only one species and having close homologs within that species; unclustered: proteins that do not belong to any of the orthologous groups. b arrangements of hox genes in lepidoptera genomes. orthologs are shown as boxes of the same color; double boxes in the same position indicate gene duplications, dashed-line around a box implies that this gene is missing in the genome assembly but present in the transcriptome; “//” marks the boundaries between different scaffolds



functional implication of non-random single-nucleotide polymorphism  distribution
the lac genome is highly heterozygous, as suggested by the distribution of k-mer frequencies . we compared heterozygosity properties of the lac genome with the highly heterozygous pgl genome that we previously assembled  <cit> . approximately  <dig>  % of the positions in the pgl genome and  <dig>  % of the positions in the lac genome are different between the two homologous chromosomes. in both genomes, the snp rate in the coding regions  is much lower than that for the non-coding regions  , which is likely due to the potential deleterious effect of snps in the coding regions.fig.  <dig> analysis of snps in the lac and pgl genomes. a histograms of 17-mer frequency in the sequence reads of lac  and pgl . for both species, the peak on the left represents frequency distribution of 17-mers from heterozygous regions and the peak on the right is for homozygous regions. the relative heights of the two peaks is an indicator for heterozygosity level. b histogram of snp rates in 1000 bp overlapping windows from different regions in the pgl genome. c histogram of snp rates in 1000 bp overlapping windows from different regions in the lac genome. d venn diagram showing the large overlap between enriched go terms associated with mutation-enriched proteins in both lac and pgl genomes. e enriched go terms  associated substitution-enriched proteins in both pgl and lac. go terms are grouped in space by similarity in meaning and colored by the level of significance , which is a product of p-values for this go term’s enrichment in pgl and lac genomes. annotations are shown for the representative go-terms for groups of similar terms. f similar to , but these go terms belong to the category of molecular function



both the pgl and lac genomes contain long segments  that are free of snps. however, the snp-free segments in the pgl genome are significantly longer than those in lac. the longest snp-free segments in pgl and lac are about  <dig>  kbp and  <dig>  kbp, respectively. one possible explanation for the presence of snp-free regions is that their high heterozygosity prevents the mapping of reads from the alternative homologous chromosomes, resulting in failures to detect snps. but this explanation is not likely the dominant reason, since we included only regions with coverage that is expected for a diploid genome in this analysis . another potential cause for snp-free regions is that insects frequently inbreed in nature and that the parents of the sequenced specimen could share a recent common ancestor, from which they inherited the same alleles.

omitting the snp-free regions, the distribution of snp rates in the pgl genome can be approximated by a single normal distribution . in contrast, the distribution of snps rates  in the lac genome can be represented by a mixture of two gaussian distributions: one centered around  <dig> – <dig>  % and a second centered at  <dig>  %. we speculate that a snp rate of  <dig> – <dig>  % corresponds to the variation accumulated within the local population of lac, whereas the higher snp rates in certain regions reflect gene flow from other populations or even from other species. human activities might have an impact on the high snp rates of lac. lac feeds on widely planted grasses . expansion of this common food source by humans might cause previously isolated lac populations to meet.

about a quarter  of the snps in the protein coding regions are non-synonymous and result in amino acid substitutions in proteins. segments in proteins that are predicted to be structurally disordered are significantly more enriched in substitutions . this enrichment is likely due to higher tolerance of disordered regions to substitutions  <cit> . to understand the functional consequence of snps in the pgl and lac genomes, we identified proteins that are significantly enriched  in substitutions in their structurally ordered regions .

the enriched go terms  associated with substitution-enriched proteins in both genomes show a significant  overlap . among the enriched biological processes  and molecular functions  in both species, the molecular function “catalytic activity” is among the most significant . approximately 40 % of the substitution-enriched proteins are enzymes in both species. the most significantly enriched go  terms for lac  can each be attributed solely to a single substitution-rich protein family: c2h <dig> zinc fingers. both insect and mammalian genomes encode large numbers of c2h <dig> zinc fingers, and their exact function is not fully understood  <cit> . however, c2h <dig> zinc fingers were implicated to function in transcriptional silencing of exogenous dna  <cit> . we hypothesize that the c2h <dig> zinc fingers evolved adaptively as the population was exposed to exogenous dna sources, such as retrovirus or gene flow from other species.

phylogenetic analysis with whole-genome data
the morphology-based view of butterfly evolution suggests a tree topology , dpl), pgl), lac), bmo, pxy)  <cit> , whereas recent dna-based phylogenetic analyses support an alternative topology , dpl), lac), pgl), bmo, pxy)  <cit> . we refer to these two topologies as the traditional topology and the alternate topology, respectively.

whole-genome sequences of these species allowed us to model their phylogeny using both the alignments of universal single-copy orthologs and the synteny of genes. however, both the traditional and the alternate tree topologies can be supported by the data depending on which evolutionary models and tree construction methods are selected. the 50 % majority rule consensus tree of maximum likelihood trees constructed with raxml  <cit>  on the alignments of individual proteins failed to completely resolve the phylogeny  due to short lengths  of individual alignments. instead, a similar consensus tree built on  <dig> random samples  from the concatenated alignment agreed with the alternate topology . however, the clade that groups skippers with other butterflies is only the best solution in 72 % of random samples.fig.  <dig> phylogenetic trees of the butterflies based on whole-genome data. a majority-rule consensus tree of the maximal likelihood trees constructed by raxml on  <dig> random samples from the concatenated alignment of universal single-copy orthologs. b neighbor-joining tree based on the frequency of gene rearrangement events between species. c consensus tree of the better-supported trees inferred from phylobayes analyses on  <dig> random samples from the concatenated alignment of universal single-copy orthologs. the tree topology was constrained to either of the two reported topologies: , dpl), lac), pgl), bmo, pxy) or , dpl), pgl), lac), bmo, pxy). d phylogenetic tree using the gene-rearrangement data inferred by phylobayes with cat model



to further test which topology is better supported, we used the bayesian phylogenetic analysis software phylobayes  <cit>  with the cat model  <cit>  that accounts for site heterogeneity in amino acid substitutions by dividing the sites into  <dig> categories. we constrained the tree topology to either the traditional or the alternative one. this analysis supported the traditional topology in 66 % of the  <dig> random samples. a consensus tree summarizing the tree topologies with higher likelihood based on each data set is shown in fig. 4b.

similarly, the phylogeny inferred from gene rearrangement events  produced different results depending on the selection of evolutionary model. while a simple neighbor-joining tree based on the frequency of gene arrangement supported the alternative topology , bayesian interference with the cat model supported the traditional topology with a higher likelihood . our analyses suggest that the traditional tree topology based on morphological features is not contradicted by the genomic data, but the uncertainty of reconstructions is too high to conclusively determine the evolutionary history of butterflies.

the discrepancy between morphological and molecular phylogeny has been a long-standing problem in evolutionary biology  <cit> . the incongruence between molecular trees obtained with different methods or different data sets is also frequently encountered  <cit>  studies on several other systems reveal similar uncertainty as we observed in our analysis  <cit> . this uncertainty in butterfly phylogeny may also result from incomplete lineage sorting  <cit> . trees built from different orthologous groups support different topologies with high bootstrap values. out of the  <dig> maximum likelihood trees of individual orthologous groups with bootstrap support above 80 %, a significant portion supports the traditional topology  and a third possible topology  that groups pgl and lac in a clade. in addition, the limited number of available butterfly genomes impedes a better taxon sampling for the phylogenetic reconstruction of butterflies. genome sequences of species that represent the early branches in each family of butterflies could help to resolve the uncertainty in the phylogenetic tree of butterflies.

expanded gene families in lac suggest possible genetic bases for phenotypic traits
compared to other lepidoptera species, the lac genome expands in several protein families . endochitinase-like proteins are uniquely expanded  and cluster on the same scaffold in the genome, which indicates that they originated from recent gene duplication events. as shown in the phylogenetic tree , these duplicated endochitinase-like proteins diverged rapidly and only one copy retained high sequence similarity to the orthologous proteins in other lepidoptera and drosophila melanogaster genomes. while this single conserved copy likely preserves the function of endochitinase, we hypothesize that the other divergent endochitinase-like proteins could have adopted new functions to digest cellulose. this hypothesis is based on the following four facts:  lac and most skippers in the hesperiinae subfamily feed on the cellulose-rich grasses;  the lac genome and other lepidoptera genomes do not encode proteins that belong to the families of known cellulases;  endochitinases are homologs of cellulases and they are structurally very similar   <cit> ;  cellulose and chitin are structurally similar and they are both digested through glycoside hydrolysis. therefore, these endochitinase-like proteins in lac may have evolved to digest cellulose, allowing lac, and possibly other grass-feeding skippers in the hesperiinae subfamily, to feed on grasses that are rich in cellulose. it remains to be explored if other monocot feeders, such as satyrinae , have a similar expansion or use different enzymes.fig.  <dig> phylogenetic trees for expanded protein families in lac. abbreviation of the species and protein names are used as labels in the phylogenetic trees. we colored the labels to indicate which species the protein is from: lac , pgl  dpl , hme , mci , bmo , pxy  and drosophila melanogaster . the clades corresponding to the unique gene expansion events in lac are highlighted in light magenta. a phylogenetic tree of endochitinases. b phylogenetic tree of geranylgeranyl pyrophosphate synthases. c phylogenetic tree of pheromone-binding proteins. 



another expanded protein family is geranylgeranyl pyrophosphate synthase  homologs. ggppss are used in the biosynthesis of terpenes and terpenoids, which are frequently used as an intermediate products for pheromone biosynthesis.  <dig> copies of ggpps homologs in lac form a clade in the phylogenetic tree  and their sequences have diverged from the drosophila ggpps. it is possible that these homologs have adopted slightly different functions and gained the ability either to catalyze different steps to synthesize one type of pheromone or to produce a wide range of different pheromone molecules. in addition, lac encodes a much larger number of pheromone-binding proteins  than other lepidoptera species and these pbps form a clade in the phylogenetic tree of lepidoptera pbps . both gene expansion events suggest a more advanced pheromone production and sensing system in lac. butterflies can select their mates both by visual cues and by sensing pheromones at close range. however, many skipper species have similar wing colors and patterns, which might confuse recognition of mates from the same species by visual cues. therefore, a stronger pheromone system in lac might allow individuals to efficiently detect mates of the same species.

the phylogenetic tree of ggpps homologs reveals two copies in lac  that clustered closely to the drosophila ggpps, rather than in the clade of other divergent ggpps homologs. we speculate that these two copies are orthologs of the drosophila ggpps and retain similar function. drosophila ggpps was shown to be crucial for heart formation. it works in the mevalonate pathway and directly synthesizes ggpp, which can be transferred to g protein gγ <dig>  the geranylgeranylation of gγ <dig> is required for heart formation  <cit> . the duplication of ggpps may be related to heart development for efficient energy supply to sustain the rapid wing beats of lac. in addition, several mitochondria targeted genes encoded by the nuclear genome are also duplicated in the lac genome , including components of the nadh dehydrogenase  complex, which are directly linked to energy production. the lac genome is significantly  enriched in mitochondria targeted genes compared to other lepidoptera as reflected by the go terms. taken together, we propose that the observed enrichment and duplications of mitochondrial proteins allow for dynamic adaptation of mitochondrial functions depending on type of organ, tissue, or life stage and ensure efficient energy supply for rapid wing beats in adults of lac.table  <dig> mitochondria-targeted proteins that are duplicated in lerema accius





CONCLUSIONS
we report the draft genome of clouded skipper. being the first sequenced genome from the hesperiidae family, it offers rich data for comparative genomics and phylogenetic studies of lepidoptera. we devised a cost-efficient protocol that overcomes the difficulty in assembling highly heterozygous genome. despite the high level of heterozygosity , the quality of our genome assembly is nearly the best among published lepidoptera genomes. this protocol should stimulate and enable sequencing of other insect genomes. comparative analyses of lepidoptera genomes suggest possible genetic bases for the unique phenotypic traits of skippers, including fast flight with rapid wing beats, ability to feed on grasses in larval stage, and recognize mates efficiently in spite of the similarity in wing patters of many species. these new data should facilitate experimental studies of skippers and contribute to the understanding of how diverse phenotypes are encoded by the genomes.

