BACKGROUND
the repertoire of coding and non-coding transcripts expressed in a given cell type - the “transcriptome” - reflects the specific biology of that cell type, including responses to external stimuli. thus, information about the transcriptome can provide deep biological insights with relevance to physiology and disease. determining and analyzing the complete transcriptome, however, can be challenging, especially with respect to unannotated cell type-specific transcripts. this endeavor, however, has been facilitated by computational genomics approaches that leverage deep sequencing technologies. herein, we apply these approaches to the study of the cardiomyocyte transcriptome, which has revealed interesting new information related to cardiovascular disease .

cvd is the leading cause of death worldwide
 <cit> . many of the underlying pathologies of cvd are directly or indirectly associated with inflammation. many studies have focused on the effects of inflammation on endothelial function and atherosclerosis
 <cit> . however, the detrimental effects of inflammation are not limited to the vascular system, but also occur in cardiomyocytes. the progression from heart injury to heart failure is closely linked to necrosis, apoptosis, or autophagy in cardiomyocytes
 <cit> . during heart failure, cardiomyocytes serve as the major source of cytokine secretion, and the secreted cytokines not only interfere with the function of the cardiomyocytes, but also recruit cardiac fibroblast cells, causing fibrosis and eventually heart damage and infarction
 <cit> .

although the effects of inflammation in cardiomyocytes have been examined previously
 <cit> , the detailed mechanisms underlying these effects are poorly understood. nf-κb, a key transcriptional regulator of inflammation, has been shown to play a dual role in cvd through its actions in various cell types of the cardiovascular system. it promotes an anti-apoptotic cardioprotective effect during hypoxia and reperfusion injury by repressing genes involved in cell death pathways, but also supports the secretion of detrimental cytokines during acute or chronic inflammatory injury, leading to cell death and fibrosis
 <cit> . the specific regulatory effects of nf-κb on gene expression programs in cardiomyocytes are not well understood.

cellular functions and processes are largely determined by carefully orchestrated cell type-specific gene-expression programs. for example, a recent study has characterized an extensive estrogen-regulated gene expression program in breast cancer cells that alters a large fraction of the transcriptome and promotes a mitogenic growth program
 <cit> . a greater understanding of the nf-κb-dependent proinflammatory gene expression program in cardiomyocytes will provide a greater understanding of the links between inflammation and impaired cardiomyocyte function. non-coding rnas  should be a key component of this analysis since previous studies have demonstrated key roles for ncrnas, including micrornas  and long non-coding rnas , in cardiovascular function
 <cit> . further mapping and characterization of all functional transcripts, including those generated by rna polymerases i and iii, are necessary for a complete picture of the cardiomyocyte transcriptome.

in the studies described herein, we have used a combination of genomic approaches, including gro-seq and chip-seq, to characterize the transcriptome of ac <dig> immortalized adult human ventricular cardiomyocyte cells in response to tumor necrosis factor . our studies shed new light on the regulation of the cardiomyocyte transcriptome in response to a proinflammatory signal and help to clarify the link between inflammation and cardiomyocyte function at the transcriptional level.

RESULTS
ac <dig> cells respond to tnfα stimulation by activating an nf-κb-dependent signaling pathway
to investigate the molecular aspects of proinflammatory gene regulation in ac <dig> cells, we first characterized responses triggered by stimulation with tumor necrosis factor alpha . we expected tnfα to activate the nf-κb signaling pathway, as has been reported previously for macrophages and endothelial cells
 <cit> . to verify this, we monitored nf-κb activation in ac <dig> cells following tnfα stimulation by western blotting fractionated cell extracts. tnfα induced nf-κb nuclear translocation, which was blocked by the ikkα/β inhibitor bay 11– <dig> . tnfα also promoted the recruitment of nf-κb to chromatin globally, as assayed by chip-seq for the nf-κb p <dig> subunit . finally, tnfα simulated the expression of known nf-κb-dependent proinflammatory genes, such as il <dig> and nfkb <dig> in a manner that was substantially reduced by bay11- <dig> . taken together, these results demonstrate that nf-κb is essential for the activation of a set of proinflammatory target genes in tnfα-treated ac <dig> cells.

the proinflammatory ac <dig> transcriptome includes a diverse array of coding and non-coding transcripts
to better understand the ac <dig> transcriptome, we used global run-on coupled with deep sequencing , a direct, high throughput genomic method, which maps the position and orientation of all transcriptionally engaged rna polymerases across the genome with high spatial resolution
 <cit> . as such, gro-seq provides a sensitive map of all regions in the genome actively transcribed by rna polymerases i, ii, and iii 
 <cit> . we performed gro-seq after a short time course of tnfα treatment . when visualized using a genome browser, the data reveal a sensitive and accurate strand-specific approach for capturing the immediate transcriptional effects of tnfα that is more sensitive than pol ii chip-seq . for example, for the classic inflammatory transcription factor gene nfkb <dig>  gro-seq reveals the time-dependent progression of pol ii waves moving from the 5′ to 3′ end of the transcription unit during the tnfα-treatment time course , information that can be used to determine rates of transcription . moreover, gro-seq also reveals the expression of a divergent transcript generated from the nfkb <dig> promoter, as well as bi-directional enhancer transcripts  originating ~50 kb upstream of the nfkb <dig> promoter, which may mark functional enhancers for nfkb <dig> .

to identify all transcripts in the proinflammatory ac <dig> transcriptome, including previously unannotated transcripts, we combined gro-seq with a bioinformatics approach called grohmm, which uses a two-state hidden markov model to identify active transcription units genome-wide
 <cit> . using this approach, we identified  <dig>  transcripts that are expressed in ac <dig> cells during at least one time point during the course of tnfα treatment . to ascertain the potential functional role of each transcript, we compared the genomic locations of the identified transcription units with existing genomic annotations. we found that approximately half of the transcription units discovered in our gro-seq data can be mapped to annotated regions, including genes encoding proteins, long non-coding rnas , micrornas , trnas, snrnas, and repeat elements , many of which are relevant to cardiac biology . the remaining transcription units map to genomic loci that were previously unannotated, but may harbor important genetic information and support important functions within the tnfα response in cardiomyocytes . we categorized these unannotated transcription units based on their orientation and location relative to annotated genes, including divergent, antisense, and intergenic . the intergenic transcripts include a category of short, bidirectionally transcribed ernas, as we have described previously
 <cit> .

ac <dig> cells rapidly and dynamically reorganize their transcriptomes in response to tnfα
to investigate the effects of tnfα on the ac <dig> transcriptome, we analyzed changes caused by tnfα treatment in further detail. we used edger, a program that determines differential expression of replicated count data considering biological and technical variability
 <cit> , to identify transcription units whose expression changes during the time course of tnfα treatment. this analysis revealed that a large fraction  of expressed transcripts is regulated in response to tnfα in a surprisingly rapid manner . the onset of regulation is evident as early as 10 minutes after treatment in many cases , similar to what we have observed previously following estrogen stimulation in mcf- <dig> cells
 <cit> . by 30 minutes, the majority of regulated transcripts have reached their maximal change, with most reflecting decreased expression . interestingly, the majority of genes  returned to near-homeostatic levels 120 minutes post-treatment . this temporal pattern follows a similar time scale as the oscillating patterns of activation and nuclear localization of nf-κb previously observed
 <cit> . these changes are most likely explained as a direct readout of nf-κb’s presence on chromatin.

when analyzing the response of individual classes of transcripts, we found that small non-coding rnas, lncrnas, divergent rnas, and antisense rnas are up- and down-regulated with similar ratios and kinetics as protein-coding transcripts . conversely, intergenic and enhancer transcripts are enriched for upregulation  at every time point of tnfα treatment, which is consistent with their putative gene activation function . overall, these analyses reveal a dynamic regulation of the ac <dig> transcriptome by tnfα that fits with the logic of a proinflammatory stress response: broad repression of transcription, with rapid and robust activation of a selected set of target genes. this pattern of regulation is distinct from the mitogenic transcriptional response that we have characterized previously
 <cit> .

gro-seq reveals different dynamics for the tnfα-dependent activation and repression of transcription
gro-seq affords the opportunity to examine the dynamics of transcription on a short time scale. to examine the dynamics of pol ii in response to tnfα, we focused on the time-dependent redistribution of pol ii at upregulated and downregulated refseq genes. metagene analyses showing the average gro-seq signal mapped to ± 4 kb around the transcription start sites  of all genes of interest reveal distinct pol ii dynamics for upregulated and downregulated genes . for genes upregulated upon tnfα treatment, pol ii rapidly increased and released into the gene body, with a limited time spent at promoter-proximal pause sites, which is consistent with previously characterized effects of the tnfα/nf-κb signaling pathway on transcriptional elongation
 <cit> . the activation occurred as early as 10 min., was maximal at 30 min., and was partially attenuated by 120 min. . in contrast, for genes downregulated upon tnfα treatment, an accumulation of promoter-proximally paused pol ii was evident prior to tnfα treatment and was only reduced after 30 min. of tnfα treatment. a reduction in gene body pol ii, however, was evident as early as 10 min. following tnfα treatment. the levels of promoter-proximally paused pol ii and gene body pol ii returned to basal levels after 120 min. . interestingly, pol ii shows different dynamics during an acute tnfα-dependent transcriptional response in ac <dig> cells than it does during a rapid estrogen-dependent mitogenic response in mcf- <dig> breast cancer cells. specifically, estrogen upregulated genes show a greater induction of promoter-proximally paused pol ii in response to the estrogen stimulus, suggesting a greater effect on pol ii loading or initiation than elongation
 <cit> . these results highlight the distinct gene activation mechanisms mediated by nf-κb and erα. pol ii chip-seq shows a pattern of pol ii dynamics consistent with those observed by gro-seq for both up- and downregulated genes . in addition, chip-seq shows the induced binding of nf-κb at the promoters of upregulated genes, but not downregulated genes, suggesting nf-κb dependence for tnfα-mediated upregulation, but not downregulation .

α-amanitin identifies pol i, pol ii, and pol iii activity across the ac <dig> transcriptome
three different rna polymerases produce the mammalian cell transcriptome: pol i transcribes a large transcript from each of the ribosomal dna  loci, which is later cleaved into 18 s,  <dig>  s, and 28 s rrnas, accounting for 50% of the total synthesized rnas in the cell
 <cit> ; pol ii synthesizes the precursor rnas for mrnas and most lncrnas, micrornas and snrnas; and pol iii transcribes the 5 s rrnas, trnas, and other small rnas closely associated with housekeeping functions
 <cit> . although the regulation and function of pol ii has been well studied, and recent mapping of the localization of the pol iii transcription machinery genome-wide has shed some light on its transcription profile
 <cit> , many questions remain regarding the coordination of pol i, ii, and iii activities. for example, which polymerase controls synthesis of novel unannotated transcripts? how are pol ii- and non-pol ii-transcribed regions distributed across the genome?

with appropriate mapping techniques, gro-seq allows the detection of rna polymerases density on trna genes and rrna genes
 <cit> . whereas trna genes have enough sequence variation to allow unique mapping of gro-seq reads, rrna genes do not. thus, we created a single reference rrna gene to which all rrna reads are mapped, yielding an average response across all rrna genes
 <cit> . although transcription of  <dig> trna genes is rapidly and transiently upregulated in response to tnfα , transcription of the remaining trna and rrna genes, on average, is largely unaffected .

to obtain a greater understanding of the ac <dig> transcriptome and to investigate coordination among the different rna polymerases in tnfα-induced inflammatory responses in cardiomyocytes, we used α-amanitin to distinguish between the activities of pol ii  and pol i/iii . nuclei isolated from ac <dig> cells were incubated on ice with α-amanitin for 15 min. prior to the run-on reaction that generates the short bromouridine-labeled transcripts for detection by gro-seq. since the final read density of each gene is normalized to the total reads obtained in each condition, non-pol ii transcripts are relatively enriched due to the loss or reduction of pol ii transcripts in the α-amanitin-treated condition . as expected, we observed a relative enrichment of gro-seq signals from rdna repeats  and trna genes , as well as a reduction of the gro-seq signal from annotated refseq genes  . this pattern serves as a validation of the reliability of our approach in mapping pol ii and non-pol ii transcripts.

next, we compared the gro-seq reads at uniquely mapped transcripts between α-amanitin- and vehicle-treated nuclei to determine which types of transcripts were produced by pol ii or pol i/iii . these results indicate that most of the recently defined types of long non-coding transcripts, such as lncrnas, ernas, divergent rnas, and antisense rnas are transcribed by pol ii , whereas annotated short non-coding transcripts are distributed between the pol ii and non-pol ii categories . for example, the majority of small nucleolar rnas  and small cytoplasmic rnas  are transcribed by pol ii, whereas small nuclear rnas  are transcribed by both pol ii and pol iii, as expected .

characterization of the pol i/iii transcriptome in ac <dig> cells
to further characterize the non-pol ii transcriptome in ac <dig> cells, we mapped  <dig> non-pol ii transcripts from gro-seq data generated ± α-amanitin . we assume that most are transcribed by pol iii, since pol i mainly controls transcription from the rdna repeats, although we did not confirm this experimentally. this set of non-pol ii transcripts includes mainly trnas, rrnas, some snrnas, and transcripts generated from sine repeat elements, as well as  <dig> novel, previously unannotated transcripts . the lengths of the majority of the  <dig> primary non-pol ii transcripts are < <dig> nucleotides, which indicates that they are short, non-coding rnas . these transcripts originate mostly from intergenic regions and, to a lesser extent, intronic regions. only a few transcripts were mapped to the exons of genic regions, concentrated in the 5′ or 3′ utrs .

as expected, a large fraction of the non-pol ii transcripts that we identified overlap with the pol iii machinery , as indicated by chip-seq of the pol iii subunit rpc <dig> or the pol iii transcription factor tfiiic  , further verifying our ability to identify pol iii transcripts. many of the transcripts also overlap with ctcf binding sites , which suggests an insulator-like function related to the genes encoding these transcripts. interestingly, with exception of the aforementioned upregulated trna genes , the expression pattern of the rest of the non-pol ii transcripts remained fairly constant across the time course of tnfα treatment . thus, during the tnfα-induced inflammatory response, transcriptional regulation occurs mostly for pol ii transcripts, but not to a great extent for pol i and pol iii transcripts.

gro-seq identifies enhancers in tnfα-stimulated cardiomyocytes
recent studies have shown that transcription factor binding sites are focal points for the recruitment of pol ii and the production of characteristic short, mono- or bi-directional transcripts called enhancer rnas 
 <cit> . for example, at the proinflammatory gene il <dig>  we observed two sites of tnfα-induced erna production about 15–20 kb upstream of the tss . both sites showed tnfα-dependent accumulation of gro-seq and pol ii chip-seq signals, while only the more proximal of the two sites was bound by nf-κb . these enhancers and their associated ernas may play an essential role in tnfα-dependent activation of the nearby il <dig> gene.

we have recently developed a computational approach for identifying functional enhancers based on these patterns of transcription in gro-seq data
 <cit> . using this approach, we identified  <dig>  sites of paired intergenic erna production in ac <dig> cells . metagene analyses of chip-seq data from adult human heart, fetal human heart, and human skeletal muscle myotubes  for the  <dig>  putative enhancers showed expected patterns of enrichment for well characterized enhancer features, such as p <dig>  h3k4me <dig>  and h3k27ac . remarkably, the putative enhancers identified in ac <dig> cells by gro-seq match well with enhancer features in the chip-seq data from related, but distinct, cell types.

meme-based motif analyses
 <cit>  of the putative nf-κb and non-nf-κb enhancers defined by gro-seq revealed enrichment of different dna sequences, which were assigned to specific transcription factors using stamp
 <cit> . the nf-κb enhancers were highly enriched for the rela/nf-κb motifs  and nf-κb p <dig> binding , as expected, as well as ap- <dig> and fos motifs . the latter is consistent with previous demonstrations that ap- <dig> augments the nf-κb regulatory program
 <cit> . interestingly, both nf-κb and ap- <dig> are activated during heart failure
 <cit> . the non-nf-κb enhancers were enriched in motifs for the transcription factors sp <dig>  krüppel-like factor  <dig> , smad <dig>  and znf <dig> . other motifs are consistent with previous literature as well. for example, sp <dig> has consistently been found in searches for cardiac transcription factors and is associated with the regulation of many cardiac genes
 <cit> , klf <dig> is a critical transcriptional regulator of stress responses in cardiomyocytes
 <cit> , smad <dig> is a key mediator of cardiac inflammation and fibrosis
 <cit> , and znf <dig> is critical for heart development in zebrafish
 <cit> .

signal-regulated expression of ernas is a common theme
 <cit> , an effect that we observed with the ac <dig> enhancers . specifically, our analyses revealed that  <dig> out of  <dig>  nf-κb binding site ernas are regulated by tnfα, with almost all upregulated, whereas only  <dig> out of  <dig>  non-nf-κb binding site ernas are regulated by tnfα, with two-thirds upregulated . thus, the non-nf-κb binding site enhancers may represent a class of constitutive enhancers that control housekeeping functions in ac <dig> cells.

to further investigate the potential gene regulatory functions of the predicted nf-κb and non-nf-κb enhancers in ac <dig> cells, we assayed transcription levels by gro-seq at the enhancers and their nearest annotated neighboring putative target genes with and without tnfα treatment . we analyzed separately  upregulated nf-κb enhancers ,  upregulated non-nf-κb enhancers , and  downregulated non-nf-κb enhancers . interestingly, transcription of the enhancers and target genes were well correlated  . these results provide further support for the functionality of the nf-κb and non-nf-κb enhancers predicted by gro-seq.

the tnfα-induced transcriptional response in ac <dig> cells reveals a functional link between inflammation and the biology of cardiomyocytes
to relate the transcriptome changes to biological processes, we performed gene set enrichment analyses and gene ontology analyses on both tnfα up- and downregulated protein-coding genes identified by gro-seq in the ac <dig> cell transcriptome . the biological functions associated with the up- and down-regulated gene sets are closely related to cardiac function. for example:  motor protein and myosin-related muscle functions are directly related to the electrophysiology of heart muscle
 <cit> ,  fibroblast proliferation and endothelial-to-mesenchymal transition contribute to cardiac fibrosis
 <cit> ; and  mitochondrial function and lipid oxidation are closely related to normal cardiac physiology
 <cit> . these dynamic transcriptome changes reflect the time-dependent shifting of biological processes in cardiomyocytes in response to tnfα . interestingly, genes related to muscle function and inflammation are upregulated immediately, whereas genes related to mitochondrial function and metabolism are downregulated first and upregulated later in the time course . these results highlight the sequential transcriptional responses that underlie shifting cellular responses in cardiomyocytes in response to tnfα treatment.
 <dig>  the number of go terms in each cluster is:   <dig>    <dig>    <dig>    <dig>  and   <dig>  b) many tnfα-regulated genes have cardiac-associated functions, as assigned by the cardiovascular gene ontology annotation initiative. the bar graph shows the number of protein coding genes from the ac <dig> cell tnfα-regulated gene set that have or do not have cardiac-associated functions. c) many of the  <dig>  cardiac-associated genes identified by the cardiovascular gene ontology annotation initiative project are regulated by tnfα. pie chart showing the number of genes from the  <dig>  cardiac-associated genes that are up-, down-, or unregulated by tnfα.

we augmented this analysis using a database from the cardiovascular gene ontology annotation initiative project, which contains more than  <dig>  genes critical for cardiac physiology and pathology. a large fraction of both up- and downregulated genes are in the cardiac-associated gene list  and ~20% are regulated by tnfα treatment . interestingly,  <dig> of the  <dig>  enhancers predicted by gro-seq are located near genes critical for cardiac physiology . collectively, our analyses of the tnfα-altered transcriptome indicate that the ac <dig> cellular state switches from maintenance of basal housekeeping functions to defense against inflammatory stress.

tnfα-induced transcriptome changes result in corresponding alterations in the steady-state levels of mrnas and proteins
as expected, the tnfα-induced changes in the ac <dig> transcriptome result in corresponding changes in mature mrna and protein levels in a similar manner, but with delayed kinetics . for example, the robust upregulated transcription of key tnfα target genes  is followed by corresponding changes in the steady-state levels of the cognate mrnas and proteins, with a delay of approximately  <dig> to 100 minutes for mrna and  <dig> to 240 minutes for proteins. these results clearly illustrate how the dynamically regulated transcriptome alters the cellular proteome. these results also further support our observation that ac <dig> cardiomyocytes secrete cytokines in response to tnfα stimulation . these cytokines may play an essential role in the overall effects of inflammation in cardiac biology.

role of non-coding rnas and the tnfα-induced proinflammatory transcriptome
protein-coding genes represent only part of the ac <dig> transcriptome; the functions carried out by the non-coding transcripts that we identified may also play critical roles in the inflammatory response in cardiomyocytes. discerning the potential functions of ncrnas can be difficult due to limited annotations and direct information available. to overcome these limitations, we performed gene ontology analyses using the genomic regions enrichment of annotations tool , which aids in predicting the molecular functions, associated biological processes, and disease associations based on the genomic region of interest and nearby genomic regions
 <cit> . as such, great has proven to be a powerful tool for studying cis-regulatory elements. using great, we found that tnfα-induced lncrnas, ernas, and antisense transcripts are enriched in the same biological processes as the tnfα-induced protein-coding genes . for example, both casp <dig> and fadd-like apoptosis regulator  and its antisense transcript are upregulated upon tnfα stimulation . cflar is a crucial component of the signaling pathway involved in cardiac remodeling and heart failure
 <cit> . in addition, the lncrna metastasis-associated lung adenocarcinoma transcript  <dig> , which is predicated to be downregulated in many types of heart disease by the nextbio-disease atlas , is downregulated upon tnfα stimulation . in addition to these antisense and lncrnas, several primary microrna transcripts that are associated with cardiac function and deregulated in pathological conditions of the cardiovascular system are regulated by tnfα. for example, microrna- <dig> , an abundant microrna whose primary transcript is upregulated by tnfα , is upregulated in many types of heart disease and may be a useful therapeutic target
 <cit> . moreover, the non-coding rna mirlet7bhg, which is a precursor for five micrornas including let-7a <dig> and let-7b, is downregulated upon tnfα treatment . let- <dig> family members are highly expressed in the heart and are essential for cardiac function and development
 <cit> . collectively, these data suggest that non-coding rnas are a key component of the tnfα-mediated proinflammatory transcriptome in cardiomyocytes.

discussion
understanding the proinflammatory cardiomyocyte transcriptome using ac <dig> cells as a model
heart disease remains the primary cause of mortality worldwide. understanding the biology and function of cardiomyocytes is critical to discovering and reducing the causes of cardiac diseases and preventing the progression from heart injury to eventual heart failure. a global view of the proinflammatory cardiomyocyte transcriptome is a key component of our overall understanding. our integrated genomic analyses using ac <dig> human cardiomyocytes as a model have helped to identify ~ <dig>  expressed transcripts under basal and proinflammatory stress conditions, including protein-coding, as well as a wide variety of non-coding, transcripts. our analyses serve as a guide for studying functionally annotated as well as unannotated pol i, ii, and iii transcripts, and our data are an excellent resource for understanding the cardiomyocyte transcriptomes and the transcriptomes of related cell types.

dynamic regulation of the ac <dig> transcriptome
a large fraction  of the ac <dig> pol ii transcriptome is regulated by tnfα, which occurs extremely rapidly, with a large number of transcripts affected within 10 minutes of tnfα treatment . this regulation is highly dynamic, with the maximum regulation for most up- and downregulated transcripts occurring after 30 minutes of tnfα treatment, with a return to basal state at 120 minutes . such a dynamic regulatory pattern is consistent with the oscillatory pattern of nf-κb nuclear translocation and gene activation
 <cit>  and is likely to play a key role in the signaling outcomes that drive cardiomyocyte biology in response to tnfα. unlike a mitogenic growth response, which upregulates the expression of pol i and iii transcripts to meet the increased protein synthesis demands of proliferating cells
 <cit> , the proinflammatory response has little effect on the expression of pol i and iii transcripts . these differences reflect the different needs of cells responding to mitogenic and stress signals.

strikingly, we observed that a large fraction  of tnfα-responsive transcription is downregulated following tnfα treatment . in this regard, the loss of gro-seq signal  was accompanied by a loss of pol ii protein on the downregulated genes , as expected. little is known about the mechanisms of gene repression during proinflammatory responses, especially at a global level. potential mechanisms of repression include:  active repression associated with the recruitment of transcriptional corepressors to target genes,  release of transcriptional activators, or  passive redistribution of the pol ii transcription machinery to other highly induced genes. interestingly, in general, nf-κb is recruited to tnfα-activated genes, but not tnfα-repressed genes in response to tnfα treatment , suggesting that the gene repression we observed is not due to modulation of nf-κb binding. other transcription factors may play a role in downregulation; for example, motif analyses of the downregulated gene promoters revealed a significant enrichment of transcription factor sp <dig> binding sites .

a functional link between inflammation and cardiomyocyte function at the transcriptional level
the temporal regulation of gene expression in ac <dig> cells in response to tnfα, as reflected in our gro-seq analyses, serves as a transcriptional readout of the sequential shift in cellular responses during the time course of treatment . the upregulated and downregulated biological responses are closely related to cardiac function and indicate a shift from a basal cellular state to a proinflammatory stress-defense state. the transcripts driving these biological responses include those encoding proinflammatory mediators  and cell death-related factors , which are induced during the acute proinflammatory response. in addition, the expression of transcripts critical for maintaining normal cardiomyocyte function  is disrupted by tnfα treatment. co-regulated transcripts may share a similar regulatory mechanism or be functionally related. for instance, we identified tnfα-regulated microrna precursors, which are further processed into several critical cardiac-associated micrornas  that target mrnas required for cardiac function
 <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
collectively, our studies show how cells reorganize their transcriptomes to respond to proinflammatory signals, doing so in a manner that is distinctly different than response to other cellular signals . the dynamic transcriptome changes that we observed reflect the time-dependent shifting of biological processes in cardiomyocytes in response to tnfα . moreover, our results suggest that proinflammatory stimulation is sufficient to capture many of the hallmarks of cardiovascular disease, suggesting a central role for the nf-κb pathway in heart disease.

