BACKGROUND
a great quantity of biomolecular information about genes and proteins is increasingly accumulating in form of textual annotations within heterogeneous and widely distributed databanks  <cit> , which are often publicly accessible through the internet. among such information, gene function controlled annotations are the most interesting because their analysis can highlight new biomedical knowledge, including the identification of functional relationships among genes or the involvement of specific genes in complex patho-physiological processes.

the gene ontology   <cit>  is currently considered the most important source of functional information and numerous studies are based on go biological processes or molecular function controlled annotations. however, in many cases the gene ontology provides only high level annotations of processes or functions that can be associated with many disorders and in which numerous genes can be involved. moreover, many genes and proteins still have very few or no go annotations, and several go annotations have been assigned only according to computational inferences but not yet experimentally confirmed or revised by experts. thus, to investigate gene function at a genomic level we think it is important to consider all different types of functional information available. among them protein family and domain annotations constitute one of the most useful information to understand protein functions and gain insight into relations among their codifying genes  <cit> . comprehension of domain structure of proteins within genomes is also fundamental to better understand the evolutionary forces and emerging functions shaping genomes  <cit> . in fact, protein families and domains respectively represent groups of evolutionarily related proteins and their components that fold independently from the remaining protein chain. the increasing number of proteins for which domain-based annotations are available hence represents an important background for computational genome-wise analyses  <cit> .

in the last years, several databanks have been creating to collect and provide proteomic information in organized form, including protein family and domain controlled annotations. among them, the pfam  <cit>  and interpro  <cit>  databanks are considered the most reliable and comprehensive, respectively. pfam is a collection of protein families and domains that contains information about multiple alignments of protein domains and conserved protein regions. interpro is an integrated documentation resource for protein families, domains and functional sites. it combines a number of databases, which use different methodologies and a varying degree of biological information on well-characterized proteins to derive protein signatures. pfam, interpro and other databanks supply a great amount of valuable information. however, for the interpretation of large experimental datasets, such as those from high-throughput technologies, it is paramount the support of automated tools able to automatically retrieve the information of interest from these databanks and use it for exhaustive analysis and mining.

in order to allow comprehensive evaluation of gene annotations sparsely available in numerous different databanks accessible through the internet, we previously developed gfinder  <cit> . it is a publicly accessible web server  <cit>  that dynamically aggregates and keeps updated functional and phenotypic annotations of user-uploaded gene lists and allows performing their statistical analysis and mining. for this purpose, in gfinder independent and interconnected modules use several controlled vocabularies describing gene related biomolecular processes and functions.

with the aim of effectively take advantage of the valuable protein information present in pfam and interpro databanks, in gfinder we implemented new specific modules dedicated to exploring and analyzing functional signatures of gene protein products. they allow annotating user-classified nucleotide sequence identifiers with controlled information on codified protein families, domains, and functional sites; classifying them according to such protein annotation categories; and statistically analyzing the classifications defined. the novel gfinder modules support a genomic approach in the biological interpretation of high-throughput experimental results and hence in the understanding of fundamental biological processes and complex cellular patho-physiological mechanisms.

RESULTS
structuring and hierarchical tree reconstruction of protein family and domain controlled annotations
pfam databank version  <dig>  contained  <dig>  protein family domain entries and interpro databank release  <dig>  included  <dig>  entries . we structured all these entries in a gfinder database and found that  <dig>  interpro entries  were grouped in  <dig> hierarchical trees of parent/child relations . we reconstructed such parent/child hierarchical trees within the gfinder database and noticed that protein family trees had a maximum of  <dig> levels, with an average of  <dig> entries per level; protein domain trees had a maximum of  <dig> levels, with an average of  <dig> entries per level; and functional site trees had a maximum of  <dig> levels, with an average of  <dig> entries per level. thus, only a total of  <dig> % of the protein family , domain  and functional sites  controlled annotations available in interpro are hierarchically organized in many unrelated and very large, but not deep, trees of parent/child hierarchical relations.

statistical analysis of protein family and domain annotations
we developed and added within the gfinder web system new original modules specifically devoted to the exploration and analysis of functional signatures of gene protein products. they first enable the annotation of numerous user-classified nucleotide sequence identifiers with controlled information on related protein families, domains, and functional sites available in pfam and interpro databanks. then, they allow classifying the annotated nucleotide sequence identifiers according to their protein annotation categories, and statistically analyzing the obtained classifications. in particular, the exploration protein families&domains module  allows to easily and graphically understand either how many and which protein families, domains, and functional sites are associated with each considered gene, or how many of the user-selected genes refer to each protein family, domain, or functional site. when the user-uploaded genes are subdivided in classes , the statistics protein families&domains module  allows evaluating the importance of each pfam or interpro controlled annotation for the uploaded genes by highlighting protein annotations significantly more represented within the user-defined classes of genes. the annotated genes are grouped accordingly to their class and annotation categories, and their distribution among the considered categories is statistically evaluated. for this aim, different statistical tests and type of corrections for multiple tests have been implemented in gfinder . after selecting a specific gene class, for each protein family or domain annotation category in that class the module provides the observed number of input genes, their expected number, and the significance p-value for that category with its histogram . in addition, external links to pfam or interpro protein family or domain descriptions related to the considered genes are given.

logistic regression of protein family and domain annotations
in gfinder web system we also implemented a new logistic regression module. it exploits controlled protein family and domain information provided by pfam and interpro databanks to allow executing logistic regression analysis of functional signature annotations that characterize protein products of user-uploaded classified gene lists. such analysis can allow identifying which protein functional characteristics better explain the binary classification of a set of genes, for instance obtained through statistical and clustering analysis of gene expression results from microarray experiments. it can also allow estimating the probability that a gene, which codifies proteins with certain functional characteristics, is functionally similar to a set of genes whose protein products have those functional characteristics. this can help in revealing or better understanding the functions of new or less studied genes.

validation of implemented protein family and domain analysis
in order to test effectiveness of our approach and assess capabilities of implemented gfinder protein familes&domains modules, we used them to evaluate two distinct sets of genes. the first consisted of  <dig> genes codifying tyrosine kinase proteins  or tyrosine phosphatase proteins   <cit> . the second included  <dig> genes related to apoptosis  or growth factors   <cit> . we used the gfinder exploration and statistics protein families&domains modules to evaluate the relevant presence of genes associated with specific protein families or domains within the tyrosine kinase genes  versus the tyrosine phosphatase genes , or within the apoptosis genes  versus the growth factor genes  considered.

first, with the exploration module we observed the distribution of protein families or domains within the two considered tk and tp classes of genes . then, using the statistics module we evaluated the protein families most represented in the tk versus tp class. we concentrated only on genes with protein family annotations and on protein family categories associated with at least three of the considered genes. as shown in figure  <dig>  statistical analysis correctly selected protein families related to the appropriate class of considered genes. in fact, the significant protein families selected included: "receptor tyrosine kinase, class v"  and "receptor tyrosine kinase, class ii"  categories for the tk class; "protein-tyrosine phosphatase, non-receptor 1/2"  and "kim-containing protein tyrosine phosphatase"  categories for the tp class.

finally, we analyzed the protein domains most represented in the tk versus tp class. focusing only on genes with protein domain annotations and on protein domain categories associated with at least five of the considered genes, gfinder statistical analysis properly highlighted as most relevant in each gene class protein domains logically pertaining to that class . in fact, the protein domains selected as most significant after fdr multiple test correction included: "protein kinase" , "protein kinase-like" , "tyrosine protein kinase" , "src homology-3" , and "sh <dig> motif"  protein domains for the tk gene class; "tyrosine specific protein phosphatase and dual specificity protein phosphatase" , "tyrosine specific protein phosphatase" , and "protein tyrosine phosphatase, catalytic region"  for the tp class.

similarly, we used the statistics module to evaluate the protein domains most represented in the apo versus gf class. also in this case, gfinder statistical analysis properly selected as most relevant in each gene class protein domains correctly pertaining to that class . in fact, they included "death-like" , "tnfr/cd27/30/40/ <dig> cysteine-rich region" , "caspase recruitment" , and "apoptosis regulator bcl- <dig>  bh"  for the apo class; "transforming growth factor beta" , "transforming growth factor beta , n-terminal" , and "growth factor, cystine knot"  for the gf class.

obtained results demonstrate validity of the approach for the analysis of protein families, domains and related genes that we developed, implemented and made available within the gfinder web system.

discussion
information about protein families and domains is paramount to understanding gene functional characteristics. as the most reliable source of such information we selected pfam, the curated databank specifically concerning protein families and domains. in addition, we also considered interpro databank, since it is the most comprehensive source of annotations on the subject. in fact, it contains data from many member databases such as uniprot, prosite, prints, prodom, smart, tigrfams, pirsf, superfamily, gene3d, panther, and also pfam. furthermore, interpro provides parent/child relations among many of its entries. such relations indicate hierarchical levels of detail between a parent entry and a more specific child entry. the gfinder protein families&domains modules we developed allow exploring and analyzing the available protein family and domain annotations by exploiting such relations. in the exploration module, the user can select the level of detail at which exploring the protein family and domain annotations associated with a considered set of genes, or explore all levels at the same time . in the statistics module, consecutive statistical tests are executed on each categorical annotation independently on its level of detail. then, analysis results are shown listing each tested categorical annotation with its hierarchical level and the obtained p-value . this simultaneously provides a comprehensive view of the statistical significance of all considered annotations and clearly highlights the evaluated protein characteristics with lowest p-value within each of the considered user-defined classes of genes, specifying also their granularity level. validation results showed that this is correctly performed also when the same protein family or domain is associated with genes in different classes, as it happens for domains contained both in tyrosine kinase  and tyrosine phosphatase  proteins . in this case, although obtained p-values do not reach statistical significance, lower p-values properly indicate more relevant protein domains for each gene class  and "immunoglobulin-like"  for the tk class, or "fibronectin, type iii-like fold"  and "fibronectin, type iii"  for the tp class).

in the logistic regression module, the user can select the level of detail of the protein annotations to be included in the regression, or focus only on those independent annotations that are not linked by parent/child relations. although logistic regression requires several samples  to provide reliable results  <cit> , application results obtained with the new gfinder logistic regression module are promising. they show that this module can support better interpretation of gene classes identified through gene expression experiments by finding the functional characteristics that better explain the considered gene classification. furthermore, it can aid in better characterizing genes whose functional role is not yet completely understood, or even unknown, by estimating the probability of a gene to be functionally similar to a set of genes with certain functional characteristics. thus, the implemented logistic regression analysis could contribute to unveil new biomedical knowledge about the considered genes.

even if several tools are available for the analysis of gene annotations according to the gene ontology, at present to our knowledge only david  <cit>  and fatigo+  <cit>  support analysis of protein family and domain controlled vocabularies, although in a more basic way than gfinder does. therefore, the novel implemented modules for evaluating protein family and domain annotations considerably enrich gfinder, which is freely available on-line for non-profit use  <cit> , and make it a unique valuable tool for genomic functional and phenotypic analysis of gene sets.

CONCLUSIONS
the novel gfinder modules for the evaluation of protein family and domain annotations of sets of genes can help in better interpreting high-throughput gene lists and in unveiling new functional knowledge about the considered genes, as our validation demonstrated. thus, they can support a genomic approach in the understanding of fundamental biological processes and complex cellular mechanisms influenced by protein structural and functional characteristics related to domain composition of the codified proteins.

