BACKGROUND
the detection of cell viability is crucial in many biological fields, e.g. in toxicology, in pharmacology , as well as in ecotoxicology for the assessment of toxic effects elicited by chemicals, drugs or contaminated environmental samples, respectively. the need for reliable, easy to handle, and fast cytotoxicity tests led to the development of several assays which are now routinely used and available to detect cytotoxic effects in in vitro cellular systems.

one of the mostly used cytotoxicity or cell proliferation assays is the mtt assay, which is a quantitative colorimetric assay. in this assay, the yellow tetrazolium salt mtt  is reduced by living cells to blue formazan crystals, which must be solubilized in a solvent, such as iso-propanol  <cit> . it was assumed that the tetrazolium salt is reduced in mitochondrial processes at two sites of the respiratory chain  <cit> , but later on it was shown, that also microsomal and cytosolic fractions are involved in the formation of formazan  <cit> . the mtt assay appeared to be a sensitive test which shows linearity over a broad range of cell densities  <cit> .

another commonly used assay is the lactate dehydrogenase  assay. it is a colorimetric assay based on the detection of ldh activity which is released from the cytosol of damaged or lysed cells. thus the evaluation of cytotoxicity is based on plasma membrane integrity  <cit> . it is a non-destructive measurement technique since it can be performed using the culture medium. also in this assay, a tetrazolium salt, int , is involved in the colorimetric reaction. coupled to the oxidation of lactate to pyruvate, int is transformed to formazan which can be detected spectrophotometrically. another possibility is to measure directly the formation of nadh by absorption  <cit> . since ldh is a relatively stable enzyme  <cit> , the culture medium can also be stored before performing the measurement  <cit> .

a further assay, working similarly as mtt, is the alamarblue  assay, which measures cellular metabolic activity. the ab assay is based on the conversion of the blue non-fluorescent dye resazurin, which is converted by mitochondrial and other enzymes to the pink fluorescent resorufin  <cit> . resorufin can be detected spectrophotometrically or fluorometrically  <cit> . since both, the oxidized substrate resazurin and the reduced product resorufin, are water soluble, they can freely diffuse along concentration gradients. in addition, ab shows no cytotoxic effects and the tested cells do not need to be destroyed, thus enabling to perform several tests or kinetic measurements on the same set of cells  <cit> .

cfda-am  is another fluorogenic dye, which is used for cytotoxicity studies, indicating plasma membrane integrity. the dye cfda-am is a non-toxic esterase substrate that can be converted by nonspecific esterases of living cells from a membrane permeable, nonpolar, nonfluorescent substance to a polar, fluorescent dye, carboxyfluorescein . the conversion to cf by the cells indicates the integrity of the plasma membrane, since only an intact membrane can maintain the cytoplasmic milieu which is needed to support esterase activity  <cit> . ab and cfda-am were already shown to be applicable in parallel on the same set of cells, since both are non-toxic to cells, require similar incubation times, and can be detected at different wavelengths without interferences  <cit> .

the performance of cytotoxicity assays strongly depends on tissue or cell line under investigation. therefore, before choosing a cytotoxicity assay for a new application, different methods should be compared. along these lines, the current study had two major aims: firstly, to test the compatibility of these assays with the zebrafish  liver cell line zfl  <cit>  and to set up the optimal test conditions. secondly, to identify which test or test combination could deliver most useful information for cytotoxicity studies in zfl cells since, to our knowledge, there is not much experience available on cytotoxicity assays in the zfl cell line. few data have been published on mtt and ab, which were applied each once to assess cell viability in presence of arsenite and heavy metals, respectively  <cit> . for evaluating the four above mentioned assays, we investigated four model compounds from three different substance groups: the polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbon benzopyrene , the triazole fungicide flusilazole , the pharmaceutical tamoxifen  and its active metabolite 4-hydroxy-tamoxifen .

RESULTS
in the first step, all assays were established in the zfl cell line investigating different influencing parameters, such as cell number per well or medium constitution, before testing the model compounds to compare the assay performances.

for the mtt assay, a commercially available kit was used. therefore, only the parameters cell density and incubation time were examined. incubation of the cells with mtt for  <dig>   <dig>  or  <dig> h led to no significant differences in absorption. therefore, a four hour incubation time was applied as suggested in the manufacturer's protocol. in addition, different cell densities were used to optimize test conditions. a linear relationship between cell number and absorption could be established for up to  <dig>  cells/well  . however, since cell densities of ≤ <dig>  cells/well led to relatively low signals,  <dig>  cells/well were used in optimized standard tests conditions.

the effect of different cell densities was also investigated for the ldh assay for which we used a commercially available kit. since the ldh assay detects lysed and not viable cells, the cells need to be destroyed for these investigations to optimize test conditions. therefore, the positive control triton x- <dig> was used, at the concentration of 2% to completely lyse the cells. a linear relationship between cell number and absorption was observed  and  <dig>  cells/well were used as standard condition . furthermore, the effect of fbs on the ldh activity was investigated, and we observed that lowering the amount of fbs to 1% in the medium greatly reduced background values . consequently, 1% fbs was used in the standard test condition.

the ab and cfda-am assay were established directly in combination, since many examples in the literature showed that there were no interferences of the two dyes in other cellular systems, such as e.g. in the rainbow trout gill cell line rtgill-w <dig>  <cit>  as well as in primary hepatocytes from mouse and rainbow trout and in the cell lines hepg <dig> and rtl-w <dig>  <cit> . the simplified earle's-g medium  <cit> , which was used to replace the standard zfl culture medium during measurement, was shown to have no negative effect on cell viability. furthermore, test performance was examined using different cell densities and a linear relationship between fluorescence and cell number was found for cell densities up to  <dig>  cells/well with a correlation coefficient r <dig> of  <dig>  for ab and  <dig>  for cfda-am, respectively .

applying the established assays to test the four model compounds in zfl cells, all four assays performed well and led to reproducible dose-response curves . we determined effective concentrations causing a 10% or 50% inhibition of cell viability for each compound except for bap. indeed, for bap cytotoxic effects were not higher than 37% even at concentrations either close to or above the aqueous solubility . therefore, effective concentrations could not be calculated for none of the assays for bap.

for the three other test compounds, effective concentrations were calculated . for exposure of zfl cells to tamoxifen, the ldh assay was the most sensitive, whereas cfda-am showed the highest ec <dig> and mtt the highest ec <dig> value. for 4-oht experiments, ldh showed the lowest ec <dig>  while cfda-am showed the lowest ec <dig> value, and the mtt assay was the least sensitive. for flusilazole, the ab assay led to the highest ec <dig> and ec <dig> values. the ldh assay and cfda-am assay were similar to the 4-oht experiment, in terms of lowest ec <dig> and ec <dig> value, respectively. however, the observed differences between the ec values from the different assays for each test compound were relatively small with a maximum factor of  <dig>  occurring for ec <dig> values and a maximum factor of  <dig>  for ec <dig> values. the deviations between the different assay ec values were not statistically significant for none of the compounds .

effective concentrations  causing  <dig> or 50% loss of cell viability were determined from a four parameter logistic equation fitted to the experimental data for three individual experiments. ec values shown in the table are mean values from three experiments ± standard deviation. no ec values could be determined for bap since dose-response curves were incomplete . ec values were not significantly different from each other .

for comparison of the four cytotoxicity assays, the parameters intra- and inter-assay variability, as well as signal-to-noise ratio were determined . the intra-assay variabilities were measured using triplicate samples within each experiment and are illustrated in figure  <dig>   <dig>   <dig> as error bars representing the standard deviation. the coefficients of variance  were calculated at high and low effect levels . the ab, cfda-am, and mtt assays showed low variability at higher signals, i.e. at higher cytotoxicities, and higher variability at low cytotoxicities, whereas the ldh assay showed overall high intra-assay variability. the inter-assay variability was derived from the ec <dig> and ec <dig> values calculated for each of the three individual experiments . inter-assay variability was higher for all assays at the ec <dig> level than at the ec <dig> level. the ldh assay showed cv values at both levels which were approximately the double of the cv values for the other three assays, thus indicating a much higher inter-assay variability. furthermore, the signal-to-noise ratios were calculated using the signals from wells without cells as background noise values. for the ab, cfda-am, and the mtt assay, with all of them detecting live cells, low ratios close to background level were observed at high compound concentrations causing 80–100% loss of cell viability, whereas ratios of  <dig>   <dig>  and  <dig> were observed for the ab, cfda-am, and mtt assay, respectively, at the lowest compound concentrations . for the ldh assay, which detects released enzyme activity from lysed cells, signals were close to background level at low compound concentrations. maximum ratios for ldh were observed at the higher compound concentrations with a ratio of  <dig> .

variability of cytotoxicity assays based on experiments assessing tam, 4-oht, and flus toxicity. intra-assay variability was calculated based on triplicate wells assessed within one assay and median values were calculated based on three independent experiments. inter-assay variability was calculated as the deviation of effective concentrations based on each three independent experiments. for both, intra- and inter-assay variability, the coefficient of variance  is shown in the table. the signal-to-noise ratio was calculated for tam exposure experiments by dividing the absorption or fluorescence in the wells containing untreated or treated cells by the signal in background wells without cells. this was performed for each tam concentration and median values are shown for low  and high  cytotoxicity ranges.

discussion
four different assays were established in the zebrafish liver cell line zfl to detect the cytotoxicity upon exposure to the four tested compounds, benzopyrene , tamoxifen , its metabolite 4-hydroxy-tamoxifen  and flusilazole . bap is known to act as a dioxin-like compound, inducing cyp1a <dig> in juvenile zebrafish and its embryos, but also inducing cyp <dig> and vitellogenin  <cit> . the presence and inducibility of cyp1a <dig> in zfl cells was shown using the dibenzodioxin tcdd  <cit>  and induction of cyp1a <dig> gene expression in bap exposed zfl cells was confirmed  <cit> . bap was reported to be metabolized via cyp1a and to form dna adducts  <cit> . tam is a widely used pharmaceutical agent for breast cancer treatment, which is biotransformed to its active metabolite 4-oht  <cit> . tam and 4-oht have been shown to stimulate oocyte maturation for zebrafish in vivo  <cit> . furthermore, tam led to increased perturbations and mortality in a partial-life cycle test with zebrafish  <cit> . flus is a sterol biosysnthesis inhibiting triazole fungicide, which blocks the enzyme 14-α-demethylase  <cit>  and interferes also with sterol pathways in mammals  <cit> . however, so far no studies are reported in zebrafish, neither in vitro nor in vivo.

all the assays performed well and no significant differences were found for the ec values from the different assays for each of the substances. this might be explained by the fact that none of these compounds specifically interferes with the processes involved in the mechanism of the assays.

on the other hand, such results give the possibility to compare in an unbiased way all the assays. based on the detected ec values, they can all be recommended for the application to zfl cells. however, assessing the assays based on all investigated parameters, i.e. ec values, signal-to-noise ratio, inter- and intra-variability, slight differences arose among them. indeed, the ldh assay showed often the lowest ec values, as also reported in the literature by kemp and brouwer   <cit> , which might be due to the difference that it is the only one of the four tested assays detecting lysed cells, whereas the others detect live cells. on the other hand, it was the one with the lowest signal-to-noise ratios and the highest inter- and intra-assay variabilities, thus making the detection of low cytotoxic effects very difficult. moreover, the ldh assay uncertainties increase at lower compound concentrations, which is the opposite for the other three assays. hence, it can be summarized for the ldh assay that it has the advantage of using only a part of the culture medium, thus enabling the use of the unaffected cells for further analysis, but even if showing the lowest ec values, it entails the disadvantage of the highest variabilities.

the mtt assay showed much lower variabilities and higher signal-to-noise ratios than the ldh assay. however, the highest ec values were observed for the mtt assay and in contrast to all other three assays, the mtt assay requires the destruction of the cells for the analysis, thus making it impossible to use the cells for other investigations and additionally it is more time consuming. on the other hand it has the advantage that no washing steps are needed and reagents are added directly to the medium, preventing enhanced variability due to procedural steps.

the ab and cfda-am assays showed, similarly to the mtt assay, low variabilities and high signal-to-noise ratios, suggesting that these assays are more precise and robust than the ldh assay. furthermore, as for the ldh assay, they are nondestructive assays, which can be performed within a very short time. both can be detected spectrophotometrically or fluorometrically  <cit> . ab and cfda-am exert no toxic effects on the cells so that even after cell viability measurement cells might be used to examine other endpoints. for example, it was shown before that a combined ab/cfda-am assay did not affect the results of later gene expression analysis of hepatocytes from rainbow trout   <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
based on the assessed parameters and handling of the four different assays, we recommend the ab and the cfda-am assay for cytotoxicity assessment. our data show that these two assays can be also easily applied in combination to zfl cells, thus enabling the simultaneous assessment of two different endpoints.

