BACKGROUND
conducting microarray experiments using affymetrix arrays is expensive. the quality of the starting material, for instance human post-mortem tissues, is often predetermined and samples may be scarce, leading to variable quality of the extracted rna. we set out to explore the relationship between quality control  variables used to assess samples prior to hybridisation  and those used to assess the quality of the hybridisation and resulting microarray data . we sought better to define which variables were important in determining the quality of the final data and to see in turn whether any post-chip measures could predict pre-chip variables.

examination of quality in genechip experiments has been hampered by the relatively new technology, rapidly changing platforms  and the inability of most centres, because of expense, to run large series of samples to examine the characteristics and limitations of the technology. in addition, the output of the qc measures reflects both technical variation in the performance of the experiment and the biological variation of the samples available. affymetrix give a series of guidelines about threshold values for quality control measures produced in the rpt file by their algorithm   <cit> . they do not really indicate what the user should do if the quality control measures fall outside their recommendations except for omitting the sample from the analysis.

dumur et al.  <cit>  examined technical variables, the effect of freezing crna and that of running the same samples on different days and found that freezing had little effect but hybridisation date did affect genechip qc variables. they examined 18s/28s ratios in total rna but found that these did not appear to predict the efficiency of the crna synthesis. finkelstein  <cit>  reported on improvements over time in the quality of expression data obtained in the st jude's children's research hospital from 2000– <dig>  with over  <dig> genechips hybridised. finkelstein attributes the improvements to technical advances in hardware and software from affymetrix and the increasing experience of the centre: technical variations clearly had the most impact on chip data in this longitudinal retrospective analysis. no attempt was made in this study to examine the pre-chip variables that influence the genechip performance. however, in studies examining the effect of biological variability in the samples, the rna integrity of samples from human brain was found to influence gene expression profiles profoundly; in turn rna quality was influenced by agonal state but not gender, age or post-mortem interval   <cit> .

we examined gene expression in a large series of rna samples extracted from post-mortem human brain  <cit> : technical variation was minimised as far as possible. all genechips came from two manufacturing batches, one person carried out all the reactions and the same instrumentation was used for all hybridisations. there are only limited variables that can be examined before genechips are hybridised. we assessed total rna quality subjectively, using agilent bioanalyser traces, as well as with the agilent-derived rna integrity number   <cit> . we excluded some samples based on their subjectively assessed rna quality as rin became available only after the samples had been hybridised . we also examined the effect of crna yield and pmi. we derived post-chip qc measures from mas  <dig>   <cit> , dchip  <cit>  and the robust multichip average  algorithms  <cit> . we used these measures as a quality control filter, initially in a subjective way, to exclude samples that had been hybridised to genechips from further analysis if they were regarded as outliers in the algorithms above  <cit> .

we have now used these data to examine the relationship of pre-chip variables to post-chip quality control measures. although we believe our original subjective decision to exclude samples at each step in the process from sample collection to expression analysis was justified  <cit> , these decisions were based on limited understanding of the relationship of the quality control measures to each other and to the quality of expression data. by exploring the relationship between the various pre- and post-chip quality control measures, we hope to move towards a more objective assessment, combining key quality control measures. this would reduce the chances of erroneous sample exclusion or inclusion with its concomitant effect in the reduction of power to detect altered mrna levels between the experimental conditions.

RESULTS
effect of brain region
the samples we used were derived from a series of hd and control brains from the new zealand neurological foundation human brain bank. the full consent of all families was obtained at the time of autopsy and the university of auckland human subjects ethics committee approved the protocols used in these studies. for most brains rna was isolated from three regions: caudate nucleus , cerebellum  and motor cortex . because there was a significant effect of brain region on some of the pre-chip  and post-chip variables   we adjusted all variables for brain region . all further analyses were carried out with the adjusted variables.

pre-chip variables
the pre-chip variables included two assessments of rna quality: a four-category subjective visual assessment of bioanalyzer traces  carried out by two of us on all samples  and the agilent-derived rin, which only became available after the genechips had been hybridised and thus was generated retrospectively . subjective quality assessment was based on ribosomal peak definition and apparent presence of low molecular weight rna . figure  <dig> shows that samples hc79cb, h131mc and h126cn, graded as excellent , have well resolved ribosomal rna peaks and virtually undetectable low molecular weight rna. hc117cb was graded good  and shows well-resolved rrna bands but has a faint trace of low molecular weight rna. hc69cb was graded moderate ; it has a less distinct 28s rrna band than seen at higher grades with visible low molecular weight rna. the remaining four samples were assessed as poor quality rna . here the 28s rrna band is blurred or invisible and there is substantial evidence for the presence of low molecular weight rnas. we also investigated the effects of pmi and crna yield in the final step of target preparation. acceptable ranges and details of the values obtained for our samples are given in table  <dig> and illustrated in additional file  <dig> 

as expected from post-mortem brain tissue, where there is little control over the events leading up to availability and preservation of tissue, pmi and rna integrity as measured by subjective and objective assessment were variable . in the original study a small number of samples  were excluded on the basis of subjective total rna quality, determined as above, and were therefore not hybridised to arrays. although they were samples at the low end of the rna quality spectrum, this decision was somewhat arbitrary and driven by array availability rather than their clear outlier status. a few samples of approximately equal subjective quality to those not hybridised to arrays performed well on all post-chip quality control assessments . although sample reactions were normalised with a reaction input of  <dig> μg, subsequent cdna and crna reactions resulted in variable yields of crna. a few samples  were excluded because they did not meet the minimum crna yield of  <dig> μg recommended by affymetrix. three of these samples were originally rated subjectively as having poor quality rna.

pmi correlated moderately negatively with our subjective assessment of rna quality , with the agilent rin and with crna yield . as expected, subjective rna quality was highly correlated with the agilent rin . subjective quality and rin also correlated significantly with yield. figure  <dig> shows the subjective assessment of rna quality for a representative selection of rna samples of the entire quality spectrum along with the corresponding rin. the four subjective categories had considerable overlapping values for rin: the best rna category had a rin range of 7– <dig>  and the poorest rna category had a range of  <dig> – <dig> , with the other two categories between these two.

post-chip variables
we computed quality measures using three different softwares: mas  <dig>   <cit> , dchip  <cit>  and the bioconductor packages affy and affyplm  <cit>  . for most of these measures the relationship between the measure and quality of quantitative expression data is unknown. there is guidance about acceptable limits for some measures, but currently the decision to exclude data from analysis is empirical and generally based on outlier status within each experiment: that is, chips that do not look like other chips in the analysis are excluded. in our experiment ten chips  were flagged as outliers as they were found to be outliers on multiple post-chip variables . this was a subjective decision based on recommended acceptable ranges for each qc measure in the algorithms and the extent to which the value for a particular sample fell outside the interquartile range for that measure in the experiment . for some of the measures, e.g. rawq, although most of our samples were outside the recommended range, there was little variation across the experiment. all ten of the chips flagged as outliers were outside the acceptable range recommended for med_nuse and those eventually excluded had med_nuse ≥  <dig>  . measures that identified the same samples as outliers were: pc_present, dchip_sing_outlier, med_nuse, noise, bg and medint suggesting that to some degree they may be assessing similar characteristics. six of the identified outlier samples judged to have a combination of the most extreme values were subsequently excluded from analysis. the other four samples flagged as outliers were not excluded from analysis because they had less severe dchip_ar_outlier and med_nuse values and were not outliers on more than three other measures .

the different algorithms generating the post-chip variables measure aspects of the same underlying hybridization process. to explore the relationships between the variables generated by the different algorithms we carried out a principal component analysis using data from u133a chips hybridised in the experiment for which measures of all variables were available . since many of the pre- and post-chip variables were not normally distributed, we based the principal component analysis on spearman  correlations. the first  <dig> components explained 75% of the variation  with the remaining components each assessing < 6%. the principal component analysis  demonstrates that the different qc algorithms assess a series of very similar parameters from the chips. the rma-qc and dchip algorithms assess the variation between chips by comparing all chips: these measures form the first principal component and account for around 1/ <dig> of the total variance. in contrast, mas  <dig>  computes single chip measures. the mas  <dig>  scaling factor  and the rma-qc median log ratio measure of bias  contribute to the second component: these measures reflect  how much adjustment of the total signal is required to make one array comparable with the rest. the second component also indexes the negative correlation between high bias and low percentage present calls. the percentage present call in both mas  <dig>  and dchip appear to behave similarly, with high scaling factor or bias values going together with low percentage present calls. mas  <dig>  and dchip assess 'noise' , seemingly in a very similar way, accounting for around 13% of the variance. mas  <dig>  quantifies rna integrity using 3'/5' ratios of two index genes ; the bioconductor affy package attempts this more globally by examining the 3'/5' ratio along the probes for all probesets : this fourth component accounts for 12% of the variance in post-chip measures. these four principal components account for 75% of the total variance and thus index the measures that are most important among those considered in examining the array expression summaries.

the first principal component  is highly correlated with variables which include iqr of relative log expression . this quantity measures the variability in the degree to which a given chip differs from a virtual median chip – that is, a chip which would have median expression for each probe set. consistent with the property of principal components of capturing the variability in the data, those chips with highest iqr relative log expression tend to be those which are largest on pc <dig> .

the largest outliers in figure  <dig> are h131mc, hc71mc, h123cn, h122cb, hc79cb, hc52mc, hc55mc and h85cb. examination of quality measures for these samples  indicates that the chips are outliers for a few different reasons rather than for the same underlying cause. some of them would appear to have undergone some degradation, particularly those with low subqual and rin , while others probably failed at some point of the hybridisation .

relationship of pre-chip to post-chip variables
canonical correlation analysis was then performed in order to detect relationships between the two sets of variables: the set of  <dig> pre-chip and that of  <dig> post-chip variables. four canonical correlations were calculated . these were used to investigate whether any of the pre-chip variables were associated with the post-chip variables in a way that would allow decisions to be made about whether samples are of suitable quality to hybridise to an array and give meaningful results.

the first canonical correlation  indexes nearly all of the relevant relationships between the pre- and post-chip variables: it is highly significant . the second canonical correlation  is also significant but indexes much less of the relationship between pre and post-chip variables. post-mortem interval makes very little contribution to either the first or second canonical correlations . rin  and yield are, however, both important . of the rma qc measures, the med_nuse and b_lr, iqr_lr and iqrplusabsb_lr are all negatively correlated with yield and rin . in mas  <dig> , sf and the 3'/5' ratios are negatively correlated with yield and rin, and % present is positively correlated. so the lower the yield or rin, the higher the sf, median nuse or bias and the 3'/5' ratios: that is, the more 'correction' needs to be applied to bring the errant chip in line with the others. percentage present call is positively correlated with yield and rin in both mas  <dig>  and dchip; this is likely to reflect the ability to detect signal when both amount and quality of sample are high. most of the other post-chip variables are less highly correlated in the first canonical correlation . in the second canonical correlation the relationships are considerably weaker and less significant. there is virtually no effect of rin, though subqual is negatively correlated and yield positively correlated with measures of 3'/5' ratios and noise.

prediction of rin using post-chip measures
although estimation of rin based on post-hybridization measures is generally not of interest for a lab analyzing its own data, it is potentially useful in the context of secondary analyses done by other labs. an increasingly common example is analysis by different groups of publicly available data, for example data deposited in gene expression omnibus   <cit> . in this case there may not be ready access to any pre-chip measures such as rin. however, if the cel files are available, in the case of data derived from affymetrix chips for example, then post-hybridization quality measures are readily computable. if the post-chip measures that best predict rin can be identified, then confidence in excluding chips from secondary analyses on the basis of poor quality rna could be made and thus improve the quality of data produced in any analysis. however, rin alone was not able to predict outliers in the current study where samples had a range of rna quality, and we could not determine an accurate threshold of rin below which samples fail post-chip quality control.

in our data, excluding the gross outlier hc79cb, the single variables most highly correlated with rin are b_actin <dig>  gapdh <dig> and sf. b_actin <dig> and gapdh <dig> are very highly correlated with each other , with somewhat lower correlation with sf . robust regression  <cit>  of rin on b_actin <dig> yields the predictor

estimated rin =  <dig>  -  <dig>  * b_actin <dig> 

with a residual standard error of about  <dig> . ordinary regression yields nearly identical coefficients, both of which are highly significant , and an adjusted r <dig> of  <dig> . using gapdh <dig> as the predictor yields

estimated rin =  <dig>  -  <dig>  * gapdh <dig> 

with residual standard error of about  <dig> . again, coefficients estimated by ordinary regression are very close, with highly significant coefficients  and adjusted r <dig> of  <dig> . including sf as an additional term does not greatly improve the fit of the model. using sf alone, we obtain

estimated rin =  <dig>  -  <dig>  * sf,

with residual standard error of about  <dig> , highly significant coefficients  and adjusted r <dig> =  <dig> . sf may be easier to obtain than b_actin <dig> or gapdh <dig> for users without mas/gcos. figure  <dig> shows the scatter plots with regression lines for each of these scenarios. the outlier chips  are indicated in the plot . we thus see that rin is at least moderately predictable from measures readily obtained from the mas/gcos rpt file and which are computable from the cel file.

the effect of including chips that fail post-chip qc on analysis of differential gene expression
discussion
it would be very useful to be able to predict which samples will go on to give interpretable results after hybridisation, based on their pre-chip quality control variables. in some cases, for instance when using post-mortem human tissue, over which the researcher often has little control before preparing the rna, these considerations become paramount. we examined the results we had obtained using  <dig> brain rna samples hybridised to u133a genechips to see if we could establish any relationships between pre- and post-chip variables. as it might also be useful for the interpretation of data from the publicly available resources we also examined whether we could predict the rin from the post-chip measures.

the two measures of rna integrity we used were highly correlated; these in turn correlated with crna yield indicating that more intact total rna will lead to better yields at the end of the sample preparation process. indeed, the few samples that did not reach the affymetrix recommended 15μg crna yield were largely generated from poor quality rna. as we did not hybridise those samples we judged to have rna that was too degraded  or that did not generate sufficient crna we cannot judge their impact on our post-chip measures. there are no reports assessing the performance of the agilent-generated rin on genechip data quality to date. using the post-chip quality control measures in our experiment, we found that samples with a rin >  <dig>  produced expression data of sufficient quality to be included in analyses. we found that longer post-mortem intervals were associated with poorer quality rna  as might be expected, although the level of correlation is low, around - <dig> . tomita et al.  <cit>  found that rna integrity measures correlated well with their measure of post-chip performance but that pmi was not correlated with rna integrity measures. in common with previous reports, they did find that agonal factors  correlated better with rna integrity than with pmi  <cit> . of the three samples in our study derived from cases with prolonged agonal state, none were clear outliers with respect to rna quality or crna yield compared with the rest of the rna samples in this experiment. they are likely to be too few and the quality too variable in our experiment to separate them out at this point but all three were clearly outliers on post-chip measures. rna integrity is also related to tissue ph  <cit>  and ph has been used as a surrogate measure of rna integrity as a result of pre- and post-agonal events. we did not measure this in our samples, but given the relative ease of doing this test, it would be a worthwhile measure in the absence of clinical information. the variation in rna quality observed in our samples may in part be due to pmi and agonal state, but these factors seem to play only a small part in the variation of quality observed. other factors such as technical problems  and unknown physiological processes likely had a greater impact.

the post-chip measures can be generated from data available in the public databases, but the pre-chip quality control measures are usually not provided. therefore it might prove useful to predict the rin, as an objective measure of rna integrity, retrospectively. it is not clear how generalisable the models generated from our data will be although they indicate that there may be relationships that can provide an estimate of this information. only examination of a large number of varied data sets will give a true indication of their general validity. however, one of these predictors might be used to obtain a 'quick and dirty' estimate of the quality of rna from which the data is derived. more importantly, it highlights the most appropriate post-chip measures that predict rna quality  and gives an estimate of their relationship which can be used to select chips to exclude from analysis based on their outlier status in these variables which would improve data quality, particularly in small datasets or datasets combined from several experiments.

yield of crna is significantly correlated with measures of rna integrity. it is thus difficult to know if yield per se is related to pmi or whether this is simply a result of its relationship with rna integrity. although yield clearly reflects rna integrity it also indexes the quality of the reactions from total rna to crna applied to the chips. however, it is clear that yield and rna integrity have different relationships with the post-chip qc factors. in our experiment where all reactions were carried out by the same person in large batches it is unlikely that there were large variations in yield due to technical factors. our study is limited by having no systematic technical replicates, for as in most such studies this would have been too expensive. the only rna sample that was re-hybridised to an a chip, having been re-generated from rna, was rated as poor and failed on both occasions.

it is useful to distinguish between the various facets of the catch-all term 'quality'. in chronological order: there is first the condition of the starting rna; next is the calibre of the experimental process and resulting hybridisation; finally comes the acceptability of the resulting expression measures, including identification of outliers.

we can think of the first four principal components as providing a grouping of post-chip measures, with each component representing a different aspect of quality : the first component reflects variables gauging array outliers, the second comprises variables assessing array adjustment, the third contains variables measuring hybridisation noise, and the fourth consists of the set of variables related to rna integrity. interestingly, these components correspond roughly to the three aspects mentioned above, but in the reverse order. the first and second components together give insight into the outlier status of a chip when it is considered as part of a set of chips. the component explaining most variability contains variables providing numerical assessments for outlier identification. a related but somewhat distinct aspect is given by an assessment of how far off the chip is from the others, or how the signal would need to be adjusted to make it more like the rest of the chips in the set; this is provided by variables strongly represented in the second component. the third and fourth components, respectively, reflect directly the second  and first  areas of quality.

it is notable that none of the quality assessment procedures have measures in all four categories covered by the principal components. the different algorithms appear to mostly view quality from different, though overlapping, perspectives. the measures provided by mas  <dig>  are most prominent in the noise and integrity aspects, but also touch on array adjustment. the rma-qc measures dominate in outlier identification, but also include array adjustment; integrity is tangentially included in the affy package  <cit>  through the slope and corresponding p-value. dchip measures also focus on outlier identification and array adjustment, but include a noise variable as well  <cit> .

these different softwares are often used in conjunction with one another, as indeed we did in our original analysis. presumably it is hoped that this increases the chance of picking out all of the important variation, although it may also increase the chances of excluding from the analysis chips with data of sufficient quality.

the relationships revealed by the canonical correlations confirm that rna perceived by subjective assessment or rin to be of high quality correlates strongly with post-chip measures of 3'/5' integrity in the first canonical correlation. this is reflected in the ability of b_actin <dig> and gapdh <dig> to predict rin retrospectively. rma and dchip measures do not explicitly index the 3'/5' ratios, seen in the relationship between rin and the affy package rnadeg_sl, that the canonical correlations reveal to be highly correlated: we did not use the rnadeg_sl in our original decisions about which chips to exclude from analysis. in retrospect it only identified  <dig> out of the  <dig> samples that we subsequently decided to drop from the analysis in our original method of exclusion and in fact identified two other chips that we decided on balance to include.

however, the scaling factor and median log ratios of rma expression are also strongly related to rna integrity variables, indicating that scaling factors or bias should be as consistent as possible across all chips in an experiment. the relationship of sf to rin is evidenced by its ability to predict rin without invoking the measures of 3'/5' ratios. this is entirely logical as higher rna integrity is related to higher yield of crna and to a signal better able to be distinguished from the noise or background. thus scaling factors will be smaller and percentage present calls higher if the rna is of good quality, as shown by the first canonical correlation. the less adjustment that needs to be applied between different chips, the more likely that a clearly interpretable signal will be obtained from an experiment. that is, there will be increased sensitivity to detect changes. including data from a poor quality chip affects the numbers of probesets considered to be differentially expressed very markedly; this effect is amplified with smaller numbers of biological replicates. an fdr adjustment  <cit>  can control the false discovery levels in the presence of poor quality chip data, but chips of poor quality appear to substantially increase the number of genes called as false negatives, as does reducing the numbers of biological replicates  <cit> . this is a result of increased variance reducing the power to detect differential expression  <cit> . archer et al.  <cit>  suggest that one way of rescuing some data from these poor quality chips is to consider only those probesets for which all probes fall within a defined distance of the 3' end of the gene, although this fails to take into account the complexity of rna degradation, which is influenced by mrna higher order structure as well as length  <cit> .

all the other variables in the first canonical correlation have correlations of <  <dig>  but users should note that lower rna integrity and yield predict lower %p calls, lower median intensity and higher measures of signal variation. the second canonical correlation shows much weaker relationships and a big difference between rin and subqual relationships to the post-chip variables. good yields combined with poor subjective quality appear to predict higher background measures as though the entire signal, including the noise, has been amplified.

CONCLUSIONS
our results indicate that, as expected, close attention should be paid to the rna integrity of the original sample, as indexed subjectively or using rin. in addition, if crna yields are not consistent, despite consistent rna quality, then it may well be worth regenerating the sample from total rna before running it on a chip in order to improve the yield. yield which does not subsequently improve may indicate that the sample should be abandoned as it will not produce sound results. pmi itself appears not to be important in determining the quality of final genechip data, but it is weakly related to rna quality and may index some of this variation. thus it may only be necessary to exclude samples before hybridisation if their rna quality is insufficient. as determining rna quality is the first step in running such an experiment this is clearly useful to know. of the post-chip measures, rnadeg_sl appears to index rna integrity better than the 3'/5' measures but both reflect the integrity of the original rna sample that is known prior to the hybridisation step. post-chip measures of the rna integrity aspect of quality are most useful for indicating when there has been poor control of the rna quality subsequent to its initial integrity assessment, or for reinterpreting publicly available data to enable prediction of its likely quality. in practice, for this experiment, expression data from chips that passed our initial post-chip qc measures were derived from samples with a rin >  <dig> .

it would be useful to identify a relationship between rna quality, crna yield and the subsequent quality of expression data in order to make informed decisions about rna samples to include in a microarray expression study. however, in this study we have found that the post-chip variables having the strongest association with quantities measurable before hybridisation are those reflecting rna integrity. other aspects of quality, such as noise measures  or measures reflecting data quality  are not well predicted by the variables we were able to determine ahead of time. to the extent that random variation affects chip hybridisation, this finding is not very surprising. however, we do not rule out the possibility that there are other variables measurable pre-hybridisation which may be better associated with expression data quality measures. uncovering such connections could create savings on costly microarray experiments by eliminating poor samples before hybridisation. we therefore encourage investigators to keep careful track of potentially relevant variables so that further studies may continue to shed light on features predictive of array quality.

