BACKGROUND
the manila clam  is a cultured bivalve species with high worldwide commercial importance and value. the culture of these clams has been increasing in recent years, especially in europe and asia. therefore, diseases can result in significant economic losses. the majority of diseases in clams are associated with vibrio <cit>  and perkinsus <cit>  species. diseases can affect not only the development and survivorship of these organisms  <cit>  but also the quality and price of the product. therefore, there has been a growing interest in the study of the molecular biology of the defense mechanisms in bivalves in the last decade. although molluscs lack a specific immune system, the innate response involving circulating hemocytes and a large variety of molecular effectors seems to be an efficient defense method for responding to external aggressions by detecting the molecular signatures of an infection  <cit> . hemocytes are the main line of cellular defense against invading pathogens in molluscs  <cit> , and the immune genes expressed in bivalve hemocytes are of great interest to researchers  <cit> . in recent years, a serious effort has also been made to increase the number of r. philippinarum sequences in public databases. before  <dig>  less than  <dig>  nucleotide sequences were available for this species. our two groups released  <dig>  and  <dig>  raw reads from adult/larval tissues and hemocytes, respectively  <cit> . concurrently, studies by ghiselli et al. on gonad tissue yielded approximately  <dig> million raw sequences  <cit> .

oligo-microarrays are a sensitive and reproducible high-throughput technology for analyzing the gene expression of thousands of genes simultaneously  <cit> . this platform has been used by scientists to study the expression profile in many species from yeast to human  <cit> . microarrays have also been applied to bivalves for different purposes  <cit> . to our knowledge, a toxicogenomics study in the gill and the digestive gland  <cit>  and a recent study of the response to brown ring disease,  <cit>  are the only works to date to use an oligo-microarray in r. philippinarum.

the main objective of this work was to analyze the response of the manila clam against strain ta <dig> of v. alginolyticus through a time course. v. alginolyticus was previously reported to produce important mortality in clam larvae  <cit> . for this study, a new version of manila clam dna microarray including the sequences of thousands of hemocyte-exclusive genes  <cit>  was designed and developed.

RESULTS
assembly and annotation
a summary of the sequence origin, assembly and annotation results is shown in table  <dig>  from the total  <dig> , <dig> sequences from r. philippinarum, the newbler software package  was able to assemble  <dig> % of the raw sequences, and  <dig> % of the sequences  remained as singletons. the assembly resulted in  <dig>  isotigs grouped into  <dig>  isogroups and  <dig> contigs.

the longest isotig of each isogroup, the contigs, the singletons with more than 200 bp of continuous sequence with a phred q >  <dig>  and the r. philippinarum ests in the ncbi database  were then considered for the annotation. the putative identities of these sequences were obtained by running blastx and blastn similarity searches in  <dig> different protein and nucleotide databases. additional file 1: table s <dig> shows the percentage value of annotation success of each database. the protein databases showed a higher average percentage of matches  than the nucleotide ones , presumably due to the degeneration of the genetic code. furthermore, the species databases yielded much lesser annotation percentage than the general ones  with the exception of certain databases, probably because of the huge amount of sequences available, in the case of h. sapiens, or the higher phylogenetic similarity, with s. purpuratus and l. gigantea. thus, we found it is worth the use of general protein databases and the specific ones previously named since only  <dig> % of the contigs/isotigs and the  <dig> % of the singletons were annotated with the remaining specific databases. a total of  <dig>  successfully annotated transcripts were considered for the r. philippinarum dna microarray design . as most sequence reads were obtained from a non-directional cdna library, sense strand orientation was inferred putatively from the homologous protein sequences of other species. one probe for annotated transcripts with known orientation was designed to construct a high-density oligo-dna microarray, while two probes with both orientations were designed for contigs with ambiguous orientation . a total of  <dig>  probes representing  <dig>  unique transcripts were created using the agilent earray interface .

microarray hybridization, robustness and validation
a total of  <dig> microarray experiments were performed. the upper and lower fluorescence values were erased from the raw data  in all of the experiments, and only robust fluorescence values were used to analyze the expression and function of the results.

quantitative pcr  is commonly used to confirm the results obtained from microarray analysis, and although microarray and qpcr data could disagree, it is known that qpcr using sybr green is useful to validate agilent inkjet-printed 60-mer oligo-microarrays  <cit> . specific primers were designed to perform a qpcr for four selected genes with cdnas synthesized from the same rnas used for the microarray hybridization. the expression patterns identified for these genes by the array and by qpcr showed similar profiles . significant differences in expression compared with the controls  were observed in the qpcr results and matched the microarray results in most of the cases  but showed some new significant results in one case . the direction of the regulation was always comparable in both techniques.

the four genes selected for qpcr were chosen based on their relevance in the immune system. the complement component c <dig> is the central component of the complement system, whose functions are to distinguish and eliminate pathogens and trigger an inflammatory response  <cit> . the complement system has been characterized in the carpet shell clam r. decussatus and was found to be inhibited early after a vibrio challenge, which concurs with our results  <cit> . the interleukin  17d belongs to a particular family with no sequence similarity to any other known cytokines. in humans, il-17d regulates cytokine production in endothelial cells and has an inhibitory effect on hematopoiesis  <cit> . previous works in vertebrates and invertebrates have analyzed il- <dig> expression after a bacterial challenge  <cit> . these studies showed a general increase in il- <dig> expression until a maximum level was reached between  <dig> and 24 hours post-challenge in both vertebrates and invertebrates, with the exception of the turbot intestine. in this fish species, the expression profile of il- <dig> is more similar to our results, with an initial increase and subsequent decrease and inhibition. the latent-transforming growth factor beta-binding protein  <dig>  assists in tgf-β folding, secretion and activation by mediating its matrix targeting  <cit>  and is also involved in cell adhesion and migration  <cit> . the tnf receptor-associated factor  <dig>  is a key signaling adaptor molecule common to the tnfr superfamily and the il-1r/tlr family that leads to the activation of the nuclear factor kappa-b  and ap- <dig> transcription factors. traf <dig> has been identified in other bivalves, such as the zhikong scallop  <cit> , and the expression of traf <dig> in hemocytes after a bacterial challenge  in vitro indicates an initial significant inhibition of traf <dig> transcription  followed by a subsequent recovery of the basal levels . this result does not coincide with our results in either expression or in timing, and this discrepancy could be a result of the different experimental designs. nevertheless a late inhibition  and recuperation of the basal expression  was observed in r. philippinarum.

gene expression profile after ta <dig> stimulation
to select genes that were significantly regulated by the v. alginolyticus challenge, we performed a t-test  to find genes that were significantly different between the control and infected samples and an anova  to analyze the effect of the challenge in the whole dataset.

the t-test yielded the identification of  <dig> differentially expressed genes between the control groups and the vibrio-infected groups. the highest number of differentially expressed genes  was found 8 hours after the challenge, while  <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> significantly differentially expressed genes were found  <dig>   <dig> and 72 hours after challenge, respectively. the expression pattern is an increase in the number of differentially expressed genes to 8 hours and a progressive decrease until reaching the minimum at 72 hours after the challenge. figure  <dig> summarizes the results of the t-test and describes the number of regulated genes in fold change groups.

a venn diagram illustrates the expression of the exclusive and common genes between the different sampling times in response to v. alginolyticus . this venn diagram shows that the general transcription pattern of these genes is on/off, which implies that the majority of the genes were regulated at a single point  and only transcribed at basal levels the rest of the time . the genes expressed at several time points were scarce , and only the ras-related c <dig> botulinum toxin substrate  <dig> , a small gtpase of the rho family implicated in cell differentiation, migration and apoptosis  <cit> , was expressed in three consecutive sampling points . in figure  <dig>  the coincident genes detected by the anova and the t-test are also shown. the anova analysis resulted in  <dig> regulated genes, and interestingly,  <dig> of these genes were in the group of 8 hours post-challenge and  <dig> genes were exclusive to this sampling point .

the sequences of the regulated genes in each sampling time  were analyzed in a gene ontology  approach to cluster them into groups depending on the biological process in which the genes were involved and the time of maximum expression . moreover, table  <dig> shows the top  <dig> expressed genes in each sampling point. with this information, it is possible to infer the timing of the r. philippinarum response to a v. alginolyticus challenge. we have to take into account that the cumulative mortality rate at the end of the experiment, 72 hours, was 44%. the high mortality assures an infection but at the same time it is not too high allowing the clams to be able to fight against vibrio.

in bold, downregulated transcripts.

in the first sampling point, 3 hours post-challenge, the results of the go term analysis  showed that most of the genes that were differentially expressed belonged to the cellular process category that involves many different functions. more specifically, one of the principal processes with a maximum expression at this sampling point was related to cellular component organization and biogenesis, leading to the assembly, disassembly or arrangement of the constituent macromolecules of the cell. signaling and death processes were also present to trigger the response to the pathogen and eliminate compromised cells after an infection. following the same line, the main functions of the top  <dig> hemocyte genes in the first sampling time were in accordance with the go results. the most significantly upregulated gene  <dig> hpc  is related to the cytoskeleton  and could be involved in cellular spreading, chemotaxis and adhesion . however, the signaling and transcription processes  could lead to a rapid triggering of several mechanisms, including the calcium-dependent processes that can lead to apoptosis via calmodulin activation  <cit> . another upregulated gene was prothrombin, which is related to coagulation, but strikingly, there was an absence of the inflammatory response at the transcription level, as demonstrated by the strong inhibition of the complement factor c <dig> 

in figure 4b, 8 hours after challenge, the most represented functions are those related to response to stimulus and immune system. these processes initiate the response to the pathogen after the initial triggering of the signaling pathways. the go term multi-organism process, with genes such as traf <dig>  is also closely related because an interaction between clams and v. alginolyticus is implied. these results coincide with the information obtained in the top-list where genes involved in defense and wound healing  or metabolism  are included. several processes were maintained from 3 hours to 8 hours, such as transcription  or recognition  and fibrinogen-related protein ). the expression of freps agrees with results reported in the mussel after a bacterial infection in which the maximum expression was obtained after 6 hours post-infection  <cit> . this result means that while the signaling is maintained because of the pathogen adhesion and recognition, the immune response seems to be initiated. the three immune-related molecules with c1q domains in the list were found to be downregulated. this effect could occur because c1q up-regulation is a very fast mechanism in molluscs as suggested by gestal et al.  <cit> .

the major diversity of the processes found by the go terms occurred one day after the vibrio challenge . general functions such as biological regulation or metabolism seemed to peak at this time point. other processes such as development, localization , reproduction, growth, cell proliferation, locomotion and biological adhesion were also important  <dig> hpc. these specific processes are closely related and could indicate the resolution of the challenge after the expression of the immune genes that were triggered at 8 hours. locomotion and biological adhesion appeared together in the time course because these two processes are intimately related and lead to taxis and migration. in zebrafish, it is known that the chemotaxis of immune cells begins quickly and lasts for several days after an inflammatory stimulus . neutrophils are rapidly recruited with a maximum cell count at 6 h post injury, and the recruitment of macrophages progressively increases until at least 48 h after injury  <cit> . the temporal response of r. philippinarum hemocytes seems to be intermediate between these two vertebrate cell types. however, the cytoskeleton stays active, which suggests that locomotion is a very dynamic process with a high percentage of the top-regulated genes  such as titin, twitchin or calponin- <dig>  in non muscular cells, as the hemocytes, titin has been shown to be related to chromosome condensation and segregation during mitosis  <cit> . this activity could be indicative of hemocyte proliferation and other upregulated processes, such as development. furthermore, other functions are upregulated, such as transcription , or downregulated, such as metabolism or transport .

three days after the challenge, many genes were downregulated, suggesting negative feedback of the majority of the activated genes . figure  <dig> also showed that the go analysis could not find any processes with a maximum representation 72 hours post-challenge. metabolism, adhesion, cytoskeleton modulation, transcription and defense  returned to basal levels, which was also illustrated by the general expression pattern shown in figure  <dig>  curiously, the most upregulated gene, mantle gene  <dig>  is related to the biomineralization of the shell  <cit> . this result could suggest that after the infection is controlled, the clams refocus the genetic machinery to other matters, such as shell repair. this result agrees with the go analysis, and all of the biological functions began to stabilize three days after the bacterial challenge.

because the defense against pathogens in molluscs relies on the innate immune system the response is expected to be fast, to overcome the infections as soon as possible. the contrary often means that the organisms will die. in fact, the critical point of the experiment seemed to be 8 hours after the challenge, when many immune genes were upregulated. regulation of the apoptotic processes in hemocytes was also triggered early after the challenge and barely no genes related to apoptosis were found 3 days after the challenge. on the other hand, some effector genes such as c <dig>  c1q, defense protein, and lysozyme seemed to exert their function before  <dig> hpc; cathepsins, proteases and protease inhibitors were up or downregulated throughout all the challenge pointing to complex interactions between bacteria and clams. these findings suggest that the survival or death of the animals is decided very early after the challenge, suggesting the importance of a fast triggering of the defense mechanisms.

enrichment analysis
a fisher’s exact test was performed to detect any significant enrichment of go terms in each sampling point and regulation in comparison with the reference set of sequences present in the microarray. only three analyses were enriched in specific go terms compared with the entire microarray output: 3 hours upregulated , 8 hours downregulated  and 72 hours downregulated . after using the blast2go tool to reduce the go enriched terms, the most specific terms  were presented in figure  <dig>  it can be observed that the first significantly enriched processes of the upregulated genes were exclusively related to immune signaling and transcription, such as the toll-like receptor pathway or the regulation of nf-κb import to nucleus. an interesting result was the negative regulation of the il- <dig> biosynthetic process, which is an indicator of an inhibition of the pro-inflammatory response. these results confirmed the previous findings of the go annotation and the top-expressed genes, which showed an initial activation of the signaling and transcriptional processes and a strong inhibition of pro-inflammatory molecules such as c <dig>  which seemed to exert their function much earlier than 3 hours after the stimulus, a trait that has been previously observed in bivalves  <cit> .

the enrichment results at 8 hours and 72 hours post-challenge show that only downregulated processes related to metabolism and transport were found, but no specific enrichment of immunity genes was observed. these results imply the importance of an early response and an effective innate immune system in these bivalves.

anova analysis: effect of the challenge in all of the experimental data
an anova was performed to globally analyze the information of the microarray experiments after the challenge. although a vast majority of the genes were regulated at a single sampling point, the anova results showed a total of  <dig> genes that were significantly regulated throughout the time course. table  <dig> summarizes a description of the  <dig> successfully annotated genes with their respective fold changes. the expression profile of the ten genes coincides with the observed pattern in figure 1: the maximum fold change is achieved 8 hours after the bacterial challenge . this finding suggests that the highest modulation of expression happens at  <dig> hpc. thus, that time point after the challenge could represent the actual time point in which the fate of the surviving and dying animals is set.
v. alginolyticus 
challenge

these ten genes have important defense, protective and homeostasis functions, including cell death and apoptosis, that are key events to decide survivorship of the challenged clams: the phosphoinositide 3-kinase adapter protein  <dig>  links toll-like receptor signaling and pi3k activation, preventing excessive inflammatory cytokine production and contributing to b-cell development in humans  <cit> , this could mean that as the same time that defense cells produce an immune response, this is being controlled to avoid self-damage by an uncontrolled inflammatory reaction. the nuclear receptor dax- <dig>  is a co-regulatory inhibitor of the transcriptional activity of other nuclear receptors. nr0b <dig> is also related to the development and maintenance of stem cell pluripotency and lipogenesis and gluconeogenesis  <cit> , important processes to maintain the energy homeostasis necessary to overcome an infection and regenerate damaged tissues. ltbp- <dig>  described in the validation of the microarray, modulates tgf-β activity and is related to cell adhesion and migration. the perlucin-like protein is a constitutive and regulating c-type lectin that promotes calcium carbonate precipitation and crystallization. perlucin contains a carbohydrate recognition domain, and because this protein is expressed both in the mantle and in the gills and the digestive tract, it has been suggested that perlucin could play a role in non-self antigen recognition, similarly to other c-type lectins to trigger the immune response  <cit> . the upregulation of heat shock proteins  represents an important mechanism in the stress response and their functions are closely linked to the innate immune system. although the primary role of hsp <dig> is to function as a molecular chaperone, it inhibits the mitochondrial apoptosis pathway as well  <cit> , a signal of the changes being produced after the vibrio challenge and the survival efforts of hemocytes to overcome the infection. traf <dig>  which has been described previously, is a signaling molecule that leads to the activation of the nf-κb and ap- <dig> transcription factors implicated in the regulation processes such as cell proliferation and survival, growth, differentiation, apoptosis, cell migration or metabolism; all of them closely related to immunity and response to a pathogen. the protein lin- <dig> homolog c establishes and maintains the distribution of channels and receptors at the plasma membrane of epithelial cells  <cit>  and is likely to be involved in the formation of the cadherin-independent tight junction-like structure in epithelial cells and in the synapses in mammals  <cit> , suggesting a role in establishment of the hemocytes adhesion to other cells and maybe intercellular signal transductions after the vibrio challenge. the last three genes are a group related to transcription: the ets-related transcription factor elf- <dig>  a transcriptional activator restricted to epithelial cells and involved in the keratinocyte differentiation in mammals  <cit> , the nf-κb p <dig> subunit and the a20-binding inhibitor of nf-κb activation  <dig>  two molecules that are implicated in the nf-κb signaling pathway, which controls many inflammatory and immune responses, cell proliferation, apoptosis and metabolism  <cit> . these molecules are closely involved in defense against pathogens, from recognition to effector functions in the immune system. additionally, cell proliferation, survival or death were very represented processes, showing that apoptotic/antiapoptotic molecules are highly expressed after a vibrio challenge, indicative of the active fight of the hemocytes.

functional immune response of hemocytes after bacterial infection
to finally evaluate if the changes in gene expression corresponded to functional parameters, the immune response triggered by the v. alginolyticus infection was evaluated. in primary cultures of clam hemocytes  , the in vitro infection with v. alginolyticus induced apoptotic and necrotic cell death 1 h after infection . this functional result agrees with the go analysis showing that most significantly upregulated genes at the beginning of the infection could be involved in chemotaxis, adhesion and therefore they lead to a rapid triggering of several mechanisms, such as apoptosis.

results obtained after the intramuscular injection of v. alginolyticus also supported the previous findings of the go annotation and the top-expressed genes. this bacterial infection induced significant changes in the cell concentration in hemolymph extracted from the site of infection. this parameter is an indirect indicator of cell migration to the site of infection. as soon as 6 h after infection the cell concentration registered in infected animals was significantly higher than that registered in controls. cell migration seemed to be a quickly response since no significant variations were registered at  <dig>   <dig> and 72 h . v. alginolyticus was also able to induce cell death after in vivo infections, although the timing for induction was different to that observed in cell cultures. a significant increment in the number of necrotic and apoptotic cells was registered at  <dig> and 24 h post-infection .

CONCLUSIONS
the current work presents the second version of the r. philippinarum oligo-microarray enriched with immune sequences from hemocytes. we have analyzed the response of the manila clam, r. philippinarum, after a v. alginolyticus challenge, strain ta <dig>  and found almost  <dig> differentially expressed genes out of  <dig>  probes. after the expression, go term analyses and functional immune studies, we were able to establish a putative timing for a vibrio infection in clams: there was an early response  of hemocytes against the vibrio challenge in which the main functions of hemocytes were mainly related to cellular component organization, biogenesis, cell migration, signaling and death. these functions were a fast response to the pathogen with related genes such as il- <dig> or calmodulin. eight hours seemed to be a key point in time to overcome the bacterial challenge, as the most important functions were related to response to stimulus, the immune system process and the multi-organism process to directly initiate the defense. genes such as pgrps, freps and defense proteins were present at this sampling point. after one day, there was a modulation of a great number of functions, from general processes such as metabolism to more specific functions such as development, localization and locomotion. many cytoskeleton genes were found between the top-expressed genes, which is indicative of a possible chemotactic response in hemocytes. finally, after 72 h, the number of regulated genes decreased substantially, indicating a stabilization of the status of the clam and the end of the cellular response to the challenge. we have to take into account that the modulation of the genes can be the result of an effective immune response but also a symptom of a future death. in fact, several apoptotic and anti-apoptotic genes were regulated. this highlights that the obtained transcriptomic profile is a reflection of a complex interaction between the host immune system and the pathogen that deserves further studies.

in summary, bivalves are able to respond quickly against an infection with an orchestrated modulation of different genes. the immune-enriched oligo-microarray for r. philippinarum has proven to be useful in hemocyte expression analysis, and this tool has yielded interesting results.

