BACKGROUND
according to life history theory, if the maintenance of two traits is energetically costly, they are very likely to trade-off with each other  <cit> . in promiscuous species like drosophila melanogaster, males are selected to invest a substantial amount of resources in pre-copulatory traits such as courtship and post-copulatory traits such as sperm competition. at the same time, such organisms also have to maintain an energetically costly immune system in order to fight against a plethora of pathogens. thus among males, sexual activity and immunity are likely to trade-off with each other  <cit> .

multiple studies have tried to address the proposed trade-off between immunity and sexual activity. in one set of studies, increasing the level of sexual activity decreased components of immunity like phenoloxidase activity, encapsulation, hemocyte load, hemolytic activity and melanization in males of different insects  <cit> . another set of studies have found that infection extracts a cost in terms of reduced ejaculate quality and secondary sexual characters in males  <cit> . sperm viability shows a negative genetic correlation with humoral components of immunity and a positive genetic correlation with cellular components of immunity  <cit> . however, in australian crickets, increased number of matings did not change lytic activity   <cit> . singly mated males of tenebrio molitor had better resistance to fungal infections compared to virgin males  <cit> . thus, the results about immunity- sexual activity trade-off in males have been fairly variable across studies. it is quite likely that at least a part of this variability is due to the different host-pathogen systems used and the components of immunity assayed across studies.

phenotypic and experimental evolution studies in drosophila melanogaster <cit>  suggest that under conditions of increased sexual activity, males show lower ability to clear bacteria from their body - a result interpreted to be in accordance with the proposed trade-off between sexual activity and immunity. most of the previous studies in drosophila addressing this issue  <cit>  have used a bacterial strain  which does not kill wild type flies but is pathogenic to flies which are immunodeficient. even though e.coli has been successfully used as a model organism for the study of immunity, it is important to look at immunity and associated trade-offs using other pathogens which are capable of growing within a wild-type host and hence can establish a sustained infection. the present study addresses the effect of sexual activity on the post infection survivorship of drosophila melanogaster males when they were challenged by two such pathogens: pseudomonas entomophila and staphylococcus succinus isolated from wild caught flies. we also measured bacterial load 24 hours post infection whenever a change in survivorship post infection was observed in order to tease out whether changes in resistance or in tolerance was responsible for change in post infection survivorship. ‘resistance’ is defined as the ability to limit parasite burden and ‘tolerance’ as ability to limit damage caused by given parasite burden  <cit> .

for our study, we used three different types of host systems -a recently wild-caught population  which has been maintained under laboratory conditions for about  <dig> generations, a long term laboratory adapted population  which has been maintained under laboratory conditions for more than  <dig> generations and the standard laboratory line canton s- and two pathogens -pseudomonas entomophila  and staphylococcus succinus . pe is a highly virulent pathogen  isolated from drosophila melanogaster <cit> . ss is a weak pathogen  recently isolated from wild- caught fruit flies in chandigarh, india . our results do not conform to the idea of a trade-off between reproduction and immunity. males’ survivorship when infected with one of the two pathogens used in this study  was found to improve with reproductive activity, with synergistic effects on males’ resistance to this pathogen. we argue that our results challenge the generality of the idea of immunity-sexual activity trade-off and propose that such trade-off might be highly system specific.

RESULTS
sexual activity enhances survivorship when infected with pe
virgin males were collected on 10th day post egg collection. it was ensured that the flies were virgins by collecting them within 6 hours of eclosion . on 12th day post egg collection, the males were randomly assigned to one of the two treatments- sexually active or virgin. males from the sexually active treatment were combined with females and allowed to interact for two days in fresh food vials. males from the virgin treatment were transferred to fresh food vials without any females. on 14th day post egg collection, males from the virgin and sexually active treatments were infected by pricking with a fine needle dipped in bacterial culture . numbers of dead individuals were recorded at regular intervals . we found that virgin males had lower survivorship and higher mortality rate compared to sexually active males when flies were challenged with pe . the data was modeled in two ways-  model 1: that includes block as a random factor  and  model 2: that does not include block as a random factor . analysis of deviance was performed comparing the log-likelihood ratio estimates of the two models. the log-likelihood ratios were not found to be different in any of the cases, thereby eliminating an effect of block . survivorship analysis using cox proportion regression analysis model and kaplan - meier estimator indicated significant differences among virgin and mated males . this result was consistent across the three host populations . however, when flies were challenged with ss, we found no significant difference between mated and virgin males in their survivorship or mortality rate . this result was again consistent across host populations . none of the sham infected controls died.

…. mortality less than 50%.

to address this new finding in some depth, we used pe and brb males for our further studies.

resistance is at least partially responsible for higher survivorship
one potential reason for the observed difference in the survivorship of sexually active and virgin males upon infection could be differences in the bacterial growth rates within the two types of males i.e., differences in ‘resistance’. to test this, we studied bacterial growth after 24 hours in infected males. we derived virgin and sexually active males as described before and infected them on 14th day post egg collection . we then estimated  the survivorship 24 hrs post infection and  the number of bacteria  within the flies at  <dig> and 24 hrs post infection. the whole experiment was repeated four times yielding  <dig> independent blocks. we used 8– <dig> plates per treatment × block combination to estimate cfus . consistent with the results from our previous experiment, we found that sexually active males survive significantly better than virgin males 24 hrs post infection . sexually active males produced significantly less number of colonies than virgin males . a three factor mixed model anova treating mating status  and time  as fixed factors and block as random factor indicated a significant effect of mating status, time and mating status × time interaction . the number of cfu’s increased between  <dig> and 24 hrs indicating that the bacteria grew within both virgin and sexually active males . comparisons using tukey’s hsd indicated that at 0 hours post infection, the bacterial load of virgin and sexually active males was not different while 24 hours post infection, sexually active males had significantly lower bacterial load compared to virgin males, thus leading to a significant interaction term . thus the growth of bacteria within the sexually active males was lesser than the bacterial growth in virgin males indicating that sexually active males probably have higher resistance to bacterial infection. in a matched control experiment, where flies were subjected to sham infection, none of the sham infected flies died. additionally, sham infected flies did not yield any bacterial colony.

*statistically significant values.

summary of results from three-way mixed model anova treating mating status  and hours  as fixed factors crossed with random blocks.

sexual activity is beneficial only if it precedes infection
virgin brb males were collected on 10th day post egg collection. they were held as virgins for four days post eclosion in groups of five flies per vial. on 4th day post eclosion, virgin males were randomly assigned to two treatments:  virgin males were infected with pe and one hour after infection, were combined with virgin females  and  virgin males were infected with pe and continued to be held in single sex groups  post infection. when virgin males were first infected with pe and then combined with virgin females, their survivorship was not significantly different from that of virgin males held without females post infection  , indicating that the protective effect of sexual activity manifests only if it precedes infection. ideally, in this experiment, we should have had a treatment where males were first held with females and then infected . however, in multiple experiments, we observe that sexually active males have consistently better survivorship than virgin males. hence, even though in this particular experiment we did not have a treatment where males had been sexually active prior to infection, we are confident that our conclusions are robust.

duration of male – female interaction affects survivorship
we tested whether the duration of male–female interaction affected the survivorship of males post infection. different treatments were created to alter the duration of male – female interaction. two days post eclosion, virgin males were randomly divided into three groups: no interaction, short duration of interaction and long duration of interaction. for short duration of interaction, five 2-day old adult males were combined with five virgin females in a food vial  for one hour and they were then separated. during this one hour, we observed mating take place in all the vials . for long duration interaction, five 2-day old adult males were combined with  <dig> virgin females in a vial  and held for two days after which, the males were infected. virgins were held in single sex groups of  <dig> flies per vial  on all days. at the time of infection, all the males were 4-day old post eclosion. males that interacted with females for only one hour did not differ from virgin males  in terms of their survivorship, whereas, males held with females for two days  survived better than both virgin males and males allowed one hour of interaction time  .

effect of intensity of sexual activity on survivorship
previous studies  <cit>  have suggested that the degree of sexual activity can affect male antibacterial immunity. in the present experiment, two day old virgin males were randomly assigned to one of the three treatments-  one male and one female per vial  one male and four females per vial and  five males per vial. thus we created three treatments differing in the levels of sexual activity- no opportunity for males to interact with females , low opportunities for males to interact with females  and high opportunities for males to interact with females . males in female biased vials are expected to have four times the amount of sexual activity than their equal sex ratio counterparts. after an exposure of two days, males were assayed for their survivorship post infection. pair wise comparisons between treatments -  one male-one female and virgin males and  one male-four females and virgin males indicated significantly higher survivorship of sexually active males . however, we did not find any significant difference between the survivorship of males from the equal sex ratio and female biased sex ratio treatments  . thus, unlike the previously reported results  <cit> , there was no effect of increased level of sexual activity on survivorship of the experimental males.

protective effect of sexual activity decays over time
to test whether the protective effects of sexual activity were time-dependent, we assayed the ability of sexually active males to survive an infection after denying them any further access to females for varying durations. males were isolated as virgins on 10th day post egg collection and held in single sex groups of  <dig> per vial. the vials were then randomly assigned to six treatments. the males in the first treatment were held as virgins prior to infection. the males in the other five treatments were allowed to interact with females for two days, separated from females after the interaction period and then held without further access to females for  4 days before infection,  3 days before infection,  2 days before infection,  1 day before infection and  0 days before infection. all males were of the same age at the time of infection and all infections were done on the same day . we used  <dig> males for each treatment. we observed that the positive effect of sexual activity on male survivorship decreased with the increase in the duration of mate deprivation . survivorship of males held without females for 4 days was not different from those of the virgins . all other types of males had higher survivorship than virgin males .

we repeated this experiment in two more blocks where we had two treatments:  <dig>  males separated from females for four days  before infection and  <dig>  males separated from females for 1 day  prior to infection. a separate virgin set was run with both the treatments. we used  <dig> males for each treatment × block combination. to check for an effect of block, same analysis using r packages coxme and coxphw was performed as mentioned before and no effect of block was observed . survivorship analysis showed that males which were separated from females one day prior to infection survived better than virgin males   while the survivorship of males deprived of mates four days prior to infection was not significantly different from that of virgin males  , which is consistent with the result of the previous experiment.

since survivorship of males held without females for four days and that of virgin males was not significantly different, we measured the bacterial load of flies from these two treatments 24 hours post - infection. we did not find any significant difference in the cfus obtained from the two treatments . our earlier results  clearly show that sexually active males have lower bacterial loads compared to virgin males 24 hours post infection. hence the present result, taken together with the previous result  indicates that the resistance of males increases with sexual activity but this increase in resistance is transient. when deprived of access to females for four days, resistance of males declines to the same levels as those of virgin males.

discussion
our study clearly shows that sexual activity can have beneficial effects on immunity of males measured in terms of survivorship post infection in a pathogen dependent manner. when staphylococcus succinus  was used as the pathogen, we found no difference between virgins and sexually active males in their post infection survivorship. however, when the pathogen was pseudomonas entomophila , sexually active males had higher resistance compared to virgins as well as higher post infection survival rates. the protective effect of sexual activity on immunity was dependent on the duration of male–female cohabitation and the time gap between infection and the last interaction with females. this finding clearly challenges the widely accepted idea of a trade-off between sexual activity and immunity.

we observed an increase in resistance against pe in sexually active males. the number of cfus obtained from sexually active males 24 hrs post infection with pe was significantly lower than those obtained from virgin males. however, the number of cfus in virgins and mated males separated from females for four days was not significantly different indicating that the ability to resist pe in mated males is a temporary effect which declines if further access to females is denied. these results clearly indicate that at least a part of the higher post infection survivorship  observed in sexually active males can be attributed to their increased resistance, i.e., ability to clear the pathogen and/or suppress the pathogens’ growth. we did not find any clear evidence of change in tolerance in sexually active or virgin males since bacterial load 24 hours post infection were different in these two treatments. thus, it is most likely that the ability to resist pe increases in sexually active males. we found that survivorship of virgin males and males held with females for one hour was not different from each other but males held with females for two days had significantly higher survivorship than either type of male. thus, we find that the beneficial effects of sexual activity against pe on survivorship post-infection are cumulative, being accrued over multiple male–female interactions. increase in the intensity of sexual activity , however, does not alter the survivorship post infection, indicating a possible threshold beyond which increased sexual activity does not affect survivorship. given the high mating rate in our host species, it is quite possible that this threshold is reached even when the treatment has a single mating pair. therefore even though in female biased treatment  mating rate is expected to be higher, it does not manifest in a difference in survivorship post infection. in previous studies using a gram negative pathogen e. coli, it has been shown that sexual activity and immunity  are negatively correlated  <cit> . however, our study involving, a gram negative  and a gram positive  pathogen found no negative effect of sexual activity on male immunity. in tenebrio molitor, singly mated males survive fungal infections better than virgin males  <cit> . our results are in broad agreement with this study  <cit>  in that mated males can survive bacterial infection better than virgin males.

there are at least two major reasons to explain the difference between our results and results of the other studies that did find a trade-off between immunity and sexual activity. first, immunity is a complex trait with multiple measureable components. in our study, we have measured survivorship post infection as an over-all measure of the health of the organism and its darwinian fitness. other studies that have found a tradeoff between sexual activity and immunity have assayed various functional components of immunity such as phenoloxidase activity, encapsulation, hemocyte load, hemolytic activity etc. . thus, it is quite possible that in a given study, the presence or absence of trade-off between sexual activity and immunity depends on which components of immune system are assayed. second, the trade-off between immunity and sexual activity seems to depend on the host-pathogen system being used in the study. in our own study, we found that the virgins and sexually active males survived equally well when the pathogen was ss. however, when the pathogen was pe, sexually active males had higher resistance and survived better than virgin males. therefore, specific interactions between host and pathogen might determine the trade-off between sexual activity and immunity. the fact that we did not find any trade-off between immunity and sexual activity in males suggests that the proposed trade-off cannot be generalized. it is important to note that our study used three different populations of drosophila melanogaster as hosts and two different pathogens. for each pathogen, we found consistent results across all three host populations, indicating that our results are robust across host populations.

the increased survivorship of sexually active males  upon infection with pe is quite surprising and our results point towards probable underlying causes. other studies  <cit>  have found that if denied further access to females, the reproductive physiology of mated males progressively resembles that of virgin males over a three day period. our finding that the protective effects of sexual activity decay over a three day period is suggestive of the involvement of changes in reproductive physiology in the increased resistance of the host  <cit> . however such changes offer protection against infections from pe but not ss indicating specificity in terms of protective effects of sexual activity.

CONCLUSIONS
our results suggest the necessity for caution while generalising the existing notion of an immunity-sexual activity trade-off in males. we show that sexual activity might increase host resistance against bacterial infection in a pathogen dependent manner. further, the beneficial effects of sexual activity depend on the duration of male–female co-habitation and time from last mating. our results indicate that immunity tradeoffs might be mediated through complex interactions between host, pathogen and the environment. thus our results have major implications for the understanding of evolution of antibacterial immunity, reproductive behaviour and life-history related traits.

