BACKGROUND
siboglinidae is a group of annelids including frenulata, vestimentifera and sclerolinum  that can be found at deep-sea reduced environments such as hydrothermal vents and cold-water sulfide/hydrocarbon seeps . one of the most recently named siboglinidae genera is osedax, described from vertebrate bones  <cit> . the females possess an elongated trunk with four anterior appendages  and a unique posterior branching structure, a so-called root system, which penetrates the bones and house bacteriocytes  <cit> . all siboglinids lack a mouth and digestive tract as adults and are dependent on bacterial endosymbionts . the slender long body of frenulates is less than one mm wide but more than 50 cm long, while species such as the giant tubeworm, riftia , can reach a length of over a meter  <cit> , whereas the osedax females are maximally 15 cm long and their dwarf males usually less than one mm in length  <cit> .

the phylogenetic position of siboglinidae within annelida is not yet settled  and various sister groups have been proposed or recovered, e.g., oweniidae  <cit> , sabellida  <cit> , cirratuliformia  <cit> , or clitellata  <cit> . within siboglinidae, osedax was initially found to be sister group to monilifera  . some recent analyses  <cit>  have placed osedax as closer to frenulata, but the placement with monilifera now seems well supported  <cit> .

the siboglinid body regions have been described with varying terminology, interpretations and homology arguments  <cit> . based on development in vestimentiferans, bright et al.  <cit>  reconciled the various siboglinid anatomical terms with those of annelids as follows: 1) the ‘cephalic lobe + forepart’ of frenulates and sclerolinum, and the ‘vestimentum’ of vestimentifera consist of the merged prostomium, peristomium and the anterior end of the first chaetiger; 2) the ‘trunk’ of vestimentifera, sclerolinum and frenulates consist of the posterior part of the first chaetiger; and 3) the ‘opisthosoma’ represents the remaining segments . osedax was described with annelid terminology  <cit> , though no explicit reference to a head was made beyond describing a crown with an oviduct and four pinnule-bearing palps in females. later descriptions of both dwarf males  <cit> , and bone-eating males and females  <cit>  mention a prostomium. the palps of osedax japonicus were suggested to be of prostomial origin  <cit> , though the exact border of the prostomium and peristomium is not yet established in osedax and more detailed developmental studies are necessary to confirm their affinity. the palp or palps  of frenulata have been regarded to be either prostomial  <cit> , or peristomial  <cit>  based on their origin posterior to the prototroch. likewise, the vestimentiferan branchial plume has been suggested to be either prostomial  <cit> , or peristomial  <cit> , or with affinity to the first chaetiger  <cit> . regardless the origin and terminology, all siboglinid palps  have been regarded as homologous structures  <cit> , though detailed studies on their innervation and nervous connection to the brain is lacking. the forepart of frenulates and sclerolinum and the vestimentum of vestimentifera has been proposed homologous to the entire  osedax trunk  <cit> . the posterior root system of osedax  has been proposed homologous to the posterior elongated ‘trunk’  of other siboglinids that likewise contains the bacterial endosymbionts  <cit> . the posteriormost opisthosoma found in most siboglinidae is missing or strongly reduced in bone-eating osedax specimens  <cit> . in osedax larvae and dwarf males the two successive dorsal and ventral pairs of posterior opisthosomal chaetae arguably reflect the presence, at least during development, of an opisthosomal region homologous to that of other siboglinidae  <cit> . a better understanding of the internal organ systems such as the nervous system may aid in solving homology and terminology issues with regard to siboglinid segments and body regions.

monilifera and frenulata possess a similar general outline of their intraepidermal nervous system consisting of a ventral brain, which posteriorly extends into a paired medio-ventral cord, lacking segmental ganglia, except in the opisthosoma  <cit> . this stands in contrast to the subepidermal nervous system of most sedentaria, consisting of a dorsal brain connected through the circumesophageal connectives to 1- <dig> ventral cords, containing a subesophageal ganglion followed by multiple segmental paired ganglia  <cit> . unsurprisingly, with the lack of a mouth, gut or obvious trunk segmentation in adult siboglinids, no circumesophageal connectives and stomatogastric nervous system, nor segmental trunk ganglia are found in adults. furthermore, the nervous system has only been investigated in detail for a few species, mainly based on classic histology and light microscopy studies.

the vestimentiferan nervous system shows following characteristics: a ventral cord originating as a single median cord at the posterior edge of the brain and extending intraepidermally along the midline of the trunk and opisthosoma to the posteriormost end. the cord also contains a pair of giant axons, accommodating fast contraction into the tube. beneath the ventral ciliated field of the vestimentum, the cord briefly separates into two strands forming a dense plexus of tiny nerves, innervating the ciliary field. in each segment of the opisthosoma, the median cord gives rise to a pair of segmental ring nerves . the brain of juvenile vestimentifera was found to originate dorsally above the transient mouth opening, although the brain of all adult siboglinids is positioned antero-ventrally  <cit> . the large adult brain shows a central neuropil surrounded by dense ventral as well as dorsal layers of perikarya  <cit> . the neurites of the dorsal perikarya form the plume nerve bundles, extending anteriorly to the plume lamellae  <cit> . the cuticle forms a thick shield ventrally, presumably hereby protecting the ventral, intraepidermally positioned brain  <cit> . a medio-dorsal nerve cord has only been described for lamellibrachia satsuma miura, tsukahara, hashimoto,  <dig>  <cit> , but may be found in other species following similar thorough examinations. there is little knowledge on the receptor cells and peripheral nervous system, which is complicated by the large size of the vestimentifera. sclerolinum, the sister group to vestimentifera within monilifera, has a similar nervous system, with one medio-ventral cord, producing a wide nerve net underneath the midventral ciliary field along the forepart  <cit> . frenulata likewise has a medio-ventral nerve cord extending from the ring-shaped brain commissure in the cephalic lobe to the segmented opisthosoma, where three-segmented ganglia has been described for siboglinum fiordicum webb,  <dig>  <cit> , possibly innervating the segmental muscles moving the chaetae. the small frenulate nereilinum murmanicum ivanov,  <dig>  <cit>  differs from other siboglinids in having separate, paired ventral cords along the entire forepart as well as trunk; the nerve net of which innervates the long locomotory mid-ventral ciliary band used for gliding  <cit> .

the nervous system of the fourth major siboglinid clade, osedax, has been described for the paedomorphic dwarf males, which have an anterior brain with two commissures, a ring nerve underlying the prototroch and three pairs of ventral and lateral nerves extending along the trunk interconnected by two posterior transverse commissures  <cit> . little is known about the female nervous system  <cit> . the microscopic dwarf males were shown to have an unusual, though very simple nervous system that is not easily compared to other siboglinids or annelid nervous systems  <cit> . however, the recent description of the secondarily reversed, large males of osedax priapus rouse, wilson, worsaae, vrijenhoek,  <dig>  <cit>  also gave a glimpse of a more complex nervous system, including a ventral brain and paired ventral cords . in the description of female osedax roseus rouse, worsaae, johnson, jones, vrijenhoek,  <dig>  <cit> , the remarkably densely stained serotonergic dorsal nerves were mistakenly taken for ventral cords, which led to a misinterpretation of the dorso-ventral orientation  <cit> . the correct dorso-ventral axis was established in a following paper  <cit>  examining the blood vascular system and identifying the forward pumping of blood by a muscular dorsal vessel ; an orientation later supported by anatomical details on cilia, nerve cords, brain and oviducts matching that of other siboglinids  <cit> .

with the present paper we aim to describe the adult nervous system of bone-eating osedax forms, covering the possible variation across four species, visualized with immunoreactivity  of the cytoskeleton and two neurotransmitters gathered with confocal laser scanning microscopy. complimentary data from tem and traditional histological lm microscopy are also added. the results are compared with previous data on other siboglinids and the evolution of nervous system within siboglinidae is discussed. furthermore, the homology and segmentation of the different body regions in siboglinidae is interpreted relative to the configuration of their nervous system.

RESULTS
general composition of nervous system
the female neuoarchitecture is highly similar among the four examined species of osedax , whereas the large-sized o. priapus male deviates slightly, following its anatomical differences  <cit>  . therefore, the common nervous system is described, naming the few interspecific differences within the description of each part. most of the nervous system seemingly shows immunoreactivity  to anti-acetylated α-tubulin , whereas only subparts of the nervous system show immunoreactivity to the neurotransmitter stainings, anti-serotonin  ir) and anti fmrf-amide  ir) .fig.  <dig> schematic drawings of female osedax mucofloris nervous system, based upon immunohistochemical studies. a drawing of the nervous system visualized with acetylated α-tubulin ir in clsm . b drawing of the serotonin lir. c drawing of the frmfamide lir in female osedax nervous system. color codes: blue, ventral nerves; green, oviduct nerves; grey, body outline; orange, palp nerves; pink, dorsal nerves; purple, dorso-lateral nerves; white, ciliary bands. abbreviations: adn – antero-dorsal nerve, aon – anterior oviduct nerve, br – brain, cb – ciliary band, cvc – commissure of the vc, cvn – crossing neurites of the vc, ddn – dorso-diagonal nerve, dn – dorsal nerve, dln1- <dig> – dorso-lateral nerves 1- <dig>  dlpn <dig>  – dorsal left palp nerve  <dig>   <dig>  dpnn – dorsal posterior nerve net, drpn <dig>   <dig> – dorsal right palp nerve  <dig>   <dig>  mn – median nerve, oln – ovisac longitudinal nerves, pac – perikarya of the cvc, pcb – palp ciliary band, ron – ring ovisac nerve, rtn – ring nerve at the base of the trunk, svn – straight ventral neurites of the vc, vc – ventral cord, vcp – ventral cord projection, vcpp – posterior process of the vc, vln – ventro-lateral nerve, vlpn <dig>   <dig> – ventral left palp nerve  <dig>   <dig>  vrpn <dig>   <dig> - ventral right palp nerve  <dig>  2

fig.  <dig> schematic drawing of female osedax “nudepalp e” brain, based upon immunohistochemical studies. acetylated α-tubulin ir shown in black, serotonin lir shown in red. only major neurite bundles shown, minor bundles and neurites traversing the neuropil are not shown for clarity. abbreviations: acbr – anterior commissure of the brain, adn – antero-dorsal nerve, ann – anterior nerve net, aon – anterior oviduct nerve, cnn – circular nerve net, dln – dorso-lateral nerve bundle, dlpn  <dig>  – dorsal left palp nerve  <dig>   <dig>  lln – lateral longitudinal neurite bundles in the brain, mcc – middle cross commissure, msc – middle serotonergic commissure, pcbr – posterior commissure of the brain, pcnn – perikarya of the cnn, pvc – perikarya of the vc, vc – ventral cord, vcp – ventral cord projection, vln – ventro-lateral nerve, vlpn <dig>  – ventral left palp nerve  <dig> , vpann – ventral perikarya of ann


fig.  <dig> schematic drawing of the nervous system of the anterior part of bone-eating male osedax priapus. acetylated α-tubulin ir shown in black, serotonin lir shown in red, body outline in grey. abbreviations: asn – anterior seminal nerve, br – brain, cvc – commissure of the vc, dn – dorsal nerve, dln 1- <dig> – dorso-lateral nerve bundle 1- <dig>  dlpn <dig>  – dorsal left palp nerve  <dig>   <dig>  drpn  <dig>   <dig> – dorsal right palp nerve  <dig>   <dig>  snn – seminal vesicle nerve net, vc – ventral cord, vcp – ventral cord projection, vln – ventro-lateral nerve

fig.  <dig> confocal laser scanning microscopy of female osedax mucofloris  and o. yellow collar  depth coded images  indicate the depth of the signal in the z-stack: scale follows the colors of the spectral light, the top is to the surface. a whole specimen , darker patch posteriorly to brain is an artifact of the labelling procedure. b lateral view of anterior region . c lateral view of anterior region of trunk . d whole specimen . e ventral side of the posterior trunk . f lateral view of the posterior trunk . g dorsal view of the posterior trunk . h dorsal view of the posterior trunk . i ventral view of the anterior trunk showing straight and crossing neurite bundles of the ventral cords. abbreviations: aon – anterior oviduct nerve, br – brain, cb – ciliary band, cnn – circular nerve net, ctn – circular trunk neurites, cvc – commissure of the vc, cvn – crossing neurites of the vc, dn – dorsal nerve, dln – dorso-lateral nerve bundle, dlpn <dig>  – dorsal left palp nerve  <dig>   <dig>  dpnn – dorsal posterior nerve net, drpn  <dig> – dorsal right palp nerve  <dig>  mn – median nerve, mvn - median ventral nerve, oln – ovisac longitudinal nerves, os – ovisac, pcb – palp ciliary band, pp – palp pinules, ron – ring ovisac nerve, svn – straight ventral neurites of the vc, tpl – trunk plexus, tr – trunk, vc – ventral cord, vcp – ventral cord projection, vcpp – posterior process of the vc, vln – ventro-lateral nerve, vlp  <dig> – ventral left palp nerve  <dig>  vpnn – ventral posterior nerve net

fig.  <dig> confocal laser scanning microscopy of female osedax mucofloris. depth coded images  indicate the depth of the signal in the z-stack: scale follows the colors of the spectral light, the top is to the surface. a dorsal view of anterior region, total depth of z-stack . b dorsal view of the dorsalmost part of z-stack only . c ventral view of the anterior region showing brain . d ventro-lateral view of the anterior region, the lateralmost part of z-stack only . e lateral view of anterior region . the black box in the upper left corner is an artifact of the stiching of two images that are not overlapping in this area. f cross section of trunk . g close up of the ventral part of  showing glands . h close up of glands from  . abbreviations: and – antero-dorsal nerve, ann– anterior nerve net, aon – anterior oviduct nerve, br – brain, cb – ciliary band, cm – circular muscles, cnn – circular nerve net, ct – ciliary tuft, cvc – commissure of the vc, dbv – dorsal blood vessel, ddn – dorso-diagonal nerve, dn – dorsal nerve, dln – dorso-lateral nerve bundle, dln1- <dig> – dorso-lateral nerves 1- <dig>  dlpn <dig>  – dorsal left palp nerve  <dig>   <dig>  drpn <dig>   <dig> – dorsal right palp nerve  <dig>   <dig>  gc – glandular cell, gn – glandular cell neck, mn – median nerve, vbv – ventral blood vessel, vc – ventral cord, vcp – ventral cord projection, vcpp – posterior process of the vc, vln – ventro-lateral nerve, vlpn <dig>   <dig> – ventral left palp nerve  <dig>   <dig>  vrpn <dig>   <dig> - ventral right palp nerve  <dig>  2

fig.  <dig> confocal laser scanning microscopy of female osedax “nudepalp e”. depth coded images  indicate the depth of the signal in the z-stack: scale follows the colors of the spectral light, the top is to the surface. a overview, dorsal view . b anterior end, dorsal view . c anterior end, lateral view . d brain, ventral view . e anterior end, dorsal view . f anterior end, ventral view . abbreviations: acbr – anterior commissure of the brain, adn – antero-dorsal nerve, ann – anterior nerve net, aon – anterior oviduct nerve, br – brain, brp – brain perikarya, cb – ciliary band, cnn – circular nerve net, com – commissure, ddn – dorso-diagonal nerve, dn – dorsal nerve, dln – dorso-lateral nerve bundle, dln1- <dig> – dorso-lateral nerves 1- <dig>  dlp – dorsal left palp, dlpn <dig>  – dorsal left palp nerve  <dig>   <dig>  drp – dorsal right palp, drpn <dig>   <dig> – dorsal right palp nerve  <dig>   <dig>  msnn – median serotonin-lir nerve net, oln – ovisac longitudinal nerves, pcbr – posterior commissure of the brain, pcnn – perikarya of the cnn, pvc – perikarya of the vcrn – root nerve, ron – ring ovisac nerve, rtn – ring nerve at the base of the trunk, tr – trunk, vc – ventral cord, vcp – ventral cord projection, vln – ventro-lateral nerve, vlp – ventral left palp, vlpn <dig>   <dig> – ventral left palp nerve  <dig>   <dig>  vpann – ventral perikarya of ann, vrpn <dig>   <dig> - ventral right palp nerve  <dig>   <dig>  vrp – ventral right palp

fig.  <dig> confocal laser scanning microscopy of female osedax priapus. a overview, ventral view . b anterior part with palps bases, ventral view . c middle part of trunk . d-h series of anterior region from the ventralmost side in  to dorsalmost side in  . i serotonin lir in anterior region, ventral side. j, k the ventralmost and dorsalmost sides of the posterior trunk region and ovisac, respectively . abbreviations: ann – anterior nerve net, br – brain, cb – ciliary band, cnn – circular nerve net, cvc – commissure of the vc, dn – dorsal nerve, dln – dorso-lateral nerve bundle, dpnn – dorsal posterior nerve net, drpn <dig>   <dig> – dorsal right palp nerve  <dig>   <dig>  mnb – neurites possibly innervating longitudinal muscles , oln – ovisac longitudinal nerves, op – ovisac nerve net, os – ovisac, pcb – palp ciliary band, pnn - posterior nerve net, tr – trunk, vc – ventral cord, vcf – ventral ciliary field, vln – ventro-lateral nerve, vlpn <dig>   <dig> – ventral left palp nerve  <dig>   <dig>  vrpn <dig> - ventral right palp nerve  <dig>  vp – ventral plexus between vc


fig.  <dig> confocal laser scanning microscopy of female osedax “yellow collar”. depth coded image  indicate the depth of the signal in the z-stack: scale follows the colors of the spectral light, the top is to the surface. a dorsal view . b anterior end, ventral view . c close up of a palp; muscles and nerves . d anterior end, dorsal view . e anterior end, dorsal view . f cephalon and brain, ventral view . g anterior end, ventral view . h dorso-lateral view . abbreviations: acbr – anterior commissure of the brain, aon – anterior oviduct nerve, br – brain, cb – ciliary band,cdln – commissure of the dorso-lateral nerves, col – collar, ctn – circular trunk neurites, ct – ciliary tuft, cvc – commissure of the ventral cords, cvn – crossing neurites of the ventral nerve cord, dn – dorsal nerve, dln – dorso-lateral nerve bundle, dln1- <dig> – dorso-lateral nerves 1- <dig>  dlp – dorsal left palp, dlpn <dig>  – dorsal left palp nerve  <dig>   <dig>  dpnn – dorsal posterior nerve net, drp – dorsal right palp, drpn <dig> – dorsal right palp nerve  <dig>  mn – median nerve, odt – oviduct tip, oln – ovisac longitudinal nerves, pac – perikarya of the cvc, pcb – palp ciliary band, pcbr – posterior commissure of the brain, pn <dig>  – palp nerve  <dig>   <dig>  pp – palp pinules, son – nerves of sensory oviduct cilia, svn – straight ventral neurites of the vc, tr – trunk, vc – ventral cord, vcp – ventral cord projection, vcpp – posterior process of the vc, vlp – ventral left palp, vlpn – ventral left palp nerve, vrpn - ventral right palp nerve, vrp – ventral right palp, vp – ventral plexus between vc


fig.  <dig> brain organization of females of osedax spp., confocal laser scanning microscopy  and light microscopy . a-c frontal clsm optical sections of the brain of o. “nudepalp e” from the most dorsal in  to the most ventral part in  . d-g frontal clsm optical sections of the right side of the brain of o. mucofloris, from the most ventral in  to the most dorsal side of the brain in  . h brain and associated neural elements of o. priapus . i frontal clsm optical section through the median part of o. priapus . g-l. transverse histological sections of the anterior trunk in the area of the brain, from the middle part of the brain in  to the anterior part of the brain in . m lm precise view of the anterior part of the brain showing the perikarya concentration. abbreviations: acbr – anterior commissure of the brain, adn – antero-dorsal nerve, ann – anterior nerve net, br – brain, brp – brain perikarya, cnn – circular nerve net, col – collar, cut – cuticular shield, cvc – commissure of the ventral cords, dln – dorso-lateral nerve bundle, dlp – dorsal left palp, dlpn <dig> – dorsal left palp nerve  <dig>  drpn <dig>   <dig> – dorsal right palp nerve  <dig>   <dig>  lln – lateral longitudinal neurite bundles in the brain, mcc – middle cross commissure, msc – middle serotonergic commissure, ovd – oviduct, pcbr – posterior commissure of the brain, pcnn – perikarya of the cnn, pvc – perikarya of the vcrn – root nerve, trc – trunk coelom, vc – ventral cord, vcp – ventral cord projection, vln – ventro-lateral nerve, vlp – ventral left palp, vpann – ventral perikarya of ann, vrpn  <dig> - ventral right palp nerve  <dig>  vrp – ventral right palp



the female nervous system is composed of an anterior, ventral brain  from which originates the following main longitudinal nerves: four pairs of nerves entering the palps, two pairs of ventral nerves, two pairs of dorsal nerves, a pair of anterior oviduct nerves, and a pair of dorso-lateral nerve bundles. the two widely separated ventral cords are connected by a single distinct commissure in the anterior trunk and possibly by an additional commissure in the posteriormost trunk . from the ventral cords project a range of smaller longitudinal nerves and plexi. a sparse peripheral nerve net, which originates from the ventral and dorsal cords, spans the trunk laterally and surrounds the posterior ovisac and root system. with the lack of an intestinal system, no stomatogastric nervous system or remnant thereof were found. the o. priapus male nervous system resembles this configuration, except for having i) two sets of palp nerves for its two palps, ii) anterior nerves not projecting into oviduct , iii) fewer longitudinal projections from the main longitudinal nerves.

brain
visualized with acetylated α-tubulin ir, serotonin lir, and fmrfamide lir as well as histology and tem
the ventral brain is intraepidermal and consist of a large neuropil, which ventrally and laterally is covered by densely packed perikarya located immediately next to the neuropil; visible with anti acetylated α-tubulin stain in a few specimens .

only 6- <dig> perikarya of the multiple brain perikarya were showing serotonin lir , and  <dig> in o. “yellow collar”) and an indistinct number of more than  <dig> perikarya were showing fmrfamide lir in o. mucofloris glover, källström, smith, dahlgren,  <dig>  <cit>  .

the neuropil is traversed by two main commissural bundles ) as well as by several minor transverse and decussating neurites . it is not possible to follow the individual neurites of the dense neuropil with the data acquired. an attempt to trace the origin within the brain of the main longitudinal nerves is given in the description of each nerve group below. however, future detailed studies including histology are necessary in order to unravel a more exact number of commissures, their detailed configuration, and the precise origin of longitudinal nerves within the brain.

palp nerves
visualized with acetylated α-tubulin ir and in parts by fmrfamide lir
each of the four palps  is innervated by two dense longitudinal nerve bundles, extending from the dorsolateral side of the neuropil of the anterior brain  to the distalmost end of the palps . each dense palp nerve bundle originates as three discrete minor bundles from the anterior brain commissure, the posterior brain commissure and the lateral neuropil, respectively . the separate origins within the brain suggest the presence of multiple neural functions such as motorneural control of palp musculature and ciliary beating as well as sensing of environmental cues. the three sets of nerves originating in the brain are gathered into two main bundles, lining each side of the palp. one of these nerve bundles  extends along the abfrontal palp side, from which minor transverse nerves project around the palp to the frontal surface, where numerous perpendicularly positioned pinnules are located. in each of these pinnules, a sensory neuron with a distally positioned perikaryon runs from the externally ciliated distal tip  and along the central core before seemingly connecting with the transverse palp nerves at the base of the pinnules . a second palp nerve  runs laterally underneath the one lateral, metachronously beating, ciliary band , which in fact are continuous around the palp tip. specific innervation of the ciliary band could not be traced, with the acetylated α-tubulin ir in the small nerves being indistinguishable from the ir of cilia .

ventral nerves 
visualized with acetylated α-tubulin ir, and in parts by serotonin lir & fmrfamide lir
widely separated paired main ventral nerves  originate from the anterior and posterior commissures within the brain  and project from the ventro-posterior border of the brain, continuing posteriorly along the ventral side of the trunk, to the ovisac. an additional shorter pair of ventro-lateral longitudinal nerves  originates at the posterior brain commissure and extend postero-laterally underneath the lateral ciliary bands of the trunk to the posterior trunk, where they terminate . the main ventral cords are interconnected by the distinct semicircular anterior trunk commissure  and possibly by the less distinct posterior trunk commissure, represented by a loose commissural nerve net forming a ring of nerves .fig.  <dig> intraepidermal elements of cns in the trunk of female osedax priapus. a, b, d-f tem of ultrathin transverse sections. c light micrograph of transverse histological section. a dorsal fragment of section  showing the oviduct with dorsal neurites. b lateral fragment of section  showing ciliary band and underlined dorsolateral neurites. c transverse histological section of the trunk, frames indicate the fragments a, b, d-f with tem views. d-f neural elements of the epidermis of the ventral side: d submerged ciliary cell at the middle of the ventral side. e right bundle of the ventral cord and neural process next to it. f overview of the ventral neural elements. abbreviations: c – cuticle, cb – ciliary band, cnc – ciliary neural cell, dn – dorsal nerve, dln – dorso-lateral nerve bundle, dvm – dorso-venral mesenterium, ep – epidermal cells, ovd – oviduct, mp – muscle processes surrounded by the membrane and stretching at the bases of epidermal cells, mpn – cellular process with actin fibers and cytoplasm with granules, nc – neural cells, ol – epidermal cells lining the oviduct, om – microvilli projecting to the oviduct lumen, tcm – trunk circular muscles, tlm – trunk longitudinal muscles, vc – ventral cord



the main nerve bundles of the ventral cords continue straight along the trunk , with a few neurites decussating to meet the contralateral cord one-third down the trunk length . a midventral ciliary nerve plexus between the ventral cords  is found in o. priapus underneath its midventral ciliary field ; neither of which are present in any of the other examined species. some minor neurite bundles project shortly from the main ventral bundles , all terminating in the middle part of the trunk: i) one pair projects latero-posteriorly, anterior of the anterior trunk commissure ; ii) one pair projects medially, posterior of the anterior trunk commissure ; iii) further posterior, one or two pairs project latero-posteriorly and meet dorsally in the middle trunk . in the posteriormost trunk, the main ventral cords approach the contralateral nerve midventrally, forming a loose commissural nerve net , from which project numerous transverse neurites, encircling the posterior trunk . from this loose bundle of circular nerves  several short longitudinal nerves extend posteriorly , possibly innervating the longitudinal muscles likewise condensed into bundles in the posteriormost trunk . several peripheral nerves encircle the trunk at the border to the ovisac , through which the small longitudinal nerves  extend across the anterior ovisac; together these nerves create a loose peripheral posterior nerve net, spanning the ovisac and roots .

whereas all ventral nerves and commissures show acetylated α-tubulin ir, only the main ventro-lateral longitudinal nerves and the main bundles of the ventral cords as well as the posterior trunk ring nerve show fmrfamide lir . the main ventral nerve bundles and most of their projections showed serotonin lir , but no signal was found in the ventro-lateral nerves or the circular commissural trunk nerves .

dorsal nerves
visualized with acetylated α-tubulin ir, and in parts by serotonin lir & fmrfamide lir
a pair of dorsal nerve bundles originates from the anterior and posterior ventral brain commissures  and extend antero-dorsally around the prostomial edge . dorsally, these nerve bundles split into three nerves: one short pair connecting with the anterior oviduct nerve; one pair running ipsilaterally across the anterior trunk and continuing straight along the entire dorso-lateral side of the trunk ; and one mid-dorsal pair continuing straight underneath the oviduct to the posterior trunk ring nerve . the closely positioned mid-dorsal nerves are interconnected ventral of the oviduct by numerous transverse neurites, projecting from the chain of perikarya lining each dorsal nerve and showing bright serotonin lir . in the anteriormost and posteriormost part of the dorsal nerve cords are found two dense serotonergic nerve plexi , possibly interconnecting with the loose circular nerves extending from the ventral side of the posteriormost trunk .

anterior oviduct nerves
visualized with acetylated α-tubulin ir, serotonin lir & fmrfamide lir
on each lateral side of the brain, posterior of the eight palp nerves, a pair of anterior oviduct nerves  originates from the brain connectives . they extend laterally around the anterior trunk, before they on the dorsal side make a  <dig> degrees turn in anterior direction, connect with the one projection of the antero-dorsal nerves, and continue along the free part of the anterior oviduct to its tip. at the tip the neurite bundles fan out with several of the highly serotonergic neurites connecting to externally ciliated sensory cells .

dorso-lateral nerves
visualized with acetylated α-tubulin ir, and in parts by fmrfamide lir
a conspicuous pair of dorso-lateral nerves  originates at the posterior brain commissure . each dorso-lateral nerve bundle extends laterally from the brain , and continues laterally around the anterior trunk, where after they split up into four-five dorso-lateral longitudinal nerves on each dorso-lateral side . the two ventralmost nerves underline the dorso-lateral ciliary band of the trunk , whereas the two-three dorsalmost nerves  all proceed around the lateral sides to meet up dorsally with the dorsal longitudinal nerves  and continue alongside these dorso-posteriorly to the posteriormost trunk . in the smaller sized species o. priapus, only three dorso-lateral nerves could be traced  that all continue dorsally . the nerves are visualized only with acetylated α-tubulin ir, except for the two ventralmost ones, also seen with fmrfamide lir.

discussion
comparison of nervous systems among female osedax spp.
there are only slight differences in neural architecture among the various studied species, which all possess the main longitudinal nerve bundles  and the brain- and anterior trunk commisures . however, some of the minor projections and peripheral nerves could not be located in all species. in particular the crossing neurites of the main ventral nerves , the circular neurite bundles in posterior trunk , the median nerve  and the posterior processes of the main ventral nerves  could not be located in o. “nudepalp e” and osedax priapus. osedax priapus females further differ by the absence of ventral cord projections , and by the presence of a ventral plexus underlying the ventral ciliary field in the trunk . despite the nerve plexus  originates from the ventral cords, the overall similarity in numbers and configuration of ventral cords, however, indicates that the ventral and ventro-lateral longitudinal nerves themselves are not closely functionally linked with the absence/presence of a midventral ciliary field. this connection was otherwise suggested  between the paramedian longitudinal nerves and the midventral ciliary band in some interstitial annelids  <cit> .

comparison of nervous systems among female osedax, bone-eating males of o. priapus and dwarf males of osedax spp.
contrary to the commonly found microscopic dwarf males, the bone-eating male o. priapus is somewhat similar in size and anatomy to the females, though showing only two palps , a spermioduct instead of an oviduct and a testis sac instead of an ovisac. the male nervous system in the head and trunk of o. priapus is likewise very similar to females, except for males having only four neurite bundles all originating at the dorsal neuropil of the anterior brain  rather than having eight bundles originating along both the dorsal and lateral sides of the anterior brain . furthermore, the seminal vesicle is innervated via anterior seminal neurite bundles extending from the median paired serotonergic perikarya in the brain  and forming dense nerve net in the wall of the seminal vesicle  possibly homologous to the anterior oviduct nerves found in females.

the dwarf male nervous system was previously described by immunocytochemistry and clsm  <cit>  and despite the great size difference of the microscopic males, their nervous system seemingly shows several homologous traits with that of bone-eating osedax forms: for instance, the dwarf male nervous system comprises an anterior ventral brain with two commissures, connected to paired ventral, ventro-lateral, dorso-lateral and dorsal longitudinal nerves . besides the similar number of main cords, the most striking resemblance is the anterior decussating neurites of the ventral cord . the homology of the transverse commissures is less easy to depict, but the first posterior trunk commissure may resemble the posterior trunk commissure in females . the anterior trunk commissure  found in all females and o. priapus males, was not found in dwarf males. with the fewer neurites generally found in dwarf males it may be overlooked, or lacking. however, there is an anterior nerve ring beneath the anterior ciliary bands . we do not consider this homologous to the more posteriorly located cvc commissure of females, since the dwarf male nerve ring seems closely related to their prototroch ciliary patches. moreover, similar prototroch nerve rings with similarly associated posterior perikarya are found in clsm studies of other annelid larvae  <cit> .

comparison with nervous systems of other siboglinidae
the neuromorphology of osedax shows overall resemblance to other siboglinids in having an intraepidermal, ventral brain and anteriorly unsegmented nerve cord with few commissures and plexi along an elongated trunk . however, it also seemingly differs from other siboglinids in having additional ventrolateral and dorsolateral longitudinal nerves , as well as having multiple longitudinally running projections from all the main nerves, together creating a relatively dense fence of longitudinal nerves surrounding the trunk. this fence-like configuration may accomodate the innervation of the surrounding sheath of longitudinal muscles as well as the broad longitudinal ciliary bands of the trunk. other siboglinids seemingly lack these paired lateral ciliary bands, possibly explaining their fewer lateral nerves . however, even though these nerves are quite prominent in the small-sized osedax spp., they may have been overlooked in the histological studies of larger sized siboglinids, where such details may be missed. the wide separation of the ventral cords along the entire trunk in osedax differs from the general adult and larval configuration in siboglinidae, where the ventral cords mostly fuse in the trunk midline  and contain giant axons . a midventral ciliary field is present in the anterior region of most larvae  and adult siboglinids  and underneath this field the ventral nerve cords are always widely separated and interconnected by a nerve plexus . a presumably homologous midventral ciliary field was found in female osedax priapus , which was similarly innervated by a dense serotonergic nerve plexus interconnecting the widely separated ventral cords.table  <dig> main characteristics of the siboglinid nervous system [10– <dig>   <dig>   <dig>  42– <dig>   <dig>   <dig>   <dig>   <dig>   <dig>   <dig>   <dig>   <dig>   <dig>  75–77


sixteen character are scored for the siboglinid species for which relatively detailed morphological studies exist. blue codes features of osedax, pink - vestimentifera, green – sclerolinum, brown – frenulata. osedax mucofloris, o. “yellow collar”, and o. “nudepalp e” had similar scorings and were therefore included in one common row. investigated osedax dwarf males likewise showed similar scores. references are given in the last column. if no information were available for the distinct species, data from closely related species were occasionally provided . the evolution of the  <dig> characters was traced on the tree shown in fig.  <dig> , which only displays unambiguously traced changes. the ancestral states for siboglinidae of all  <dig> characters were likewise traced and provided in last row of the table; states written in italics being apomorphic  of siboglinidae

fig.  <dig> evolution of nervous system and homology of segments and body regions in siboglinidae. consensus phylogenetic tree constructed from a combination of recent molecular phylogenies: clade of osedax spp. resolved based on  <cit> , vestimentifera -  <cit> , frenulata -  <cit> , interrelationship of these clades -  <cit> , serpulid outgroups -  <cit> . neural characters provided in table  <dig> are traced on the tree showing the  <dig> unambiguous character transformations on the main branches . a-i schemes of the main ventral cords and brains in siboglinidae. green color indicate fused prostomial + peristomial region; pink and yellow colors indicate following body segments of suggested homology among siboglinids and the metatrochophore of pomatoceros lamarckii. nerves and perikarya are drawn in red; ciliary bands in grey. sidebars indicate body regions according to traditional siboglinid terminology. a metatrochophore of p. lamarckii  <cit> . b metatrochophore of siboglinum poseidoni   <cit> . c combination of adult siboglinum caulleryi  and s. fiordicum  <cit> . d adult nereilinum murmanicum  <cit> . e adult sclerolinum contortum  <cit> . f juvenile riftia pachyptila  <cit> . g female osedax priapus. h female o. mucofloris. i. dwarf male of o. rubiplumus  <cit> . abbreviations: at – apical tuft, i – brain, i – broadened ventral cord, cc – circumesophageal connectives, cb – ciliary band, ch – chaetae, cvc –commissure of vc, cvn – crossing neurites of vc, mn – median nerve, mvn - median ventral nerve, og – opisthosomal ganglion, pcr – telotroch, pg – posterior ganglion, pgn – posterior ganglion nerve, pha – phaosome, phr – photoreceptor, pn – palp nerve, pr – prototroch, pac – perikarya of cvc, rco – prototroch ring commissure, rn – ring nerve, ron – ring ovisac nerve, rtn – posterior trunk ring nerve, sbg – subesophageal ganglion, smap – serotonergic perikarya of vc, tco – terminal commissure, tn – palp nerve, tg – trunk ganglion, vc – ventral cord, vcf – ventral ciliary field, vp – ventral plexus between vc




the present study shows that the two longitudinal nerves of each osedax palp arise from the anterior- and, to a lesser degree, the posterior brain commissures. with the uncertain phylogenetic position of siboglinidae, and the lack of mouth, gut and accordingly circumesophageal connectives, it is not possible to homologize the brain commissures in osedax with the dorsal and ventral commissures found in most other annelids  <cit> . two longitudinal nerves have been found in each of the so-called tentacles of some vestimentiferan riftia, ridgeia and lamellibrachia luymesi van der land and nørrevang,  <dig>  <cit> , supporting their homology to osedax palps, though their innervation has not been traced to the brain commissures. in the frenulates studied to date, only one nerve has been found in each also so-called tentacle  <cit> , underlining their presumably more distant relationship to osedax, though presumably still being homologous to annelid palps sensu orrhage and müller  <cit> .

osedax specimens have two main  brain commissures and one anterior trunk commissure arguably homologous to the supra- and subesophageal ganglia, respectively, found in most annelids. the vestimentiferan riftia likewise show two main brain commissures, which fuse with the single commissure of the subesophageal ganglion during development  <cit> . frenulates have only one broad brain commissure and lack a subesophageal ganglion in both larval and adult stages. further developmental and detailed histological studies are warranted to fully address the commissural configuration and homology across siboglinidae as well as annelids in general. with a better understanding of the brain commisures, the exact origin and homology of palps and longitudinal nerves can be assessed.

evolution of the siboglinid nervous system
the most parsimonious reconstructions of the neuromorphological characters  were traced  on a consensus phylogeny for siboglinidae, based on various phylogenetic results . since osedax only has a few segments, we found it most relevant to compare the details with those of late larval stages in outgroup taxa, when they have similarly few segments. furthermore, the metatrochophore  has all basic body parts of annelids: prostomium + peristomium + larval segments + pygidium, whereas in adults of e.g., sabellida the prostomium and peristomium fuse  <cit> . for both of the two serpulid terminals shown in fig.  <dig>  the nervous system has been studied using comparable immohistochemical methods  <cit> .

only unambiguous transformations  along the main siboglinid branches are discussed here . only one unambiguous transformation supports siboglinidae: character  <dig>  the shift from dorsal to ventral position of the brain. the possible loss of a ganglionated cord  within siboglinidae could not be traced unambiguously, since many siboglinids have not been investigated in such details to assess presence or absence . also, ganglionated cords are not consistently found in annelids  <cit> , so the character transformation is further dependent on the choice of outgroup, which is as yet unresolved for siboglinidae. the intraepidermal nervous system with widely separated nerve cords, double brain commissures, and double palp nerves and numerous other traits found in osedax were all traced as plesiomorphic states for siboglinidae, though not consistently present in all siboglinids . two unambiguous transformations characterize frenulata: character  <dig>  loss of subesophageal ganglion, and character  <dig>  fusion of two brain commissures into one broad single commissure. only one unambiguous transformation respectively characterized the osedax + monilifera clade , monilifera itself , and vestimentifera . for osedax we traced four unambiguous transformations: character  <dig>  decussating neurites of the ventral nerve cords; character  <dig>  fusion of the two ventral cords into one in the third body segment; character  <dig>  loss of giant axons; character  <dig>  formation of multiple ventro-lateral nerve processes in the trunk.

with the few apomorphic states supporting the main clades, it is clear that a neurophylogeny would not alone be able to resolve the interrelationships of siboglinidae. also, the reconstruction depends on the topology and outgroups of the phylogenetic tree on which the characters are mapped, some of which are still debated. however, this was the first attempt within annelida to assess neurophylogenetic characters and states. several of these could be reconstructed unambiguously, thus providing significant information on transformations of the nervous system within siboglinidae.

definition of segment borders and regions across different species and sexes of osedax
based on the presence of one pair of ganglia or one major commissure per segment, the general configuration of the nervous system, and the four pairs of chaetae found in dwarf males, we argue for the following body regionalization and up to three body segments being present in osedax : i) fused prostomium and peristomium containing the brain with two main commissures, prototroch nerve ring underlying the prototroch , and palps innervated by nerves originating at the brain commissures ; ii) first body segment containing the anterior trunk with an anterior commissure of the ventral cord , and posterior to this, either a characteristic crossover of the ventral cords  second body segment, which in the larval/dwarf male stage comprises a first set of chaetae as well as a ganglion, and in the females comprises a posterior trunk commissure  as well as possibly the ovisac and roots; iiii) third trunk segment found in dwarf males containing a second set of chaetae and a terminal commissure , which may resemble the first opisthosomal segment in other siboglinids. this contrasts with our previous intepretation of osedax dwarf males as having only a total of two segments  <cit> . in females no opisthosomal or trunk chaetae have been found to date, and their posterior ovisac and roots may resemble either a posterior part of the second trunk segment in dwarf males or a third segment, though with no clear indication of segment borders .

homology of body regions and segmentation in siboglinidae
the prostomium and peristomium is not easily distinguished from the body segments in adult siboglinidae, and the exact homology is not obvious. in osedax we suggest that the anteriormost part of the body represents the fused prostomium + peristomium, again corresponding to the cephalic lobe seen in frenulata and sclerolinum  and a ventral brain in this region . a posterior demarcation of this region  is externally indistinguishable in all siboglinidae, lacking a constriction, though a mouth opening may be present in larval stages. the external morphology of this region is relatively simple in osedax larvae, only showing an apical tuft and a prototroch  <cit> , whereas vestimentifera and frenulata larvae also show a mouth opening  <cit> , and frenulate larvae and adults possess phaosomes  <cit> . internally, the larvae  contain a prototrochal commissure ), and all adult siboglinidae possess a conspicious ventral brain . in larvae of riftia  this here suggested prostomial/peristomial region was shown to be posteriorly demarcated by the septa of the following first body segment, having a separate coelomic cavity  <cit> . unfortunately, for all other siboglinidae the coelomic cavities are either unstudied, less clearly interpreted, or as for frenulata showing a different configuration  <cit> . no cell lineage studies or gene expression studies have been performed of siboglinidae, but studies of the annelids platynereis  <cit> , hydroides and capitella  <cit>  all confirm the presence of a proliferating stomodaeal region separate from the prostomium as well as the first body segment.

the first body segment develops posterior to the peristomium, and while the exact border between these two can be difficult to detect, we argue that the first segment of bone-eating osedax is easily recognized by the presence of a pair of subesophageal ganglia/commissure, even though chaetae are missing  <cit>  . we further suggest that the first body segment in siboglinids is constituted by the forepart in frenulata and sclerolinum . the first segment is, moreover, equivalent to the middle part of the vestimentum in vestimentifera   <cit> , and lastly this is homologous to the middle part of the trunk in osedax  <cit>  . our proposed homology and demarcation of the first segment is supported by the present finding of an anterior commissure  in the anterior trunk of bone-eating osedax, as well as by the recovered ventral ciliary field with an underlying nerve net in osedax priapus, similar to what has been reported for vestimentifera, sclerolinum and possibly the larvae of frenulata  <cit> . a presumed homologous subesophageal ganglion is found in vestimentifera  and other annelids , though not reported for sclerolinum  <cit> , and in frenulata may instead be represented by a ring nerve  <cit> .

the second body segment comprises the posterior part of the trunk in osedax, demarcated by one pair of chaetae and a prominent commissure with ganglia in dwarf males, or by a posterior trunk ring nerve in the bone-eating forms . in bone-eating forms this segment has previously been referred to as ‘trunk base’ or ‘lower trunk’ and it may extend into the ovisac . we suggest it to be homologous to the trunk in frenulata, sclerolinum and vestimentifera  <cit> , which in vestimentifera has 1- <dig> pairs of chaetae   <cit> . a homology to the osedax dwarf male ganglia or posterior trunk commissure have not been found in other adult siboglinidae, however, a single ganglion is present in frenulate larvae  <cit> . our neuromorphological regionalization is further supported by other anatomical features such as presence of a second coelomic cavity delineated by dissipiments in larval stages of both frenulata and vestimentifera  <cit> , as well as the presence of gonads and the trophosome in this segment in all adult siboglinidae  <cit> . however, this interpretation contradicts the regionalization suggested by bright et al.  <cit>  according to which, the trunk together with the forepart/vestimentum constitutes the first body segment and not a separate second segment.

the third body segment in most siboglinids equals the first segment of the opisthosomal region  <cit> , characterized by opisthosomal chaetae in all siboglinids except the bone-eating forms of osedax, and is further characterized by a telotroch in larvae of osedax and frenulata  <cit> . developmental studies are necessary in order to clarify whether the ovisac and roots in bone-eating forms of osedax likewise represent a third segment  rather than a second segment, similar to the dwarf males. the hooked chaetae in osedax dwarf males are all similar, whereas other siboglinids may show modified opisthosomal compared to trunk chaetae  <cit> . neural architecture in the third segment comprises a terminal commissure in osedax dwarf males  <cit> , a pair of ganglia in frenulata  <cit> , broadening of the ventral nerve cord in sclerolinum  <cit> , or a neural circular bundle in vestimentifera  <cit> . this organization is repeated in the following opisthosomal segments of other siboglinidae, if present.

CONCLUSIONS
the female osedax nervous system revealed many similarities to the nervous system of other siboglinidae but also differed in term of the presence of multiple, widely-separated longitudinal nerves, extending throughout the trunk, and by their lack of giant axons and a segmented opistosomal region. moreover, the present, first, broader comparison of nervous system across osedax and siboglinidae has led to new proposed homologies of the ambiguous, and much debated, anterior segments in siboglinidae - with osedax females  suggested to comprise two in the trunk. osedax dwarf males are here suggested to have three body segments in total . this is also the first neurophylogenetic study performed on annelids and siboglinidae, leaving several transformations unambigously reconstructed at the deep nodes. the reconstruction did reveal that the osedax intraepidermal nervous system with multiple, widely separated nerve cords, double brain commissures, double palp nerves are siboglinid plesiomorphies; hereby bridging the evolutionary gap to non-siboglinid annelids and enhancing our understanding of the neural evolution within siboglinidae.

material
for recruitment of female osedax mucofloris, cow and whale bones were placed at 125 m depth off the coast of tjärnö, sweden, and successfully retrieved in  <dig>  <cit> , in close vicinity to a minke whale carcass sunk in october  <dig>  <cit> . all necessary permits were obtained for the described whale fall experiment; received from karin pettersson at the county administrative board västra götalands län, october  <dig>  the presently undescribed osedax “yellow collar” was sampled in november  <dig> in monterey bay, california , the usa, at 385 m depth from a gray whale skeleton. osedax priapus  were collected from bones of a northern fur seal and a northern elephant seal that were deployed in monterey canyon, ca, the usa, in  <dig>  and cow bones deployed at hydrate ridge, oregon, in  <dig>  <cit> . all bones were placed at 600-800 m depth. collections of the undescribed o. “nudepalp e”, were made on specimens living on whale skeletons deployed at 683-1820 m depth in monterey bay, ca, the usa  <cit>  in 2002- <dig>  <cit> . o. “yellow collar” and o. “nudepalp e” are separate undescribed phylogenetic entities as revealed by a molecular phylogeny  <cit> .

