BACKGROUND
adaptive evolution is subject to a number of constraining factors that can prevent a species from evolving an optimal phenotype for a particular selective pressure. adaptation can be constrained by available genetic variation  <cit> , and developmental  <cit> , biomechanical-chemical  <cit> , and functional  <cit>  factors. such constraints can impose qualitative and quantitative limits on adaptation  <cit> . further, natural selection acts upon the whole organism rather than on isolated traits, and thus, adaptive evolution may be constrained by the interaction between traits that are functionally or physiologically integrated. in fact, several studies have revealed that natural selection often involves tradeoffs among competing functions and places limits on the course or outcome of adaptive evolution  <cit> .

most seed plants at the time of seed production have two major fatty acid  sinks: the triacylglycerols  and the phospholipids . for the most part, tags are highly seed specific, occasionally also being produced in large quantities for fruits, e.g., in the mesocarp of avocado and oil palm, whereas pls are produced in every cell for production and maintenance of membranes  <cit> . in plants, fas are synthesized de novo in the plastid and modified there and in the endoplasmic reticulum . during synthesis in the plastids, all fas are initially saturated, with unsaturated fas being produced from these saturated fas by desaturases  <cit> . generally, plastid-generated fas are no longer than  <dig> carbons and have at most a single degree of desaturation. the majority of pl and tag are assembled in the er using fas exported from the plastid  <cit> . in the er, fas may be elongated and more highly desaturated before they are incorporated into tags and pls  <cit> . both pls and tags are synthesized by adding fas to a glycerol backbone.

evidence indicates that variation in the fa composition of both tags and pls has played a role in the adaptive evolution of each to temperature  <cit> . the relative proportions of saturated and unsaturated fas in seed tags often shift from high proportions of saturated fas at low latitudes—where germination temperatures are higher—to lower proportions at higher latitudes—where germination temperatures are lower  <cit> . in the case of pls, studies have shown that when temperatures drop, many plants plastically increase the proportion of unsaturated fas in pls, which is likely an adaptive plastic response to maintain the flexibility of cellular and other membranes during cold periods  <cit> . thus, fa composition in seeds and leaves seem to be under strong selection by temperature at both micro- and macro-evolutionary levels and affects the melting point and adaptation to different temperature regimens. hence, it will be important to identify chromosomal regions responsible for local adaptation and then characterizing the underlying genes as this information will be of immense importance for understanding and enhancing the fitness of the plants in different environmental conditions, breeding oil seed crops, understanding seed oil evolution and for selecting genotypes for producing good quality oil in brassica and other species.

since the fas for tags and pls are derived from a common source, selection to optimize each lipid class’s fa composition may be constrained by the selective pressures on the other class. our understanding of the genetics underlying the regulation of fa production has made considerable progress due to studies by ohlrogge and colleagues and other groups  <cit> . however, it is not immediately clear how use of particular fas in pls and tags might affect each lipid class’s fa composition. the outcome of selection could depend heavily on the mechanisms for producing the different pools of fas. for example, during cooler summers, increased demand for unsaturated fas in the pls could limit the availability of unsaturated fas in seed tags, causing the proportion of saturated fas in tags to be higher than is optimal. alternatively, if increased demand for unsaturated fas in the pls unregulated production of unsaturated fas, the net effect on the seed tags might be negligible or could even increase the relative amount of unsaturated fatty acids in them. in some plant species, the fa composition of tags is decoupled from changes in the fa composition of pls  <cit> , but this is not universal.

tradeoffs between the fa compositions of seed tags and pls may also depend on the seasonal germination and maturation time of the seeds. seed germination in temperate plants often occurs in spring, but those seeds are most often provisioned with tags in summer when seeds are maturing  <cit> . the demands for particular fas in pls during the period of seed maturation may conflict with the most appropriate fa composition in the tags for optimal germination in the spring. in addition, annual variation in summer temperatures might cause the relative amounts of saturated and unsaturated fas in pls to vary in different years, further complicating the ability of selection to optimize the fa composition of tags. the degree to which pl and tag production are coupled in arabidopsis thaliana is not known. a. thaliana produces fas for tags and pls that vary widely in their length, degrees of desaturation and melting points . some evidence indicates that the fa composition of its seed tags might be constrained by fa use in pls, but this is based upon only the inbred columbia  and landsberg erecta  lines  <cit> . however, the leaf pl fa composition is not supposed to have any correlation with seed tag fa composition. because, the correlation could be an artifact of the low genetic variation in the lines, we used  <dig> wild a. thaliana accessions that were collected over a wide latitudinal gradient in europe , to study whether the apparent tradeoffs seen in col and ler hold more generally. we also investigated whether a plastic response to temperature in pls affects the fa composition of seed tags by growing all  <dig> accessions at two temperature regimens. finally, we tested the strength of the correlations of the individual fas within pls and within tags, and between pls and tags.

RESULTS
the nine individual fas in seed tags and the five individual fas in pls showed continuous phenotypic variation. in the tags, we observed extensive variation in the proportions of five of the fas that is 16: <dig> , 18: <dig> , 18: <dig> , 18: <dig>  and 20: <dig> and less than 5% variation in the proportions of 18: <dig>  20: <dig>  20: <dig> and 22: <dig>  we also observed considerable variation in the proportions of 16: <dig> , 16: <dig>  18: <dig> , 18: <dig> , 18: <dig>  and 18: <dig>  in the pls.

latitudinal variation in tags and pls
the relative proportion of total saturated fas in tags decreased significantly with increasing latitude when plants were grown at low temperatures . at high temperature, the slope trended in the same direction but was non-significant when controlled for multiple tests, albeit marginally for one test . the slopes of the high and low temperature regressions were nearly identical, with the relative proportions of total saturated fas in tags decreasing by  <dig> %/degree of latitude. the relative proportion of total saturated fas in pls showed no significant relationship with latitude when corrected for multiple comparisons for both growing temperatures .

numbers in bold indicate significance at α =  <dig> .

adirection of the change in proportions of fas as latitude increases.

bsignificance of the change in proportions of fas as latitude increases for the high growing temperature treatment.

csignificance of the change in proportions of fas as latitude increasesfor the low growing temperature treatment.

dregressioncoefficients of the change in proportions of fas.

erate of change in proportions of fas per degree of latitude as latitude increases.

fgrowing temperature.

to assess which of the saturated fas were most responsible for the latitudinal cline in total saturated fas in tags, we examined the regressions of individual saturated fas and saturated fas in combination. none of the individual saturated fas exhibited a significant latitudinal cline for tags  even though all of them trended to lower relative proportions at higher latitudes. at low temperature, the sum of palmitic  and stearic  fas—which comprised more than 90% of the total proportion of saturated fas in tags—showed a significant latitudinal cline . a similar, but non-significant trend was seen for 16:0 + 18: <dig> at high temperature.

finally, we examined the unsaturated fas in pls and tags to see if any varied significantly with respect to latitude. none of the unsaturated fas in pls showed a significant relationship with latitude, whereas in tags, only erucic acid  in plants grown at low temperature varied significantly with latitude , decreasing as latitude increased. on average, the relative proportion of erucic acid decreased by  <dig> % /degree of latitude.

plastic responses of tags and pls to growing temperature
plasticity in tags
the average total saturated fas in tags was higher at higher growing temperatures . to further understand this plastic response, we performed four tests to assess the plastic responses of the proportions of total saturated fas and each of the individual fas in tags of plants grown at high and low temperatures: one-way ancovas that included latitude as a covariate and temperature as a fixed main effect, two-way anova which included temperature and accessions as the factors, one-tailed paired t-tests, and chi-square tests.

for the saturated fas, the proportion of total saturated and arachidic  fas were significantly different at the two growing temperatures for all four tests , decreasing at the lower growing temperature. palmitic acid  was significant in three of the tests  with the exception of the two-way anova  where it was nearly significant at fdr  <dig>  and trended in the right direction. although reaction norms did not show a universal response for all of the accessions , the results from the tests, particularly the chi-square, indicate that many more of them decreased at the lower growing temperature.

ameans and  of fa proportions at high and low growing temperatures.

btotal proportion of saturated fas.

call tests that were significant at α ≤  <dig>  are in bold.

for individual unsaturated fas, all four tests were significant for the relative proportions of oleic , linoleic , and eicosadienoic  fas at high and low growing temperatures . linolenic acid  was significant for three of the tests  with the exception of the two-way anova . for each trait, the direction of the reaction norms was not universal for all of the accessions , but the proportions of linoleic, linolenic and eicosadienoic acids generally increased for the low temperature treatment, and the proportion of oleic acid decreased.

plasticity in pls
for the fas in the pls, the proportions of total saturated, palmitoleic, stearic, oleic and linoleic  fas varied significantly by growing temperature, and only when ancovas and anovas  were performed , indicating that without correction for latitude, other factors obscured these trends. the trends of the fas were not in the expected direction because the relative proportions of saturated and stearic acids increased in plants grown at low temperature whereas the relative proportion of palmitoleic and linoleic acids decreased. only the relative proportion of oleic acid decreased at lower temperatures as expected.

ameans and  of fa proportions at high and low growing temperatures.

btotal proportion of saturated fas.

call tests that were significant at α ≤ <dig>  are in bold.

correlation of fas in tags and pls
we investigated the correlations between fas in tags and pls in plants grown at high and low temperatures to study whether genetic constraints might influence the fa proportions in each sink. we also quantified the correlations between individual fas within tags and pls to see how the proportions of fatty acids in each affect one another and to provide some insight into the regulation of the relative proportions of fatty acids in each lipid category.

correlations of fas between tags and pls
as expected we did not find any significant correlations between the fas of seed tags and leaf pls irrespective of temperature treatment .

a‘t’ indicates fatty acids in triacylglycerols.

b‘p’ indicates fatty acids in phospholipids.

cnumbers in bold indicate that the correlation is significant at q- value and bh-fdr of <dig> .

a‘t’ indicates fatty acids in triacylglycerols.

b‘p’ indicates fatty acids in phospholipids.

cnumbers in bold indicate that the correlation is significant at q-value and bh-fdr =  <dig> .

correlations among fas in tags
the pairwise correlations among the fas in tags were complex  and did not have a straightforward interpretation. at high temperature, nine of the correlations were significant when controlled for multiple tests, and at low temperature there were twelve. of these, only four were significant at both high and low temperature and all of them were negative correlations.

for each class of correlation combinations , the relative numbers of significant positive and negative correlations did not differ from a null expectation of equal numbers whether the data were analyzed by growing temperature or by lumping across growing temperatures .

one might expect reactants and products in pathways to be negatively correlated since conversion of one into the other necessarily decreases the reactant and increases the product. when the correlations of single-step reactant-product relationships were examined, no significant correlations were found for the high growing temperature, and one positive and one negative correlation were detected for the low temperature treatment. allowing one or two steps between reactant and product more clearly fit the hypothesis. at high temperature, four of the significant correlations were negative and none were positive, and at low temperature five were negative and one was positive. if the temperature results are lumped, there are enough values for a chi-square test, which is significant . interestingly, all of the significant cases where 18: <dig> was the reactant were seen at both temperatures and were all negative.

correlations among fas within pls
the pairwise correlations among the fas in pls were also complex . at high temperature, five of the correlations were significant when controlled for multiple tests, and at low temperature there were six. of these, three were significant at both high and low temperature. one was positive and two were negative.

for each class of correlation combinations , the relative numbers of significant positive and negative correlations did not differ from a null expectation of equal numbers whether the data were analyzed by growing temperature or by lumping across growing temperatures .

as with the fas in tags, we examined whether there was a consistent pattern of significant negative correlations between pl fatty acid reactants and products one or two steps apart. in all cases, only a small number of reactant-product relationships were significantly correlated, preventing any statistical analysis. also, in all cases the number of significant positive and negative correlations differed by just one.

discussion
evidence for a latitudinal cline
as predicted by the adaptive theory  <cit> , a. thaliana accessions follow a latitudinal cline for total saturated fa composition in their tags  independent of the growing temperature. the relative proportion of total saturated fas in tags of a. thaliana accessions decreased with latitude as predicted and in accordance with other species with broad latitudinal distributions  <cit> . the pattern was clearly significant at low growing temperatures and a nearly significant cline was observed at high growing temperatures.

compared to prior work with helianthus <cit> , the scatter around the regression was greater. at least two explanations might account for the difference. first, because the helianthus species studied are self-incompatible  <cit>  and a. thaliana is not  <cit> . it could be that the higher level of inbreeding in a. thaliana reduced genetic variation available to selection for optimizing the relative proportions of saturated and unsaturated fa in tags. second, the much smaller seed size of a. thaliana may have promoted longer distance migration of its seeds in transported soil or other material, and the higher rate of gene flow could be countering selection. since these explanations are not mutually exclusive, both could be operating. a third explanation, that genetic variation was depleted in populations as a. thaliana’s range expanded northward after the last ice age  seems less likely because helianthus likely underwent a similar range expansion in north america after the last ice age.

when the fas were examined individually, only one  in tags showed significant clinal variation . however, all individual tag fas either trended in the expected directions based upon their melting points or showed no trend. fas having melting points above 20°c and showing a trend all decreased at higher latitudes, and all fas having melting points below 20°c and showing a trend increased at higher latitudes. special comment needs to be made about erucic acid’s trend to lower levels at higher latitudes. in addition to having a relatively high melting point , erucic acid is also known to be unpalatable to many species of animals  <cit> . since herbivory generally decreases at higher latitudes  <cit>  selection might be stronger for higher levels of erucic acid at lower latitude. thus, both germination temperature and herbivory could be selecting for the relative proportions of erucic acid.

for the pls, no clear relationship was observed between latitude and fa composition. this might be expected because of previous work demonstrating adaptive plastic responses to temperature in the fa composition of pls  <cit> . adaptive plastic responses would weaken selection on genetically deterministic fa composition. however, we found no evidence for consistent adaptive plastic responses to growing temperature in a. thaliana . perhaps selection on seed tags has been stronger than that on the pls, but at this time we do not have an explanation for the behavior of the fas in the pls.

plastic responses of fa composition to growing temperature
in tags, palmitic , arachidic , oleic , linoleic , linolenic  and eicosadienoic  fas responded plastically to growing temperature, with the possible exception of oleic acid all of these fas responded to growing temperature in directions that would be adaptively plastic. higher melting point fas decreased at the lower growing temperature and lower melting point fas increased. oleic acid has a relatively low melting point , but it decreased at the lower growing temperature. this may be a consequence of the biosynthetic pathway that links oleic acid with linoleic and linolenic acid. the latter two unsaturated fas have much lower melting points . linoleic acid is produced by desaturating oleic acid, and linolenic acid is produced by desaturating linoleic acid. therefore, plastically lowering the melting point of tags by increasing the relative proportions of linoleic and linolenic acid may decrease the relative amount of oleic acid. this conjecture is supported also by the negative correlation between oleic and linolenic acid and the negative correlation between linoleic and linolenic acids .

in contrast, only one of the fas  of pls responded plastically to growing temperature as expected based on prior work on adaptive cold tolerance in membrane lipids  <cit>  . this result is very surprising and deserves further study. several other studies have demonstrated cold acclimation of plasma membranes in a. thaliana when temperatures drop below freezing  <cit> , but little has been done at the temperature used for our high temperature treatment. since a. thaliana is a cool weather species, it might grow so consistently under cooler temperatures that selection has been relaxed on plastic acclimation of the fa composition of its pls, at the temperatures we provided. however, this seems unlikely given the temperatures in europe when a. thaliana is setting seed and the appropriate plastic responses of the tags.

one might also conjecture that the adaptive plastic response of the fas in tags is constraining the adaptive plasticity of the pls. however, the fa composition of the leaf pl and seed tag is not supposed to have any correlation and the complete lack of significant correlations between any tag and pl fatty acids  indicates clearly that it is unlikely.

correlations of fa composition between and within tags and pls
prior studies on the ler and col accessions in a. thaliana indicated some genetic correlation between the fa compositions of seed tags and leaf pls  <cit> . our study of a broad latitudinal range of eighty-four wild accessions showed no evidence of these correlations. thus, revealing that there should not be any correlation observed between the fas of seed tags and leaf pls. this suggests that evolutionarily each lipid category is largely unconstrained by the other and can evolve independently of other within the constraints of available genetic variation.

the regulation of the relative amounts of fa types in pls and tags is very complex and the subject of much ongoing research  <cit> . our analysis of the genetic correlations among pairs of fas yielded only a little insight into the mechanisms that cause the amounts of some fas to influence the amounts of other fas. within the tags we did find some evidence that reactant-product relationships were causing negative relationships between some fa reactants and products sources and sinks of fas, this potential explanation applied to less than half of the significant correlations among the tag fatty acids . in the case of the pls some significant reactant-product correlations were also seen, but on balance, approximately half were positive and half were negative.

implications for evolutionary studies
the natural variation observed in this study in  <dig> accessions of a. thaliana and in  <dig> accessions in a previous study by o’neill et al. in  <dig>  <cit>  revealed extensive variation in tags in a. thaliana. in addition, since no correlation was observed between the fas in tags and pls, a significant latitudinal cline was observed for saturated fas and erucuc acid, and also a plastic response of fas to temperature was observed, a. thaliana will be an ideal system to study seed oil evolution. preliminary screening of fifteen fa synthesis genes of three of the accessions  showed that nine of these fa synthesis genes had polymorphisms . ten or more polymorphisms were observed in six  of these nine genes. the number of polymorphisms observed was greater in the introns, intergenic region within  <dig> bp upstream of the promoter and synonymous substitutions in the exon region indicating that selection could be acting on these genes and would be a suitable system to investigate seed oil evolution. since, the fas in pls did not follow the expected patterns; it would also be very useful to find out why the fas in pls are behaving differently.

implications of breeding seed oil crops
the response of fas to latitude and temperature and the presence of extensive natural variation suggest that recombinant inbred lines  can be generated from parents which differ in fa composition to conduct marker-assisted selection and to identify desirable alleles and introduce them into agricultural genotypes for seed oil breeding programs especially the brassica oilseed crops. preliminary investigation has identified several polymorphisms in fa genes, and modern sequencing technology can help us identify several polymorphisms which will enable us to detect relationships between phenotypic variation and gene polymorphisms in the current germplasm without generating a mapping population. the extensive information of the arabidopsis genome and the availability of several ril populations has been successfully used to elucidate the flowering time genes, fa desaturases and the glucosinate pathway  <cit>  and would be very useful to understand the seed oil pathway.

CONCLUSIONS
we report the first evidence supporting adaptive evolution of seed tags in a. thaliana on a latitudinal cline and the first evidence that the plastic responses of seed tags to growing temperature appear to be adaptive. we showed that as expected there were no significant genetic correlations between the fas in seed tags and leaf pls, indicating that selection can act on seed tags without being constrained by the fa requirements of pls. because of the many genetic tools available for manipulating a. thaliana, it is an excellent system for studying the mechanisms of the evolution of seed oil composition and also for breeding seed oil crops especially the brassica species.

surprisingly, we found no evidence for adaptive plastic responses of pls to growing temperature at the temperatures used in our experiments. given the evidence for adaptive plasticity at cool temperatures, this finding deserves further study.

