BACKGROUND
the gastrointestinal tract is the primary site where microorganisms interact with the host species. the gastrointestinal microbiota maintains the functions of nutrient, immune, and development regulation and is important for host health . the gut microbiota is commonly influenced by the host diet  <cit> . the composition of the intestinal microbial community is suggested to result from natural selection operating at the host level to stabilize the gut environment and at the microbial level to promote functional specialization  <cit> . the relative abundance of symbionts and pathogenic microbes reflects the health status of the host species  <cit> . microbial interactions, e.g., resource competition, represent a deterministic factor for the dominance of the gastrointestinal microbial community  <cit> . diets serve as a source of gut microbes, which are further selected by the gastrointestinal environment.

the gastrointestinal microbes are composed of autochthonous components  and allochthonous members . species composition of the gastrointestinal microbial community is different from that of environmental microbes  <cit> . firmicutes and bacteroidetes are the most abundant gastrointestinal microbial phyla  that were suggested to descend from the early colonists in mammalian gut evolution  <cit> , while proteobacteria was found to be most dominant in tadpoles  <cit> , house sparrow  <cit> , and fish  <cit> . the codominance of these phyla was suggested to be a consequence of niche partitioning and metabolic complementation  <cit> . a healthy gut microbial community occupied by native bacteria could establish a selective environment to prevent emerging pathogens from building up a necessary population size to cause disease. the native microbes can prevent other similar taxa for colonization by high density blocking, and this effect is like the “founder-takes-all” effect of the field of population ecology  <cit> . however, such “founder-takes-all” effect  <cit>  could be vanished if fast colonization by abundant allochthonous microbes  <cit> . here, host immunity not only plays a role as a selective pressure on intestinal microbes but also an object of natural selection by the emerging microbes.

since the importance of relationships between the food web complexity and species composition in an ecosystem, and between the diet content and intestinal microbiome is emphasized in literature  <cit> , we aimed to explore whether the change in ecosystems as a result of agricultural activities alters the intestinal microbial composition of wildlife. agricultural activities affect the distribution of wildlife in the natural environment. farmland biodiversity is typically lower than that in natural fields, which is reflected in a widespread decline of species richness and/or abundance of farmland wildlife . custom farming and agricultural intensification that rely on the use of fertilizers and pesticides recurrently create selective pressures not only on vertebrates, but also on invertebrates  <cit> , plants  <cit> , and soil microbes  <cit> . the change in land use alters the nutrient cycling of soil, which affects the diversity and abundances of numerous environmentally important genes of microbes  <cit> . changes in nutrient cycling affect the food webs of ecosystems  <cit> , and changes in heterotrophic processes and diet diversity can further alter the digestive-tract microbiome of animals  <cit> .

in this study, we used the rice frog fejervarya limnocharis   as a system to compare the food composition  and intestinal microbiota between natural and farmland frog populations. fejervarya limnocharis is widespread in east, southeast, and south asia. in taiwan, it is one of the dominant amphibian species in lowland areas and is commonly found in farmlands. the taiwanese f. limnocharis is phylogenetically inferred as a member of the core f. limnocharis group based on mtdna and allozyme evidence  <cit> . in this study, we profiled the diet and intestinal microbial composition of f. limnocharis in natural and farmland habitats. comparisons of the stomach contents and dominant intestinal microbes were made to understand the changes of intestinal microbiota under the selective pressure of environmental change, such as the habitat variation due to agricultural activities. the multiple comparisons allowed us to address three questions:  is there any dietary difference between frogs living in different habitats?  does the intestinal bacterial diversity differ within and between frogs living in different habitats?  does the compositional change in intestinal microbiota reflect the health of the in vivo microbial ecosystem in farmland frogs?

RESULTS
diet differentiation between habitats
a total of 26 f. limnocharis individuals , of which  <dig> originated from natural habitats and  <dig> from farmlands, had stomach contents. a total of  <dig> individual prey items were identified to  <dig> orders . the prey consumption rate was significantly different between the two sites . in the natural habitat, hymenoptera had the highest index of relative importance  score , followed by orthoptera . in farmlands, the highest and the second highest iri scores were  <dig>  and  <dig>  in orthoptera and coleoptera, respectively . the abundance and number of categories of stomach contents were significantly higher in natural habitat than that in farmlands , but the prey volume was not significantly different between habitats .table  <dig> stomach contents of f. limnocharis in natural habitat and farmlands

n
iri
n
iri

n number of prey, %f percentage of frequency of each prey item, %v percentage of prey volume, iri index of relative importance

p


sequencing depth and alpha-diversity of intestinal microbiota
the gut microbes of frog samples from the natural environment  and farmland  were used for exploring the influence of land use practices on intestinal microbial composition. we generated a microbial 16s rrna dataset consisting of  <dig>  filtered high quality, classifiable sequence reads from  <dig>  raw sequence reads in total , with a mean number of sequences per frog sample  <dig>  ±  <dig>  . the total number of microbial species  of intestinal communities characterized using a criterion of >97 % sequence similarity was  <dig>  with an average length of 496 bps per sequence. the average number of otus of each intestinal community was 592 ±  <dig>  ranging from  <dig>  to  <dig> . the average coverage was  <dig>  ±  <dig> , ranging from  <dig>   to  <dig>  . the rarefaction analysis indicated that the sequence samplings mostly reached the plateau phase, particularly for farmland frogs . the microbial community richness and diversity were inferred based on the otus characterized using the abundance coverage-based estimator  and chao <dig> indices, which are nonparametric species richness estimator accounting rare species. the ace of the intestinal microbiota of frogs from natural and farmland populations was  <dig>  ±  <dig>  and  <dig>  ±  <dig> , respectively , whereas the chao <dig> index was  <dig>  ±  <dig>  and  <dig>  ±  <dig> , respectively . the intestinal microbial community diversities in frogs from both natural and farmland populations were significantly different in terms of shannon index  but not significantly different in simpson index . the detailed estimates of alpha-diversity are shown in table  <dig> fig.  <dig> rarefaction curves for the intestinal microbial communities of rice frogs in natural habitats  and farmland  at a difference level of 3 %


ace abundance coverage-based estimator



dominant intestinal microbial taxa in rice frogs
the abundance and richness are significantly different between intestinal microbial species richness of f. limnocharis from natural and farmland population. the microbes of f. limnocharis mainly belonged to the phyla bacteroidetes, firmicutes, and proteobacteria:  <dig> ,  <dig> , and  <dig>  % in natural population, and  <dig> ,  <dig> , and  <dig>  % in farmland population, respectively . figure 2b showed an obvious increase of abundance in firmicutes and decrease in bacteroidetes in farmland frogs compared with those in natural habitats. the three highest-richness phyla of intestinal microbes are firmicutes, bacteroidetes, and proteobacteria . obvious increase richness in proteobacteria was shown in farmland frogs . we compared the identity and differences in microbial taxa between frog samples and between different habitats and found that the farmland frogs were composed of roughly  <dig> times more unique microbial taxa than the frogs from natural habitat, particularly in the sample f <dig> . in addition, there are several farmland-specific clades in neighbor-joining  trees of proteobacteria, actinobacteria, acidobacteria, and planctomycetes , indicating that the farmland environments have created special ecological niches for these microbial groups; in contrast, most intestinal microbes of the natural population are commonly found in farmland frogs, indicating that these microbial species retain their ancestral traits. most of the dominant microbes in frogs from natural habitats were common in farmland frogs. in contrast, many dominant microorganisms in farmland frogs were not found in frogs from natural habitats . this comparison suggests a replacement of dominant intestinal microbes in farmland frogs. the phylogenetic analysis also showed consistent results that the main composition of intestinal microbes of the rice frogs was different between the natural and farmland habitats. the phylogenetic grouping of the top  <dig> microbes indicated an admixture of dominant microbes collected from the same habitat, but represented apparent sorting of microbes in different habitats. taxa in the phyla bacteroidetes and firmicutes dominated the guts of frogs from the natural population , whereas taxa from the phyla proteobacteria and firmicutes dominated the intestines of the farmland frogs .fig.  <dig> comparisons of  the iri of food contents,  the abundance and  richness of intestinal microbial phyla between frogs of the natural habitats and farmlands

fig.  <dig> microbial composition revealed in neighbor-joining trees and venn diagram. a–f the phylogenetic analyses revealed that the microbes of phyla bacteroidetes and firmicutes are mostly found in both habitats, while several microbes of phyla proteobacteria, acidobacteria, planctomycetes, and actinobacteria are only found in farmland frogs. this result suggests that the special intestinal environment leads assemblage of unique microbes with higher phylogenetic niche conservatism in farmland frogs. the red, blue, and green dots indicate the microbes found in frogs of natural population only, farmland population only, and both natural and farmland populations, respectively. g venn diagram representing the species diversity of the intestinal microbial taxa in frog intestines. the numbers in circles represent the number of taxa. as can be seen, a higher number of unique microbial taxa were found in farmland frogs . these results revealed that the anthropogenic interference have altered the microbial phylogenetic distribution and species composition

fig.  <dig> neighbor-joining analysis for the top  <dig> species of intestinal microbes of rice frog in natural  and farmland  field ecosystems using the 16s rrna gene. taxonomic hierarchies of the identified microorganisms are listed after the nj tree. the symbol “-” indicates unclassified



classification of gut bacteria
intestinal microbial organisms were classified into three categories—generalists, specialists, and too rare—based on the multinomial species classification method. eight phyla were habitat generalists , ten were farmland specialists , one was a natural-habitat specialist , and ten phyla were too rare to be identified . at the species level, we found that  <dig> ,  <dig> ,  <dig> , and  <dig>  otus belonged to the generalist, natural-habitat specialist, farmland specialist, and too-rare types, respectively . this classification indicated that relatively low proportions of common gastrointestinal bacteria are found in both natural and farmland habitats and that approximately one-fifth of the bacteria differentiate the gut microbiota between habitats, while most microorganisms are rare in these habitats. we also performed pairwise comparisons of the gut microbial community of different host individuals and found a relatively high proportion of generalists and a lower proportion of specialists in gut bacterial communities of frogs within habitats  than those seen for frogs between habitats . however, these differences were not statistically significant, indicating that the individual effect cannot be neglected while explaining gut microbial diversity .

discussion
the differences in stomach contents of rice frogs may reflect the changes in faunal species composition. there were long-term anthropogenic disturbance such as the use of fertilizers and pesticides in custom farming. these anthropogenic activities may alter the faunal species composition in farming habitat although the invertebrate fauna of both natural and farmlands were not directly investigated. the diet analysis showed that the food volume of rice frogs was not significantly different between the natural and farmland habitats, but the stomach content  in farmland frogs showed lower diversity than that in frogs from natural habitats. such dietary alteration is probably ascribed to agricultural activities. the increase of soil life  in 14-year of monitoring conservation agriculture and organic farming indicated the harmful effects of pesticides and fertilizers on the terrestrial ecosystem  <cit> . in this study, the decreased number of prey categories in the guts of farmland frogs did not only point to the presence of simplified invertebrate and plant communities in farmlands and the decreased iri of hymenoptera , but also reflected the reduction of pollinator demand in the plant community  <cit> . in contrast, the increase in the iri of orthoptera  often suggested an increase in monocot abundance, particularly of the poaceae . the dietary analysis suggested the occurrence of dramatic changes in the farmland ecosystem due to agricultural activities.

conventional agriculture or custom farming may strongly alter the species composition in many ways  <cit> . for example, habitat destruction during farming may reduce diet resources and subsequently alter gastrointestinal microbiome composition in the howler monkey   <cit> . habitat degradation following temperature change  <cit>  and water pollution  <cit>  can also subsequently alter amphibian gut microbiota. research on the microbial composition surrounding the forest soils revealed similar dominant microbes among different forest types with slight difference in microbiota  <cit> . this is similar to our findings that the dominant gut bacteria are habitat generalists and most gut microbes belong to the “too-rare” type bacteria. however, we found that approximately one-fifth of the gut bacteria were habitat specialists , indicating that the varied habitat indeed altered the gut microbial composition.

our results suggest that the estimated intestinal microbial species richness in frog guts varied within the same order of magnitude as that in the human gut, as estimated based on fecal analysis  <cit> . the gut microbiota is mainly determined by the environmental conditions where the host species reside  <cit> . although relatively few frog samples were chosen to represent the gut microbiota of rice frogs, the gut environments of different frog individuals from the same habitat may be similar because frogs from the same habitat might share similar niches. the digestive fluid secreted from some specialized cells in the epithelium of the small intestine, which maintains a stable environment in the gut  <cit> . therefore, the dominant gut bacteria could be similar among frogs with similar habitats because the coexistence of these dominant bacteria reflects the consequence of long-term selection in the gut environment. we also found that both dominant gut bacterial species in the natural habitat  and farmland habitat  were habitat specialists, indicating that the external environment plays a major role in the gut-dominant bacteria in frogs.

on comparing the microbial species composition, a certain proportion of common microbial taxa  was similar between frogs from natural habitats and farmlands, revealing the host species specificity of microbes . the same pattern of similar taxa in different microbial communities of diet-differentiated, geographically distant host populations was also found in wild and laboratory drosophila  <cit>  and cylindroiulus fulviceps  with different feeding treatments  <cit> . however, the higher proportion of bacterial habitat specialists than habitat generalists suggested that external factors such as diet, geographic variation, and the environment still play major roles in determining the gut microbial composition . differences in dominant taxa, revealed by different clusters in phylogenetic analysis , suggested strong selectivity of the microbial community in the gut environment  <cit> .

the microbial abundances between frogs of natural habitat and farmland are different, especially in bacteroidetes and firmicutes. these two phyla are the most prevalent bacteria in digestive tracts of terrestrial animals  <cit> . in natural population, bacteroidetes are the mostly abundant microbes in rice frogs’ intestines followed by firmicutes, but the abundance of bacteroidetes is lower than firmicutes in farmland population . the bacteroidetes of the frogs of natural habitats were mostly composed of the order bacteroidales . bacteroidales are known as symbiotic bacteria essential for the digestive activity of several organisms  <cit> . however, the abundance of bacteroidetes decreased in farmland frogs and was replaced by firmicutes . higher firmicutes-to-bacteroidetes ratio could improve the efficiency of calories uptake from food  <cit> . these firmicutes microbes were almost composed of ruminococcaceae and lachnospiraceae, which digest cellulose and ferment glucose and xylose to obtain nutrients and are the prevalent bacterial families in herbivore’s digestive system  <cit> . the ecological meaning of the increased abundance of ruminococcaceae and lachnospiraceae in farmland frogs’ intestine is unknown yet, but the high firmicutes-to-bacteroidetes ratio suggests that the alteration of food composition might change the intestinal environments and microbial community in farmland frogs.

the differences in dominant intestinal microbial taxa between natural habitats and farmlands revealed in nj analysis indicated that the frogs acquired different bacteria due to the changes in environmental conditions. in contrast to the high frequency of common microbial taxa in frogs from natural habitats, the intestinal microbial communities of farmland frogs were characterized by higher ratios of unique microbes . these unique microbes mostly belonged to proteobacteria, actinobacteria, acidobacteria, and planctomycetes . from the analysis of the top  <dig> microbial organisms of every frog intestinal samples, we found that the classes of γ-proteobacteria in farmland frogs have an obvious increase in abundance  than the frogs of natural habitats . although γ-proteobacteria is common in guts of diverse taxa including amphibians , most of the γ-proteobacteria in farmland frogs belong to the order enterobacteriales  . several intestinal bacteria that are dominant in the farmland frogs, such as species in the genera treponema , roseomonas , clostridium  and genera legionella, acinetobacter, pseudomonas, citrobacter, morganella of γ-proteobacteria , were probably infectious disease-related pathogens. these bacterial genera are clinically proven to cause emerging infectious diseases  not only in humans , but also in amphibian 

these bacteria mostly belong to the proteobacteria. several proteobacteria have pathogenic or antipathogenic functions in amphibians, for example, janthinobacterium lividum in amphibian guts can inhibit the growth of lethal amphibian fungi  <cit> . certain antifungal bacteria from the genus pseudomonas that were discovered on the skin of amphibians, that is, the salamander   <cit>  and the frog   <cit> ), were also found in leopard frogs   <cit> ). the intestines of amphibians could serve as the reservoir for these antifungal bacteria via uptake of invertebrates that have come into contact with these bacteria in the soil or by eating their own shed skin  <cit> . the dynamics of these bacteria may be an indicator of host susceptibility to these lethal fungi  <cit> . these proteobacteria were previously found in smaller amounts than bacteroidetes and firmicutes in healthy adult mammals  <cit>  and human gastrointestinal samples  <cit>  and in the frogs from natural habitats investigated in this study.

in addition to the phylum proteobacteria, certain bacterial genera, such as flavobacterium in phylum bacteroidetes and actinobacterium and bacillus in phylum firmicutes, that are chytrid-resistant or have probiotic capabilities were mostly found in the gut of frogs in the farmland habitat  but rarely in the natural habitat . the higher proportion of pathogen-resistant bacteria found in farmland frogs reflected the higher occurrence rate of harmful pathogens in the farmland habitat. the intestinal microbial composition in frogs from farmlands was possibly under a high risk of infectious diseases. because stomach content is a proxy of food source in the natural environment, the differences in intestinal microbiota between farmland and natural habitats did not only explain the dietary alteration, but also reflected the risk of disease in farmland wildlife due to the ecosystem alterations as a result of anthropogenic activities.

intestinal microbiota can possibly reflect the state of the immune system and health of the host species  <cit> . different microbial composition in frog guts may be related to pathogen resistance, for example, differential antifungal bacterium composition between populations may be important in preventing chytrid fungus infections  <cit> . differentiation of gut microbial composition could even reflect overall body healthy of frogs. we found lower food diversity but higher intestinal microbial richness in farmland frogs than in natural habitats. this can possibly be explained by the recurrent selective pressures from agricultural activities simplifying the farmland fauna and increasing the risks of infectious disease in frog predators. simplified food sources could also weaken the immunity of wild animals and lead to higher pathogen invasion  <cit> . disturbance in gut microbial composition and microbial and ecological dynamics can lead to an increased risk of disease outbreaks in wildlife  <cit> , or provide less anti-pathogen reservoir for preventing infection of skin pathogen  <cit> . anthropogenic ecosystem alteration and pathogen or vector movements via human or natural agencies could give rise to eid in wildlife  <cit> . in this study, we showed that anthropogenic interference in ecosystem  and a change of “vectors”  can weaken frog immunity, which is reflected in the change of intestinal microbial climax.

CONCLUSIONS
alterations in diet and intestinal microbial composition in farmland f. limnocharis indicate that custom farming influences the intestinal ecosystem of wildlife. food may not only play a resource role but also be one of the factors serve as a vector of infectious microbes. the intestinal microbial composition reflected the result of intestinal environmental selection by both extrinsic  and intrinsic  factors. in the farmland habitat, less diverse food content and more diverse intestinal microbiota in frogs were found than in natural habitats. this result suggests that the in vitro ecosystem changes in vivo ecosystem. the intestinal microbiota of f. limnocharis was determined by both environmental factors and host species, whereas the dominant intestinal microbes were more easily affected by external environmental conditions than were the rare microbes. the increased numbers of proteobacteria suggested that pathogenic invasion was affected or will be affected by the weakened immunity of farmland frogs, which is probably caused by the heavy use of pesticides and fertilizers in farmland. the current study revealed the change in food resources and intestinal microbial diversity in farmland wildlife, and also suggested that outbreaks of disease-related bacteria within the gut microbial community can reflect the damage of in vivo and in vitro ecosystem health due to agricultural interference. it should be notified that the small sample size of frogs in this study may not be sufficient to draw strong conclusions, but could be indicative of changes across habitats. even though, this research still represents different microbial composition between habitats and provides a reference for future studies regarding the amphibians’ gastrointestinal microbiota.

