BACKGROUND
development, growth and homeostasis of multi-cellular organisms depend on the ability of individual cells to convert noisy, analog signals into clear, yes-or-no cell fate decisions, such as apoptosis, proliferation and differentiation. one way that cells make such decisions is through the use of signal transduction systems that sense the strength of an analog input signal, and then convert it into one of several distinct activity states, such as “on” or “off” output states of highly ultrasensitive or bistable systems  <cit> . for example, various mitogen concentrations can cause bistable activation of cyclin-dependent kinases to drive cell cycle transition decisions  <cit> . theoretical studies have shown that signaling networks containing positive or double negative feedback loops  <cit> , opposing modification enzymes exhibiting saturation kinetics  <cit>  and multi-site modification cycles  <cit>  can exhibit digital  behavior. however, not all networks that contain such motifs will necessarily exhibit digital behavior; such behavior arises from the cell’s precise tuning of quantitative, spatiotemporal aspects of the network. indeed, the signal transduction network connecting epidermal growth factor  to activation of extracellular signal-regulated kinase 1/ <dig>  contains many elements that potentially can lead to switch-like behavior. however, previous single cell studies in different mammalian cell lines have reported both graded  <cit>  and “all-or-nothing”  <cit>  egf-induced erk activation responses. one determinant of whether signaling is graded or switch-like is the spatial localization of signal processing proteins  <cit> .

under idealized conditions of cell-to-cell homogeneity, experimental techniques such as immunoblotting that measure average population responses may be able to detect all-or-none signaling responses, as long as the cell-to-cell variability in response activation thresholds are negligible  <cit> . however, it is becoming clear that the fundamental processes of transcription and translation are inherently stochastic, and give rise to significant cell-to-cell variability in protein levels  <cit> . the primary stochastic factors are  the rate of transcription, which is burst-like due to the low number  of genes for a particular protein in a cell  <cit>  and  the number of proteins produced per mrna, which is random due to competition between ribosomes and rnase for the mrna  <cit> . protein degradation also contributes to expression noise, but usually to a lesser extent, since protein copy numbers are typically large enough to dampen the comparatively small stochastic fluctuations in degradation rate. thus, even genetically identical cells show substantial variations in protein and mrna abundance, and as a result, may also show differences in their signaling responses  <cit> . because of such heterogeneity in protein abundance, population average measurements are not sufficient for investigating “all-or-nothing” responses; single-cell measurement techniques capable of capturing the dynamics of digital signal transduction are needed  <cit> .

here, we use flow cytometry to measure egf-induced, single-cell erk activation responses in a hek <dig> cell population. we observe bimodal response distributions in cell populations that are usually thought to indicate switch-like behavior in single cells. surprisingly, an erk cascade signaling model incorporating negative feedback and a graded, analog single cell dose response is shown to be consistent with the observed population responses. our model analysis suggests that such a conversion of analog responses in single cells to digital responses at the population level is due to protein abundance variability, which gives rise to a broad distribution of erk pathway activation thresholds and rasgtp levels. thus, bimodal response distributions do not necessarily imply digital single cell signaling; such distributions can arise from the interplay between protein expression noise and negative feedback-mediated, analog single-cell responses.

RESULTS
analyses of erk responses to egf in individual cells and populations
we used a flow cytometry-based phosphorylation assay   <cit>  to determine the kinetics and dose response of erk activation by egf in hek <dig> cells. we show that population averages obtained from fcpa results correspond well to traditional western blot measurements of activated  pperk levels in cell populations . however, the fcpa also reveals how individual cells contribute to this collective population response . the increase in mean values of pperk was dose-dependent after two minutes of egf stimulation, suggesting that analog signaling has occurred in individual cells. however, a fraction of cells contain pperk levels similar to those of the basal state. we refer to this feature of the distribution as a shoulder. although the height of this shoulder decreases with increasing egf dose, its position remains unchanged, indicating a dose-dependent fraction of cells failing to activate erk. at five minutes after egf stimulation, the pperk distribution is unambiguously bimodal, implying digital “on-off” behavior. higher egf doses increase the fraction of cells with high pperk  at the expense of the “erk-off” population. thus, in a dose-dependent manner, egf increases the probability that a cell will have erk turned on. at later time points, a bimodal distribution persists at some egf doses, while data from other doses show “shouldering” patterns similar to the behavior at  <dig> minutes. thus, the egf-induced erk response on the population level is complex consisting of both analog and digital elements.

next, we investigated how cell-to-cell variability in total erk abundance affects the pperk responses. measurements of the total erk distribution by flow cytometry, as expected, revealed substantial cell-to-cell variability in total erk levels . the data are well-approximated by a gamma distribution, which has been postulated by others to be a good representation of cell-to-cell variability in protein levels   <cit> . we then stimulated cells with  <dig>  and  <dig> nm egf for  <dig> minutes and measured both pperk and erk levels simultaneously . normalizing the pperk levels by the amount of total erk in each individual cell does not change the variance of “erk-off” population . this is most likely because measurement variability is dominant at these low pperk levels, and normalizing by total erk levels does not correct for measurement variability. normalizing the pperk levels by total erk levels does reduce the variability of the “erk-on” population, but does not change the fraction of cells in the “erk-on” and “erk-off” populations . this assertion is reinforced by the fact that pperk levels in both the “erk-off” and “erk-on” populations span the entire spectrum of total erk levels . moreover, there is significant positive correlation between total erk and pperk levels in both the erk-off and erk-on populations . thus, although cell-to-cell variability in erk abundance contributes to pperk response variability, it does not control bimodality, raising the question of what other factors contribute to the observed bimodality.

stochastic, dynamic modeling explanation of the data
egf activates the small gtpase ras, which activates erk downstream of the raf and mek kinases. although we were not able to measure gtp-bound active ras  by flow cytometry, the population average dose and dynamic responses were assayed via pull-down and western blotting, and then quantified . these population average data show a rapid rise and dose-dependent peak in rasgtp levels after egf stimulation, followed by a fast decline. although the most direct interpretation of these rasgtp responses  is a unimodal rasgtp distribution, a recent study suggested that in t lymphocytes, a positive feedback between rasgtp and its activator guanine exchange factor son of sevenless  leads to bistability and hysteresis in ras activation  <cit> . if ras activation was also bistable in hek <dig> cells, then two distinct rasgtp populations would exist with high mean and low mean rasgtp levels . stimulation by egf would only affect the relative fraction of cells in the two populations, but not their means. since under basal conditions pperk levels are negligible , the low mean rasgtp population would not contribute to erk activation, implying that there is a threshold above which rasgtp levels cause erk activation . if we assume a simple sigmoidal dose–response relationship between rasgtp and pperk levels , then a defined high mean rasgtp population would induce a defined high mean pperk population with boundaries eon-low and eon-high . however, the flow cytometry data in figure 1a-d show that when clear bimodality is present, eon-low and eon-high are different for various high mean pperk populations. thus in hek <dig> cells, our single cell pperk signaling data seem to be inconsistent with a bistable rasgtp model.

if the rasgtp response to egf is unimodal, then how might these mixed analog-digital responses emerge from salient features of the mapk/erk cascade? at the single cell level, dynamic responses are encoded by the pathway topology and reaction kinetics. therefore, we examined different configurations of the mapk/erk cascade for their ability to reproduce the experimentally observed behavior. specifically, we sought topologies where simulations showed that  distributions of active erk display bimodal/shouldering behavior with increasing egf dose, and  the “erk-on” population mean increases with increasing egf dose at early time points, but decreases with time at constant egf dose. to explore this, we used a previously developed mechanistic model that relates active ras to pperk  <cit> , and investigated in silico the ability of different network topologies to reproduce our experimental observations . by changing the feedback strength parameter  in this model, we created three different topologies: positive feedback , ultrasensitive , and negative feedback , all of which have been experimentally observed for mapk cascades under various circumstances .

steady-state analysis
first, we characterized the steady-state input–output behavior of these three models by changing the input  from zero to  <dig> nm at  <dig> nm increments and allowing the system reach a steady-state between each step change. then, we reversed the stimulation, this time changing the input from  <dig> to zero nm. the pf model exhibits bistability/hysteresis, whereas the us and nf models do not . in fact, due to the inherent properties of a negative feedback loop coupled with a kinase amplifier module, the nf model exhibits a smooth, analog input–output relationship  <cit> . however, the nf model also exhibits a threshold of erk activation at low rasgtp levels as a result of the multi-tier, multi-site phosphorylation structure of the mapk/erk cascade  <cit> .

these deterministic simulations correspond to input–output curves for an average cell. to incorporate stochastic fluctuations in reaction rates, we applied the gillespie algorithm to integrate the differential equation. however, these solutions did not appreciably change the steady-state dose responses , indicating that under these conditions and model parameters, reaction rate fluctuations do not constitute a significant source of signaling variability. this is most likely due to the relatively high abundance of the mapk/erk cascade components.

we therefore explicitly included protein expression variability in the models. we first investigated whether the gamma distribution provides a generally valid model for the distribution of protein levels, as others have suggested  <cit> . we found that there is good agreement between gamma distribution fits and both experimental and stochastic simulation data from the literature   <cit> . next, we performed our own stochastic simulations using a simple protein expression model where a gene can be active or inactive, an active gene can produce mrna, mrna can produce protein, and both mrna and protein can degrade, all with first order kinetics. we then analyzed the resulting distribution of steady-state protein abundance obtained from multiple independent simulations under  <dig> different parameter conditions . for most conditions, the steady-state protein abundance distribution is well represented by a gamma distribution . therefore, for the steady-state analysis we sampled total levels of raf, mek and erk from a gamma distribution, and computed the dose response curves for  <dig> cells, each cell having different, sampled levels of raf, mek and erk . the means of these stochastic, steady-state response curves  have the same qualitative features as the deterministic curves, and the pf model remains bistable. however, there is substantial cell-to-cell variability in the dose responses. the rasgtp levels eliciting half-maximal pperk responses vary significantly, as do the maximum pperk levels. according to these results, stochastic variability in protein expression is a major contributor to steady-state, cell-to-cell signaling variability, inducing a wide distribution of erk activation thresholds.

analysis of transient responses
to simulate the dynamic behavior of pperk, we first specified the rasgtp input kinetics, according to the unimodal rasgtp distribution hypothesis discussed above. experimental data show that in egf-stimulated hek <dig> cells, rasgtp levels peak between 1– <dig> minutes after egf stimulation and then, approximately  <dig> minutes later, decay to a steady-state value that is slightly higher than basal rasgtp levels . moreover, increasing the egf dose increases the peak magnitude of rasgtp levels, and shortens the rise time. we incorporated these experimentally observed trends into a simple mathematical model , and obtained simulated rasgtp dynamics. we then used these simulated dynamics as input to the mapk/erk cascade model for determining the pperk dynamic and dose responses . to incorporate cell-to-cell variability in ras levels, we sampled the peak rasgtp values from a gamma distribution whose mean increases with increasing input magnitude .

using these rasgtp dynamics, we then investigated which models  reproduce the experimental observations described above. as expected, the pf and us models show bimodal population behavior because of their switch-like input–output responses . but surprisingly, so too does the nf model, despite exhibiting an analog input–output relationship . this bimodality in the nf model is due to the wide range of erk activation thresholds introduced by protein expression variability , combined with variability in egf-induced rasgtp levels. thus, all three topologies exhibit time and dose-dependent bimodality or “shouldering”. however, only the nf model simulations, and not those of the us or pf models, reproduce proper behavior of the erk-on population mean, namely that the mean increases as a function of dose at short times , and decreases as a function of time at a particular egf dose .

we conclude that for the realistic parameter values used here, the nf model with protein expression variability is most consistent with experimental data. to examine if this conclusion holds over a wide range of parameter values, we employed parameter sensitivity analysis . this analysis showed that models with negative feedback preferentially demonstrated the experimentally observed signaling characteristics over the examined parameter ranges . yet, we cannot rule out the possibility that positive feedback and ultrasensitive systems may also exhibit the experimentally observed behavior. indeed, sensitivity analysis also showed that under some rare parameter conditions, the mean pperk levels in the erk-on population increase as a function of dose at short times for the pf and us models . one mechanism that may lead to this pf and us model behavior is if the pperk activation kinetics were slow, such that the behavior at  <dig> and  <dig> min post egf stimulation were due to transient effects, rather than a pseudo-steady state phenomenon. yet, for pf models, simulated pperk signaling remains high over the 30-minute time course , rather than returning closer to basal levels as the experimental data show . thus, the erk cascade model with negative feedback seems to be the most consistent with our experimental observations over a wide range of parameter values.

test of the negative feedback prediction
although the preceding analysis suggests that in our hek <dig> cell system the most likely net feedback strength from erk is negative, parameter sensitivity analysis showed that ultrasensitive or positive feedback systems might also account for such data, albeit in rare circumstances. if the feedback were negative, blocking erk activity should increase the activation of upstream elements, such as rasgtp. therefore, we measured the dynamic and dose response of rasgtp with and without the mek inhibitor u <dig>  and found that blocking erk activation increased rasgtp levels, confirming the presence of strong negative feedback . although positive feedback and ultrasensitivity have been observed in various mapk cascades , in hek <dig> cells the major feedback regulation is negative, confirming the predictions of the modeling. notably, this feedback is less significant at five minutes after egf stimulation, when the rasgtp response is saturated and pperk levels are at their peak, implying that either this feedback is slow , or perhaps that there are alternative negative feedback mechanisms.

to investigate whether alternative negative feedback mechanisms may explain the weak feedback effects at  <dig> minutes post-stimulation, we repeated the u <dig> experiment with the egf receptor ligand tgfα. although both egf and tgfα activate the egf receptor and induce receptor endocytosis, egf preferentially targets the receptor to multi-vesicular bodies and lysosomal degradation, while tgfα enhances receptor recycling and surface availability  <cit> . thus, it is possible that egf-induced receptor degradation or sequestration may be influencing our results. we found that the tgfα-induced rasgtp levels do not differ from those induced by egf in the presence or absence of the mek inhibitor u <dig> over a 30-minute time course . therefore we conclude that negative feedback from erk seems to dominate trafficking-mediated effects.

discussion
we have studied egf-induced signal transduction to erk in single hek <dig> cells, finding that the conversion of an analog signal at the single cell level to an apparent digital response at the population level can be mediated by a combination of cell-to-cell variability in protein expression and a pathway design that incorporates negative feedback . a uniform step increase in egf concentration causes a wide distribution of rasgtp levels due to cell-to-cell heterogeneity in protein expression. cell-to-cell heterogeneity in protein expression also causes significant variability in the sigmoidal dose response relationship between rasgtp and pperk, and in particular, in the pperk activation threshold . because cell-to-cell variability in rasgtp levels can span the range of erk pathway activation thresholds, the pathway is activated to various degrees in individual cells. a distribution of pperk levels ensues across the cell population. the mean of the pperk distribution depends on egf dosage and agrees with results obtained from western blots. despite the fact that the negative feedback smooths the rasgtp/pperk dose–response relationship, a threshold for pperk activation persists. this threshold element further enhances cell-to-cell variability in pperk levels, and results in bimodal responses at the population level. thus, the resulting bimodal distribution relies on a combination of a threshold behavior and a linear pperk increase followed by saturation behavior with increasing egf dose . surprisingly and counterintuitively, bimodality does not require switch-like behavior at the single-cell level, but can arise from cell-to-cell variability in protein expression and a pathway activation threshold. thus, cells can retain the robustness benefits offered by negative feedback  <cit> , while generating on/off responses at the cell population level that are thought to be critical for cell fate decisions.

our observations are unlikely to be caused by a fraction of cells simply not binding ligand. first, under our experimental conditions , at the lowest ligand dose , the ratio of egf molecules to cells is approximately  <dig>  making it very unlikely that a cell does not encounter a ligand molecule. second, for nearly all egf doses, a significant fraction of cells is in the “erk-on” population at some point in time, indicating that most cells have been activated and therefore had bound ligand.

how might cells still generate reliable signals despite protein expression noise? one possibility is that cells have a reliable fold-change response of pperk from basal levels, and that downstream of pperk cells employ systems that sense fold-changes rather than absolute levels. in fact this fold-change scenario has recently been shown to be the case. in cells stably expressing erk2-yfp from the endogenous promoter, egf stimulation led to widely varying maximum nuclear erk2-yfp accumulation, with a coefficient of variation  of approximately  <dig>   <cit> . however, normalizing the maximum nuclear erk2-yfp signal by the basal levels of erk2-yfp in the same cell, which yields fold-change responses, lowers the cv by approximately 3-fold  <cit> . this is consistent with our observed effects of total erk abundance variability on the total variance of pperk in the erk-on population . to sense these fold-changes, rather than absolute levels, a cell may use a type- <dig> incoherent feedforward loop , where an input x activates both an intermediate y and the output z, but y represses z  <cit> . such a network structure may in principle be downstream of pperk , which causes the immediate-early expression of multiple genes including c-fos, which can mediate general transcriptional repression perhaps even of itself  <cit> .

although protein expression noise is certainly a hindrance to some biological functions, and evolution has selected for mechanisms such as the i1-ffl that allow a cell to deal with this noise, there are potential benefits of and perhaps even essential functions for such noise. tissue homeostasis may in fact require protein expression variability. consider that there is no protein expression variability, and all cells that are involved with, for instance, hematopoiesis, respond identically to the various proliferation and differentiation cues. the body needs to produce, from the hematopoietic stem cells, a balance between the lymphoid and myeloid progenitors. if all the hematopoietic stem cells responded identically, then it would be nearly impossible for the body to maintain a finely tuned balance between the production of these two lineages. the same logic applies to the further differentiation of lymphoid and myeloid progenitors into various other downstream cell types, such as megakaryocytes, erythrocytes, b cells, t cells, and natural killer cells, where finely tuned control of differential cell-fate decisions is even more critical. thus, it is likely that without protein expression noise-induced phenotypic variability, homeostasis of hematopoiesis, and probably other tissues, would not be possible. this logic argues for a conceptual model whereby growth factor concentration, in tissues, controls the probability a cell will choose a particular fate.

CONCLUSIONS
it is commonly thought that the existence of bimodal signaling behavior on the population level is indicative of so-called digital behavior  of the underlying signaling network in single cells. our work demonstrates that this is not necessarily the case; protein expression noise coupled with nonlinear network dynamics can bring about digital population responses from analog single cell dose responses. in particular, we show that a network combining an activation threshold and strong negative feedback also robustly displays such bimodal population behavior due to cell-to-cell variability in protein expression levels. this system retains the benefits of robustness arising from negative feedback, while simultaneously generating population-level on/off responses thought to be critical for cell fate decisions. overall, the results extend our understanding of the amazing behavioral complexity that can be displayed by even small molecular networks  <cit> .

