BACKGROUND
understanding the genetic basis of adaptive changes has been a major goal of evolutionary biology. so far, complete, comprehensive analyses have been possible only in microorganisms . the advent of a new generation of massively parallel dna sequencing technologies  brings the promise of rapid progress in understanding the genetic basis of adaptation also in more complex organisms, including mammals  <cit> . the marriage of large-scale selection experiments  with new sequencing technologies appears to be a prospective research strategy to this end.

even now, whole genome resequencing in most non-model eukaryotes, possessing complex genomes, is not a viable option, due to challenges with assembly in the presence of large amounts of repetitive sequences, and it is unclear whether the situation will improve in the near future  <cit> . therefore, researchers have turned to transcriptome analysis as a powerful and universal tool for identification of both variation at the gene expression level and sequence polymorphisms in coding regions. deep-coverage transcriptome sequencing  enables the developmental stage and/or tissue-specific analysis of the abundance of transcripts as well as detection of sequence variants  <cit> . thus, a comprehensive characterization of the transcriptional differences between selection regimes in terms of single nucleotide polymorphisms , splicing variants, transcription start sites and at the level of transcription of individual genes is possible. the design and feasibility of rnaseq experiments, however, depend on the availability of the reference genome to which the short reads from rnaseq experiments are aligned. if the reference genome is not available, which is the case for the majority of non-model eukaryotes, the lack of genomic resources may be circumvented by employing a two-step strategy: i) assemble the transcriptome de novo  <cit> , and then ii) use the assembly as a reference to align the short reads from rnaseq experiments. if the initial assembly is performed on sequences derived from multiple individuals, the detection of sequence differences between individuals or populations  can be also performed at this stage.

theoretically, producing both de novo assembly and obtaining information about the levels of transcription would be possible in a single step, although currently available technologies impose serious constrains on such experiments. technology offering long reads  does not provide enough coverage  for detailed expression profiling, while assembling short reads provided in large amounts  by illumina and abi solid has been notoriously difficult. thus, de novo assembly using  <dig> technology or a combination of  <dig> and shorter read technologies  <cit> , followed by expression profiling using short reads seems a reasonable approach.

when selecting the organ and/or developmental stage for transcriptome characterization one encounters a tradeoff between maximizing the number of distinct transcripts and maximizing coverage of individual transcripts, the two determinants of transcriptome completeness. this tradeoff is likely to remain even when cdna normalization is used to limit the variation in abundance of transcripts from various genes, simply because the expression of many genes is spatially or temporally restricted. a common practice that maximizes transcript discovery is pooling rna extracted from multiple tissues and/or developmental stages  <cit> . however, this approach usually comes at the expense of the completeness of individual transcript sequences. while sequences of housekeeping genes, which are highly expressed in most tissues and developmental stages, will be fully reconstructed, genes with low or limited expression might be entirely missed or only patchily covered. in higher eukaryotes, an additional problem is widespread alternative splicing, often tissue-specific  <cit> , which may compromise transcriptome assembly. therefore, the other popular approach is to characterize the transcriptome of a single tissue  <cit> .

in the present study, we performed analysis and de novo assembly of the bank vole heart transcriptome using 454/roche titanium technology. the bank vole is an important organism in evolutionary, ecological and behavioral studies  <cit> . however, its genome is not available, and, to our knowledge, no genome project for this species is under way. the direct impetus for this study has been a large experimental evolution study using bank voles selected for high aerobic metabolism during locomotor activity  <cit> . the experiment addresses important questions about the evolution of endothermy and the genetic architecture of intra- and interspecific variation in metabolic rates. genomic and transcriptomic resources are essential for extracting the maximum amount of information from this large-scale experiment  <cit> . we decided to concentrate on the transcriptome of a single tissue and selected the heart because its role in aerobic exercise performance is obvious, and differential gene expression in hearts of rats from lines characterized by low and high aerobic capacity has been already reported  <cit> . association of differential gene expression and aerobic metabolism of the heart has been also shown at the level of individual variation in fish  <cit> .

during the analysis of the bank vole heart transcriptome, we used the genomic resources available for the best characterized model mammal - the laboratory mouse. the bank vole and mouse diverged ca. 20- <dig> million years ago  <cit> . this moderate level of divergence, although too high for direct mapping of the bank vole short sequencing reads to the mouse genome, makes possible similarity searches of both protein sequences and nucleotide sequences available for mouse. thus, a more comprehensive evaluation of the completeness of the transcriptome than mere cataloging genes based on similarity to protein sequences is possible. consequently, in the present paper we not only provide information on the number of protein coding genes but also estimate the completeness of transcripts, including untranslated regions, and evaluate biases with regard to the coverage of various transcript regions. furthermore, for the first time, we present evidence that a significant part of sequences derived from a "typical"  <dig> transcriptome study in a nonmodel organism may represent the transcribed non protein-coding parts of genome, for example long noncoding rnas. finally, we compare the sequences of transcribed genes between lines selected for high metabolic rate and controls and identify candidate snps that underlie the response to selection.

RESULTS
sequencing and assembly
the bank vole cdna was sequenced in a single  <dig> titanium run, which produced a total of  <dig>  million reads  of an average length of  <dig>  bp and a median length of  <dig> bp. pooled cdna from four selected lines was sequenced in one half of the picotiter plate and pooled cdna from four unselected control lines was sequenced in the other half of the plate. all analyses except assessing snp differences between selected and control lines were performed on the full dataset. after adapter trimming and removal of reads with high similarity to repetitive sequences in repbase,  <dig>  million reads  of minimum length  <dig> bp were used for cap <dig> assembly. the detailed statistics of these "cleaned" reads are presented in table  <dig> and fig.  <dig>  it is notable that a substantial number of "cleaned" reads were longer than  <dig> bp.

"cleaning" involved adapter trimming and removal of reads with high similarity to repetitive sequences.

cap <dig> assembling resulted in  <dig>  contigs  of an average length of  <dig>  and a median length of  <dig> bp; n <dig> was  <dig> bp . the maximum length of a contig was  <dig>  bp, and the length of a substantial number of contigs  exceeded  <dig> kb . the 10% of longest contigs accommodated almost 60% of all assembled bases . contigs were composed on average of  <dig>  reads , however the median number of reads per contig was three . very high coverage of certain contigs should be noted, with the maximum reaching  <dig>  reads per contig and the maximum average per base coverage of  <dig> . we detected in our trimmed reads  <dig>  microsatellite repeats, the majority of them containing dinucleotide motifs , followed by tetra-  and trinucleotide repeats .

functional annotation of the transcriptome
searching the swissprot database revealed that  <dig>   contigs and  <dig>   singletons showed similarity to proteins in the database at an e-value threshold 10- <dig> . in total, we identified significant similarity to  <dig>  genes. many more sequences exhibited similarity to sequences from the ensembl collection of mouse transcripts :  <dig>  contigs  and  <dig>   singletons representing  <dig>  ensembl genes . interestingly, a number of contigs  and singletons , that did not have hits in ecmt did have hits in swissprot. over 60% of such sequences showed homology to viral or transposon proteins . contigs and singletons without hits in ecmt were blasted against the mouse and rat genomes as well as the aceview  <cit>  nonredundant database of mouse transcripts. a substantial proportion of contigs  showed similarity to the mouse or rat genome, and two-thirds of them had hits in both genomes . a qualitatively similar picture was obtained for singletons, although the proportion of sequences with hits  was lower than for contigs . the absolute number of singletons with hits to genomes was higher than the number of singletons with hits to ecmt. a remarkable result is that a large number of sequences  had hits in the aceview although this database covers only less than 10% of the mouse genome. thus, sequences that did not match ecmt but matched genomes were highly enriched in sequences known to be transcribed.

ecmt - ensembl collection of mouse transcripts.

results of blast searches against mouse and rat genomes and the aceview collection of mouse transcribed sequences.

we compiled the list of the one hundred most abundant genes, as measured by contigs with the highest per-base coverage . several conclusions may be drawn from the inspection of this table. genes for all proteins encoded in mitochondrial and for both mitochondrial ribosomal rnas were among the high-coverage contigs. a number of nuclear genes encoding mitochondrial proteins were present as well. in contrast, only five genes encoding structural cardiac muscle proteins or proteins involved in the cardiac muscle contraction were detected among the most abundant genes. overall, although the normalization procedure was successful, as judged from the gel images before and after normalization, the dynamic range of library, expressed as the total number of bases matching a transcript divided by the transcript length, still spanned six orders of magnitude .

completeness of the transcriptome
to evaluate the completeness of the transcriptome, we checked whether transcripts of all genes normally present in most mammalian cells could be detected. we tested for the presence of genes encoding proteins forming selected macromolecular complexes and genes encoding proteins involved in basic metabolic pathways. in five of six macromolecular complexes and all four evaluated metabolic pathways, all of the involved genes were identified in the bank vole heart transcriptome .

we also evaluated the presence of genes that should be expressed in the heart because their products are structural and functional components of the cardiac muscle or are involved in regulation of heart function. we selected five geneontology categories related to cardiac muscle organization and contraction: 1) contractile fiber part , 2) myofibril , 3) cardiac myofibril assembly , 4) sacrcomere organization , 5) cardiac muscle contraction , and then compiled a nonredundant list of mammalian genes in these and all children categories and checked whether these genes were detected in our dataset. we excluded from the analysis eleven genes not present in the mouse heart est library  and detected  <dig> of the  <dig>  remaining cardiac muscle-related genes in our dataset .

of the  <dig>  unigenes with assigned gene symbols known to be expressed in the mouse heart ,  <dig>  of these symbols are present in the ensembl collection of mouse genes. we detected  <dig>   of them in our sequences, which indicated that representation of genes expressed in the heart, regardless of their expression levels, was almost complete in our study. this conclusion holds even if we consider all mouse unigenes, including those with no gene symbol assigned; such unigenes represent poorly characterized, often weakly expressed transcripts. blast searches of the bank vole sequences against the entire mouse unigene database detected  <dig> % of the  <dig>  unigenes with expression reported in the heart. on the other hand, sequences similar to  <dig>  mouse unigenes not known to be expressed in the mouse heart were detected, indicating that the expression information in public databases may be very incomplete.

because two steps of our cdna preparation procedure involved pcr amplification, a possible bias against detection of long transcripts might have occurred. to evaluate this possibility, we compared the length distribution of transcripts in all mouse ensembl genes  with the length distribution of transcripts of genes detected in the bank vole. contrary to the expectation, we found that genes with short transcripts were underrepresented in our experiments, the relative frequencies of genes with transcripts 1- <dig> kb long were almost identical in ensembl mouse gene collection, and genes with longer transcripts were actually overrepresented in our dataset . thus, no bias against the detection of longer transcripts was introduced by our amplification procedures.

another, perhaps more informative, measure of transcriptome completeness is the fraction of the transcript length covered by the bank vole sequences. as the reference we used the data on the transcript length and location of coding sequences from the ecmt . nearly full  transcript length was obtained for  <dig>  transcripts, and for many more ), an almost complete cds was identified . as could have been expected there was a negative correlation between the mouse transcript length and the fraction of transcript covered by the bank vole sequences, although this effect was rather weak  . the mean fraction covered was  <dig>  . notably, the coding regions of transcripts had a much higher fraction of their length covered  than 3'  and 5'  utrs .

there are at least two alternative explanations for the lower 3' and 5' utr coverage. it is possible that a bias was introduced during laboratory/sequencing procedures, causing under-representation of cdna ends both in the primary  <dig> library and, consequently, in the obtained sequences. on the other hand, under-representation of utrs may reflect weaker evolutionary conservation of these regions, resulting in a lack of sequence similarity  to mouse transcripts over a substantial portion of contig/singleton  length. thus, artifactual "under-representation" of these regions would be caused by sequence divergence in the utrs beyond the point of blast-detectable similarity and not by the actual bias against utrs in our sequences. we evaluated these two explanations by analyzing cs mapping to those mouse transcripts that contained the protein coding regions. assuming that each cs indeed represented a continuous cdna stretch, for each cs we computed the proportion of its length that did not have significant similarity to the mouse transcript, separately for the parts falling into 5'utr, cds and 3'utr. the proportion was much higher in 5' utrs  and 3'utrs  than in cds . thus, weaker evolutionary conservation of untranslated transcript regions substantially contributes to the less complete utr representation in our study.

based on the information about the completeness of the identified transcripts, one may ask how much more sequencing effort would be needed to obtain nearly complete transcript lengths of the majority of genes expressed in the bank vole heart. the relationship between transcript completeness and the per base coverage averaged over the total transcript length  indicates that, to achieve 75% transcript completeness for transcripts <  <dig> kb,  <dig> × coverage is needed, and, for longer transcripts even >  <dig> × may be required. the coverage obtained in the present study varies widely, but for 75% of transcripts <  <dig> kb, it was >  <dig>  ×. thus, to achieve the 75% transcript completeness for 75% transcripts <  <dig> kb with the highest coverage, an additional  <dig>  <dig> titanium runs would be theoretically needed, and even more sequencing would be necessary to achieve completeness of longer transcripts. however, 50% completeness of 75% transcripts <  <dig> kb with the highest coverage would require only three additional runs. the median coverage for transcripts <  <dig> kb obtained in our study was  <dig> ×, sufficient to achieve ca. 50% completeness of the half of transcripts 

snp differences between selection regimes
because most  <dig> sequencing errors are indels, we analyzed only substitution-type single nucleotide polymorphisms  in our data. in  <dig>  of the snps detected by gigabayes, each variant was present in at least  <dig> sequencing reads, minimising the impact of sequencing errors  <cit> . we then compared frequencies of these snps between selection regimes. frequencies of  <dig> snps  differed between the selection lines and unselected control at the 10- <dig> significance level  and  <dig>  at the 10- <dig> level . searches of the second-highest level gene ontology categories revealed that genes harboring snps that were differentiated between the selection lines at 10- <dig> level were significantly enriched only for "organelle part" , and the representation of snp enriched genes was nonrandom. further inspection of go revealed that this was due to the highly significant overrepresentation of genes for mitochondrial proteins . it should be noted, however, that these genes were overrepresented among the contigs with highest per-base coverage, constituting about half of these genes , which might have made detection of snps with significant differences among lineages easier due to the higher coverage.

discussion
assembly quality
the present study used a third generation of  <dig> technology , which yielded a usable median read length of almost  <dig> bp. as expected, longer reads produced better assembly, in terms of the average and maximum contig length, than reported in most studies employing the first generation, gs <dig>  <cit>  and second generation, flx  <cit> ,  <dig> technologies. almost three thousand contigs in our dataset exceeded  <dig>  bp in length, with the longest contig reaching nearly  <dig>  bp, again a substantial improvement in comparison to most studies performed with gs <dig> and flx technology. on the other hand, only 66% of all high-quality bases sequenced in the present experiment were assembled into contigs, with 34% remaining as singletons. similar values were obtained with earlier generations of  <dig> pyrosequencing. the singleton sequences may either be derived from transcripts of low abundance or represent artifacts from laboratory procedures and/or sequencing. earlier work showed that most singletons are genuine transcript sequences and therefore it is justified to retain and analyze them further  <cit> . the results discussed in the following sections provide some explanation of the relatively high proportion of singletons.

transcript discovery and functional annotation of the transcriptome
mining the swissprot protein database and the ensembl collection of mouse transcripts  for sequences similar to those present in our dataset allowed detection of transcripts from a large number of putative genes. more than  <dig>  swiss-prot proteins and transcripts of over  <dig>  ensembl mouse genes produced significant hits. as evidenced by the searches for macromolecular complexes and essential metabolic pathways, our gene detection was practically complete for genes expressed in all tissues. with respect to heart muscle-related gene discovery we found over 95% of  <dig> mammalian genes assigned geneontology categories related to cardiac muscle organization and contraction. among the most abundant transcripts in our study were those encoded in mitochondrial dna. this is in accordance with results from sage analysis of the adult mouse heart transcriptome, which indicate that the cardiac tissue contains the highest percentage of mitochondrial-genome derived transcripts  <cit> . the estimate of the number of unique transcripts in the adult mouse heart derived from the extrapolation of the results of sage experiments exceeds  <dig>   <cit> , and a similar order of magnitude has been suggested for human heart  <cit> . according to the unigene, a gene-oriented database of transcribed sequences, the number of transcribed genes in the mouse heart reaches  <dig>  . we detected expression of 80% these genes  in the bank vole heart. moreover, we found in our data sequences similar to over  <dig>  other mouse unigenes, with no heart-confirmed expression. thus, one the one hand, our gene discovery in the heart appears to be close to complete, but, on the other hand, public resources based mainly on sanger est sequencing may be very incomplete with respect to tissue-specific expression.

transcript completeness and evaluation of biases
the length of nearly  <dig>  transcripts was almost completely  covered by our sequences, and when considering only coding regions, this number increased to over  <dig> . however, genes with less than 20% of their transcribed length covered constituted almost 34% of all transcripts detected in emtc, indicating that many transcripts were only patchily reconstructed, a finding further confirmed by the fact that matches to more than  <dig>  swissprot proteins and over  <dig>  ecmt were detected only as singletons.

three factors apparently contributed to the variation in transcript completeness of various genes. first, transcript length was negatively correlated with completeness , although this factor explained only a minor fraction of variation and many short transcripts were also very incomplete . second, normalization was certainly not perfect, with variation still spanning orders of magnitude . originally rare transcripts would probably also remain rare after normalization, thus producing a low number of reads and resulting in patchy coverage. third, the sequence divergence from the mouse could have contributed to the less than complete reconstruction of transcripts. we demonstrated this effect by comparing similarity of portions of contigs/singletons matching utrs and coding regions to mouse sequences. higher sequence divergence in untranslated regions contributed to the generally lower coverage of utrs in comparison to the coding parts of transcripts. the lowest coverage of 5'utrs may also reflect the bias against the 5' end of transcripts expected if polyt primers are used for reverse transcription, although studies differ with regard to the extent of this bias  <cit> .

we expected a lower discovery rate for genes with long transcripts because our cdna preparation method involved pcr with one primer anchored at the 3' end of transcripts. the reverse was true, with a higher proportion of long transcripts detected than observed in the ecmt. however, many long transcripts were detected only as singletons, indicating that average coverage of long transcripts was poor. in a  <dig> study of the arabidopsis transcriptome, weber et al.  <cit>  obtained unbiased representations of short , medium  and long  transcripts. in our data virtually no bias was observed for transcripts 1- <dig> kb long . the particularly strong underrepresentation of transcripts <  <dig> bp was probably caused by the rna extraction method, in which mainly fragments longer than  <dig> bp bind to a silica membrane.

the two-step approach for transcriptome characterization requires that the expressed sequences be first characterized using long read assembly. in our single titanium run, we only achieved 45% average completeness for cds, which may not be enough for effective mapping of short reads to obtain information on expression level. the coverage was lower than expected for two reasons. first, the number of genes we targeted was larger than could have been expected on published information about the number of genes expressed in mouse heart. second, despite normalization, there was still high variation in coverage among genes, resulting in complete coverage on only  <dig>   apparently highly expressed genes, and low coverage of most other genes . based on our data, we estimated that to achieve a reasonable completeness  of the three quarters of most abundant  transcripts, substantial additional sequencing effort may be needed, rendering the two-step strategy problematic. our results also suggest that the sequencing effort needed to obtain a reasonable de novo mammalian transcriptome assembly may be higher than suggested by simulations based on sequencing transcriptome of several plants, particularly arabidopsis  <cit> . therefore, in organisms with no genomic resources, but that possess close relatives with sequenced-genomes, using these genomes as a reference for mapping short reads  might be a more useful strategy. on the other hand, in the absence of related reference genomes,  <dig> sequencing can still be very useful, taking into account the following considerations. first the coverage per transcript may be improved by increasing normalization efficiency, but differences of an order of magnitude or more would still be expected. second, the data gathered and assembled in the long read  <dig> experiments may serve as a useful reference to be filled in with the shorter reads provided abundantly by other sequencing technologies, as suggested previously  <cit> . the  <dig> assemblies are particularly likely to be useful in anchoring short contigs derived from short reads. third, the full lengths of transcripts do not need to be known to perform rnaseq experiments, because one would be able to estimate the expression level of the gene from reads mapping to a known fragment. fourth, our data on coverage appear to be underestimated due to the divergence from the mouse, and may be missing some utrs. an only modest increase in the coverage might join these contigs with those representing coding sequences, thus improving both the completeness of transcripts and per-base coverage considerably. fifth, because we selected the longest transcript per gene, the completeness and per-base coverage values are necessarily conservative. therefore, we conclude that the approach we present constitutes a reasonable first step towards rnaseq experiments on non-model organisms. in the future, the wide adoption of the pair-end sequencing approach to transcriptome studies with short read technologies may bring rapid progress and become the method of choice for such experiments  <cit> .

widespread transcription in noncoding regions?
a notable result emerging from our study is that only a minority of contigs and singletons exhibited sequence similarity to the swissprot proteins and ensembl mouse transcripts. therefore, to gain insight into the identity of other sequences we blasted them against the genomes of the mouse and rat. a very large fraction of the bank vole sequences which did not map to ecmt  had hits in the mouse or rat genome. in a study of another arvicoline rodent, the prairie vole, about one third of random genomic fragments sequenced from the bac library could have been mapped to the mouse genome  <cit> , a value similar to that obtained for singletons in our study. this could, in principle, indicate a substantial contamination with genomic dna. however, this possibility seems unlikely given our laboratory procedures, which involved poly-t priming of first strand cdna synthesis. instead, we hypothesize that the large number of matches to genomic sequences may be the result of a widespread transcription, known to occur in most eukaryotic genomes, including mouse  <cit> . the hypothesis is supported by a search of the aceview collection of mouse transcripts, which also contains noncoding rnas. although the database covers less than 10% of the ca  <dig>  gb mouse genome, almost one third of our contigs and singletons matching the genome but not ecmt showed similarity to aceview sequences, indicating that the bank vole sequences obtained in the present study are enriched in homologs of sequences transcribed in mouse . the finding that, contrary to the situation observed with contigs, more singletons had hits to genome than to emct is consistent with the well-known fact that the expression level of most noncoding genome transcripts is generally low and tissue or even cell-type specific  <cit> . this may also explain the lack of reports of noncoding transcripts in the previous  <dig> studies of transcriptomes in nonmodel organisms. either coverage was not sufficient in those studies, or the lack of a moderately divergent model organism, enabling meaningful nucleotide-nucleotide similarity searches against the genome, precluded the identification of noncoding transcripts. certainly, further experimental studies involving rt-pcr or microarrays would be necessary to validate further our hypothesis and provide more decisive answers as to whether noncoding rnas indeed represent a substantial portion of the bank vole normalized heart cdna library.

snp differences between selection lines
we identified over  <dig>  of putative snps that showed apparently significant frequency differences between lines. these polymorphisms constitute an abundant source of candidates for genes underlying microevolutionary response to selection on increased maximum metabolic rate. overrepresentation of mitochondrial genes among those with snp frequencies differentiated between selection regimes may be an artifact resulting from generally high coverage of transcripts for mitochondrial proteins in our data. the candidates will be further validated  <cit>  and investigated using methods allowing large scale snp genotyping on an individual basis . the search for genes underlying the response to selection will be facilitated by construction of a genetic map, which has not yet been developed for the bank vole. single nucleotide polymorphisms and microsatellite markers identified in this study will be useful for this purpose.

CONCLUSIONS
in the present paper, we report the first comprehensive sequence analysis of the bank vole transcriptome. the heart transcriptome was sequenced in the lines selected for high metabolism and in control lines. longer reads and higher sequence yield per run provided by the  <dig> titanium technology proved beneficial for the assembly quality. we detected transcripts of over  <dig>  genes, and, for a substantial fraction of them, the full length of coding regions were obtained. almost full representation of genes known to be expressed in the mouse heart was identified. in addition to genes from the mouse ensembl collection, patterns observed in our data were consistent with widespread transcription from noncoding genomic regions, a finding not reported in previous studies about transcriptomes in non-model organisms. we also detected a number of putative snps; a much higher fraction of snps than expected by chance exhibited variant frequency differences between selection regimes. these snps are thus promising candidates for causal genetic factors underlying response to selection on metabolic rate. the transcript sequences generated in the present study constitute a valuable permanent resource forming a foundation for rnaseq experiments aiming in detection adaptive changes both at the level of gene expression and sequence variants, that would facilitate studies of the genetic basis of evolutionary divergence.

