BACKGROUND
molecular and genetic interaction networks have proven to be useful in a variety of contexts. they can potentially be used to predict gene functions  <cit> , to predict perturbation phenotypes  <cit>  and genetic modifier loci  <cit> , to identify human disease genes and drug targets  <cit> , to increase the statistical power in human genetics  <cit> , and to study pathogen/virus-host crosstalk  <cit> , to name just a few examples. typically, they are constructed through the integration of multiple data sources such as expression data and interaction data  <cit> . the motivations for building such networks include the following:  from a biological perspective, genes are assumed to be interconnected into cohesive networks that control a certain biological process and  from a methodological perspective, the integration of multiple layers of information is more likely to identify biologically relevant signals than analysis of either data source alone. therefore, these integrated networks hold great promise for explaining the control mechanisms that underlie particular physiological and developmental processes.

in humans, embryogenesis is a complex process that consists of several sequential developmental events: fertilization, blastulation, gastrulation, and organogenesis  <cit> . although several studies have attempted to understand the molecular networks that control early embryogenesis   <cit> , the extent to which these developmental events can be explained by their underlying networks is still unknown. the molecular profiling of human organogenesis is increasingly becoming the focus of considerable research  <cit> . recently, we have reported the first comprehensive transcriptome analysis of early organogenesis, which ranged from carnegie stages  <dig>  to  <dig>   <cit> . through the in-depth data mining  <cit>  and comparisons with mouse embryos  <cit>  and human embryonic stem cells   <cit> , we have found sets of genes that are important for the initiation and maintenance of early human organogenesis. with further integration of interaction data  <cit> , we have also shown that the coordination of early human organogenesis is probably under the control of a shared molecular network, or a human organogenesis network . preliminary analysis has revealed that this network contains a stemness-relevant module  and a differentiation-relevant module . given the hypothetical nature of this network  <cit> , additional research is warranted to further explore its potentials for characterizing early human organogenesis. it also remains unclear whether this network can be extended to describe the other stages of human organogenesis. because the network is inherently associated with two modules, there is a great need to clarify the circumstances in which it can be used as a reference for evaluating the stem potential versus the differentiation potential.

to do this, we started with our previously identified network   <cit> . the network itself is associated with the intrinsic features of expression information from early human organogenesis and well-curated interaction information from existing human interactome resources. the genes in this network are collectively informative as a molecular signature of this developmental window, similar to the concept of using disease-perturbed networks as a basis for understanding disease initiation and progression  <cit> . with this network at hand, we applied gene set enrichment analysis  to perform expression-based inspections of the horgnet and its two modules in different, yet representative developmental contexts, including human organogenesis, various human stem cell types, and a hesc-derived embryoid body  model. these comparisons demonstrate the ability of this integrated network to improve our coarse-grained understanding of early human development, both in vivo and in vitro.

RESULTS
the comparative transcriptome analysis pipeline using an integrated network during early human organogenesis 
the procedures for network-orientated comparisons are illustrated in figure  <dig>  briefly, transcriptome data from a variety of developmental contexts are available from public databases such as ncbi geo  <cit> . in this study, we focused on three representative developmental contexts, including human embryos  <cit> , the stem cell matrix , and eb models  <cit> . by viewing the genes in the horgnet collectively as a signature  of early human organogenesis, we were able to apply gsea analysis  <cit>  to explore the possibility of using the horgnet to re-interpret these context-specific transcriptome data. to do this, we first ranked the gene lists based on linear models for microarray data  supervised analysis of these context-specific transcriptome data  <cit> . next, we performed gsea analysis to determine the degree to which genes in the horgnet  were overrepresented at the top or bottom of the ranked list of genes. we used this rank-based comparative approach because it has been proven to be highly reproducible and interpretable  <cit> . gsea reports several useful statistics for interpreting the results, including a normalized enrichment score  and a false discovery rate   <cit> . the former indicates a positive or negative correlation, while the latter indicates the statistical significance. by analyzing transcriptome data from the stem cell matrix, eb models and human embryos, we found that the horgnet and its two modules can advance our understanding of early human development, both in vivo and in vitro.

the two modules of the horgnet capture the expression patterns of early human organogenesis
previously, we have constructed a horgnet based on both expression and interaction information  <cit> . preliminary analysis indicates that the horgnet is probably inherited with the yin-yang crosstalk of a stemness-relevant module  and another differentiation-relevant module . prior to the applications to other developmental processes, we first asked whether the horgnet and its two modules were associated with the gradual loss of the stem potential and the increased diversity of the differentiation potential during development. to address this question, we conducted gsea analysis of the horgnet and its two modules using transcriptome data of human embryos from carnegie stages  <dig>  to  <dig>   <cit> . the gsea results showed that the hstemmodule enrichments monotonically shifted from the most positive at s <dig>  to the most negative at s <dig> , whereas the hdiffmodule showed more dynamic changes during early human organogenesis . recently, another study has reported a transcriptome analysis of human embryos during weeks  4- <dig>  <cit> . as shown in figure 2b, the gsea results showed that the hstemmodule enrichments decreased gradually from a significant positive correlation at wk  <dig>  to no significant correlation during wk 5- <dig>  to a significant negative correlation at wk  <dig>  and at wk  <dig> . a significant negative correlation between the hdiffmodule and wk  <dig> human embryos was also observed . beyond wk  <dig> , however, we found there was no significant correlation between the hdiffmodule and human embryos . taken together, analysis of this developmental window  of early human organogenesis and the beyond suggests that the hstemmodule may in general reflect the gradual loss of the stem potential, while the hdiffmodule reflects the dynamic changes in the differentiation potential that are required for proper differentiation at each stage of this developmental window.

the hstemmodule is a general indicator that distinguishes different cell types in terms of the stem potential
stem cell matrix is a database for transcriptome data from various cultured cells including pluripotent, multipotent and differentiated cell types  <cit>  . we first used the stem cell matrix to test whether the hstemmodule is indicative of the stem potential in these varied cell types. as shown in table  <dig> , the application of gsea to the stem cell matrix showed that the hstemmodule was significantly and positively correlated with pluripotent cells including embryonic pluripotent stem cells , teratocarcinoma pluripotent stem cells  and induced pluripotent stem cells . in contrast, no correlation or negative correlation was observed with other multipotent and differentiated cell types . furthermore, the ipscs were more likely to be associated with the hstemmodule than either the epscs or the tpscs . more surprisingly, the hstemmodule was also positively correlated with embryonic pluripotent stem cell-derived embryoid bodies  . to exclude the possibility of artifacts associated with the above observation, we chose another set of transcriptome data from an early stage eb  that was derived from two hesc lines   <cit>  as an independent validation. the gsea results again indicated that there was a significant positive correlation between the hstemmodule and early ebs: nes =  <dig>  and fdr =  <dig> for h1-derived ebs and nes =  <dig>  and fdr =  <dig> for h9-derived ebs . these results clearly demonstrate the discriminative power of the stemness-relevant module in distinguishing cultured cell types of various stem potentials.

1epsc = embryonic pluripotent stem cells, tpsc = teratocarcinoma pluripotent stem cells, ipsc = induced pluripotent stem cells, epsc_nsc = embryonic pluripotent stem cell-derived neural stem cells, tpsc_nlin = teratocarcinoma pluripotent stem cells differentiated into dopaminergic neural lineage, fnspc = fetal neural stem cell or primary fetal neural precursor cells, hanse = adult surgery neural precursors, bm_msc = bone marrow mesenchymal stem cells, huvecs = umbilical vein endothelial cells, epsc_eb = embryonic pluripotent stem cell-derived embryoid bodies;  <dig>  nes for positive correlation,  nes for negative correlation; 3significance for correlation: *fdr <  <dig> , **fdr <  <dig> , and 'null' for no significant correlation.

1epsc = embryonic pluripotent stem cells, tpsc = teratocarcinoma pluripotent stem cells, ipsc = induced pluripotent stem cells;  <dig>  nes for positive correlation,  nes for negative correlation; 3significance for correlation: **fdr <  <dig> , and 'null' for no significant association.

1h1_esc = embryonic stem cell line h <dig>  h1_eb = h1-derived embryoid bodies, h9_esc = embryonic stem cell line h <dig>  h9_eb = h9-derived embryoid bodies;  <dig>  nes for positive correlation,  nes for negative correlation; 3significance for correlation: *fdr <  <dig> , **fdr <  <dig> .

the hdiffmodule is seemingly able to predict differences in the differentiation potential among pluripotent cells of different origins, but not among differentiated cells of different types
next, we used the stem cell matrix to examine whether the hdiffmodule could be used to evaluate the differentiation potential among different cell types. our previous work  <cit>  showed that the hdiffmodule is largely composed of differentiation-associated genes that are regulated during early human organogenesis. because those genes are under-expressed in hescs , the hdiffmodule is expected to negatively correlate with hescs. indeed, we observed a significant negative correlation between this module and both epscs  and embryonal carcinomas, or tpscs , but did not observe a correlation between this module and most of differentiated cell types . we unexpectedly found that the diffmodule was positively correlated with the ipscs, the pluripotent cells of non-embryonic origins . consistent with this result, we also found a significant positive correlation between the hdiffmodule and ipscs vs. epscs  and ipscs vs. tpscs  . similar to the hstemmodule, the hdiffmodule was also positively correlated with epsc_eb  ; this observation was repeated with a separate dataset . notably, in vitro eb differentiation models consistently showed a positive correlation with the hdiffmodule, the hstemmodule, and the horgnet made up by these two modules . this suggests the possibility of further characterizing relationships between the developing embryo and the in vitro differentiation models that are intended to mimic in vivo events.

 <dig> ,3the same as in table  <dig> 

 <dig> ,3the same as in table  <dig> 

 <dig> ,3the same as in table  <dig> 

the horgnet-based characterization of relationships between early human organogenesis in vivo and hesc-derived ebs in vitro
to further explore the usefulness of the horgnet  in characterizing relationships between early human organogenesis in vivo  and the eb models in vitro, we used a time-course of transcriptome data from shhes1-derived ebs at days  <dig>   <dig> and  <dig>  <cit>  to perform gsea of the horgnet and its two modules . first, we found that the 8-day eb was comparable to s <dig> ; both were positively correlated with the hstemmodule and negatively correlated with the hdiffmodule. this is consistent with the timing of the in vitro model, which mimics complex in vivo events. second, a positive correlation with the hdiffmodule was observed for the 13- and 18-day ebs, which probably reflects the sustained differentiation in vitro . the hstemmodule experiences a shift from the positive correlation seen in the 8-day eb  to the negative correlation seen in the 18-day eb , indicating the loss of the stem potential . third, the gsea results with respect to the horgnet showed a tendency towards an increased correlation between the horgnet and the in vitro eb model, partially supporting the idea of sustained differentiation in this in vitro eb model . therefore, the gsea analyses suggest a resemblance between the 8-day eb and s <dig> with regard to both the stem and differentiation potentials, and also suggest that the sustained differentiation in vitro in 13- and 18-day ebs could explain their lack of correspondence to any embryonic stage after s <dig> . to vividly display these relationships between the early human organogenesis in vivo and this eb model in vitro, we performed a principle component analysis  on the expression matrix of the member genes in the horgnet during early human organogenesis and during eb differentiation. as illustrated in figure 3b, two distinct trajectories were revealed, one representing the developmental trajectory in vivo during early human organogenesis and the other representing the sustained differentiation in vitro in the shhes1-derived eb model. the positions along each of the trajectories probably reflect the developmental nature of the embryos and the sustained, differentiating nature of the eb model, respectively. these two different trajectories clearly show considerable differences between the developing embryos in vivo and the eb cultures over time in vitro.

discussion
the different behaviors of the two modules are consistent with the very nature of human embryogenesis
during embryogenesis in humans, early embryonic cells progressively confine their lineage commitment by changing their developmental potential, i.e., their ability to develop into multiple distinct cell types  <cit> . cell fate specification during development was first described by c. waddington as the epigenetic landscape  <cit> , which has recently gained popularity with the advent of cell reprogramming  <cit> . in addition to the waddington landscape, embryonic cells being committed to descendants can also be viewed as a result of a yin-yang-like crosstalk between two key aspects of the developmental potential: the stem potential and the differentiation potential. the former is assumed to maintain the stemness properties, while the latter is crucial for specifying the proper differentiation. together, they act together in harmony to ensure the successful implementation of embryogenesis. the two modules  in the horgnet might meet the needs of these two respective roles. the gsea analysis in figure  <dig> shows that the expression patterns of genes in these two modules correlate well with our current knowledge about the development potential of early embryonic cells: a gradual loss of stemness and a concomitant diversity of cell types. therefore, it is logical to speculate that the monotonous behavior of the hstemmodule is the necessary outcome of the gradual loss of the stemness during the embryogenesis. the dynamic changes of the hdiffmodule, however, could be required for proper differentiation in a stage-specific and context-dependent manner. the different behaviors of these two modules are the biological basis of their utility, as demonstrated in this study, for distinguishing various cell types  and characterizing the relationships between embryogenesis in vivo and differentiation models in vitro .

the two modules differ in their power to distinguish cultured cells of different types
choosing a single, yet comprehensive transcriptome dataset  of various cultured cells as an input may reduce the potential technical biases that could otherwise be introduced when using different types of detection methods from different labs. processing the stem cell matrix revealed the differences in the discriminative power of the two modules. the hstemmodule consistently distinguished cell types of various stem potentials . in contrast, the hdiffmodule appeared to be unable to distinguish differentiated cells of different types , although it provided useful clues for pluripotent cells of different origins . their differences in discriminative power can be partially explained by the expression patterns of their member genes in hescs compared to many differentiated cell types  <cit> . in our previous work  <cit> , we have showed that the hstemmodule is enriched for stemness-relevant genes that are consistently over-expressed in hescs, while the hdiffmodule contains differentiation-relevant genes that are consistently under-expressed in hescs. in other words, we know for sure that the genes in the hstemmodule should be consistently expressed in hescs. however, the genes in the hdiffmodule may be expressed in one or more types of differentiated cells that we cannot identify with certainty, and the hdiffmodule itself is therefore not informative regarding differentiated cells of different types.

differences and similarities of the two modules in distinguishing pluripotent cells of different origins
pluripotent cells were first isolated from embryonic sources, such as epscs from the inner cell mass of the blastocyst  <cit>  and tpscs from embryonal carcinoma  <cit> . as a new source of pluripotent cells, ipscs are generated from non-pluripotent cells  that are genetically reprogrammed to an epsc-like state  <cit> . initially, ipscs were thought to be quite similar to their embryonic counterparts, but recent studies have suggested substantial differences between them at both the gene expression  <cit>  and the epigenetic levels  <cit> . in this study, we showed that the hstemmodule positively correlates with all types of pluripotent cells , whereas the hdiffmodule is negatively correlated with the pluripotent cells of embryonic origins other than ipscs . this difference may be meaningful. in terms of the stem potential, all pluripotent cells should share the characteristics of pluripotency. however, with regard to the differentiation potential, the pluripotent cells of embryonic origins completely repress the expression of differentiation-associated genes, while ipscs derived from the differentiated cells may inevitably retain an imprint from their origins despite being reprogrammed to a fully pluripotent state. apart from this difference, we also observed the similarities between the two modules when comparing pluripotent cells of different origins. compared with the pluripotent cells of embryonic origins , ipscs showed a significant positive correlation with each of the two modules . although the exact implication remains unclear, this may reflect the unique nature of ipscs; their stemness- and differentiation-contexts may be more similar to those of the hstemmodule and the hdiffmodule than those of pluripotent cells of the embryonic origins. future studies will clarify these observations in a wet experimental setting.

recommended circumstances for using the two modules
in addition to the above situation involving pluripotent cells of different origins, we suggest that the following a priori knowledge will be indispensable for using two modules as a monitor of the stem potential versus differentiation potential, especially for the hdiffmodule . owing to the stage-specific and context-dependent nature of the hdiffmodule , it is only valid when the comparisons are constrained to the s9-s <dig> developmental window or the equivalent in vitro differentiation processes  that recapitulate the in vivo cues of this developmental window. the stage-specific nature of the hdiffmodule  does not necessarily mean that it is unsuitable for characterizing the s9-s <dig> or the equivalent models. genes in the hdiffmodule show both reduced and increased expression patterns from s <dig> to s <dig> , and the positive or negative correlation from the gsea analysis implies the extent of expression changes required for proper differentiation at each stage. the stage-specific expression profiles of the hdiffmodule-containing genes are indicative of each stage, and their correlations  all have statistical significance as shown in figure 2a. together with the hstemmodule, the hdiffmodule gives the horgnet as a specific signature for each stage during early human organogenesis from s <dig> to s <dig>  additionally, it raises the possibility of using the horgnet to understand relationships between early human organogenesis in vivo and eb models in vitro.

implications of the differences between the in vivo and in vitro developmental trajectories captured by the horgnet
the observations of  the resemblance between 8-day eb and s <dig> and  the divergence of 13- and 18-day ebs away from the subsequent developmental stages , have several implications. first, hescs differentiated in vitro into ebs can mimic events that occur in vivo both before and after the embryonic implantation  <cit> , even extending to s <dig> at least in terms of the stem and differentiation potential. second, the prolonged differentiation in culture raises concerns over the limitations of in vitro eb models. the eb at days  <dig> and  <dig> tended to be positively correlated with the hdiffmodule, which is probably due to the sustained expression of the same subsets of differentiation-associated genes that make up the hdiffmodule. however, in in vivo embryos, different subsets of differentiation-associated genes from the hdiffmodule were expressed at each of the different stages, even though the overall correlations between the hdiffmodule and stages s13/s <dig> also remained significantly positive. this selective expression of hdiffmodule genes in the developing embryos in vivo and the sustained expression of hdiffmodule genes in ebs cultured in vitro could explain the two different trajectories as revealed in figure 3b. finally, the two overlapping, yet different trajectories observed in this study will warrant the use of this integrated network and its two modules in future studies on human embryogenesis, both in vivo and in vitro. this network will be particularly useful for those studies that focus on evaluating the stem potential versus the differentiation potential.

CONCLUSIONS
using a previously proposed integrated network  and its two modules, the stemness-relevant module  and the differentiation-relevant module , we illustrate its utility by analyzing transcriptome data from a wide variety of developmental contexts . this analysis provides new insights into early human development, both in vivo and in vitro . these advances add an additional dimension to network applications. we strongly recommend the use of this network and its two modules for the circumstances  when pluripotent cell types of different origins are involved and  when the comparisons are constrained to the in vivo embryos during early human organogenesis or to the equivalent in vitro differentiation processes. as the transcriptome data coverage for human embryos improves, we anticipate that even more precise relationships will be revealed using similar network-based comparative transcriptome analyses.

