BACKGROUND
the malaria parasite plasmodium falciparum remains a major causative agent of human disease, killing ~ <dig>  people each year  <cit> . to facilitate development of drugs and vaccines to control malaria and to better understand the biology of the parasite, the genome of the 3d <dig> strain was sequenced and published in  <dig>  <cit> , which constitutes a significant achievement in malaria research. like most genome projects of other species, the initial gene prediction and annotation were largely accomplished using in silico prediction, which may lead to errors in some gene models. indeed, up to 30% of the detected transcripts were found to be unannotated, even in the well characterized drosophila genome in a high-density microarray analysis  <cit> . similarly, approximately a quarter of the predicted gene models of the p. falciparum were found to contain errors in a study of cdna sequence analysis  <cit> .

large numbers of p. falciparum expressed sequence tags  or cdna sequences  <cit> , and structural/regulatory rna  <cit>  have been reported from p. falciparum; however, efforts to sequence and obtain full-length cdna have been hindered by the at-rich dna sequences in the genome that has an average of ~80% a+t  <cit> . first, the traditional sanger sequencing approach generally requires cloning cdna sequences into bacteria, and many of the p. falciparum dna sequences are unstable in bacteria and are often deleted during the cloning process. second, a full-length cdna will contain 5' and 3' untranslated regions . the 5' and 3' utrs of the parasite--including the polya tail--are usually very at rich and are difficult to sequence. these difficulties have prevented the cloning and sequencing of many p. falciparum cdna sequences, particularly transcripts larger than  <dig> kb. recently, many next-generation sequencing platforms have been introduced for transcriptome and genome analyses  <cit> . these methods are low-cost, high-throughput, and do not require cloning dna into bacteria. indeed, several recent studies have reported large-scale sequencing of transcriptome and epigenome from p. falciparum, including samples from clinical isolates  <cit> . these studies identified large numbers of additional intron-exon splicing junctions missed by the initial genome annotation, alternative splicing events, and antisense transcripts, and have greatly improved est coverage and genome annotation; however, these studies primarily focused on genes expressed in asexual stages. no systematic cdna sequence analysis or verification of gene models has been done for gametocyte  and mosquito stages, which are expected to have many stage-specific expressed genes.

here we report results of illumina-based sequencing of mrna from two gametocyte stages , ookinete , and four time points of erythrocytic stages representing ring , early trophozoite , late trophozoite , and schizont . we also sequenced strand-specific  cdna libraries from et, sc, gii, and gv to systematically investigate antisense transcripts. after comparing our rna sequences with the latest gene models incorporating updates described in the recent reports  <cit> , we detected more than one thousand additional errors in gene models, alternatively spliced events including stage-specific alternatively spliced genes, and antisense transcripts in g and oo stages. our data suggest that antisense rna plays a role in gene expression regulation in the sexual stages.

RESULTS
rna-seq from p. falciparum developmental stages
to investigate changes in p. falciparum gene expression and regulation during its life cycle, we initially constructed seven illumina rna-seq single-end libraries  from the 3d <dig> parasite . polyadenylated mrna was affinity purified using oligo beads and converted to cdna using random hexamers. a total of  <dig> million 36-bp reads , ranging from  <dig>  to  <dig>  million per library, was first obtained . the sequence reads were aligned to the 3d <dig> reference genome  using tophat, a bowtie-based software capable of aligning split reads  <cit> . except for the oo library, for which one mismatch was allowed due to the longer reads, only those reads with a unique alignment and zero mismatch to the reference genome were used in further analysis. approximately 35% of the reads were successfully mapped to the reference genome. although the oo stage generated the largest number of raw reads , only  <dig>  reads  were mapped to the 3d <dig> reference genome due to large amount of anopheles gambiae rna.

r, et, lt, sc, gii, gv, and oo correspond to ring, early trophozoite, late trophozoite, schizont, gametocyte ii, gametocyte v, and ookinete stages, respectively. bd represents bidirectional libraries, and ss represents strand-specific libraries. "total reads" corresponds to the initial output of sequencing after analysis with illumina pipeline v <dig> ; "mapped reads" refers to numbers of reads mapped to the pf3d <dig> reference genome  allowing one single hit and no mismatches , one mismatch , or up to two mismatches  at the reads. + indicates the total numbers of reads obtained after de-multiplexing.

antisense transcripts and strand-specific cdna libraries
alignment of the reads from the bidirectional libraries to the 3d <dig> reference genome revealed  <dig> splicing events characterized by 5'cu-ac3' junctions that matched the reverse and complement sequence of the canonical intron-exon boundary of 5'gt-ag3', suggesting intron-exon junctions in antisense. these antisense junctions affected a total of  <dig> genes,  <dig> of which were also described in a recent study  <cit>  . interestingly, 79% of the genes displaying antisense junctions were multiple-exon genes, in agreement with the previously mentioned study where up to 86% of the antisense junctions detected were mapped to intron-containing genes  <cit> . furthermore, 55% of the antisense junctions identified in this study specifically overlapped with intron-exon boundaries in the sense direction of transcription. the majority  of these putative antisense transcripts were detected in g and oo stages, particularly at gv , suggesting that these antisense transcripts may play an important role in gene expression in g and oo development such as suppressing the expression of genes essential for asexual growth and replication.

to further investigate the scale and pattern of antisense transcription, we obtained reads from strand-specific  cdna libraries of four different stages of p. falciparum and mapped the sequenced read pairs to the parasite reference genome. we obtained  <dig> ,  <dig> ,  <dig> , and  <dig>  million of bar coded 45-bp  paired-end reads from lt, sc, gii, and gv stages, respectively . we first evaluated the quality of our strand-specific libraries by plotting the fraction of sense reads in each exon in the genome. as expected, the vast majority of exons was transcribed overwhelmingly in the sense direction, with a fraction of sense reads approaching 1; in contrast, distribution of sense fraction was centered around  <dig>  for the bidirectional libraries . we noted that the distribution of sense ratios was different for individual stages, with gii and gv having distributions of sense ratio characterized by smaller variance than lt and sc . while we cannot exclude the possibility that this is due to technical variability in the efficiency of second-strand digestion during the library preparations, it is possible that there is a tighter directional control of gene expression in g along with more bidirectional promoter activity during the sc stage. interestingly, the majority of genes with large numbers of antisense reads either had low fractions of sense transcripts  or had relatively high levels of sense transcripts  , although again we cannot rule out that some of the antisense transcripts were due to background noises from reverse transcription.

stage-specific antisense transcripts
to account for differences in each library, we modeled each exon with n sense reads as a sample from a binomial distribution, b, with n successes each with probability r, where r is estimated individually for each library from the overall ratio of sense to antisense . we then used -log, where p is calculated from a binomial test, as a measure of antisense transcription that could be applied to all exons. we identified  <dig> exons that had large numbers of antisense reads  ≥ 150) in one or more of the four stages analyzed . again the gv stage had the largest number of genes covered with dominant antisense transcripts , including  <dig> that had strong antisense transcription accompanied by an almost total depletion of sense transcripts . these  <dig> exons belonged to  <dig> genes,  <dig> of which are also detected as antisense-containing genes after the identification of cu-ac junctions in our bidirectional libraries . there were also genes with high levels of antisense reads at gv but high levels of sense transcript in lt and sc, and the two transcripts are expressed reciprocally in a dynamic transition process as the parasite grows from lt to sc, gii, and finally to dominant antisense transcripts in gv . these could represent genes that are expressed at high levels in asexual stages and become silent in expression at g stages when antisense transcriptions increase.

physical locations of antisense transcripts
it has been shown that antisense-sense ratio  was unevenly distributed across the mouse genome, with some chromosomes having higher  as:s pair density than the genome average  <cit> . exons with high as/s in the p. falciparum genome were randomly distributed across the  <dig> parasite chromosomes . visual inspection of individual genes revealed an uneven distribution of antisense reads within some genes. in a number of cases, antisense reads were markedly clustered at the 3' end of the exon of predicted gene models , suggesting potential bidirectional promoter activity  <cit> . run-over transcriptions into neighboring genes appeared to occur in genes arranged in tail-to-tail orientation , which may prevent the neighboring genes from being transcribed in the sense direction.

functional categories of genes with antisense transcripts
the majority of the  <dig> genes with high levels of antisense transcripts encoded conserved plasmodium protein with unknown function or were small transcripts  that could represent regulating rna or could have been previously annotated with a random directionality . among the genes with predicted functions,  <dig> were associated with transmembrane transport and  <dig> were involved in protein/intracellular transport . additionally,  <dig> genes encoded ribosomal proteins including  <dig> organelle ribosomal proteins,  <dig> genes encoded zinc finger proteins, and  <dig> encoded histone proteins. gene ontology enrichment analysis on molecular function showed significant enrichment in cell adhesion, protein binding, and transport activities, and cellular component clustering identified significant enrichment of ribosomal subunits .

detection and confirmation of intron-exon junctions
due to differences in read length and nature between our strand-specific and bidirectional libraries, we analyzed the two datasets independently. we first aligned the sequence reads from the strand-specific libraries to the genome sequence using tophat, which outputs putative junctions in a gene model-independent approach. we then evaluated the performance of individual libraries and parameter settings using the annotated junctions as a validation set. based on the number of currently annotated junctions identified and the number of mismatched junctions, we estimated the rate of false positives and false negatives at different parameter settings. as expected, the percentage of intron-exon matches increased along with the increase of numbers of bridging reads, reaching ~92% matching junctions at 15-read coverage and leveling off at ~95% matching with 40-read coverage . we also compared our data with those from two recent rna-seq studies in intron-exon matching  <cit> . both our data and those from otto et al.  <cit>  reached a plateau of ~95-96% matches when the junctions were covered with  <dig> or more reads. our four strand-specific libraries matched  <dig>  out of the total of  <dig>  predicted junctions  at plasmodb if only one bridging read was considered, and  <dig>  junctions  if  <dig> bridging reads were used . our sequences matched slightly more predicted introns than those of the two previous studies , which can partly be attributed to the inclusion of sexual stages in our dataset. our strand-specific rna-seq data had slightly greater positive predictive value  at a given sensitivity , which we again attribute to the additional lifecycle stages represented in our libraries . for example, at ppv =  <dig> , ~75% of intron-exon junctions from our rna-seq matched those in plasmodb, whereas at the same ppv, ~65% intron-exon junctions from bartfai et al. rna-seq and ~55% from otto et al., rna-seq matched the intron-exon junctions in plasmodb .

using the rna-seq data from our strand-specific libraries as well as those from the two previous studies and a ppv =  <dig>  cutoff, we identified  <dig>  intron-exon junctions not present in plasmodb v <dig>  . using the same ppv =  <dig>  cutoff, our rna-seq alone detected  <dig> novel junctions. as expected, the datasets from otto et al. and bartfai et al. shared more junctions because their data did not include sequences from sexual stages.

we also identified  <dig>  new junctions using the bidirectional libraries . among the  <dig>  junctions,  <dig> were found uniquely at one stage, and the majority  of the stage-specific junctions were from g or oo stages, with  <dig> from gv,  <dig> from gii, and  <dig> from oo.

correlation of gene expression of various datasets
to compare the observed expression between our rna-seq data and those published data from rna-seq and microarray analysis, we calculated the pearson correlation coefficient using the expression values at the seven time points under this study with data from four previous studies  <cit>  . the expression levels estimated from our asexual stages correlated well with those of previous studies; however, correlation for the g stages was relatively low compared with the microarray data from young et al.  <cit> . generally, our data correlated better with data from similar rna-seq than those from microarray .

stage-specific expressed and/or spliced genes
the malaria parasite has a complex life cycle with different morphology and functional characteristics associated with specific gene expression patterns  <cit> . sequencing cdna from multiple stages of parasite development, particularly the oo, allowed us to catalog stage-specific expressed genes. we compared the fold changes in read coverage between ring  and the other six stages. stage-specific genes or genes showing significant changes in expression were identified . a total of  <dig>  genes were found to change significantly in expression in one or more stages compared with those of r. in particular, there were  <dig> genes that were expressed significantly higher  or lower  in oo than those in r stage. these genes included secreted oo adhesive protein, trap-related protein, oo capsule protein, and secreted oo protein that are associated with development in mosquito midgut. there were also a large number of genes  that are expressed at higher levels only in gv stage, the majority of which are plasmodium conserved proteins, reflecting a large number of uncharacterized g-specific genes. this analysis was performed exclusively using data from the bidirectional libraries, where oo data were available, and some signals could come from antisense transcripts.

alternative spliced genes
another mechanism of gene expression regulation is alternative splicing, which has been reported in p. falciparum previously  <cit> . using the bidirectional libraries, we detected  <dig> new alternatively spliced events affecting  <dig> genes , including  <dig> alternative splicing isoforms that were only found in one stage  . even though we cannot eliminate the possibility that some isoforms were expressed in undetectable levels at a particular stage, the stage-specific isoforms identified in this study could suggest a special role for these genes in parasite differentiation and development.

experimental verification of new and alternatively spliced isoforms
to validate the intron-exon junctions and alternatively spliced events detected by our rna-seq, we randomly selected  <dig> splicing junctions identified from the bidirectional libraries and  <dig> junctions from the strand-specific libraries . we designed primers flanking the newly described splice sites and pcr amplified cdna from the same rna samples used for library construction. of the  <dig> junctions from the bidirectional libraries,  <dig>  were confirmed by pcr. among the  <dig> that were found to be incorrect,  <dig>  were located in areas of repeats in the genome. based on these results, we filtered out all the detected junctions partially overlapping with repeat regions and/or without gt-ag site , leading to an estimated confirmation rate of ~89% .

from the  <dig> junctions randomly selected from the strand-specific libraries,  <dig> were experimentally validated and  <dig> were demonstrated to be wrong, presenting a validation rate of  <dig> % . again, after removing one in repetitive regions, the validation rate increased to  <dig> %.

discussion
several recent studies have reported large numbers of cdna sequences that have greatly improved genome annotation and gene models in the p. falciparum genome  <cit> ; however, none of the studies presented sequences from g or stages from mosquito. in this study, we obtained cdna sequences from gii, gv, oo, and four time points from asexual stages as well as strand-specific cdna sequences from lt, sc, gii and gv. we identified many unknown splicing junctions and stage specific expressed genes, including oo-specific genes. alignment of our sequences to the 3d <dig> genome sequence produced good matches of intron-exon junctions between our sequences and the gene models in the genome . we showed that gs appear to have sense transcripts characterized by smaller variance of antisense than the asexual stages.

natural antisense transcripts  have been widely recognized as an important mechanism of post-transcriptional regulation in both prokaryote and eukaryotic organisms  <cit> . in the human and mouse genomes, up to 72% of all genomic loci are found to have both sense and antisense transcripts  <cit> . antisense transcripts have been shown to play a role in sense rna transcription, pre-mrna splicing, rna editing, stability, and transport, and in regulation of translation  <cit> . nat can regulate gene expression through several mechanisms  <cit> . in the transcriptional interference model, two bulky rna polymerase ii complexes on opposite dna strands may interfere with one another, arresting transcription in one direction. in the rna masking model, an antisense may mask a splice site on the sense pre-mrna sequence, leading to an alternative splicing event. formation of double-stranded rna such as rna editing and rna interference is another type of regulatory mechanism, which may lead to degradation of sense transcripts . in chromatin remodeling mechanism, transcription of non-coding antisense transcripts may be also involved in monoallelic gene expression such as genomic imprinting, x-inactivation and clonal expression of lymphocyte genes. antisense transcripts can silence the expression of nearby genes through chromatin remodeling, most likely through the recruitment of histone-modifying enzymes  <cit> . nats have been reported from p. falciparum previously  <cit> , and antisense rna or oligodeoxynucleotides have also been used to regulate gene expression in the parasite  <cit> . our observation that the majority of the genes in schizont are expressed with s/as pairs  is consistent with these previous reports and with the observations in human and mouse in which the majority of genes are expressed in both directions  <cit> . although we do not have additional experimental evidence to confirm that the antisense transcripts we found here play a role in gene expression regulation through a specific mechanism, the presence of high levels of antisense rna in a stage specific manner suggests that these antisense transcripts are likely associated with some unique features of the parasite developmental stages. although the mechanism of rnai has been shown to be absent in malaria parasites  <cit> , pairing of antisense and sense transcripts may still play a role in gene expression through non-rnai mechanisms. the mapping of ~86% of all antisense reads to intron containing genes suggests that antisense may play a role in intron splicing, possibly through the mechanism of masking the sense splicing sites; the predominant presence of antisense transcripts in intron-containing genes could be due to promoter activities of the introns. of course, some of the genes with antisense coverage could also be artifacts produced by dna-dependent dna polymerase activity of reverse transcriptase  <cit> ; however, it is difficult to imagine that one artifact only occurred in one stage such as g but not in other stages, because the samples were processed similarly at the same time.

an interesting observation from our strand-specific library sequences was the changes in the numbers of genes expressed in either a single direction  or in different s/as mixtures in different stages. whereas the majority of the genes in schizont are transcribed in mixtures with 10-30% rna in the opposite directions of the major transcripts , the sexual stages appear to have a higher proportion of genes transcribed in higher s/as ratios, suggesting a gradual shifting from more genes with mixture of transcripts in both directions in early g to more single-direction transcripts in mature g. similarly, there appeared to be more genes with strand-specific transcripts in lt than sc stage. interestingly, it has been shown that the mouse x chromosome contains fewer bidirectional pairs of s/as transcripts than the autosomes, and s:as pairing is also associated with imprinted loci  <cit> . high levels of strand-specific transcripts in g stages will lead to fewer s/as pairs in these stages, suggesting the possibility of a similar mechanism in regulating sexual development in the malaria parasite mediated through antisense rna. further investigation on the patterns of transcription direction in more stages will provide additional information on the changes in s:as ratios and the relationship of s:as ratio variation and parasite development cycle. the observation may also help explain the lack of correlation in expression level of rna transcript and protein  <cit>  and suggests that analysis of rna expression should be conducted using strand-specific cdna libraries so that more precise transcriptional patterns can be characterized.

the mature gametocyte  is a unique sexual stage that is developmentally arrested but can quickly resume development, producing male and female gametes as soon as it is taken into a mosquito midgut. in the rodent malaria parasite plasmodium berghei, it has been shown that many genes are transcribed but not translated in the g, which is regulated by a mechanism--termed "translational repression" mediated by ddx6-class rna helicase, dozi --found in a complex with mrna species in cytoplasmic bodies  <cit> . our data showing the presence of large numbers of antisense transcripts  in g suggest that these antisense transcripts could also be involved in gene expression regulation, either being part of the described translational suppression complex or other unknown mechanisms.

using strand-specific reads, we were able to confirm ~84% and 73% of the intron-exon junctions in the predicted gene models if  <dig> or ≥  <dig> bridging reads were used, respectively. compared with the sequences from two previous reports  <cit> , our strand-specific sequences appeared to match the predicted intron-exon junctions better  than those of the other two studies. the performance of a set of libraries in identifying splice junctions depends on the read lengths, base quality, total number of reads, the fraction of the total number of transcripts expressed at appreciable levels, and sequence alignment parameters. one explanation for the observed higher matches from our data is likely that our libraries included transcripts from g and oo, whereas the other two studies had sequences from asexual stages only and therefore would miss the splice junctions in sexual stages. our sequences also identified nearly  <dig> putative intron-exon junctions using a ppv =  <dig>  cutoff. as expected, many of the new junctions were from genes that were expressed in gs and were not characterized in previous studies. another potential explanation for lower junction coverage for the data from otto et al. could be related to bias amplification using high pcr extension temperature. we have shown that using an extension temperature of 60°c can increase the coverage of sequences in non-coding regions  <cit> . intron-exon junctions at 5' or 3' utr may not amplify well using standard pcr conditions that were likely employed by otto et al.  <cit> . we used 60°c extension temperature, and bartfai et al.  <cit>  used a linear amplification method that avoided biased sequencing of the at-rich plasmodium genome; these two approaches therefore produced similar numbers of junction calls .

sequences from oo also allow us to systematically characterize transcripts expressed specifically in this stage . oo is a transient stage in mosquito, and it has been difficult to obtain sufficient parasite material for genome-wide analysis. although the majority of the sequences we obtained were transcripts from mosquito, the sequences allowed us to identify many genes that were upregulated and uniquely expressed at this stage, including genes encoding oo capsule protein and oo secreted-proteins. on the other hand, there were also  <dig> genes that encode conserved plasmodium proteins and are specifically expressed or upregulated in oo. our work represents the first large-scale transcriptional analysis from the oo stage of p. falciparum. the information presented here provides new insights into gene expression and regulation in this transient stage.

CONCLUSIONS
although the majority of the gene models in the p. falciparum genome have been correctly predicted and/or verified, it is still necessary to continue to sequence cdna from different developmental stages, particularly those of non-erythrocytic stages. gene expression studies should be based on directional cdna libraries, because the presence of antisense transcripts may lead to erroneous conclusions on gene expression and regulation. the presence of antisense transcripts in some gametocyte and ookinete genes suggests that these antisense rnas may play an important role in gene expression regulation and development of these stages.

