BACKGROUND
the genus bordetella comprises several human and animal pathogens and nine species are currently described . human-restricted b. pertussis and b. parapertussis cause whooping cough, whereas b. bronchiseptica and b. avium are responsible for respiratory infections in many mammals and birds, respectively  <cit> . despite the availability of vaccines, there are still  <dig>  deaths/year caused by b. pertussis and significant economic losses associated with infections in poultry and cattle. the genomes of these bordetellae were recently sequenced and analyzed  <cit> . the genome sequence of b. avium revealed that it is quite divergent from the mammalian pathogens. in contrast, the genomes of the human pathogens b. pertussis and b. parapertussis showed that they are independent derivatives of b. bronchiseptica-like ancestors. they both underwent significant gene loss, probably mediated by insertion sequence  elements, during the process of host adaptation, as indicated by their smaller genome sizes compared to that of b. bronchiseptica and the presence of many pseudogenes. the evolution of human-adapted species is characterized by massive genome reduction, lack of horizontal acquisition of genetic material and significant differences in virulence gene expression among species  <cit> .

the type strain of the only environmental species of the genus, b. petrii, was isolated from a dechlorinating bioreactor enriched by river sediment  <cit> . b. petrii strains were repeatedly found in environmental samples, e.g. microbial consortia degrading aromatic compounds  <cit> . recently, two b. petrii strains were isolated from patients suffering from mandibular osteomyelitis and chronic suppurative mastoiditis  <cit> . bacteria closely related to b. petrii were also found in cystic fibrosis patients  <cit> . moreover, b. petrii strains were also isolated from marine sponges and a grass root consortium  <cit> . phylogenetic analysis shows that the bordetellae are closely related to achromobacter and alcaligenes   <cit> . these environmental organisms occasionally cause severe nosocomial infections and they are also isolated from patients with cystic fibrosis  <cit> . in addition to their medical relevance, these microorganisms also have an intrinsic biotechnological interest, because they show a remarkable capacity to degrade aromatic compounds and detoxify heavy metals  <cit> .

since b. petrii exhibits properties of host-associated and environmental bacteria, it is important to perform a genomic analysis of this bacterium in order to understand the genetic basis of its versatility. the b. petrii genome provides insights into the evolutionary history of the bordetellae, acting also as a spyglass to the alcaligenes/achromobacter group for which, despite their biotechnological potential, no sequenced genomes are available yet.

RESULTS
genome features and comparative analysis
the general features of the bordetella genomes are shown in table  <dig> and figure  <dig>  the genome of b. petrii has a similar size  and coding-capacity  to that of b. bronchiseptica . the genomes of b. pertussis, b. parapertussis and b. avium are much smaller, showing massive gene loss during host-adaptation. the overall gc content  of b. petrii is intermediate between that of b. bronchiseptica  and b. avium . b. petrii has  <dig> pseudogenes, less than b. pertussis  and b. parapertussis , but more than b. bronchiseptica  and b. avium .

the genomes of b. petrii and b. avium show lower similarity and synteny than those of mammalian-adapted bordetellae, suggesting that they are most distantly related. reciprocal blastp analysis with other sequenced bordetellae identified coding sequences unique to b. petrii   <cit> . b. petrii, b. bronchiseptica and b. avium share  <dig>  cdss, which represent the bordetella core gene set, which was likely inherited from a common ancestor. b. petrii shares more cdss with b. bronchiseptica  than with b. avium . interestingly, b. petrii has  <dig>  cdss that are not present in either b. bronchiseptica or b. avium. a large number of these b. petrii-unique cdss  are located on mobile elements and encode accessory metabolic functions .

mobile genetic elements – a mosaic genome
the most prominent feature that distinguishes b. petrii from other bordetellae is the presence of seven laterally acquired genomic islands . the locations of these gis on the chromosome correlate with atypical gc-content and gc-bias . these gis have the characteristic features of mobile elements collectively known as integrative and conjugative elements . four of the b. petrii gis  are related to the clc element of pseudomonas knackmussii b <dig>  which codes for proteins involved in the biodegradation of chloroaromatics  <cit> . the similarity between these four gis and the clc element is mostly confined to the conjugal transfer region and varies substantially  between individual genes within this region . however, among these gis, gi <dig> is the most similar  to the clc element and also carries all the chloroaromatic degredation genes found in the clc element. like the clc element in b <dig>  these four gis are integrated into the 3'-end of trnagly genes, are flanked by a 15– <dig> bp direct repeat generated by the duplication of the 3'-end of trna, and each encodes an integrase highly similar  to that of the clc element . gi <dig>  gi <dig> and gi <dig> are located in close proximity within a  <dig> kb region . the clc-type mobile elements are self transmissible and b. petrii may have obtained them from environmental pseudomonads, with which it shares habitat  <cit> . during the conjugal transfer process, ices are excised from the chromosome and form a circular intermediate  <cit> . interestingly, during in vitro culture the whole  <dig> kb region encompassing gi <dig>  gi <dig> and gi <dig> is deleted in a fraction of the bacterial population. sequence analysis of the deletion point revealed a regenerated  <dig> bp integration site , indicating that these gis are still active in terms of excision from the chromosome. in fact, circular intermediates were detected for all gis in b. petrii cells during normal growth .

the remaining gis  encode a conjugal transfer system similar to the type iv secretion systems associated with plasmids. gi <dig> is highly similar to tn <dig> of ralstonia eutropha a5/cupriavidus oxalaticus, a 55-kb conjugative transposon that carries genes involved in the degradation of biphenyl or 4-chlorobiphenyl  <cit> . the features of all gis are summarized in table  <dig> 

it has been previously reported that the chromosomes of b. pertussis and b. parapertussis carry a large number of is elements . these is elements are responsible for the extensive shuffling and deletions in their genomes  <cit> . in contrast, b. bronchiseptica and b. avium carry none. b. petrii carries  <dig> is elements, most of which belong to the is3-family. interestingly, there are six copies of is <dig> which was found in b. pertussis and one truncated copy of is <dig>  which was found in b. parapertussis. the vast majority  of the b. petrii is are located within gis, whereas 34% are randomly dispersed around the chromosome. b. petrii also carries two intact prophages  , and phage-like particles were indeed observed by electron microscopy of the sequenced strain  <cit> . phage  <dig> is inserted at the 3'end of a gene encoding a trnacys, while phage  <dig> is related to bacteriophage mu. in addition, there are several regions on the b. petrii genome which may encode prophage remnants . in contrast, b. avium carries three and b. bronchiseptica carries four prophages, however, none of them is related to the b. petrii phages.

the gis , is elements and prophages represent 22% of the b. petrii genome. this highly mosaic genome structure reflects extensive dna exchange and provides first evidence for a considerable horizontal gene transfer-driven evolution in the genus bordetella.

metabolism of b. petrii – genomic basis for metabolic versatility
the central metabolic pathways are remarkably similar between b. petrii and the pathogenic bordetellae. for instance, the glycolytic pathway is incomplete, lacking the determinants for glucokinase and phosphofructokinase. b petrii encodes all the enzymes needed for the tca cycle and for the synthesis of all essential nucleotides, cofactors, amino acids and fatty acids. however, the in silico analysis of the genome sequence of b. petrii suggests the presence of a set of auxiliary pathways for the use of alternative nutrients, such as gluconate, degraded plant products, cyanate , and various aromatic compounds , which may contribute to the ability of b. petrii to thrive in different environments .

gluconate is an intermediate in the degradation of sugar acids and sugar derivatives, which are components of more complex molecules, such as plant materials and secondary metabolites. the genome analysis of b. petrii suggests that this microorganism can also utilize gluconate via a variant of the entner-doudoroff  pathway, which is only found in few bacteria, such as rhodobacter sphaeroides, but absent in all the other sequenced bordetellae  <cit> . in this pathway, gluconate is first transformed by a gluconate dehydratase  to 2-dehydro-3-deoxy-d-gluconate, which is then imported into the cytoplasm via 2-dehydro-3-deoxy-d-gluconate permease  and phosphorylated to 2-dehydro-3-deoxy-d-gluconate-6-phosphate by a 2-dehydro-3-deoxy-d-gluconate kinase . this compound is then converted to glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate and pyruvate by the action of 2-dehydro-3-deoxy-d-gluconate-6-phosphate aldolase . a iclr family transcription regulator  is present immediately upstream of the kdga and kdgk genes suggesting that this variant ed pathway may be inducible by this regulator depending on the availability of the external carbon source. in this regard, it is surprising that although a periplasmic glucose dehydrogenase , which converts glucose to gluconate, is encoded in the genome, b. petrii is unable to metabolize glucose  <cit> .

interestingly, b. petrii encodes a protein  with significant similarity to pectate lyases, extracellular enzymes secreted by phytopathogens, such as erwinia carotovora, which catalyze the cleavage of pectate  <cit> . the reaction products are channeled into the variant ed pathway  <cit> . in agreement with this, the determinants for two other important enzymes of these pathways, 2-deoxy-d-gluconate 3-dehydrogenase  and altronate hydrolase  are present, indicating that b. petrii uses plant cell-wall constituents as nutrient sources, which is in line with the isolation of a b. petrii strain from a plant root consortium  <cit> . the presence of a cyanate transporter  and a cyanate lyase  catalyzing the decomposition of cyanate into ammonia and bicarbonate, suggests that b. petrii is not only able to cope with the toxicity of environmental cyanate, but like e. coli may use it as a nitrogen source  <cit> . a striking difference between b. petrii and the other bordetellae is that it has a facultative anaerobic energy metabolism and can utilize nitrate as the terminal electron acceptor during anaerobic respiration  <cit> . accordingly, on its core genome b. petrii encodes the factors  necessary to carry out complete denitrification from nitrate to n <dig>  interestingly, only some of the respective genes are present in the pathogenic bordetellae. b. bronchiseptica appears to encode a functional nitrate reductase, while b. parapertussis has a truncated napd gene probably leading to a non-functional nitrate reductase, and b. pertussis does not encode genes involved in denitrification at all.

metabolic talents of b. petrii – degradation of aromatic compounds
the in silico analysis of the b. petrii genome revealed an unusual metabolic capability regarding the degradation of aromatic compounds summarized in figure  <dig>  for the metabolisation of some of these compounds including benzoate, phthalate, 3-hydroxybenzoate, 3-hydroxyphenylacetate and 4-hydroxyphenylacetate we have obtained experimental evidence .

a prominent feature is the presence of a surprisingly large number of genes coding for enzymes of the chloroaromatic metabolism. one complete set of chlorocatechol pathway genes  is localized on gi <dig> highly related to the clc element of pseudomonas knackmussii b <dig>  a second set of chlorocatechol pathway genes  is located on gi <dig> and shows high similarity to genes identified in the  <dig> ,4-trichlorobenzene degrading pseudomonas strain p <dig>  <cit> . a third possible chlorocatechol gene cluster encoding proteins only distantly related to those previously characterized is also located on gi <dig>  this multiplicity of chlorocatechol gene clusters probably endows this strain with the ability to effectively metabolize a broad range of differently substituted chlorocatechols, providing thereby a valuable competitive advantage to thrive in polluted environments  <cit> .

on gi <dig>  chlorocatechol genes are preceded by a gene cluster  encoding a chlorobenzene dioxygenase and chlorobenzene dihydrodiol dehydrogenase, highly homologous to those of the  <dig> ,4-trichlorobenzene degraders cupriavidus strain ps <dig> and pseudomonas strain p <dig>  <cit> . the absence of any linked extradiol dioxygenase encoding gene suggests that similarly to what is observed in the strains ps <dig> and p <dig>  this cluster has specifically evolved for the transformation of chlorobenzenes  <cit> .

b. petrii also harbors four different central pathways for aromatic metabolism via dihydroxylated central intermediates, the gentisate , the homogentisate  and the catechol and protocatechuate branch of the 3-oxoadipate pathway . such versatility is similar to that observed in bacteria well known for their high metabolic capabilities, such as p. putida kt <dig> and cupriavidus necator  <cit> . only genes encoding enzymes of the homogentisate pathway were detected in all other sequenced bordetellae, and those involved in the gentisate pathway are only present in b. avium.

various natural aromatic compounds are known to be degraded via either the catechol or the protocatechuate branch of the 3-oxoadipate pathway, which thus plays a key role in bacterial aromatic catabolism. this pathway is widespread in proteobacteria, however, all previously sequenced bordetella strains are devoid of complete pathways and only a catijcd cluster  is present as a remnant. in b. petrii, complete pathways are formed by genes of the protocatechuate branch  located in a genomic region with a quite low gc content, but lacking other typical features of a genomic island , and two clusters localized on gi <dig>  encoding the enzymes of the catechol branch. we believe this to be the first example of natural horizontal transfer of this central aromatic metabolic pathway. notably, also peripheral pathways for funneling benzoate  and benzylalcohol  to catechol are located on gi <dig>  a peripheral pathway for channeling phthalate to protocatechuate  is located on gi <dig>  the low number of peripheral routes contrasts with the situation in other proteobacteria, such as b. xenovorans lb <dig>  where five substrates are degraded via protocatechuate  <cit> .

a strategy of aerobic degradation of aromatics alternative to the metabolism via dihydroxylated intermediates is initiated by coa ligases  <cit> . b. petrii carries gene clusters required for the metabolism of all three substrates, which are known to be degraded by such a strategy . as degradation via coa derivatives needs less oxygen molecules compared to degradation via dihydroxylated intermediates, this may provide b. petrii with a selective advantage to also thrive in oxygen limited environments. for an overview about the aromatic degradation capabilities of b. petrii see figure  <dig> and additional file  <dig> 

"virulence factors" of b. petrii and host-restricted bordetellae
pathogenic bordetellae produce many surface associated or secreted virulence factors  <cit> . b. petrii does not code for the well-characterized toxins of classical bordetellae . however, it produces a low amount  of the non-protein tracheal cytotoxin , a spontaneously released muramylpeptide that disrupts epithelia  <cit> . this expression range is comparable to the expression levels observed for the broad host range pathogen b. bronchiseptica.

autotransporter or type v secretion proteins play a major role in bordetella virulence  <cit> . b. bronchiseptica encodes  <dig> autotransporter proteins, whereas b. petrii encodes only four   <cit> . two of them  are paralogous and show significant homology to the putative serine protease autotransporter bb <dig> of b. bronchiseptica, whereas the other two do not show significant similarity to any database entry. pathogenic bordetellae also encode a two-partner secretion system which allows secretion of the colonization factor filamentous hemagglutinin   <cit> . this protein requires the fhac protein for translocation across the outer membrane. b. petrii encodes proteins related to fhab and fhac . b. petrii fhab has  <dig> amino acids and its n-terminus, which is required for export, is well-conserved with respect to pathogenic bordetellae. however, the overall similarity with fhab of pathogenic bordetellae is very low, being more similar to putative secreted proteins of plant pathogens . this suggests that the fha genes found in b. petrii and the pathogenic bordetellae may not be orthologous.

other protein secretion systems are differentially distributed among bordetellae. in contrast to the mammalian pathogens, b. petrii and b. avium lack type i and iii protein secretion systems, but encode a type ii secretion system . type iv secretion systems are either engaged in protein transport to the extracellular medium or into eukaryotic cells, or they are involved in dna-transfer. there are three gene clusters in b. petrii, which are associated with gis and appear to encode complete type iv secretion systems . none of these systems appears to be related to the pertussis toxin exporting type iv system of b. pertussis, being probably involved in conjugal dna transfer.

the b. petrii genome carries three fimbrial gene clusters , each encoding a major fimbrial subunit, a fimbrial assembly chaperone, an outer membrane usher protein and a fimbrial adhesin. the chaperone and usher proteins have significant sequence similarities with their counterparts in the pathogenic bordetellae, with e-values ranging from 6e- <dig> to 3e- <dig> for the chaperones and e-values ranging from 3e- <dig> to 6e- <dig> for the usher proteins. in contrast, the homology of the major structural proteins and fimbrial adhesins with the proteins of the pathogenic bordetellae is very low . similarly to b. avium, b. petrii lacks the genes for the biosynthesis of siderophores. however, it specifies  <dig> tonb-dependent iron scavenging receptors, which may be important for iron acquisition in soil and plant-associated environments.

most virulence factors are coordinately regulated in pathogenic bordetellae by a single master regulator, the bvgas two-component system  <cit> . this system consists of two proteins, a response regulator  and a multidomain histidine kinase , consisting of a periplasmic solute-binding domain, and, on the cytoplasmic side, of a pas, a transmitter, a receiver and an hpt domain. although the b. petrii bvga  is highly homologous to the bvga proteins of the pathogenic bordetellae , the structure of the b. petrii equivalents of bvgs is more complex. first of all, there are two histidine kinases, bvgs <dig>  and bvgs <dig> , with significant sequence similarities to bvgs. bvgs <dig> contains a pas, a transmitter and a receiver domain, whereas bvgs <dig> contains a transmitter and a receiver domain. in contrast to bvgs, both b. petrii proteins are devoid of a large periplasmic domain. the hpt domain, which in pathogenic bordetellae is part of the multidomain bvgs protein, in b. petrii is an independent protein  . this suggests that during their evolution to pathogens, the virulence regulatory system has been streamlined by the omission of one histidine kinase and incorporation of the hpt domain into the multidomain histidine kinase bvgs.

therefore, b. petrii is endowed with several putative virulence factors for plant and animal hosts, such as adhesins  and a master virulence regulator , but lacks bordetella toxins. this suggests that pathogenic bordetellae might have acquired their toxin genes horizontally, while adapting to an obligate pathogenic lifestyle. alternatively, it is possible that toxin genes have been lost from the b. petrii lineage.

CONCLUSIONS
the five sequenced bordetella species, b. bronchiseptica, b. pertussis, b. parapertussis, b. avium and b. petrii, represent different states of environmental adaptation. these five organisms have followed different evolutionary paths. evolution of the b. bronchiseptica-derived host restricted-pathogens b. pertussis and b. parapertussis was dominated by substantial gene decay and loss. this might also hold true for b. avium, which is characterized by a relatively small genome containing  <dig> pseudogenes. in contrast, the evolution of the environmental isolate b. petrii was dominated by horizontal acquisition of large genomic islands expanding its metabolic capacities. b. bronchiseptica, with a broad host range and the potential to survive in the environment, might represent an intermediate evolutionary state. if the bordetellae derive from a common environmental ancestor, b. petrii appears to be more closely related to this ancestor than the pathogenic bordetellae, since it is the only true environmental isolate within the genus, which is also found in association with host organisms. moreover, b. petrii is the only facultative anaerobic bordetella species  <cit> . since closely related achromobacter species are also facultative anaerobes, the common ancestor of the bordetellae probably had a facultative anaerobic energy metabolism. during adaptation to an obligate host association, the genes for several metabolic functions, e.g. those required for denitrification, may have been deleted from the genomes of pathogenic bordetellae, leaving just a few remnants in the various species.

