BACKGROUND
duplicate genes generally persist and evolve through the partitioning of ancestral functions among the duplicates  or the acquisition of novel functions through the fixation of beneficial mutations . to date, many duplicate genes have been shown to have evolved through sub-/neo-functionalization in terms of the spatiotemporal pattern of their expression and/or the functional repertoire of their coding proteins  <cit> . additionally, duplication may result in an increase in gene dosage that sometimes has advantageous effects, resulting in the maintenance of the duplicated genes  <cit> . for example, translational rnas such as trna and rrna, and structural proteins such as histones are often encoded by multiple gene copies  <cit> . this likely corresponds to the high demand of their gene products needed for translational and structural roles. regarding subcellular networks, on the other hand, the genes involved in transcription regulations and signal transduction pathways were found to be over-retained in duplicate after whole genome duplication  in higher eukaryotes  <cit> . these data have been interpreted and discussed in the theoretical context of an increase of gene dosage  <cit> . however, it remains largely unexplored for possible effect of increased dosage of respective genes on overall function of subcellular networks, such as signal transduction pathways. these types of investigations may provide a more comprehensive understanding of evolution by gene duplication.

in a previous study of vertebrate genes involved in olfactory transduction , we found that the three-spined stickleback gasterosteus aculeatus has multiple duplicates of the phosphodiesterase  1c gene . in that study, we performed comparative analyses among four teleost and three tetrapod genomes to search for duplicate genes derived from the teleost-specific third-round -wgd  <cit>  by focusing on several kinds of signal transduction networks. data mining and phylogenetic analyses showed that the pde1c gene, which decomposes camp and thus has a key role in the negative feedback of the ot  <cit> , underwent 6– <dig> duplications in stickleback ancestor after its split with pufferfish. thus, at least stickleback  has multiple pde1c genes, whereas other model vertebrates including medaka, xenopus, and human have only one or two pde1c genes. however, the mechanisms for the maintenance of these pde1c duplicates are unknown. the ot system, in which the pde1c is involved, is expected to play an important role in the evolution of the stickleback, which demonstrates interesting ecological behaviors such as anadromous migration, territorial behavior, nest building, and parental care of eggs  <cit> . thus, it is of interest to understand whether the multiple pde1cs in stickleback have persisted through sub-/neo-functionalization or by the effects of increased gene dosage in the ot system.

in this study, to explore the functional and evolutionary significance of the highly duplicated pde1c genes in the stickleback, we carried out a comprehensive evolutionary analysis. first, we investigated the gene phylogeny and conserved synteny of the duplicated pde1c genes to elucidate the chromosome/genome-level events that have generated the multiple pde1cs of stickleback. second, based on the evolutionary framework obtained from the above investigation, the functional diversification of expression in organs and protein-coding sequences of the duplicated pde1c genes were examined by gene expression and molecular evolutionary analyses. third, we estimated the number of pde1c loci involved in the ot of stickleback by analyzing co-expression between the pde1cs and olfactory-type g-protein . according to the result of the co-expression analysis, finally, we attempted to address the effect of increased pde1c dosage on the function of the ot using in silico pathway simulation. our results implied that the evolutionary significance of the duplicated pde1c genes in stickleback is in the diversification of expression patterns and an increase in gene dosage, rather than neofunctionalization of the coding sequences.

RESULTS
phylogeny and synteny among stickleback pde1c genes
the maximum likelihood /bayesian molecular phylogeny of chordate pde1a and pde1c  showed that seven of the duplicated pde1c genes in stickleback  arose from repeated duplications that occurred after the divergence between stickleback and pufferfish . in addition, the teleost  pde1c genes were grouped within two major clades, pde1ca and pde1cb, with relatively high support values . this branching pattern suggests that the pde1c gene was duplicated in a teleost ancestor after its split from the tetrapods , possibly through the 3r-wgd  <cit> . this possibility was examined by investigating the synteny of the surrounding genes of the pde1c loci in teleosts and tetrapods as described below.

to clarify the genomic events that generated the two paralogous genes in teleosts  and multiple pde1cb genes in stickleback, we investigated the genomic regions around the pde1c loci. we found conserved synteny between the pde1c locus in tetrapods  and the pde1ca locus in medaka, stickleback, and pufferfish . one more homologous region corresponding to the cs- <dig> was found in medaka, pufferfish, and stickleback . cs- <dig> and cs- <dig> were considered doubly conserved syntenies derived from the 3r-wgd, which corresponds to a single tetrapod chromosome segment. however, cs- <dig> appeared to have lost the putative region that contains pde1cb. zebrafish pde1ca, pufferfish pde1cb, and stickleback pde1cb1-b <dig> were found within other chromosome segments, implying secondary translocation of these pde1c genes after the 3r-wgd. the pufferfish pde1cb region partially corresponded to human chromosomes  <dig>  and  <dig>  . however, we were unable to find human chromosome regions corresponding to the zebrafish pde1ca and stickleback pde1cb1-b <dig> regions. among the stickleback pde1cb1-b <dig> regions, the surrounding genes were very similar , implying that repeated segmental duplications generated the multiple pde1cb regions in stickleback. we found one more ninth pde1c locus in stickleback  , whose sequence was 5'-and 3'-truncated and partial  probably due to incompleteness of the sequence contig where the locus was located . we could not conclude whether this is pseudogene or not, and thus we did not include this locus in our analysis.

our overall results from the phylogenetic and synteny analyses clearly revealed the evolutionary relationships among pde1c genes in the bony vertebrates and the evolutionary origin of multiple pde1c genes in stickleback. this provided the basis for our subsequent analysis on the molecular evolution of the multiple stickleback pde1c genes.

molecular evolution of multiple pde1c genes
the multiple pde1c genes of stickleback were analyzed by ml-estimation of the nonsynonymous to synonymous substitution rates  during evolution, which is a possible indicator of adaptation at the protein sequence level  <cit> . in this analysis, we tested whether some portion of the pde1cb sequences shows ω > <dig>  which is the signature of adaptive amino acid changes, by comparing maximum-likelihood values of simple evolution model having fewer ω parameter  with those of more complex model having more ω parameters, some of which were allowed to be > <dig> . the likelihood ratio test - <dig>  the comparison between m <dig> with m <dig>  implied that the stickleback pde1cb genes  were under positive diversifying selection with regard to their protein sequences . however, the lrt- <dig>  lrt- <dig>  and "branch-site test", the comparison between m <dig> and m <dig>  m <dig> and m <dig>  and m <dig> and m <dig>  respectively, did not support this implication . the lrt- <dig>  detected five codon sites under positive selection, including sites 76– <dig>   <dig>  and  <dig> . on the other hand, the lrt- <dig>  lrt- <dig>  and branch-site test  did not identify these individual sites as being under positive selection.

a log-likelihood scores.

b nonsynonymous–synonymous substitution ratio  averaged over sites.

* p <  <dig> 

the positively selected sites inferred by the lrt- <dig> described above were not located on the known active sites of the enzyme or on specific domains or motifs of the pde proteins . the active enzyme sites that are generally conserved in pde proteins   <cit>  were also conserved among the stickleback pde1cb genes, with exceptions at sites  <dig> in pde1cb <dig>   <dig> in pde1cb <dig>  and  <dig> in pde1cb <dig>  moreover, the known pde-specific protein domains were successfully detected in all stickleback pde1cb genes  via queries to protein domain databases pfam  <cit>  and prosite  <cit> , suggesting that they conserve pde function. on the other hand, the sequence region containing the inferred positively-selected sites  yielded no hits in these databases. those positively-selected sites were distributed on the opposite side of a substrate-binding pocket of this enzyme . in addition, this region did not correspond to the important variant region of the three functional splicing variants reported in mouse pde1c  <cit> .

spatial expression of the multiple pde1c genes
spatial expression patterns across tissues were investigated and compared among the multiple pde1c and g genes in adult stickleback . reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction  analysis showed that seven of the eight pde1c genes were co-expressed with g in the nose of stickleback. among these seven genes, five  were strongly expressed, and two  were weakly expressed in the nose. in addition, those stickleback pde1cs were roughly divided into two groups in terms of their overall expression patterns. one group included the pde1cs that were expressed strongly in a few tissues  and the other group included the pde1cs that were strongly expressed in several tissues . among the "group i" genes, the expression of pde1ca was clearly detected in the nose, brain, and intestine and was similar to that of g, which was strongly expressed in the nose, gill raker, and intestine. on the other hand, pde1cb <dig>  b <dig>  b <dig>  and b <dig> seemed to have lost the strong co-expression with g in the nose , intestine , or both tissues . among the "group ii" genes, pde1cb <dig> was strongly expressed in the nose, brain, skin, and skeletal muscle, and pde1cb <dig> and b <dig> were strongly expressed in almost all tissues.

in silico simulations for the multiple pde1c genes
we examined the possible effects of increased gene/product dosage from the multiple pde1c genes in stickleback on the output  of the ot pathway using in silico simulations. figure  <dig> depicts a schematic diagram of the ot simulation model constructed according to the kegg pathway database   <cit> , and a representative result of the simulation . figure 5b shows that the odorant and olfactory receptor  produced or-odorant complex  that stimulated the g , led to depolarization occurring on the simulation time scale of 0– <dig> . the depolarization is blocked by activation of the pde1c. figure 5c shows that the activated g increased the concentration of ca2+ , which stimulates pde1c  via the mediation of calmodulin . when the activity level of the pde1c has gone over its firing threshold , the activated pde1c decomposed camp , and finally terminated the depolarization . although this preliminary model approach may be simple, we thought that this model would provide a basic framework to analyze the effect of an increased dosage of a specific element; that is, the pde1c gene. we compared the depolarization signals of the "single-pde1c" model and "multiple-pde1cs" model. since five pde1cs were strongly expressed, and two were weakly expressed in the nose , we set the number of pde1c circuits equal to six in the "multiple-pde1cs" model as an approximate representation of the estimated gene dosage in the ot.

our ot model simulations implied that the increase in the number of pde1c circuits affects the longevity of the depolarization signal . in the case of the single- and multiple-pde1c models with a pde1c threshold =  <dig>  the resultant depolarization signals were weak  and short-lived  when the number of pde1c circuits was one or six . in these simulation models, pde1c seems to work rapidly after odorant stimulation, leading to an instant block of depolarization by the pde1c circuit regardless of whether multiple pde1cs were involved. when the pde1c threshold =  <dig>  on the other hand, the resultant depolarization signals became more intense , and the "multiple-pde1c " model yielded an elongated signal of depolarization  compared to the "single-pde1c " model .

we also found that the depolarization longevity of the "multiple-pde1c " model was further extended by limiting the availability of ca2+, which is an upstream regulator of the pde1c circuit. ca2+ dosage limitation affected the single- and multiple-pde1c  models similarly in terms of their depolarization intensities, which were reduced to  <dig> – <dig> , compared to the model with unlimited ca2+ . in the "multiple-pde1c  + ca2+-limited" model, the longevity of the depolarization signal was greatly elongated , compared to the "single-pde1c  + ca2+-limited" model .

since the pde1c is activated by ca2+-activated cam, it is possible that the finite ca2+ dosage invoked competition among increased pde1cs, resulting in a delay in blocking of the depolarization. this situation likely led to a positive-feedback circuit , also activated by upstream ca2+, to be more prevalent in the ot system. therefore, the depolarization longevity was extended in the "multiple-pde1c" models . this possibility was supported by an in silico mutation analysis , in which we knocked out the positive feedback circuit  in the simulation model. in this "multiple-pde1c  + positive-feedback loop defeated" model, the resultant depolarization signals were not greatly elongated , and the longevity was similar to that of the "single-pde1c " model .

discussion
evolutionary origins of the multiple pde1c genes in stickleback
molecular phylogenies  and conserved synteny  analyses showed that the teleost pde1c was duplicated through the 3r-wgd, generating two isoforms, pde1ca and pde1cb, and that pde1cb was repeatedly duplicated in the stickleback lineage 6– <dig> times through chromosome segment duplications. such multiple gene copies could be generated by fewer than six duplications especially in tandemly located genes; however, this seems not to be the case of the stickleback pde1cb genes, which are located on different scaffolds respectively. the stickleback pde1cb loci and the orthologous pufferfish pde1cb locus appears to have translocated from cs- <dig>  which is one of the pair of conserved chromosome regions derived from 3r-wgd. the corresponding pde1cb locus in medaka and zebrafish has been lost . since no synteny was found between stickleback pde1cb loci and the pufferfish pde1cb locus, the translocation of the pde1cb gene may have occurred independently in the two lineages. alternatively, the pde1cb translocation may have occurred once in an earlier ancestor, and either the stickleback or pufferfish experienced an additional pde1cb translocation. after the translocation, the stickleback pde1cb gene along with the neighboring tandemly repeated "unknown" genes  appeared to have undergone lineage-specific expansion   <cit>  by chromosome segment duplications of > <dig> kbp. such plasticity in the evolution of the 3r-wgd-derived duplicates, such as an independent loss or persistence among teleost lineages, is also shown in a recent study on androgen receptors  <cit> . the persistence of these receptors in various percomorph fishes is suggested to be responsible for their neofunctionalization in ligand-binding activities that may be associated with plasticity of sex determination in those teleosts. it is also interesting to explore how the multiple stickleback pde1cb loci presented here have been retained.

the various stickleback chromosome segments that contain pde1cb1-b <dig>  may have been retained because of advantages related to the lse of pde1cb and/or the "unknown" genes mentioned above. lses are thought to have played an important role in the proteome evolution of multicellular eukaryotes  <cit> , particularly in the evolution of proteins involved in ligand recognition, pathogen resistance, etc  <cit> . the function of the "unknown" genes is not annotated in the ensembl stickleback genome. however, at least a part of their corresponding human genes is suggested to function as an angiotensin ii/arginine vasopressin  receptor-like protein responsible for an autoimmune disease  . the "unknown" stickleback genes may also have immune-related functions. the repeated segmental duplication of these "unknown" genes  might be advantageous in stickleback responses to diverse pathogens or other ligands. this possibility should be examined further. on the other hand, the stickleback pde1cb genes are intact and do not have stop codons or frameshifts in their coding sequences. thus, they should also have been allowed to be highly duplicated. accordingly, the pde1cb genes in stickleback may also have important phenotypic consequences; for this reason, we analyzed their molecular evolution, gene expression, and possible gene dosage effects, as discussed below.

sequence and expression evolution of the multiple stickleback pde1c genes
the sequence evolution analysis of the multiple pde1cb genes in stickleback did not provide strong evidence for neofunctionalization  <cit>  in their coding proteins. the known active sites and specific domains/motifs of pde enzymes were highly conserved among the multiple pde1cb genes . in addition, although the ml-estimation of the dn/ds ratio implied adaptive sequence evolution in the case of lrt- <dig> , the estimated positively-selected amino acid sites are located on the opposite side of a substrate-binding pocket of the pde <dig>  and these positively-selected sites are included in the sequence region for which the possible function is not reported . from these observations, we can hardly conclude that the multiple pde1cb genes were maintained through the acquisition of new enzyme functions. this implies that evolutionary mechanisms other than neofunctionalization in coding sequence may have retained the multiple stickleback pde1c genes.

gene expression analysis  showed that the pde1ca and relatively "basal" pde1cb genes  were strongly expressed in a few  tissues, and their expression patterns were similar to g. since pde1c and g are involved in the ot  <cit> , expression patterns of these basal  pde1cb genes seem to represent ancestral states of the teleost pde1cb. this might be verified by further expression analysis on the pde1cb from many other teleosts in the future. on the other hand, the "derived" pde1cb genes  were strongly expressed in many more tissues, implying that they acquired expression in new organs. these pde1cb genes, which seem to be neofunctionalized in terms of expression patterns, may be under functional adaptation to their new subcellular environments. furthermore, they might experience neofunctionalization through the acquisition of new mutations in the future.

in addition, the number of pde1c loci involved in the stickleback ot seems to be increased, as suggested by the fact that at least seven pde1c isoforms were co-expressed with g in the stickleback nose . such an increase in pde1c gene products may have some functional significance in the performance of the ot. however, directly addressing this question is difficult within the scope of this study, because it would require gene knockout, neurophysiological, and behavioral analyses. furthermore, gene expression levels of the pde1c would be assessed more quantitatively by a real-time pcr approach. such an approach will also useful to explore the existence of gene number variation of pde1c within and between populations of stickleback, which includes a variety of ecomorphs   <cit>  in the future. to obtain and describe the primary predictions of the phenotypic effects from increased pde1c dosage, we used in silico pathway simulations, as discussed below.

possible effect of increased pde1c products on olfactory transduction
the effect of increased pde1c dosage on stickleback ot was surveyed using in silico pathway simulation. the simulation was based on limited information and knowledge of ot, and the predictions resulting from the simulation should be empirically evaluated. regardless, such approaches may provide insight into the evolutionary significance of the multiple pde1c genes in the stickleback.

according to the results of the ot simulation, the increased pde1c dosage extends the longevity of the depolarization signal of the olfactory receptor neuron . pde1c is involved in the negative feedback circuit of the ot and decomposes cyclic adenylic acid  and eventually terminates the depolarization depending on upstream ca2+/cam  <cit>  . accordingly, the increased pde1c products may compete with each other for binding to these upstream ca2+/cam molecules, and consequently delay the termination of depolarization . this proposed delay mechanism seems to be supported from our additional simulation results that ca2+/cam limitation further extends the longevity of the depolarization signal . competition among the increased pde1cs involved in the negative feedback circuit may result in positive feedback in the ot system to be dominant. this situation would also elongate the depolarization signal. our in silico mutation-simulation analysis supported this hypothesis . that is, a defect in the positive feedback circuit antagonized the effect of the increased pde1c dosage, suppressing the depolarization elongation. to summarize, our simulation analyses suggested that increased pde1c dosage induces competition among pde1cs and causes the positive feedback loop to be dominant in the ot system, resulting in a delay in the termination of the output depolarization of the olfactory receptor neuron.

it is proposed that an extension in the duration of olfactory signals is associated with the territorial ecology of the house mouse mus domesticus  <cit> . in m. domesticus, the male scent mark contains lipocalin proteins called major urinary proteins . the mups bind with the semiochemical molecules and release them gradually, which eventually extends the longevity of the odor signal. this makes it difficult for other male mice to tell whether the odor signals come from scent marks or a territorial male, and the other males are hesitant to approach the territorial zone because the scent-mark odor has an aggressive message. this is thought to be evolutionarily advantageous for both the territorial and the other individual because potential male invaders reduce their risk of damage or death due to conflict  <cit> . although this phenomenon and the underlying mechanisms in house mice are different from those proposed for the stickleback, the multiple pde1c genes may play an important role in stickleback ecology and behavior. this speculation may be appealing when considering that sticklebacks also hold territories where they build nests and reproduce.

of course, these hypotheses should be empirically examined. additionally, the application of the vertebrate ot system described in the kegg  <cit>  to this stickleback study should be verified in future research. however, we propose that the evolutionary significance of multiple gene duplicates may be evaluated more comprehensively using available biological information and analytical tools such as whole genome sequences, pathway data, and in silico simulation software, as was attempted here. such a comprehensive approach would be particularly favorable for questions that are not entirely addressed using the molecular evolutionary analysis of a particular gene/protein. for example, this approach could be used in testing the effects of increased gene dosage in signal transduction pathways. with improvements in the pathway models and their parameters, the in silico pathway simulation, which can perform a synthetic analysis of molecular dynamics for multiple gene products and other biomolecules, will become one of the most powerful approaches in understanding complex macro-phenotypic evolution.

CONCLUSIONS
in this paper, we presented the results of a comprehensive analysis of the evolution of multiple pde1c genes in the stickleback involved in a camp-mediated signal transduction pathway. our results suggested that the pde1c genes are evolutionary significant through either their diversification in expression among organs and/or through an increased gene dosage effect on the olfactory transduction pathway, rather than through neofunctionalization of their coding sequences. in particular, in silico simulation analysis implied that an increase of pde1c dosage extends the longevity of olfactory signals. an increase in gene product may have a substantial effect on the functions of subcellular networks.

