BACKGROUND
polyamines are ubiquitous, low-molecular-weight aliphatic polycations that play a vital role in regulating gene expression, signal transduction, ion-channel function, dna and protein synthesis as well as cell proliferation and differentiation  <cit> . they scavenge reactive oxygen species thereby protecting dna, proteins, and lipids from oxidative damage  <cit> . in plants, the most common polyamines are diamine putrescine, triamine spermidine, and tetramine spermine  <cit> . they occur either in free form or as conjugates bound to phenolic acids and low molecular weight compounds. due to their positive charge, polyamines interact with negatively charged macromolecules such as proteins and nucleic acids leading to the stabilization of these molecules under stress conditions  <cit> .

in plants, the first step in polyamine biosynthesis is the formation of putrescine from either ornithine or arginine . ornithine is converted directly into putrescine by ornithine decarboxylase . arginine can be converted into ornithine by arginase, or can take a longer route whereby it is converted to agmatine by arginine decarboxylase , then to n-carbamoylputrescine by agmatine deiminase and finally into putrescine by n-carbamoylputrescine amidohydrolase. putrescine subsequently receives an aminopropyl moiety from decarboxylated s-adenosylmethionine  via spermidine synthase  to produce spermidine; and spermine is then generated by a second aminopropyl transfer by spermine synthase   <cit> .figure  <dig> 
ornithine and polyamine biosynthesis pathway. the principle pathway of ornithine and polyamine biosynthesis is shown along with a summary of key findings from the current study. change in abundance of transcripts in susceptible wheat plants is indicated by solid triangles and in virulent hessian fly larvae as open triangles, compared to controls. triangles pointing up or down indicate increase or decrease, respectively, in transcript abundance quantified by rt-qpcr. solid circles indicate transcripts that are either transiently expressed in only one time-point or do not differ significantly from control levels in wheat tissue. solid block-style arrows indicate polyamine levels in susceptible wheat plants and open block-style arrows indicate polyamine levels in virulent hessian fly larvae. arrows pointing up indicate increased levels of polyamines in infested tissue compared to uninfested controls or in virulent larvae compared to avirulent larvae.



involvement of polyamines in plant disease resistance has been extensively reviewed  <cit> . polyamine catabolism produces h2o <dig>  which plays a role in plant defense by contributing to the hypersensitive response  <cit>  that acts against different biotic stressors like fungi, bacteria and viruses  <cit> . some examples of polyamines associated with plant defense include castor  against fusarium oxysporum f. sp. ricini  <cit> , arabidopsis against pseudomonas syringae  <cit>  and tobacco in response to inoculation with tobacco mosaic virus   <cit> . monocots also respond with increased polyamine levels during defense against microbial pathogens. in an incompatible interaction between barley and powdery mildew , levels of free and conjugated spermidine and putrescine as well as activity of odc, adc and samdc enzymes increased, three days after inoculation  <cit> .

despite documented changes of plant polyamine levels in response to various microbial pathogens, limited information is available on their involvement in plant-pest interactions. increased abundance of polyamines during plant resistance has been reported for interactions between sweet pepper and leafminer  <cit>  and during tolerance in nicotiana attenuata attacked by mirid bug  <cit>  and triticale infested by aphids  <cit> . one proposed function in plant defense is that phenolic polyamines block glutamatergic neuromuscular junctions resulting in paralysis of insect skeletal muscles  <cit> . other defense mechanisms associated with increased polyamine abundance include spider mite-induced plant volatiles that attract carnivorous natural enemies to lima bean  <cit>  and disrupted settling of bird cherry-oat aphids on triticale  <cit> .

hessian fly , a member of the gall midge family  is a destructive insect pest of wheat  causing significant economic losses worldwide  <cit> . this insect is an obligate parasite that must receive all of its nutrition from the host plant. following egg hatch, the first-instar hessian fly larvae crawl down the leaf blade to the base  of the wheat plant and attempt to establish sustained feeding sites. probing by the larvae results in either an incompatible  or a compatible  interaction.

resistance of wheat to hessian fly attack is achieved through the action of any of  <dig> distinct resistance genes  identified so far  <cit> . gene-for-gene interaction  <cit>  is thought to occur when a larval salivary gene product is recognized by a wheat resistance gene product  <cit> . the resulting incompatible interactions are characterized by expression of defense response genes  <cit> , accumulation of feeding deterrent proteins  <cit> , and changes in surface wax composition  <cit>  as well as host-cell permeability that aids in delivery of these substances  <cit>  and ultimately leads to larval death.

during compatible interactions, salivary effectors from virulent larvae suppress wheat defense responses leading to susceptibility, which allows the insect to complete its life cycle  <cit> . within three to four days of larval attack, the virulent larvae alter host metabolic pathways  <cit>  resulting in differentiation of a nutritive tissue at the feeding site, which is believed to provide the larvae a diet rich in essential nutrients  <cit> . these physiological changes are accompanied by a shift from carbon-containing compounds to elevated levels of nitrogen-containing compounds with corresponding changes in transcript levels of genes involved in glycolysis, the pentose phosphate pathway, and the tricarboxylic acid cycle  <cit> . the carbon/nitrogen shift may provide better nutrition for insect development. in addition, a significant increase in levels of certain amino acids, including, proline, glycine, serine, tyrosine and glutamic acid, were observed in nutritive tissue  <cit> . proline, glycine, serine and tyrosine are ‘conditionally essential’ amino acids, meaning they become essential only when the organism faces periods of extreme stress where the physiological need exceeds the organism’s ability to produce. although methionine abundance does not increase in compatible interactions, it is an essential amino acid that cannot be synthesized de novo by an animal and must be supplied in its diet. the demand for amino acids expands beyond the essential set to the conditionally essential set in rapidly developing insect tissues  <cit> . therefore, these nutrients must be supplied exogenously through diet. proline, glutamic acid and methionine enter the ornithine biosynthesis pathway, eventually leading to the production of polyamines.

the present study focuses on the polyamine biosynthesis pathways in both wheat and hessian fly larvae during compatible  and incompatible  interactions. we addressed two hypotheses. the first hypothesis was that wheat production of polyamines would increase as a component of its defense response against attack by hessian fly larvae. this assumption was based on numerous reports of polyamine accumulation in response of resistant plants to biotic stresses  <cit> . the second hypothesis was that the polyamine biosynthetic pathway would be highly up-regulated in virulent hessian fly larvae to support the rapid growth processes driven by gene transcription and translation, as is the case in organisms ranging from mammals to bacteria  <cit> . we report differences in polyamine levels as well as in the transcript abundance of key genes involved in biosynthesis of polyamines in susceptible and resistant wheat plants during response to feeding by hessian fly larvae. in addition, polyamine levels and biosynthetic pathway were monitored in virulent hessian fly larvae. the implications of increased polyamines as an additional source of nutrition leading to development of the virulent hessian fly larvae are discussed.

RESULTS
polyamine levels increase in susceptible wheat and virulent hessian fly larvae
metabolite profiling using hplc detected differences in the free polyamine levels between resistant and susceptible wheat plants following hessian fly  larval attack . in susceptible newton wheat, putrescine concentration increased to more than two-fold  at  <dig> and  <dig> dah, and nine-fold  by  <dig> dah above levels in the uninfested control . spermidine and spermine levels did not increase significantly above control levels at  <dig> dah in susceptible wheat . however, they increased significantly in the susceptible wheat by  <dig> dah , and then slightly decreased by  <dig> dah . in contrast, resistant h9-iris wheat showed no change in any of the polyamine levels relative to the uninfested controls .figure  <dig> 
wheat and hessian fly polyamine levels. panels a, b, and c show polyamine levels in h9-iris  and newton  wheat crown tissue  at the larval feeding site. panels d, e, and f show levels in avirulent and virulent biotype l hessian fly larvae feeding on h9-iris and newton wheat plants, respectively. error bars represent mean ± se of two independent biological replicates. statistically significant  differences in polyamine levels between infested and uninfested  wheat plants  and between virulent and avirulent larvae  are indicated by ‘*’ with fold-change values.



polyamine levels in virulent and avirulent hessian fly larvae positively correlated with the levels observed in susceptible and resistant host plants over the time-course . in virulent larvae feeding on the susceptible plants, putrescine levels increased from 3- to 5-fold between  <dig> and  <dig> dah  above levels in the avirulent larvae. spermidine levels increased significantly in virulent larvae from 20-fold by  <dig> dah  to over 440-fold  by  <dig> dah . this level decreased to 40-fold  by  <dig> dah . spermine levels were low and did not vary significantly between the virulent and avirulent larvae . in the avirulent larvae the levels of putrescine, spermidine and spermine remained unchanged showing no significant difference  at all time-points . in both, susceptible wheat and the virulent larvae, spermidine was by far the most abundant of the three polyamines investigated in the current study.

wheat polyamine pathway transcript abundance parallels polyamine levels
the biosynthesis of putrescine, spermidine and spermine from amino acids involves several enzymatic steps. to determine which of the genes in the polyamine biosynthesis pathway are activated by hessian fly infestation we carried out rt-qpcr expression studies . in susceptible newton wheat infested with biotype l, transcripts encoding ornithine decarboxylase , s-adenosylmethionine synthetase  and s-adenosylmethionine decarboxylase  were significantly responsive over time from  <dig> through  <dig> dah compared to the uninfested controls. while arginine decarboxylase  did not show an increase in transcript abundance , spermidine synthase  showed a small but significant increase only at later times . in contrast, in the resistant h9-iris wheat line only transcripts for ta-odc accumulated to significantly higher levels than the uninfested control following attack by the avirulent larvae . transcript levels of polyamine oxidase , involved in the catabolism of polyamines did not show any change in either susceptible or resistant wheat . transcriptional profiling studies carried out in other wheat genotypes infested with either a different hessian fly biotype or harboring a different r gene  yielded very similar patterns of expression with significant accumulation of polyamine pathway transcripts during compatible interactions.figure  <dig> 
abundance of polyamine biosynthesis pathway transcripts in
h9-iris
and newton wheat infested with biotype l hessian fly larvae. transcript levels of a)
ta-odc, b)
hfr-spds, c)
ta-sams, and d)
hfr-samdc in crown tissue  quantified by rt-qpcr. values are the log fold-change ± se of infested compared to uninfested control  plants. statistically significant  differences are indicated by ‘*’ with linear fold-change values.



transcripts encoding enzymes for amino acid utilization in ornithine biosynthesis accumulate in susceptible wheat
expression  studies revealed increased abundance of transcripts encoding enzymes catalyzing the conversion of the precursor amino acids proline and glutamic acid to ornithine . transcripts for genes encoding pyrroline-5-carboxylate synthetase , glutamate reductase  and acetylornithinase  were most responsive in the susceptible newton wheat , whereas transcripts of pyrroline-5-carboxylate reductase , arginase , and ornithine aminotransferase , showed a minimal transient response . a similar expression profile was observed in other wheat genotypes infested with different fly biotypes also resulting in compatible interactions . however, unlike the h9-wheat, the h13-wheat transcript abundance increased for ta-oat and decreased for ta-glr.figure  <dig> 
abundance of ornithine biosynthesis pathway transcripts in
h9-iris
and newton wheat infested with biotype l hessian fly larvae. transcript levels of a)
ta-p5cs, b)
ta-glr, and c)
ta-aor from crown tissue  quantified by rt-qpcr. values are the log fold-change ± se of infested compared to the uninfested control plants. statistically significant  differences are indicated by ‘*’ with linear fold-change values.



activity of s-adenosylmethionine decarboxylase  increases in susceptible wheat after hessian fly larval attack
increase in hfr-samdc transcript abundance  resulted in higher hfr-samdc enzyme activity in the susceptible wheat line after hessian fly attack. significantly higher levels of hfr-samdc activity were detected in the infested susceptible plants than in uninfested controls at  <dig>  and  <dig>  dah . although hfr-samdc transcripts were significantly higher at  <dig> dah in susceptible wheat , significant increases in hfr-samdc enzyme activity were not detected until later. at no time did hfr-samdc activity significantly differ  between the resistant and their uninfested control plants .figure  <dig> 
specific activity of wheat hfr-samdc  in
h9-iris
and newton wheat infested with biotype l hessian fly larvae. hfr-samdc enzymatic activity was measured in wheat crown tissue . data are presented as mean ± se. statistically significant  differences between infested and uninfested control are indicated by ‘*’ with fold-change values.



annotation and phylogenetic reconstruction of m. destructor genes involved in synthesis of polyamines
to identify hessian fly polyamine biosynthesis genes for use in carrying out transcript analysis, these genes were annotated from the hessian fly genome assembly. we successfully annotated near full-length cdna sequence for mdes-odc, mdes-spds and mdes-spms genes and a partial cdna sequence for mdes-samdc . the sequences for all four genes were highly similar to their respective orthologs annotated from the aedes aegypti genome. we were unable to annotate s-adenosylmethionine synthetase from the hessian fly genome assembly. the annotated genes were cloned and sequenced to validate the gbrowse annotated sequences. phylogenetic reconstructions grouped the genes with their respective orthologs from other insect species verifying that the correct hessian fly genes were identified for use in expression studies .

virulent and avirulent hessian fly larvae exhibit differential expression of polyamine biosynthesis pathway genes
as polyamine levels of susceptible wheat increased, so did polyamine levels in the virulent hessian fly larvae. to ascertain whether increased larval polyamine levels were caused by activation of polyamine pathway genes in the larvae or whether larval polyamines were plant-derived we carried out rt-qpcr studies to look at expression of mdes-odc, mdes-samdc, mdes-spds and mdes-spms genes in the virulent and avirulent hessian fly larvae. expression levels were compared to those in neonate larvae that had never fed on a wheat plant. odc is considered the rate-determining enzyme in polyamine biosynthesis; however, transcripts for mdes-odc were significantly less abundant in virulent larvae than in the neonate larvae . in contrast, transcripts for the other three genes increased greatly  in abundance 2– <dig> dah , indicating an increased capacity, especially for spermidine production, through non-mdes-odc entry points. the abundance of mdes-samdc, mdes-spds and mdes-spms transcripts gradually decreased by  <dig> dah in virulent larvae . in the avirulent hessian fly larvae, transcripts for all four genes under study were significantly lower at all stages of development as compared to the neonate larvae .figure  <dig> 
abundance of hessian fly larval transcripts for polyamine biosynthesis. transcript levels of a)
mdes-odc, b)
mdes-samdc, c)
mdes-spds, and d)
mdes-spms were quantified by rt-qpcr. values are the log fold-change ± se for avirulent and virulent hessian fly larvae that have fed on host plants compared to neonate larvae  that had not fed on plants. statistically significant  differences are indicated by ‘*’ with linear fold-change values.



inhibiting wheat ornithine decarboxylase enzyme activity limits hessian fly larval growth
to study the effects of limiting wheat polyamine production on virulent hessian fly larval growth, we used dfmo to inhibit odc enzymatic activity of the susceptible host plants. the larvae were prevented from coming into direct contact with the applied dfmo because the blade of the first leaf was painted with the inhibitor and allowed to dry before adult flies were released onto the plant. the eggs were oviposited on the second leaf blade ensuring lack of direct contact with the dfmo. since peak abundance of most polyamines as well as the transcripts encoding the enzymes were observed between  <dig> and  <dig> dah, larval length measurements were taken  <dig> dah. the larvae growing on plants treated with  <dig> or 5 mm dfmo were significantly smaller  compared to larvae on untreated plants . no significant difference  was seen in the size of larvae growing on plants treated with 1 mm dfmo. in addition, at concentrations of  <dig> and 5 mm dfmo the percentage of insects that had reached pupation  <dig> dah was significantly lower  indicating delayed larval development. larvae inhabiting plants treated with 1 mm dfmo did not exhibit significant differences in pupation rate as compared to the control .figure  <dig> 
hessian fly larval responses to inhibition of wheat odc activity with difluoromethylornithine . a) length of biotype l larvae  feeding on susceptible newton wheat plants that were pretreated with  <dig>   <dig> and 5 mm concentrations of dfmo to block wheat odc activity. data are represented as mean larval length ± se for the respective number of larvae  measured for each treatment. treatments showing statistically significant  differences between dfmo-treated and untreated plants  are indicated with ‘*’. b) representative photomicrographs of biotype l hessian fly larvae from each of the treatments. c) mean percentage ± se for the respective number  of insects for each treatment in larval  or pupal stages  on treated susceptible newton wheat plants  <dig> dah. treatments showing statistically significant  differences from the control  are indicated with ‘*’.



discussion
the current study was undertaken to examine temporal changes in free polyamine abundance and expression of genes contributing to polyamine biosynthesis during wheat interactions with hessian fly larvae. key findings summarized in figure  <dig> were:  susceptible wheat: increased levels of ornithine and polyamine biosynthesis gene transcripts plus higher samdc enzyme activity resulted in greater putrescine, spermidine and spermine abundance,  resistant wheat: the polyamine pathway was unresponsive to hessian fly attack, and  virulent larvae: although putrescine and spermidine levels increased, transcripts encoding mdes-odc  decreased in abundance. irrespective of the wheat genotype or hessian fly biotype used, these results were consistently observed in all compatible wheat-hessian fly interactions.

resistant plants exhibited no change in either the transcript levels of genes that encode enzymes for polyamine biosynthesis or in the levels of free polyamines. in contrast, the induction of wheat susceptibility resulted in increased polyamine production. thus, our first hypothesis that polyamine production would increase as a component of wheat defense response against attack by hessian fly larvae was not supported. although higher polyamine levels are predominantly associated with induced plant resistance, their increase has occasionally been associated with susceptibility in cereals. elevated spermidine levels  were observed in susceptible barley leaves that had “green islands” surrounding the infection sites of brown rust and powdery mildew fungi  <cit> . likewise, stripe rust caused an increase in the polyamine content in a susceptible wheat cultivar  <cit> . feeding by bird cherry-oat aphid  resulted in higher level of putrescine and spermidine in shoots of susceptible triticale cultivars  <cit> .

our earlier observations of a significant increase in susceptible wheat production of glutamic acid , proline , and alanine  by day four following hessian fly larval attack  <cit>  suggest a linkage to the increase in polyamine production. in that study, small but significant increases in mrna abundance for alanine aminotransferase and glutamine-dependent asparagine synthetase, lead to glutamic acid becoming the most abundant free amino acid produced at the larval feeding sites in susceptible wheat  <cit> . building on that information, the current study showed increased abundance of transcripts for ta-p5cs, ta-glr, and ta-aor in susceptible wheat indicating that at least part of the increased production of proline and glutamic acid is shunted into the polyamine pathway via ornithine. further, the increased levels of ta-odc, ta-sams, hfr-samdc and hfr-spds transcripts, as well as increased abundance of all three free polyamines observed in susceptible crown tissue, provide evidence that the increased wheat polyamine synthesis is an integral part of the compatible interaction with hessian fly larvae.

generally, both odc- and adc-mediated polyamine biosynthesis is induced in plants as a response to biotic  <cit>  and abiotic stresses  <cit> . however, induction of the odc-mediated pathway seems to be the predominant mode of polyamine biosynthesis during plant biotic stress as compared to abiotic stress  <cit> . our results showed a greater increase in ta-odc transcripts  than ta-adc transcripts , in susceptible wheat following hessian fly attack, implicating odc-mediated polyamine biosynthesis as the predominant entry into this pathway.

resource manipulation of the host plant is a common life strategy for insects that are obligate parasites. the group of gall-forming insects, which includes the hessian fly, uses an effector-based mechanism to reorient the physiology of the host, creating a sustainable environment that provides physical protection and quality nutrients  <cit> . like amino acids, the pool of polyamines in an organism is maintained by de novo synthesis, exogenous supply through the diet or both  <cit> . among other functions, polyamines are growth factors and are required to maintain metabolic processes in all organisms  <cit> . several studies document benefits of dietary polyamines during insect development. one example showed increased larval survival and the rate of development for saw-toothed grain beetle  when putrescine was added to an artificial diet  <cit> . however, induction of host-plant polyamine production may benefit hessian fly larvae in other ways. like fungal pathogens that manipulate polyamine levels to maintain “green islands”, tissue in a juvenile and metabolically active state in an otherwise senescing cereal leaf  <cit> , hessian fly larvae require their host wheat plant to continue producing nutrients throughout their feeding stages. hessian fly-infested susceptible wheat plants are known to be darker green than resistant or control plants  <cit>  and thus the entire plant may represent a “green island”. because polyamines offer some degree of protection against pathogen attack as well as oxidative, acidic and osmotic stresses  <cit> , their increased production could benefit both the susceptible wheat plant and the virulent larvae. susceptible wheat mounts a basal defense against hessian fly larvae that includes production of molecules such as reactive oxygen species  <cit>  and lectins  <cit>  that have the capacity to damage the larval midgut when ingested. in resistant tobacco plants, in response to tmv infection, polyamine degradation by polyamine oxidase is a source of h2o <dig> leading to a hypersensitive response  <cit> . however, no increase in transcripts of wheat polyamine oxidase was observed in either compatible or incompatible interactions  suggesting that polyamines are the terminal catabolic products that are utilized by the hessian fly larvae. the contribution of polyamines to gut repair following injury  <cit> , may help protect the midgut of virulent larvae from basal defenses since no visible damage was detected in the midgut of virulent larvae feeding on susceptible wheat  <cit> .

our expression profiling studies revealed low abundance of mdes-odc transcripts in both virulent and avirulent larvae, which should limit the production of downstream polyamines. however, abundance of mdes-samdc, mdes-spds, and mdes-spms transcripts increased significantly and so did polyamine abundance  <dig> dah in the virulent hessian fly larvae. thus our second hypothesis, that the polyamine biosynthetic pathway would be highly up-regulated in virulent hessian fly larvae to support the rapid growth processes driven by gene transcription and translation, was only partially supported. since odc is a rate-limiting enzyme in the conversion of ornithine to putrescine  <cit> , the increasing levels of larval putrescine, which parallel the increasing levels in the host wheat plant, may be of plant origin.

the experiment utilizing dfmo to block wheat odc activity  and thus decrease polyamine production, resulted in a significant decrease in larval size and rate of development, providing further evidence for a plant-derived source of polyamines in the virulent larvae. dfmo application to the first leaf before infesting with hessian flies on the second leaf minimized the chances that the dfmo came in direct contact with either eggs or larvae. although dfmo is systemically translocated in plants  <cit>  and thus small amounts could be ingested by larvae, the effect of inhibiting larval odc should be small since mdes-odc transcript levels are already very low in larvae . the objective of the experiment was to inhibit the plant odc enzyme with dfmo to decrease the availability of putrescine for ingestion by the virulent hessian fly larvae. since these larvae were significantly smaller and exhibited delayed pupation compared to larvae on the control plants without dfmo, it appears that larval development was negatively affected by decreasing levels of putrescine in the host plant.

CONCLUSIONS
the response of polyamines during biotic stress varies for different host-pathogen systems  <cit> . contrary to other interactions where polyamines play a role in resistance, salivary elicitors from the avirulent hessian fly larvae are promptly detected by the resistant wheat host surveillance mechanism but do not trigger polyamine production during the defense response . in susceptible wheat responding to virulent hessian fly larval elicitors, a dramatic increase occurs in free polyamine levels along with amino acids and sugars, adding to the nutritional component of the plant-derived larval diet. although the capacity of virulent larvae to convert ornithine to putrescine is limited due to low expression of the mdes-odc gene, other genes in the polyamine pathway become activated, suggesting that the source of increased larval polyamine abundance is plant-derived. further studies involving genetic manipulation of both free as well as conjugated polyamine metabolism in wheat will reveal valuable information on a more definitive biological role of these molecules during wheat-hessian fly interactions.figure  <dig> 
model depicting the involvement of polyamines in susceptibility to virulent hessian fly larvae. hessian fly larvae apply effectors  to host cells. in the absence of effector recognition by wheat r gene products  a compatible interaction  takes place resulting in the formation of a nutritive tissue that is rich in amino acids and other nutrients. some amino acids are converted to polyamines directly, or indirectly through the mediation of decarboxylated s-adenosylmethionine . the polyamines and amino acids increase the nutritional value of the host tissue and are ingested by virulent hessian fly larvae, benefiting their growth and development. in contrast, recognition of larval effectors by wheat r gene products triggers an incompatible interaction  takes place, leading to a cascade of defense responses that do not allow the formation of a nutritive tissue, and eventually result death of larvae by starvation.



