BACKGROUND
chromatin diminution is the programmed deletion of dna from presomatic cell or nuclear lineages during development, producing single organisms that contain two dramatically different nuclear genomes. phylogenetically diverse taxa undergo some form of chromatin diminution or chromosome elimination, including representatives from the ciliates, nematodes, copepods, lampreys, and hagfish  <cit> . cyclopoid copepods excise more than an order of magnitude more sequence than other taxa; depending on species, ~ <dig> to  <dig> gb of dna are lost from the presomatic cell lineage at an early embryonic cleavage division each generation  <cit> . this excision produces somatic genomes that are only ~1% – 20% of the size of the germline genomes. post-diminuted somatic genomes are comparable in size to genomes of related copepods that lack chromatin diminution, whereas the pre-diminuted germline genomes are 5- to 75-fold larger  <cit> .

different functions for chromatin diminution have been proposed for different taxa, reflecting specific properties of the excised dna . for example, reduction in gene misexpression in the soma through excision of germline-specific genes has been proposed for the lamprey and the nematode ascaris <cit> . in contrast, transposon elimination from the soma, which enables high-level somatic gene expression based on somatic polyploidy without high levels of te transcription, has been proposed for ciliates  <cit> . in copepods, maintenance of high rrna gene copy number during embryogenesis has been proposed  <cit> , as has removal of short, non-functional sequences  <cit> . because comparatively little is known about the sequence of excised dna in copepods, however, most copepod-specific hypotheses for the functional significance of chromatin diminution focus on the effects of higher dna content in the germline, irrespective of sequence. such hypotheses include modulation of egg size, body size, developmental rate, and cell division rate, all of which are correlated with genome size in copepods  <cit> . to date, the dna excised from copepods has not been analyzed using large-scale genomic data  <cit> , hindering in-depth study of the processes underlying germline genomic gigantism in this clade, as well as the functional significance of chromatin diminution.

here, we used high-throughput genomic shotgun data and qpcr to characterize the germline and somatic genomes of mesocyclops edax, a freshwater cyclopoid copepod species with a diploid germline genome of ~ <dig> gb and a diploid somatic genome of ~ <dig> gb  <cit> . chromosomal fragmentation and excision of dna occurs at the 5th cleavage division;  <dig> gb of sequence is lost from each of the  <dig> presumptive somatic cells during anaphase. eliminated dna appears to be heterochromatic and located primarily in the distal half of chromosomes; chromosome number is constant before and after diminution   <cit> . because genome expansion  typically reflects the accumulation of transposable elements in eukaryotes, we targeted our study towards identifying and classifying repetitive dna in the germline and somatic genomes. we show that the majority of both m. edax genomes consists of repetitive sequences that are either 1) verifiable transposable elements , or 2) non-simple repeat elements of likely te origin. these identified repeats explain more than 90% of the difference in size between germline and somatic genomes. excised repeats are a non-random sample of the total germline genomic repeat landscape; younger repeats are disproportionately excised from the somatic genome, whereas older repeats are disproportionately retained. similarly, high-frequency dna transposon and line superfamilies are disproportionately excised from the somatic genome, whereas high-frequency ltr retrotransposons are disproportionately retained. sequence divergences of repeat elements in both genomes show a skew towards younger elements, indicating recent/ongoing repeat proliferation. taken together, our results suggest that germline genome expansion in m. edax reflects explosive proliferation of repeat elements , and that billions of base pairs of such repeats are deleted from the somatic genome every generation. thus, we hypothesize that chromatin diminution is a mechanism that controls repeat element load, and that this load can evolve to be highly divergent between tissue types within single organisms.

RESULTS
repeat content of germline and somatic genomes
we sequenced  <dig> % and  <dig> % of the germline and somatic genomes, respectively, using amplified genomic dna from undiminuted embryos and antennae. summary statistics for shotgun sequencing of genomes from somatic and germline tissue  are summarized in table  <dig>  all sequences are deposited in the ncbi sequence read archive . we modified a pipeline used in our previous studies  <cit>  to mine and classify repeats from low-coverage genomic shotgun data in taxa that lack genomic resources. in total,  <dig> % and  <dig> % of the total base pairs of shotgun data were masked by the m. edax-specific repeat library we generated  in the germline and somatic datasets, respectively. germline and somatic genome sizes are  <dig> and  <dig> gb, respectively. assuming that these shotgun reads are representative subsets of the whole genomes, ~ <dig>  gb of germline dna and ~ <dig>  gb of somatic dna are composed of the identified repeats, accounting for ~ <dig> of the  <dig> gb of dna eliminated from the presomatic cell lineage during m. edax development. because our methods miss some low-copy-number and highly divergent  repeats, these numbers are underestimates of the true repeat content.
mesocyclops edax 
genomes

repeats were classified as 1) tes belonging to known superfamilies , 2) simple repeats, 3) unknown repeats, and 4) rrnas. figure  <dig> summarizes the estimated number of base pairs occupied by the different repeat classes in the germline and somatic genomes. tes and unknown repeats account for the vast majority of the genome size difference between germline and soma; tes account for ~ <dig>  gb and unknowns account for ~ <dig>  gb. simple  repeats and rrna sequences also contribute more sequence to the germline than somatic genomes, but these repeats comprise very small proportions of both genomes.

verification of repeat copy number differences between germline and soma with qpcr
for each of four types of repeats, we picked one representative family that our bioinformatic analyses identified as having higher copy number in germline than soma — dna/hat , line/l <dig> , ltr/gypsy , and an unknown repeat. we estimated the copy number of each repeat family in both genomes with quantitative pcr. results from qpcr analyses are summarized in figure  <dig>  germline copy numbers for these four repeats range from  <dig> –  <dig> . consistent with the bioinformatic results, copy numbers in all cases are higher in the germline than in the soma , indicating that these repeats do contribute to the size difference between the two genomes. we emphasize that our qpcr analyses target individual repeat families; multiple families within each te superfamily coexist in the genome, each with its own copy numbers in both germline and soma.

characterization of unknown repeat sequences
because unknown repeats make up a substantial portion of both genomes, we performed 1) open reading frame  identification, and 2) homology searches to further characterize such sequences. of the  <dig>  unknown repeats present in the m. edax repeat library,  <dig>   and  <dig>   were found to contain orfs >  <dig> nucleotides in length using relaxed and strict criteria, respectively. although most such orfs were between  <dig> and  <dig> base pairs in length, a few were >  <dig> bp long . thus, many of the unknown repeats have the potential to encode proteins. however, only  <dig> of the  <dig>  unknown repeat sequences  retrieved hits from the protein database of daphnia pulex, the only crustacean with a sequenced genome to date. such hits comprised  <dig> daphnia genes in total and included both hypothetical and known genes . we note that, because daphnia and mesocyclops last shared a common ancestor hundreds of millions of years ago, this analysis would only detect genes exhibiting long-term sequence conservation, likely reflecting high levels of functional constraint. thus, although many unknown repeats may encode proteins, most do not appear to be multi-copy endogenous genes exhibiting functional conservation across long evolutionary timescales. taken together, the presence of orfs and the lack of recognizable endogenous genes, as well as the non-simple/non-tandem  sequence composition, are consistent with the unknown repeats being of te origin, although more extensive sequencing efforts will be required to classify these repeats conclusively.

repeat element sequence divergence in somatic and germline genomes
to summarize global historical patterns of repeat proliferation and deletion in m. edax, we estimated divergences of repeats from their ancestral sequences  in the somatic and germline genomes. pairwise divergences of repeat elements in both genomes are skewed towards younger  elements, with the highest proportion of repeats showing <1 % divergence from the consensus . overall, the germline repeats are younger than the somatic repeats. to verify that overall repeat element divergence patterns can be estimated accurately from low-coverage genomic shotgun data, we subsampled the human genome to produce five datasets comparable to our copepod data and estimated pairwise divergence of repeats as described. repeat pairwise divergence patterns are similar across the five subsampled datasets, showing a proliferation peak in the past and low levels of younger elements . this result is consistent with the pattern reported from the full human genome sequence  <cit> , confirming that the repeat divergence profile we estimated from m. edax with low-coverage shotgun data  is not an artifact of sequencing coverage. thus, our results indicate extensive recent and/or ongoing repeat proliferation in m. edax <cit> .

characterization of sequences excised during chromatin diminution
the ~ <dig> gb of largely repetitive sequence eliminated from somatic cells during chromatin diminution could be either a random or a non-random 80% subset of the germline genome. to discriminate between these two possibilities, we first tested whether some types of tes were more likely to be excised from the somatic genome than others. relative frequencies or sample proportions of individual te superfamilies  are summarized for both genomes in figure  <dig>  of the known te superfamilies, ltr-gypsy, line-l <dig>  and dna-hat are present at the highest relative frequencies in both genomes. the ratio of germline to somatic relative frequency f^g/f^s is highly variable across known te superfamilies, ranging from  <dig>  to  <dig>  . these results suggest that different repeat elements are differentially targeted for excision during chromatin diminution; f^g/f^s >>  <dig> indicates repeats that are disproportionately excised from the soma, whereas f^g/f^s <<  <dig> indicates repeats that are disproportionately retained in the soma . among the known te superfamilies, dna transposon and non-ltr retrotransposon  superfamilies that were observed most frequently in the germline genome  are disproportionately excised from the soma. in contrast, ltr retrotransposons found at higher relative frequencies in the germline genome are disproportionately retained in the soma  or are retained at near-equal proportions . elements found at lower relative frequencies in the germline genome are almost all disproportionately retained in the soma, although confidence intervals for such elements are large .
m. edax


h

0
 : 
f


g

 = 
f


s 

λ 
λ 
the first data column gives the p-value based on a x <dig> approximation for rejecting the null hypothesis of equal relative frequencies in the two genomes. the second column identifies which genome has a statistically significant higher relative frequency  the third column gives the ratio of the observed relative frequencies in the experiment. the fourth and fifth columns give 95% and 99% confidence bounds on the ratio, respectively, for a one-sided test.

next, we tested whether repeat elements of certain ages  were more likely to be excised from the somatic genome than others. sequences that are disproportionately eliminated from the somatic genome  are significantly younger than sequences that are present at equal frequencies in the somatic and germline genomes   . similarly, sequences that are disproportionately retained in the somatic genome  are significantly older than sequences that are present at equal frequencies in the somatic and germline genomes   . these results suggest that younger elements are disproportionately deleted from the somatic genome during chromatin diminution, whereas older elements are disproportionately retained.

discussion
our analyses of the first large-scale genomic sequence datasets from copepod germline and soma show that the vast majority of the excised sequences are non-simple, non-tandem  repeats of known te or likely te origin. we show that 1) young, rapidly proliferating repeat elements underlie the gigantism of adult germline genomes of m. edax, and 2) the younger elements are disproportionately excised from the somatic genome. thus, m. edax represents an unusual host/genetic parasite system; some of the deleterious effects of a recent/ongoing explosion in transposition activity  are largely restricted to the germline and substantially reduced in the soma through physical removal of the transposing sequences. previous smaller scale restriction digestion, cloning, and pcr-based studies of chromatin diminution in copepods identified several short simple repeats, several tes, rrnas, and dispersed motifs among the excised dna sequences  <cit> . however, given the tiny fraction of the genome analyzed in these studies, a comprehensive picture of the targets of chromatin diminution has remained unknown. our results confirm that all of these types of sequences are eliminated from the somatic genome. however, our conclusions about the relative contributions of these different sequence classes to the excised dna differ, likely reflecting the different size scales of our datasets. for example, based on analyses of ~ <dig> sequences from pre- and postdiminuted m. edax genomes, with read lengths of  <dig> –  <dig> bps, mckinnon and drouin  <cit>  concluded that tes were not disproportionately deleted during chromatin diminution. the te sequences in that study were from the ltr/bel, ltr/copia, ltr/gypsy, and dna/ginger superfamilies. our results corroborate their finding that none of these superfamilies is disproportionately excised from the soma; however, other tes , as well as unknown repeats, not represented in mckinnon and drouin’s dataset but represented in our shotgun data are disproportionately excised .

germline genomic gigantism and chromatin diminution have co-evolved independently several times in the copepod genera mesocyclops, metacyclops, megacyclops, and cyclops <cit> , suggesting that this mechanism of controlling repeat element load has been re-deployed numerous times within the cyclopoid copepods. based on our current results, we propose the following hypothetical evolutionary scenarios for the origins of this trait: 1) some copepod lineages begin to experience elevated germline repeat element proliferation, which may reflect genomic invasion of novel elements , decreased efficiency of cellular machinery targeting existing repeats, and/or decreased efficacy of selection against repeats because of strong genetic drift . 2) lineages begin to eliminate these young repeats from the somatic genome by the introduction and non-homologous repair of double-strand breaks at germline-soma differentiation  <cit> . because these sequences are eliminated synchronously, an active, enzymatic mechanism is more likely than one mediated by ectopic recombination. older, more divergent repeat elements  remain in the somatic genome . alternatively, the introduction and non-homologous repair of double-strand breaks at germline-soma differentiation may initially have targeted other sequences not identified in our dataset , and tes targeting such regions tagged for excision subsequently proliferated in the germline genome. 3) in either case, the germline and somatic genomes are now free to diverge from one another in repeat element content. in copepods with chromatin diminution, the germline genome grows to  <dig> –  <dig> times larger than the somatic genome.

repeat elements and the repeat suppression/elimination machinery of their hosts co-evolve   <cit> . the outcome of this coevolutionary dynamic — the amount of repeat sequence present in a genome — is dictated in part by the relative strengths of 1) genetic drift, which can cause fixation of slightly deleterious repeats, and 2) selection for/against repeat insertions and efficacy of the cell’s repeat silencing machinery  <cit> . our results show that, in m. edax, genomes with both high and low repeat content exist within single individuals. germline genomic gigantism in copepods has been hypothesized to sequester the nucleotides necessary to provision a rapidly differentiating embryo, particularly in nitrogen- and phosphorous-poor environments  <cit> . this function is a candidate target for selection to increase  germline repeat load in m. edax, despite the high costs that accompany high te load   <cit> . alternatively, the high levels of germline repeats may serve no function in m. edax, but simply reflect selection’s inability to regulate these “selfish” sequences  <cit> . in either case, elimination of the majority of repeats through chromatin diminution minimizes te-associated costs to the soma and maintains ancestral somatic developmental rate, nucleus size, and cell size  <cit> .

molecular mechanisms of repeat removal in copepods remain unexplored. however, our results in m. edax, coupled with information about chromatin diminution in ciliates, suggest a candidate mechanism. in ciliates, the dna excised from the micronucleus is derived from tes, and its excision is directed by small-rna-mediated modification of heterochromatin, followed by excision of this tagged heterochromatin by domesticated transposases  <cit> . this represents the evolution of a novel function in ciliates for the rnai-mediated transposon silencing machinery widely shared by eukaryotes  <cit> . in m. edax, the germline genome has extremely high levels of te and putatively te-derived sequences , and their sequence divergence distributions show extensive recent and ongoing proliferation . high-frequency dna transposon and line superfamilies, as well as the younger copies of all types of elements, are disproportionately excised from the somatic genome . taken together, these results suggest that the rnai transposon silencing machinery in the ancestral lineages leading to extant taxa with chromatin diminution may have changed function, from transposition silencing  to tagging specific te sequences for excision . alternatively, repeat removal may occur by a completely different mechanism in m. edax and the other cyclopoid copepods that possess chromatin diminution. further analyses of the molecular processes underlying repeat removal in copepods will demonstrate whether phylogenetically distant taxa have evolved to eliminate repeats by the same, or different, mechanisms.

CONCLUSIONS
our study used genomic shotgun sequence data from the cyclopoid copepod mesocyclops edax to identify the repetitive sequences present in the species’ massive germline genome, but eliminated from the somatic genome by chromatin diminution. we show that excised repeats are a non-random sample of the total germline genome; younger repeats, as well as high-frequency dna transposon and line superfamilies, are disproportionately excised from the somatic genome. sequence divergence of repeat elements indicates recent/ongoing repeat proliferation. taken together, our results suggest that germline genome expansion in m. edax reflects explosive proliferation of repeat elements , and that billions of base pairs of such repeats are deleted from the somatic genome every generation. thus, we hypothesize that chromatin diminution is a mechanism that controls repeat element load, and that this load can evolve to be highly divergent between tissue types within single organisms.

