BACKGROUND
gobiids  are a diverse and fascinating group of small, predominately bottom-dwelling fish species with a world-wide distribution. the gobiidae family contains more than  <dig> species in more than  <dig> genera and is therefore one of the largest vertebrate families  <cit> . gobiids display a wide range of very special adaptations. several species are able to breathe air and display an amphibious lifestyle. other species spend early and late life stages at different salinities, or are euryhaline and can cope with sudden salinity shifts  <cit> . some species display alternative reproductive tactics  <cit> . others are tremendously successful bioinvaders  <cit> . in recent years, two eurasian gobiid species received particular attention. the sand goby pomatoschistus minutus became an evolutionary model species for behavioural studies , while the invasive round goby neogobius melanostomus became a model species for invasion ecology and invasion genetics .

most west eurasian gobiid species, including the sand goby and the round goby, lack molecular resources. therefore, west eurasian gobiids are under-represented in some phylogenetic studies. sequence-based phylogenies based on up to five nuclear and mitochondrial markers have outlined two major clades within gobiidae, the gobiine-like and the gobionelline-like gobiids   <cit> . west eurasian gobiid species cluster with both clades. while the round goby and its ponto-caspian relatives belong to the gobiine-like gobiids  <cit> , the sand goby group  <cit>  belongs to the gobionelline-like gobiids  <cit> .

complete mitochondrial genomes can provide both sequence- and non-sequence based phylogenetic information of high resolution. a high rate of sequence evolution, a lack of recombination, its inheritance as one locus, and a short coalescence time compared to bi-parentally inherited nuclear loci  <cit>  render the mitochondrial genome a valuable sequence-based phylogenetic marker. also, size variations and non-coding sequence insertions and deletions  <cit>  as well as gene order variations between species and taxonomic groups  <cit>  are common and provide additional non-sequence based phylogenetic information. to confirm and to better understand phylogenetic relationships, molecular trees can then be interpreted with regard to physiological and ecological traits to identify branch-specific and ancestral adaptations  <cit> .

the aim of this paper is to enhance our molecular understanding of the round and the sand goby by reporting the annotated mitochondrial genomes of these two west eurasian gobiid research model species, and to place these genomes within the mitochondrial phylogeny of gobiidae using forty gobiidae species, nine species from other gobioid families, and of siganus guttatus and lactoria diphana. we extend current phylogenies using the additional power of gene arrangement analyses and whole mitochondrial genome tree building, and make sense of these phylogenies by linking them to the ecological properties of the analysed species. we also aim to identify novel molecular markers and to explore the origin and the potential implications of a novel, large non-coding sequence insertion in the round goby mitochondrial genome.

in this paper, we use the term “non-coding region” for all sequence of unknown function which is not coding for either protein or trnas. we use the term “control region” to refer to non-coding sequences which contain functional elements that control mitochondrial genome replication.

RESULTS
mitochondrial genome size
during genome sequencing projects for the round goby and the sand goby, we found that both the sand goby and the round goby mitochondrial genome were unusual with regard to their lengths. the sand goby mitochondrial genome  was the second smallest mitochondrial genome of all gobiid species sequenced to date, while the round goby mitochondrial genome  was the longest of all gobiid mitochondrial genomes known . the round goby mitochondrial genome also was larger than most mitochondrial genomes of ray-finned fish  and other vertebrates . only  <dig> % of sequenced vertebrate species  = 3652) and  <dig> % of sequenced animal species  = 5567) had larger mitochondrial genomes. we found that the large size was caused by two instances of sequence insertions. first, the noncoding region between trna proline and trna phenylalanine that contains the control region was larger than in other species . second, the round goby genome featured a 1250 bp insert between trna phenylalanine and the 12s rrna gene .fig.  <dig> the round goby mitochondrial genome is one of the largest vertebrate mitochondrial genomes. a barplot of gobioid mitochondrial genome sizes available on ncbi. species are ordered according to phylogenetic relatedness as determined in this study. round goby and sand goby genomes are highlighted in orange. b histogram of mitochondrial genome sizes of  <dig> ray-finned fish for which complete mitochondrial genomes were available. orange arrowheads indicate the sizes of sand goby and round goby mitochondrial genomes. c boxplots illustrating the mitochondrial genome size distributions for major vertebrate classes. for  <dig> species, mitochondrial genomes as well as class annotations were available from ncbi and iucn respectively. “reptiles” includes all members of the reptilia clade  except birds. orange arrowheads and dotted lines indicate the sizes of sand goby and round goby mitochondrial genomes


fig.  <dig> sand and round goby mitochondrial genome gene arrangements. left panel, sand goby mitochondrial genome annotation. right panel, round goby mitochondrial genome annotation. the round goby genome features an enlarged d-loop region, a non-coding sequence insertion downstream of trna phe, and an inverted arrangement of trna ile and trna gln




characterisation of non-coding sequence inserts
to better understand the source of the inserted sequences, we annotated functional regions and repeats. we identified the control region, which directs mitochondrial genome replication and transcription, by searching for transcription associated site - and conserved sequence block -like elements in conserved regions between trna proline and trna phenylalanine. three canonical tas sites are conserved in gobiids . in addition, the round goby mitochondrial genome contains many canonical tas sites in the context of tandem repeats. csb sites were more difficult to identify. only when relaxing search criteria , we were able to identify csb-i like sequences in conserved regions downstream from the tas motif. we also identified csb ii and csb iii-like sequences in conserved regions .

the round goby non-coding sequence insert between trna phenylalanine and the 12s rrna gene did not contain tas or csb motifs, and was not similar to any published sequence, but bore similarity to sequence parts upstream of trna phenylalanine. by mapping repeated sequence motifs between sand goby, round goby, and its closest sequenced relative, the bighead goby ponticola kessleri, we identified five repeated motifs, which we called nm_ <dig> , nm_ <dig> , nm_ <dig> , nm_ <dig> , and pk_ <dig> . nm_ <dig> and pk_ <dig> are both located between csb iii and trna phenylalanine and share a 14 bp core motif . nm_ <dig>  nm_ <dig>  and nm_ <dig> occur both upstream and downstream of trna phenylalanine. all repeat motifs are predicted to form secondary structures .fig.  <dig> architecture of non-coding sequences. non-coding regions between trna pro and the 12s gene of sand goby, bighead goby , and round goby are drawn to scale below each other. conserved and/or putatively functional motifs of the control region such as tas and csb elements, tandem repeats, repeated sequences, and the location of trna phe are indicated by coloured bars





gene arrangement analysis
to compare gene arrangements between the analysed species, we performed automatic annotations. they revealed two instances of non-canonical gene arrangements involving trna genes, one in ponto-caspian gobies and one in odontobutis platycephala . in most gobioids analysed in this study, the trnas for isoleucine, glutamine and methionine come in the order ile/gln/met. in the two ponto-caspian species, the round goby and the bighead goby, these trnas are arranged as gln/ile/met . strandedness differed between the two species, with gln /ile /met  in the bighead goby and gln /ile /met  in the round goby. in odontobutis platycephala, we found that the trnas for serine, leucine and histidine came as ser/leu/his instead of the canonical his/ser/leu arrangement .

mitochondrial phylogeny
to complement previous gene-centered studies, we buildt whole mitochondrial genome phylogenies using bayesian and maximum likelihood approaches. the resulting phylogenies were consistent with phylogenies from previous studies , with two exceptions . as expected, we identified two major clades within gobiidae, gobionelline-like gobiids and gobiine-like gobiids . members from butidae, eleotridae, rhyacichththydae, and odontobutidae clustered as sister groups to the gobiidae .fig.  <dig> phylogenetic analysis matched with biological and ecological species characteristics. a phylogenetic tree of twelve concatenated mitochondrial genes obtained from mrbayes. black dots indicate branches with a posterior probability value from mrbayes >  <dig>  and a bootstrap value from maximum likelihood analysis in raxml > <dig>  b mitochondrial genome features of the respective species. c ecological characteristics of the respective species. features and characteristics in b and c are indicated by the colour and/or size of the dot and/or symbol. body size corresponds to maximal total length  observed



boleophthalmus pectinirostris

bostrychus sinensis

eucyclogobius newberryi

gillichthys mirabilis

gymnogobius urotaenia

mogurnda adspersa

mugilogobius chulae

neogobius melanostomus

odontamblyopus rubicundus

odontobutis platycephala

oxuderces dentatus

oxyeleotris lineolata

oxyeleotris marmorata

pomatoschistus minutus

ponticola kessleri

pseudogobius javanicus

rhyacichthys aspro

scartelaos histophorus

sicyopterus lagocephalus

tridentiger bifasciatus
only species for which information on their classification was available from previous phylogenetic studies are included




gobionelline-like gobiids split into two major groups, with members from the acanthogobius- and mugilogobius-lineages  in one, and members from the stenogobius- and periophthalmus-lineages  in the other group. the sand goby clustered as sister taxon to all other gobionelline-like gobiids. since statistical support was too low to determine the exact branching order among all three major groups within gobionelline-like gobiids, the sand goby may cluster as sister taxon to either one of the two other large gobionelline-like gobiid groups.

gobiine-like gobiids clustered into two major groups. unexpectedly, one of those contained micropercops swinhonis, a member of odontobutidae  <cit> , and oxyurichthys formosanus, which was expected to cluster with the gobionelline-like lineage stenogobius  <cit> , with high statistical support. the round goby clustered with the bighead goby, the only other west eurasian gobiine-like gobiid species included into this study. these two species grouped with two glossogobius species, albeit with low statistical support.

linking ecology, biology, and mitochondrial phylogeny
to complement the molecular phylogeny, we mapped genetic, biological, and ecological traits such as mitochondrial genome size, gene rearrangements, geographical occurrence, body length, preferred salinity, and specialized adaptations to the mitochondrial phylogenetic tree. we found that mitochondrial genome size, body length, and specialized adaptations were linked to particular branches with high statistical branch support, while the other features were independent from the mitochondrial phylogeny.

extremely large mitochondrial genomes were distributed randomly throughout the gobiid mitochondrial phylogeny, but smaller-than-average and larger-than-average genomes clustered together with high statistical branch support. the four species with exceptionally large mitochondrial genomes exceeding 17 kb, round goby, chaeturichthys stigmatias, amblychaeturichthys hexanema, and odontobutis platycephala, clustered with the gobiine-like gobiids, the gobionelline-like gobiids, and gobiidae outgroups, respectively. however, when considering only mitochondrial genomes smaller than 17 kb, smaller genomes  were particularly prevalent in an acanthogobius/mugilogobius-lineage  while larger genomes were more common in a clade formed exclusively by species related to members of the acanthogobius-lineage  and in a clade consisting of members of the periophthalmus-lineage  .

for the ecological parameters compiled, we found that salinity preference and geographical occurrence were independent from the mitochondrial phylogeny, while body size and specialized adaptations occurred within certain clades or groups for the species included in this study that received high statistical branch support. specifically, many of the analyzed members of the rhinogobius group  were small. burrowing life-style appeared to be a feature of gobionelline-like gobiid species only. nonetheless, the trait appeared to have evolved twice independently based on the mitochondrial phylogeny. similarly, air-breathing and amphibious life style was restricted to the gobionelline-like clade, but appeared to have several independent origins.

discussion
functional implications of the round goby sequence insertions
while sequence variations and repetitive elements flanking the control regions are common in a wide range of species , the non-coding sequence inserted downstream of trna phenylalanine in the round goby mitochondrial genome is located at an unusual position and may therefore either come at a cost and/or have a novel function. repeated sequence motifs and a degenerate copy of trna phenylalanine at the end of the insertion suggest that the insertion arose from a duplication event involving the 3’ end of the control region. since the insert does not contain tas or csb-like sites, it is quite unlikely that the insert represents a functional duplicated control region as observed in parrots  <cit> , mites and ticks  <cit> , silk moths  <cit> , or millipedes  <cit> . however, the insert may be transcribed into rna, since the origins of heavy strand transcription lie upstream of trna phenylalanine .

transcription and replication are rate limiting steps in tissues with high energy demands  <cit> . therefore, animal mitochondrial genomes are under selection for small size and are depleted of non-coding sequences, they lack introns and intergenic sequences . the retention of a non-coding sequence in the round goby thus suggests functional relevance. mitochondrial variants can have great impact on the fitness of an organism . also, size selection on mitochondrial genomes is stronger in endotherms than in ectotherms, which indicates that metabolic rates and mitochondrial genotypes may be closely linked  <cit> . in this context, it is of particular interest that the highly invasive round goby has lower metabolic rates, and controls metabolic rates better at high temperatures than other less invasive ponto-caspian goby species  <cit> .

phylogenetic origins of mitochondrial genome size
our results indicate that the tendency to harbour a smaller- or larger-than-average mitochondrial genome may be a feature of entire mitochondrial lineages. mitochondrial genome size has been linked to body temperature and metabolism  <cit> . thus, the observed size patterns may be linked to ecological parameters such as water temperature that were not covered in this study. alternatively, the propensity of certain lineages to generate and tolerate sequence insertions on the one hand or to select for small mitochondrial genome size on the other hand may possibly depend on evolutionary differences in the dna replication or repair machineries of those lineages.

potentials and limitations of gobiid mitochondrial genome phylogenies
our phylogenetic reconstructions recovered the two previously described clades within gobiidae, gobiine-like gobiids and gobionelline-like gobiids  <cit> , and confirmed the placing of round goby in the former and sand goby in the latter group . for gobionelline-like gobiids, our results agree with previous studies, except for members of the mugilogobius-lineage. we find mugilogobius species nested within an acanthogobius-lineage, while they were considered sister groups, albeit with low statistical support, by two recent studies  <cit> . the gobiine-like gobiid clade also contains two unexpected members: oxyurichthys formosanus and micropercops swinhonis. previously, other members of the oxyurichthys genus grouped with gobionelline-like gobiids . micropercops swinhonis was previously placed with odontobutidae  <cit> , which form a sister lineage to gobiidae  <cit> . however, micropercops swinhonis does not always group with odontobutis  <cit> , and its developmental process is different from odontobutis but resembles that of gobiidae  <cit> . also, it contains the same his-ser-leu trna arrangement as all gobiidae, while odontobutis platycephala shows a unique ser-leu-his arrangement. thus, micropercops swinhonis may be a true member of gobiidae.

for sand goby, our results reflect previous uncertainties about the exact phylogenetic placement of this species. the position as sister taxon to either an acanthogobius/mugilogobius lineage, to a stenogobius/periophthalmus lineage, or to all four gobionelline-like gobiid lineages is consistent with  <cit>  ,  <cit>  ,  <cit>  , but conflicting with  <cit>  , and  <cit>  .

as expected, the round goby groups together with the ponticola kessleri, the bighead goby, which is at present the only other representative of benthophilinae with an available complete mitochondrial genome. the ponto-caspian species group and their immediate relatives have been previously suggested to have experienced an evolutionary burst that led to the formation of three benthophilinae tribes, ponticolini, neogobiini, and benthophilini  <cit> . both round goby  and bighead goby  feature a particular trna arrangement . if this arrangement is also present in benthophilini, it may be a specific signature of the entire group, and may be related to the suggested historic radiative event promoting the diversification of benthophilinae. the differential orientation of these trnas on the heavy and light strand in the round goby and the bighead goby may in turn help to shed light on the radiation within benthophilinae.

many previous phylogenetic studies of gobiids were based on a combination of individual nuclear and mitochondrial markers or on nuclear markers alone. differences among topologies obtained from different regions of the genome  are expected and can be explained by different evolutionary processes acting on those regions, such as incomplete lineage sorting, gene duplications and hybridization . all in all, our results strongly speak for further examination of gobiidae, in particular west eurasian gobiids, using denser taxon sampling for the mitochondrial genome and additional nuclear markers.

ion-transport capacities may explain the tremendous success of gobiidae
one striking feature of gobiids is their capacity to colonize very different habitats and even the land. we support the idea that this capacity, albeit it manifests itself in restricted lineages only, may be linked to a more ancient ability of this family to deal with fluctuating ion concentrations. euryhalinity and amphidromous life cycle are present in many gobiid clades, and species with a preference of high or low salt conditions are evenly distributed across the mitochondrial phylogeny including outgroup species from other gobioidei lineages, indicating that adaptation to novel salinity levels may be a capacity of all gobioids. similarly, several gobioid mitochondrial lineages contain amphidromous species, indicating that the ability to breed in fresh water, develop in sea water, and then return to freshwater may be an ancient adaptation in the gobioid group. in the gobionellinae-like gobiids, amphidromous species belong to the stenogobius- and acanthogobius-lineages , represented by sycopterus, stiphodon and rhinogobius in the present study, and in gobiine-like gobiids to glossogobius  <cit> . the amphidromous life cycle is additionally present in the gobioid families eleotridae and ryacichthyidae, which are sister taxa to gobiidae in the gobioid phylogeny.

in contrast, the ability to breathe air is mostly restricted to the periophthalmus-lineage . scartelaos, boleophthalmus and periophthalmus, the so-called mudskippers, spend a large time of their time above water  <cit> . in agreement with  <cit>  and  <cit> , mudskippers are a paraphyletic group in the mitochondrial phylogeny and appear to have evolved twice independently. alternatively, the mud-burrowing ‘eel gobies’ represented by odontamblyopus rubicundus and trypauchen vagina in the present study, may have evolved from mudskippers. also, the mud flat living non-mudskipper oxyderces dentatus may actually have a partly amphibious lifestyle  <cit> . thus, all members of this lineage follow land- and air-oriented lifestyles.

while euryhalinity and air breathing may seem like very different features, euryhalinity, amphidromous life cycle, and amphibious life style all expose organisms to salinity oscillations, and require the ability to tolerate and excrete ammonia independently of ambient levels. thus, they all demand excellent and adaptable active ion transport capacities  <cit> . these observations suggest that the entire gobiid family may have evolved the ability to deal with fluctuating ion gradients, which in turn may be the key to their world-wide success.

CONCLUSIONS
in conclusion, we find that the sand goby mitochondrial genome closely resembles other gobiid mitochondrial genomes. the round goby on the other hand has an unusually large mitochondrial genome featuring tandem repeat expansions in the control region and a non-coding and potentially transcribed sequence inserted downstream of the putative origin of transcription. we may thus speculate that the tremendous colonization abilities of this species may be linked to special features of its mitochondrial metabolism. while we were not able to further resolve the phylogenetic placement of the sand goby and the round goby, we provided additional information on the placement of oxyurichthys formosanus and micropercops swinhonis in the mitochondrial phylogeny. also, we identified a novel molecular marker for ponto-caspian species in the gene arrangement of the trnas gln-ile-met. from analysing the ecological traits of air-breathing and amphibious lifestyle we speculate that the entire species group may be adapted to deal with challenging ion transport conditions, which may be the critical factor in their world-wide success.

