BACKGROUND
considerable divergence has occurred between bread wheat  and barley  since evolution from a common ancestor 10– <dig> million years ago. since then, these two members of the triticeae have been subjected to largely parallel processes of cultivation and domestication, starting in the fertile crescent over  <dig>  years ago  <cit> . barley has remained diploid with a base chromosome number of  <dig>  while bread wheat is the product of a series of hybridization events between related species that has resulted in an allo-hexaploid genome with three homoeologous sets of  <dig> chromosome pairs . despite these major genomic perturbations during its evolution, genetic mapping  <cit>  and detailed structural genomic studies  <cit>  have shown that the wheat and barley genomes are highly conserved. indeed, barley chromosomes can even be substituted for wheat chromosomes  <cit> . as a consequence of its simplified genetics, many have suggested that barley is a good genetic model for its genetically more complex cousin. this assertion is supported by the broad range of common morphological and developmental characteristics shared by both species, though fundamental biological differences do exist .

polyploidization is common across the plant kingdom and the process has been associated with a range of changes in newly synthesized hybrids of several species. these include the genome-wide removal of some  duplicated, and hence redundant, genetic information, sub- and/or neo-functionalization of duplicated genes, pseudogenization, differential cytosine methylation and epigenetic reprogramming of gene expression , and transposable element activation . levy and feldman  <cit>  summarized some of the major consequences resulting from the recent polyploidization of the wheat genome. in common with other plant species, the outcome for wheat was more than simply the additive combination of genomes and included many of the features described across the species range  <cit> .

wheat is an important species for studying the impact of polyploidization because it is a relatively recent polyploid. moreover, the outcomes can be studied in very early generations because it is possible to artificially re-synthesize polyploids from their diploid and tetraploid relatives. in such cases, epigenetic silencing of duplicated genes appears to be a common response, with indications of reciprocal silencing in different organs an early sign of sub-functionalization  <cit> . gene activation or silencing may also occur as a result of transcriptional interference associated with stochastic rearrangements of non-coding rna  <cit> . over longer time frames, the evolutionary consequences of such events are better observed in ancient polyploids. in arabidopsis , for example, blanc and wolfe  <cit>  reported that more than half of the observed gene pairs retained in the genome exhibited differential transcript abundance in different tissues. an immediate impact of polyploidy is therefore to provide the raw genetic material for adaptation and the evolution of phenotype.

the close evolutionary relationship between wheat and barley, reflected in largely parallel morphological and developmental patterns, makes a comparison of their transcriptomes particularly intriguing. it may provide insight, for example, into consequences of speciation and polyploidization. ideally a genomic-scale comparison of this sort would be carried out once the genomes have been sequenced. this would permit the reliable disentanglement of the evolutionary relationships between individual genes and also provide the foundation on which to build dependable expression analysis platforms. regrettably, the size and complexity of the wheat and barley genomes has been a major impediment to full-scale sequencing, so that even the diploid barley genome is not expected to be available before  <dig> . in short, among plants comparative transcriptomics is rare: comprehensive pair-wise comparisons have so far only been carried out in rice and arabidopsis  <cit> , various cotton species  <cit>  and in poplar and arabidopsis  <cit> . recently, a three-way study between arabidopsis, poplar and rice has also appeared  <cit> .

compared to genome-wide studies, comparisons of expression patterns of individual orthologous gene pairs, individual gene families and/or in connection with a particular phenotypic characteristic are more frequent. for example, mangelsen et al.  <cit>  compared, within a number of tissues, expression patterns of members of the wrky transcription factor family among barley, rice and arabidopsis and found that, at least within this gene family, coordinated conservation of expression patterns and sequence. horvath et al.  <cit>  found that groups of genes associated with cell division were consistently expressed preferentially in shoot apices in arabidopsis, wild oats, poplar and leafy spurge. differential gene expression, on the other hand, has been observed in some members of the zip and nas metal homeostatis gene families in two closely related arabidopsis species when exposed to both low and high zn levels, presumably associated with different zn accumulation patterns in these two species  <cit> . analogously, differential time-dependent expression of a small number genes in response to salt stress in both barley  and rice  were studied by ueda et al.  <cit> , while taji et al.  <cit>  performed a similar comparative study in salt cress  and arabidopsis .

comprehensive affymetrix genechip platforms have now been developed for both wheat and barley, based on extensive est collections for both species . the barley <dig> genechip has already been used to develop an atlas of gene expression covering the entire developmental cycle of the barley cultivar morex  <cit>  and intra-species varietal comparisons have been carried out both for morex and golden promise  <cit>  as well as morex and steptoe  <cit> . taking advantage of these resources, we have sampled a similar set of biological material collected through the developmental cycle of wheat , grown under near-identical conditions to those in druka et al.  <cit> . this permits the first comprehensive comparison of developmental expression patterns in these two important crop species. we report on this transcriptome-wide comparison here. at the same time, in order to facilitate more detailed studies of individual homologous genes motivated, say, by particular phenotypic differences as in  <cit> , we make available a convenient web-based comparative tool enabling access to the developmental expression profiles of any individual wheat and barley homologs probed by the two genechips.

it is well known that meaningful comparative expression analyses using microarray platforms based solely on est collections can be difficult because of the frequent and confounding presence of multiple splice forms, paralogs and orthologs, as well as, in the case of polyploids, homoeologs with near-identical sequence  <cit> . because of this, we have also investigated, in some detail, the specificity of the wheat genechip to individual homoeologs and expended considerable effort to avoid misidentification of orthologs in the two species.

RESULTS
gene expression measurements were carried out on a developmental tissue series for wild-type wheat  using the affymetrix wheat genechip. tissues and developmental stages were chosen to match the barley  tissue series of druka et al.  <cit> , employing the barley <dig> genechip, as closely as possible. they consisted of root tissue at two different developmental stages, leaf, crown, caryopsis, anther, pistil, inflorescence, bracts, mesocotyl, endosperm, embryo and coleoptile . this wheat expression dataset may be obtained from and visualized at plexdb , experiment ta <dig>  or geo , experiment gse <dig>  because the  <dig>  probesets on the wheat genechip reflect the complete collection of publically available wheat ests at the time of design of the chip, this dataset serves as an 'expression atlas' for hexaploid wheat. while in this paper we concentrate on the comparison of the barley and wheat transcriptomes, the comprehensive nature of the dataset means that it may be used by wheat researchers seeking to explore correlations in transcript levels across tissues to discover putatively co-regulated and/or functionally related genes and it provides a baseline against which transcription in biotically or abiotically stressed plants, other cultivars and mutants may be compared.

using single varieties as representatives for both barley and wheat may to some extent be an oversimplification as it is known that considerable variation can exist among varieties of the same species. indeed, extensive intra-species variation in barley has been used  as a genotyping tool for a cross between the barley varieties steptoe and morex  <cit>  and for expression polymorphisms among morex, steptoe, owb rec, owb dom, barke, haruna nijo, golden promise and optic . we compared the relative importance of intra- and interspecies variation by making use of a common series of  <dig> tissues from the barley cultivars golden promise and morex .

for the purpose of the comparison of the transcriptomes of the two species, we found it convenient to define a set of probesets, obtained by eliminating those probesets that were potentially unreliable for various reasons . this set of probesets will be referred to as the "high quality" set throughout this paper. this resulted in an expression dataset for  <dig>  wheat probesets that could be compared, across  <dig> tissues, with the equivalent dataset obtained with  <dig>  barley probesets hybridized by druka et al.  <cit> .

athe total number of probesets does not include reporters and controls. note that there is some overlap among the various probeset groups in this table.

polyploidy and the wheat genechip
a comparison of the transcriptomes of barley and wheat is complicated by the fact that the latter is a hexaploid, but the design of the probesets on the wheat genechip did not specifically take this polyploidy into account. hence, depending on the stringency of the probeset design, an expression profile obtained from the wheat genechip may receive contributions from one, two or three homoeologs. this has the potential to complicate a comparative study of gene expression in the two species. we explored this issue by comparing the probes on the wheat genechip with known sequences of wheat homoeologs. in mochida et al.  <cit> , ests for  <dig> genes were assigned to the a, b and d genomes using nullisomic lines of chinese spring. these authors found that  <dig> genes had one of the homoeologs silenced while  <dig> exhibited transcript accumulation for all three homoeologs.

we extracted all 25-mer probe sequences on the wheat genechip that exhibited a perfect match to this set of  <dig> ×  <dig> =  <dig> sequences. discarding probes from those probesets which are known to either cross-hybridize or are likely to hybridize inefficiently , as well as homoeologous triplets for which only a very small number  of matching probes are present on the genechip, left  <dig> homoeolog triplets for which relatively reliable expression information was available from the microarray.

the distribution of matching probes for these  <dig> triplets is shown in figure  <dig>  for more than half of the homoeologous triplets a significant number of probes  from a single probeset match perfectly to all three copies of the gene. for many of the remaining triplets either one or two homoeologs do not significantly hybridize to any probesets. as indicated by the three bars in the right half of figure  <dig>  only for five triplets can significant information be obtained from two or more probesets. at first sight, this lack of specificity might seem surprising, given that for these sequences the single nucleotide polymorphism  frequency across the a, b and d genomes is around  <dig> per  <dig> bases  <cit> . with this snp frequency, one might have naively expected to find imperfect matches to any given homoeolog in roughly every sixth probe. it is likely that the observed specificity is lower than this because of the design of the wheat genechip, on which probes were specifically designed to the conserved regions of consensus sequences. in any case, by extrapolating from this rather small sample to the whole dataset we conclude that it is likely that for over ~90% of genes the measured expression profiles represent a sum of the individual profiles of the relevant homoeologs.

homolog identification on the wheat and barley <dig> genechips
putative homologous sequences on the wheat and barley genechips were inferred using a clustering approach based on sequence similarity  <cit> . this methodology was chosen over, for example, direct putative ortholog identification via the traditional best reciprocal blast hit  method  <cit>  because  the latter is known to be unreliable in the presence of multiple paralogs  <cit> ,  the rbh method can lead to misidentifications due to the incomplete coverage of the wheat and barley genomes  <cit>  and  the rbh method could not simultaneously detect the frequent presence of both 3' and 5' fragments of individual genes on the wheat genechip. for details relating to this clustering, see materials and methods: homolog identification on the wheat and barley genechips.

as a resource for the triticeae community, we have built an on-line tool where these "homologous clusters", as well as their associated expression profiles and sequence annotation, can be interrogated. this tool, the webcomparator, is available at . it may be used to assess similarities and differences of expression profiles of  <dig>  individual homologous clusters. expression profile differences may be due to biological differences, but quite frequently may simply reflect problems with hybridization efficiencies for individual probesets. the tool, therefore, is also useful in assessing the reliability of individual probesets on the affymetrix wheat and barley <dig> genechips. apart from similarities and differences in expression profiles of genes in individual homologous clusters, underlying global patterns are observable in the two datasets and it is those on which we focus here.

gene expression in wheat and barley is highly correlated
direct gene-by-gene comparison of expression profiles in wheat and barley is complicated by the ambiguities associated with the many-to-many relationships characteristic of the homologous clusters. however, for the class of clusters consisting of exactly one wheat probeset and one barley probeset, ortholog association is less ambiguous: apart from the aforementioned general insensitivity to individual wheat homoeologues, one would expect this class to be enriched for probesets targeting single-copy and single-spliceform genes. using only the "high quality" probesets , this group of clusters consists of  <dig>  sequence pairs.

transcript profiles for these probesets are shown as heat maps in figure  <dig> where probesets have been sorted according to a hierarchical clustering for the barley dataset, defined via a single linkage correlation measure. the same pattern of gene expression is clearly visible in both the barley and wheat heat maps indicating that, by and large, gene expression in the two species is highly conserved. the same conclusion can be reached by inspection of the correlation distribution shown in figure  <dig>  the average correlation of the expression profile pairs in these  <dig>  homologous clusters is  <dig> .

systematic relative shifts in expression levels are frequent in wheat and barley
while expression profiles in wheat and barley are highly correlated, it is also of interest to know whether the overall level of expression is similar. in this case the euclidean distance between corresponding expression profiles should be small. indeed, the accumulation of points near the origin of the euclidean distance plot shown in figure 4a confirms this to be generally true. however, there are also a significant number of sequence pairs whose profiles are of similar shape but offset by significant amounts . an example of this, where expression in barley is roughly  <dig> times that in wheat, is shown in figure 4c. the fact that there are many more points in the upper half of the boxed region in figure 4a as compared to the lower half shows that if profiles are offset in this way, it is generally barley that exhibits a higher signal intensity than wheat. for comparison, figure 4b presents an analogous plot to figure 4a, involving the two barley cultivars morex and golden promise . comparison to figure 4a shows that, on the whole, differences between these two barley varieties are negligible when compared to the differences between the two species.

if this unexpected difference of signal intensities in wheat and barley were to reflect an underlying difference in mrna levels for these genes it would be of interest to compare the corresponding protein levels in these two species. this might indicate a surprising shift of regulatory control from the transcriptional to the translational level. however, because overall shifts in signal intensities as measured by two different platforms can easily have a technical origin we have sought to independently verify the effect using quantitative real-time pcr . the results are shown in figure  <dig>  where microarray signal intensities are plotted against expression levels as measured by qpcr for a number of different sequence pairs  verifications). four wheat and four barley sequences where the overall microarray fluorescence intensity in wheat is significantly higher than in barley are indicated by "w". three wheat and four barley sequences where the microarray results for barley is significantly higher than wheat are marked by "b". five sequence pairs where microarray fluorescence intensities are roughly the same for the two species are indicated as plain data points and were used to generate a calibration curve for the two types of measurements. the uncertainty of this calibration, in the form of single prediction 95% confidence limits, is indicated by shaded regions in figure  <dig> 

we first concentrate on those data points, marked by a "w", where the wheat profile obtained with the microarray is significantly higher than the corresponding barley profile. expression data for barley  show that these sequences exhibit a microarray fluorescence intensity that is significantly at odds with that expected from the corresponding qpcr signal. at the same time there is no sign of anomalous differences between the qpcr and microarray measurements for the corresponding wheat expression . we conclude from this that for those orthologous pairs for which microarray measurements indicate expression in barley to be systematically lower than in wheat  the differences are likely to be due to a deficient signal obtained from the barley microarray, and not due to enhanced expression in wheat. we defer comment on the likely origin of this deficiency to the discussion section.

for sequence pairs where the barley profile is systematically higher than its wheat counterpart  the situation is less clear. these data points do fall mostly within the calculated 95% confidence limits for a consistent qpcr and microarray signal and the data is, therefore, consistent with the conclusion that for a significant number of genes the transcriptional activity in wheat is indeed below that in barley. we caution, however, that at this stage one also cannot rule out that the discrepancy may be due to simultaneous small shifts of technical rather than biological origin, causing the barley fluorescence in the microarray data to be systematically increased and at the same time the wheat fluorescence to be systematically decreased somewhat from what they should be.

5' probesets on the wheat genechip hybridize unpredictably
the comparison of expression information between wheat and barley provides a unique opportunity to assess the reliability of the hybridization signal from the wheat genechip. this is important because the wheat microarray contains, apart from the usual probesets designed for sequences for which there is good evidence that they are near the 3' end of the gene , a large number of probesets for which this evidence does not exist . because of mrna degradation away from the 3' end, one might expect the latter to lead to a reduced signal.

individual 3' and 5' probesets can be inferred to correspond to the same gene if they both show strong sequence similarity to a barley sequence but at the same time do not have a significant similarity with each other. indeed, of the approximately  <dig>  consensus sequences from the 5' set homologous to a barley sequence, 78% can be associated to a wheat 3' sequence in this way. a subset of these sequences is contained in the class of homologous clusters shown in figure 6a. there are  <dig>  clusters of this type in our dataset.

the distribution of correlations of the expression profiles from this set of 3' and 5' wheat sequences is shown in figure 6b. the typical correlation between the 3' wheat and barley profile is quite high , while the correlation between the 5' wheat and barley profiles tends to be considerably lower . it appears from this that while some 5' wheat probesets might very well give a reliable signal, on average the reliability is significantly lower than that of the 3' wheat probesets. additional evidence to support this conclusion is shown in figure 6c where the distribution in actual expression levels for both the wheat 3' and wheat 5' probesets is shown along with the expression levels in barley. it appears from this plot that the signal from the 5' probesets is consistently substantially lower than the signal from the barley probesets. finally, a cursory inspection of profiles for any homologous cluster using the webcomparator  shows that probesets from the 5' set often don't show any significant hybridization. we conclude that one needs to interpret the signal from these probesets with great care and for this reason we shall not include them in our comparative analyses.

conservation and divergence of gene function in wheat and barley
gene and protein expression studies indicate that, in general, sequence divergence after duplication events is associated with a divergence of functionality in the resulting paralogs, presumably because of reduced selection pressure after duplication  <cit> . in fact, it is widely believed that gene duplication – either individually or as part of genome-scale duplication events – is crucial for providing the resource for the subsequent evolution of genes with new functions  <cit> . genome-wide studies of this sequence divergence have mostly been undertaken in sequenced organisms separated by reasonably large evolutionary distances. the wheat and barley tissues series permit such a study in these more closely related grass species. consider homologous clusters of the type presented in figure  <dig>  the type of cluster shown in figure 7a is consistent with a gene duplication event in wheat, with subsequent sequence divergence of sequence w <dig>  similarly, figure 7b is consistent with a gene duplication in barley, with subsequent sequence divergence of sequence b <dig>  the "high quality" dataset contains  <dig> and  <dig> examples of this type of cluster, respectively.

a measure of functional divergence, on the other hand, is once more provided by the correlation between wheat and barley expression profiles. for the cluster shown in figure 7a, if the correlation between the profile for the barley sequence b and the wheat sequence w <dig> ) is similar to the correlation between b and w2), one would conclude that there is little relation between functional and sequence divergence. on the other hand, c <c would indicate a possible relationship. the results of these comparisons are presented in table  <dig>  the average correlation between the profiles for b and w <dig> is higher than that for b and w <dig>  and similarly the profiles for w and b <dig> are on average more correlated than those for w and b <dig>  while the sample sizes are small, the p-values associated with a wilcoxon signed-rank test indicate that these differences are likely to be significant. in short, wheat and barley apparently exhibit a correlation between divergence of gene function and gene sequence akin to that found in less closely related species.

the correlation of gene expression profiles in wheat and barley increases with similarity of gene sequence. gene pairs refer to those shown in figure 7a  and 7b . <c> refers to the average pearson correlation for the expression profiles of these gene pairs. n is the sample size and the p-value is calculated using the wilcoxon signed-rank test.

dosage constraints in wheat and barley
while gene duplication provides opportunities for the evolution of new gene function, it has also been argued that selective pressure can maintain original function after a duplication event. this might occur if the gene codes for part of a protein complex  <cit> , thus imposing strong stoichiometric constraints, or if 'buffering' of crucial functions  <cit>  is required. in addition, studies in yeast  <cit>  and paramecium  <cit>  indicate that dosage constraints may account for the inhibition of divergence of duplicated genes. these authors found that, at least in these two species, duplicate copies of genes are more likely to be retained if the expression level is high than if it is low, presumably in order to maintain high transcript levels.

we have compared the wheat and barley transcriptomes to see if such a correlation between maintenance of gene function and expression level persists in these two species. again, we use conservation of the expression profiles  between wheat and barley genes as an indirect measure of conservation of function. the results, using all wheat and barley probesets from the "high quality" set linked by a reciprocal blast hit, are shown in figure 8a. genes that are expressed at a higher level tend to be genes which have more correlated expression profiles. in order to make sure that this is not an artefact of noise washing out underlying correlations at low expression levels we confirmed that the trends shown in figure 8a persist even if genes with low expression levels  in any tissue are left out of the analysis. finally, one sees that the same correlation persists if one uses sequence similarity instead of profile similarity as a measure for conservation of gene function . we conclude, therefore, that for wheat and barley the maintenance of high expression levels is a significant driver in maintaining gene function.

discussion
gene expression in wheat and barley is highly correlated
our results  indicate highly correlated gene expression for the subset of barley and wheat genes in the 'high-quality set' that belong to homologous clusters with exactly one member from each species. while this restriction makes ortholog identification relatively unambiguous, it also leads to a biased sample: by construction, this selection is enriched for genes that are not members of gene families and/or genes where the sequence differences between homoeologs are small . it is quite possible, even plausible, that the average correlation of a broader gene set that includes members of gene families may differ from the value  <dig>  observed in our more restricted set. indeed, if the presence of gene family members is taken to indicate increased redundancy, one might well expect that the average correlation of expression levels might reduce. while, given the lack of reliable sequence information, it is not feasible to test this conjecture at present, it is interesting to note that our restricted sample of  <dig> sequence pairs exhibits, on average, higher expression levels than the complete "high-quality set": expression levels in barley appear increased marginally by 37%, while in wheat they are roughly doubled.

conservation and divergence of gene function in wheat and barley
the evolution of new functional roles for duplicated genes can depend on a number of mechanisms. most directly, accumulation of sequence changes in coding regions can lead to changes in protein structure, either by substitution of amino acids or through the evolution of new splice variants. this type of sequence divergence after gene duplication is well documented  <cit> . numerous studies have observed the expected decreased selective pressure on sequence conservation after duplication through comparisons of synonymous and non-synonymous nucleotide substitutions  <cit> . a second mechanism is provided through alteration of gene regulation imparted through mutation in cis-acting elements and/or alterations of trans-acting factors. this alters a gene's expression repertoire even in the absence of changes in its sequence. the relationship between these two mechanisms also sheds light on the importance of selective pressure in the evolutionary process; random drift under a neutral model would result in unrelated expression and sequence changes, while strong selective pressure would be reflected by a positive correlation.

the results in table  <dig> provide an indication that gene activity patterns across tissues and accumulation of sequence changes after gene duplication are positively correlated in wheat and barley, as one would expect in the presence of selective pressure  <cit> . this finding is in agreement with some of the studies in model species such as yeast  <cit> , c. elegans  <cit> , drosophila  <cit>  and primates  <cit> . however, these results are by no means universal and in other studies no clear correlation is observed  <cit> . for example, no  <cit>  or weak  <cit>  correlation was observed in two studies using the model plant arabidopsis. it is likely that the lack of agreement reflects differences in approach; for example, in some studies sequence divergence is measured on the protein level, in others it is quantified through the rate of non-synonymous substitutions and others through the rate of synonymous substitutions. in some studies tandem duplications are separated out from ancient segmental duplications, while in others  they are not. expression divergence, on the other hand, will clearly depend on the number and types of different temporal, spatial and environmental conditions which are probed.

we believe that at present the results shown in table  <dig> should be seen as indicative only. gene duplication and subsequent divergence is only one possible source for the apparently correlated divergence of sequence and expression. a second source for this correlation might be found in the generation of new alternative splice forms rather than new genes, with the original splice form maintaining its expression pattern but the new one diverging.

furthermore, as opposed to the species mentioned above, wheat and barley do not have sequenced genomes and this naturally has an influence on the reliability of the available sequence and expression information. here sequence divergence was assessed purely on the basis of the existence  and absence  of a blast hit of sufficient quality. this is a cruder measure than a count of synonymous substitutions, and other effects such as a reduced sequence length of w <dig> and b <dig> due to incomplete est information could easily impact on this. in addition, our sample size is quite small because it includes only those homologous graphs that we considered to be the most reliable, i.e. those containing the blast hits of the type shown in figure  <dig>  notwithstanding these qualifications, these latter issues would tend to reduce any underlying correlation, so the presence of these in table  <dig> may actually be relatively robust. we also note that any remaining cross-hybridization between w <dig> and w <dig> , which we have sought to eliminate by considering only the "high-quality" dataset that doesn't contain "_x,s,a_at" probesets, would also tend to reduce any difference in the correlation signal. improved knowledge of the sequence content of these two species will increase the reliability of the signal that we have observed.

a second effect apparent in table  <dig> should be treated with even more caution. the expression profiles of duplicated wheat genes appear to be considerably less similar to that of their barley ortholog  than duplicated barley genes and their wheat ortholog . these correlations can be compared to those  <dig>  sequence pairs discussed earlier where there is no evidence of gene and/or splice form duplication . while it might be tempting to conclude that expression patterns in wheat evolve faster than their counterparts in barley, this signal is sensitive to any asymmetry in design of the two genechips. in particular, as discussed in  <cit>  and at , the est clustering procedures used in the construction of the barley <dig> and wheat genechips was rather different, particularly in their treatment of potential splice-variants. it could well be these differences has led to differing proportions of probesets on the two genechips designed to individual splice forms.

because both alternative splice forms as well as gene duplications potentially contribute to the asymmetries in table  <dig>  a differing admixture of the two could easily be responsible for this asymmetry between the species.

highly expressed genes show correlated expression in wheat and barley
numerous studies have shown that genes transcribed at high levels tend to evolve more slowly than genes transcribed at low levels  <cit> . as already mentioned above, the "rate of evolution" in this type of study is quantified by sequence divergence, either on the dna level by counting synonymous and/or non-synonymous substitutions or on the protein level by counting amino acid changes. the results shown in figure 8b show that this correlation between sequence conservation and mean expression level can clearly be seen in the wheat and barley transcriptomes, even though we use the comparatively rough measure of a blast hit e-value to quantify sequence similarity.

systematic shifts in expression levels and platform dependant biases
while differential hybridization signal  intensities in a select number of tissues are highly likely to be indicative of true biological differences between wheat and barley, great care must be taken in interpreting overall shifts of fluorescence levels in the same way. the rna extractions for these experiments were performed in two different laboratories and, of course, with different species using genechips with two different design philosophies. rna hybridization to the genechips, on the other hand, was performed at the same facility in a virtually identical manner. even issues such as the poor hybridization efficiency of the large number of wheat 5' probesets are likely to have an impact on the relative normalization. without an absolute standard, a rigorous relative calibration of the two datasets therefore seems very difficult, if not impossible. our approach to this issue was two-fold: firstly, while one might not be able to control the overall normalization uncertainty one can attempt to estimate its importance and secondly, as described, we performed additional qpcr measurements in an attempt to verify interesting outcomes.

an estimate of the overall normalization uncertainty is provided by the data shown in figure 4a. for these data, the average difference in  fluorescence levels is around  <dig> , indicating that on average the fluorescence levels for the barley data are about 75% higher than the corresponding levels for the wheat data. under the assumption that the true average expression level in the two species is similar one would conclude that overall normalization issues may account for a factor of around  <dig> between the datasets. the differences, often 10-fold or more, of the observed fluorescence levels shown in figures 4c and  <dig> makes this an unlikely explanation.

for those probesets where there is a systematic decrease in the observed fluorescence levels in barley as compared to wheat, the barley qpcr results do not confirm the barley microarray results. this indicates that for these probesets, at least, the difference has a technical rather than biological origin. an obvious possibility for a lack of signal is the possible presence of single feature polymorphisms  between the probes on the barley <dig> array and the morex mrna being hybridized to it. if this is the case, the rough consistency of qpcr and microarray results for wheat, for those probesets with enhanced microarray fluorescence levels in barley, would indicate that the sfps do not play as much of a role in the hybridization of chinese spring to the wheat genechip as they do for the hybridization of morex to the barley <dig> genechip.

there is corroborating evidence supporting this conjecture. the barley <dig> genechip was designed using the ests collected from  <dig> libraries, originating from est projects in japan, finland, germany, scotland, and the us, respectively. five major and a few minor cultivars were used, representing the favorite from each project. in the end, the majority of these ests were from barke  and, to a lesser extent, morex   <cit> ; in total, only about  <dig> in  <dig> ests used to design barley <dig> came from morex  <cit> . the dominant cultivar in the est collections used to design the wheat genechip, on the other hand, is chinese spring. one would, therefore, expect a greater prevalence of sfps between morex mrna and the probes on the barley <dig> genechip as compared to sfps between chinese spring mrna and the probes on the wheat genechip. we have compared the sequences in current publicly available est collections against the probe sequences on the two genechips and find that this is indeed the case: from this comparison, we estimate that the probability of any mismatch between a 25mer barley probe and morex sequence to be around  <dig> % while for the wheat genechip the probability of a mismatch between a probe and a chinese spring sequence is around  <dig> %. assuming independence, this implies that in figure 4a of the order of ten or so barley <dig> genechip probesets may contain more than two sfps when compared to morex sequences, while for chinese spring the effect is negligible. in other words, sfps between the two cultivars and their respective genechips may indeed be responsible, qualitatively and quantitatively, for the discrepancies between the qpcr and microarray results observed for barley but not wheat.

CONCLUSIONS
we have performed a comparative study of gene expression in barley and hexaploid wheat, using  <dig> different tissues and developmental stages. the comparison has been achieved through the clustering of almost  <dig>  wheat and barley sequences represented on the affymetrix wheat and barley genechips into homologous clusters, with over  <dig>  clusters containing more than one sequence. detailed comparisons of expression profiles for all of these sequences have been made available at  and individually the two gene expression atlases can be explored further at , accession numbers bb <dig> and ta <dig> 

we have established that on the whole there are strong similarities between expression patterns of homologous genes in the two species. this conclusion could only be reached, however, by first taking into account the differing designs of the two genechips. among several confounding factors, the most significant is the presence of over  <dig>  probesets on the wheat genechip not clearly anchored to the 3' end of gene sequences. the expression profiles obtained with these probesets and, particularly, the comparison to expression profiles of homologous barley sequences clearly shows that most lead to a significantly compromised signal. in this way, our comparative results provide a significant resource aiding the interpretation of the hybridization signal from individual probesets in future experiments employing the wheat genechip.

our results indicate that the hybridization signal obtained from the wheat genechip generally does not differentiate between wheat homoeologs. detailed study of homoeolog expression patterns across tissues awaits the construction of microarray platforms that specifically target regions of homoeolog sequence divergence and/or studies employing direct transcriptome sequencing.

finally, we have used several high-quality subsets of our expression datasets to investigate some of the more prominent, but nevertheless comparatively small, systematic differences between the wheat and barley data. as is to be expected, we found that great care must be taken to distinguish genuine differences in the transcriptomes from artifactual differences due either to the dissimilar design of the genechips and/or the disparity in our current knowledge of the wheat and barley genomes. examples of the latter include a systematic shift in absolute expression found in a significant number of wheat and barley putative orthologs. on the other hand, we also found a comparatively clear indication that highly expressed wheat and barley genes tend to be evolutionarily conserved, both in sequence as well as transcriptional activity. this observation for these two grasses is in agreement with results from previous studies of model species.

