BACKGROUND
neurons of the entorhinal cortex  send unidirectional, afferent projections to the hippocampus, where terminals synapse on granule cell dendrites in the outer molecular layer  of the dentate gyrus  <cit> . interruption of entorhinal input to the dentate gyrus, by chemical lesion or severing the afferent fibers, causes anterograde degeneration of the axon terminals and stimulates sprouting of viable fibers from this and other neuronal circuits  <cit> . the entorhinal cortex lesion  has been used as a model of neural plasticity for more than three decades  <cit> . to identify and innervate a target after injury or during development, growing neuron terminals must traverse through a complex extracellular milieu that consists of soluble factors, cell surface adhesive ligands and an extracellular matrix  along the way toward its target. the growing terminal samples this milieu, and appropriate protein-protein binding and activation regulates the direction and extent of growth, terminal sprouting, and likely synaptogenesis. for example, certain ecm molecules such as laminin are permissive toward neurite outgrowth, whereas others, such as the highly negatively charged, proteoglycans  substituted with chondroitin sulfate  , inhibit neurite outgrowth on permissive substrates  <cit> . interestingly, the expression of several lecticans, including brevican is markedly up-regulated during the neural plasticity response that occurs following ecl  <cit> .

the lectican pgs are the most abundant ecm molecules in the adult, uninjured central nervous system  and of these brevican is the most highly expressed  <cit> . brevican and other lecticans are found in perineuronal nets and throughout the neuropil and are components of ecm aggregate complexes that are thought to stabilize synapses in neural networks and inhibit neurite outgrowth  <cit> . most evidence suggests that the cs component in these complexes provides the inhibitory signal toward neurite outgrowth, although the protein core plays a role as well  <cit> . however, proteolytic cleavage of the brevican core protein may "loosen" the aggregated complexes and change the extracellular environment to one that is more permissive for neural plasticity to occur  <cit> . a significant proportion of brevican in the adult cns exists as a fragment formed by proteolytic cleavage of the protein core, suggesting that this mechanism may play a role in experience-dependent and other forms of neural plasticity in the uninjured, adult. in addition, in disorders such as alzheimer's disease, alterations in the ecm may be related to diminished synaptic plasticity and therefore play a role in cognitive dysfunction.

the metalloproteinases responsible for cleavage of lectican core proteins and the generation of fragments of aggrecan, brevican, and versican have been cloned and belong to a family of proteins, termed the adamtss , that include glutamyl endopeptidases. adamts <dig> and adamts <dig> are prominently expressed in rat brain  <cit>  and cleave the  <dig> kd intact core protein of brevican into a  <dig> kd n-terminal, and an  <dig> kd c-terminal fragment  <cit>  . the adamts-derived  <dig> kd fragment may be distinguished from total cleaved fragment  using a neoepitope antibody raised against the distinctive c-terminal sequence  of the n-terminal,  <dig> kd fragment  that is generated by glutamyl endopeptidase cleavage. using this antibody, in vivo adamts activity may be estimated by expressing the amount of adamts-derived brevican fragment as a proportion of total intact brevican.

others have demonstrated changes in the levels and activity of matrix metalloproteinases  in the deafferented neuropil after various lesions, however in these experiments, the substrate proteolytically processed by the mmps was not identified  <cit> . nonetheless, changes in structure and function that were associated with lesion-induced sprouting were reversed by mmp inhibitors  <cit> . lesions produced by systemic injection of kainic acid produce wide-spread neuronal degeneration in the cns, including the ec and stimulate expression of the mmps and the adamtss  <cit> . in response to this lesion, the abundance of the neoepitope fragment generated by adamts-cleavage of brevican was markedly elevated in the oml of the dentate gyrus. this increase was preceded by elevated adamts <dig> and adamts <dig> mrna expression in dentate granule neurons  <cit> . although these results suggest that proteolytic processing of brevican appears to be a significant extracellular event in the remodeling of the dentate after ecl, because of the widespread neuronal death, it was difficult to associate these two particular endpoints as individual, yet associated events involved in neural plasticity. thus, we decided to employ the classical ecl model in the c57bl <dig> mouse, thereby discretely disrupting synaptic innervation of the molecular layer of the dentate gyrus. our intention was to observe any altered expression of brevican and the adamtss that may be associated with reinnervation of the injured area  <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> days after lesion.

RESULTS
expression of adamts-derived, brevican fragment
brevican is an abundantly expressed pg in the cns that is secreted from astrocytes and neurons as a  <dig> kd core protein that bears up to three, covalently-linked, cs chains . it is also is secreted as a  <dig> kd core protein without cs chains . when cleaved by extracellular glutamyl endopeptidases, the adamtss, a  <dig> kd n-terminal fragment is formed that contains the unique c-terminal epitope eamese . each of these isoforms of brevican was expressed in numerous regions of the cns. figure 3a shows a brevican immunoblot of several brain regions from an untreated c57bl <dig> mouse. the > <dig> kd  intact isoform, the  <dig> kd  intact core protein and the generalized  <dig> kd n-terminal fragment were easily differentiated from one another on western blot  using an antibody that recognizes an epitope in the n-terminal globular domain . in the mouse, all isoforms of brevican appeared to be more abundant in brain stem and cerebellum compared to other regions that were measured. panel b shows a blot with the same extracts and probed using the anti-neoepitope eamese antibody. this antibody recognized the adamts-derived, c-terminally truncated,  <dig> kd fragment with the novel c-terminal epitope eamese and did not recognize any of the intact, core brevican proteins . thus, given the ability to quantitate the adamts-derived brevican fragment and its intact substrates using immunoblot, regional in vivo adamts activity may be estimated.

deafferentation and neural plasticity in the dentate gyrus
to validate a complete deafferentation of this synapse of the perforant path, from the ec to the molecular layer of the dentate gyrus, animals were injected with ibotenic acid into the lateral ec, perfused with fixative, the brain sectioned, and immunostained for brevican. brevican is a marker expressed by reactive glia in response to brain injury  <cit> . thus, after lesion, increased deposition of brevican would be expected in the ipsilateral ec. brevican immunoreactivity was elevated at the lesion site  compared to the contralateral, non-lesioned ec .

since an endpoint in this experiment is the reinnervation and sprouting of neurites and the formation of new synapses in the oml of the dentate gyrus, synaptophysin immunoreactivity, a vesicular pre-synaptic marker, was examined two, seven, and thirty days post-lesion. on the contralateral side and in unlesioned mice, a tri-laminar synaptophysin staining pattern was observed that outlines the inner, middle and omls  of the dentate gyrus. two days after ecl, there was a marked decline in synaptophysin immunoreactivity in the oml on the ipsilateral side of the dentate , that was reflected by a loss of the typical tri-laminar pattern of synaptophysin staining  with only the inner molecular layer clearly distinguishable. seven days after ecl, synaptophysin immunoreactivity in the oml remained markedly reduced, although the pattern was similar to the contralateral side at  <dig> days .

in response to injury and the deafferentation of synapses, there is an activation of astrocytes in the oml  <cit> . tissue immunostained with the astrocytic marker gfap , showed increased staining selectively in the oml of the dentate seven days after ecl  compared to the contralateral side . although these markers may be sufficient to identify some level of diminished innervation to the oml, a synaptophysin elisa and a specific method to isolate the tissue of the dentate gyrus  was developed to better quantitate this loss.

two days after lesion, synaptophysin levels as detected by elisa, declined by 46% in the ipsilateral dentate compared to the contralateral side  . this trend was sustained at seven days post-lesion, and synaptophysin levels were 41% of the contralateral value  . however, when tissue was examined thirty days post-lesion, synaptophysin concentrations were not different from the control side. this observation shows there is a complete reinnervation of the oml after ecl .

the decline in the level of synaptophysin concentrations in the tissue from the "dentate punch" on the ipsilateral side compared to the contralateral side indicates that there was denervation of cortical input to the dentate molecular layer. the question of interest was, however, were there associated changes in the abundance and proteolysis of brevican in this region of neural plasticity?

abundance and proteolysis of brevican after ecl
brevican and its various isoforms were identified in immunoblots from isolated dentate gyrus tissue obtained from mice two, seven and thirty days after ecl. at two days post-lesion , there was a 3-fold increase in the glycosaminoglycan -containing form of brevican  in the dentate on the denervated side, and a trend for an increase in all the isoforms of brevican on this side. at seven days after insult, a time thought to be the initial synaptic reorganization period after ecl  <cit> , intact brevican had returned to contralateral levels, but there was a significant, almost 2-fold elevation in the adamts-derived fragment of brevican in the dentate . in addition, there was a trend for an increase in the generalized  <dig> kd fragment of brevican  at this time point. thirty days after undergoing surgery, all of the forms of brevican had returned to levels not different from the contralateral side; however, a slight increase in the gag-containing, intact isoform was seen at this time point .

to estimate apparent adamts activity in vivo, the density of the eamese  immunoreactive fragment in western blot was divided by the densitometric level of intact full-length and core protein brevican isoforms  . two days post-ecl there was a decrease in apparent adamts activity in the ipsilateral dentate gyrus, however, at the seven day critical reinnervation period, adamts activity was increased almost 50%. this observation is supported by the significant increase in the adamts-derived,  <dig> kd fragment at this time point. by thirty days post-lesion, the activity was not different from the contralateral side. thus, this data suggests that the adamtss and the catabolism of brevican may play a prominent role in neural plasticity in the dentate gyrus after lesion of the ec in mice.

discussion
the purpose of this study was to determine whether the catabolism of brevican is involved in mechanisms of neural plasticity in the hippocampus, and to accomplish this, synaptic input to the oml of the dentate gyrus was denervated by excitotoxic lesion in the lateral ec. two days after lesion, synaptic input into the oml was significantly reduced and this was accompanied by an increase in the production of full length, intact brevican. at seven days, while brevican levels returned to baseline, a significant increase in the adamts-derived, c-terminally truncated, brevican fragment was observed during this initial, sprouting and reinnervation period. this implies that there was an increase in adamts activity in the oml during the highly plastic, regenerative phase. however at thirty days post-lesion, there was complete reinnervation of the oml on the ipsilateral side, as synaptic density, brevican and adamts activity were not different from the contralateral side at this time point. these results indicate that the adamtss and their substrate, brevican, that is abundant in the cns, have a regulatory function in neural plasticity and support earlier data that had demonstrated important actions for the adamtss in plasticity after seizure-induced hippocampal lesion  <cit> .

previous studies have examined the role of matrix-altering proteases in synaptic plasticity after cns lesion. the expression of the matrix metalloproteinases , mmp- <dig> and mmp- <dig>  have been shown to be increased in various regions of the hippocampus after seizure-induced lesion  <cit> . mmp- <dig> concentrations were elevated in the molecular layer of the dentate after traumatic brain injury  <cit> . more specifically after ecl, administration of a non-selective mmp inhibitor was able to diminish sprouting and synaptogenesis in the dentate oml  <cit> , suggesting a direct proteolytic role for the mmps in this process. in adults, most mmp expression and activity is low and maintained throughout adulthood. after injury and during the recovery and regenerative phase, however, there is increased activity of mmps derived from glia and neurons that is thought to facilitate axonal reinnervation, sprouting and/or synaptogenesis. nonetheless, the mechanism of action of the mmps and the potential substrates on which they act to promote neural plasticity have yet to be determined in these models. more recently, the activity and expression of the pg-degrading, adamtss have been shown to be elevated in the oml after kainite-induced lesion. in contrast to the absence of a defined substrate for the mmps, a selective adamts-derived, brevican fragment was localized to the oml after seizure-induced lesion in the rat  <cit> . in the present study, a similar adamts-derived brevican fragment was localized to the oml of the mouse after discrete denervation of the perforant path, suggesting a critical role in neural plasticity for the proteolytic turnover of brevican. thus, the ability to localize and quantitate the adamts specific, proteolytic product of brevican provides a means to indirectly estimate adamts activity during times of neural plasticity and synaptogenesis.

the expression of brevican was shown previously to be up-regulated in the oml, the area of denervation after ecl in the rat  <cit> , however, in contrast to the transient production observed here in the mouse, expression of immunoreactive brevican remained elevated compared to the non-lesioned side for almost  <dig> months after injury. neurocan is a lectican that is expressed at high levels during early development but it was found to be up-regulated and synthesized by astrocytes in the oml after ecl. it was suggested that neurocan and possibly brevican may act to maintain the boundary of the denervated dentate after ecl  <cit> , yet these complex molecules may be multifunctional during periods of neural plasticity. each of the lecticans, exhibit a characteristic pattern of expression during development, with neurocan and versican v <dig> highly expressed in the brain of the fetus and neonate, whereas aggrecan, versican v <dig> and brevican increase expression during the period of synaptic stabilization in the adult and expression remains high throughout adulthood  <cit> . each of the lecticans is thought to bind to tenascin r and hyaluronic acid  forming a multi-molecular lattice of ecm  <cit> . it may be that proteolytic cleavage of the lectican loosens the lattice to promote neurite growth and synaptogenesis. classically, the highly negatively charged cs chains on the lecticans inhibits neurite outgrowth, but proteolytic cleavage of the core protein may allow more movement of these chains and actually promote plasticity of neurons. this is a testable notion and preliminary data indicates that the adamtss promote neurite outgrowth and other measures of neural plasticity in vitro .

the projection from the ec to the hippocampus is called the perforant path  <cit> , and is thought to be involved in long-term potentiation and learning and memory  <cit> . the ecl model to study neural and synaptic plasticity denervates up to 80% of the input to the outer two-thirds of the molecular layer of the dentate gyrus  <cit> , and due to sprouting of surviving fiber systems will reinnervate nearly fully. this model was developed more than thirty years ago in the rat  <cit> , yet it has been only relatively recently that the technique was employed in mice to take advantage of transgenic models  <cit> . surprisingly, there are some differences in the projections from the ec to the hippocampal formation between rats and mice  <cit> . for example, input to the dentate molecular layer from the contralateral ec is absent in the mouse, yet these contralateral fibers are responsible for much of the sprouting after ecl in the rat. in addition, the width of the inner molecular layer, that contains associational-commissural fibers, is thinner in the mouse than in the rat, causing an increase in the relative width occupied by the middle and omls, layers innervated mainly by ec fibers. in the mouse, the middle and oml occupy closer to four-fifths of the total, rather than two-thirds as seen in the rat. moreover, three layers can be clearly differentiated in an untreated mouse, but not in a rat, using synaptophysin immunohistochemistry  <cit> , and following ecl this laminar feature is lost . synaptophysin immunochemistry has been one of the more common techniques, among many, to quantitate the loss and reinnervation of input into the ipsilateral molecular layer of the dentate gyrus after unilateral ecl  <cit> . optical density of the synaptophysin signal in the contralateral oml is measured using the sum  of the gray levels of the pixels in this region, and this value is used as a "normal" value to the ipsilateral side. however, with this technique, the ipsilateral dentate usually shows only a 10–30% reduction in signal compared to the contralateral side at seven days after lesion, a time when sprouting has begun  <cit> . clearly this absolute value does not reflect the extent to which fibers are actually lost in the oml after ecl. thus, we decided to develop a fresh tissue, needle punch dissection technique that could be limited to the dentate gyrus in the mouse. this way, biochemical assays could be conducted on the tissue to measure overall synaptophysin immunoreactivity by elisa. using this method, at two and seven days after lesion, there was greater than a 40% reduction in synaptophysin levels in the oml, a value which at least may closer reflect the absolute loss of fibers after ecl. the major disadvantage of this method is that the dissected tissue also includes the granule layer and the hilus of the dentate, regions where input is not lost after ecl. at the same time using this technique, tissue containing the lesion itself may be collected and assayed biochemically or processed for histochemistry to monitor the extent of the lesion in the ec.

the present results suggest that the lecticans and the proteases that cleave the lecticans play a regulatory role in neural plasticity after ecl. there are several potential mechanisms by which this substrate – protease pair may modulate neural plasticity, one of which was described above. significant changes were observed in the abundance of the different isoforms of brevican including the expression of the c-terminally-truncated adamts-derived brevican fragment during plastic events in the hippocampus. a genetic approach to study the individual lecticans and adamtss could reveal the individual contributions for each of the molecules involved in neural plasticity after ecl, however, there is considerable redundancy among these molecules. for example, there appears to be a compensatory increase in the expression of neurocan in the brain of the brevican null mouse.  <cit>  in addition, several of the adamtss exhibit proteoglycanase activity, and of these, at least adamts <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> appear to be expressed in the nervous system . whether there are compensatory changes in the expression of any of these molecules in the brain in adamts null mice remains to be determined. nonetheless, significant protective effects toward arthritic changes were demonstrated just recently in a single mutant, the adamts <dig> null mouse  <cit> . should it turn out that these proteases play a significant role in plasticity related mechanisms in the nervous system, it will be interesting to examine how removing this regulatory action will impact development, sprouting after lesion, learning and memory and other plasticity related mechanisms in the adult.

CONCLUSIONS
growth, sprouting and targeting in neural plasticity of an ecl model may involve extracellular cues whose expression and/or secretion is altered following the lesion. one of these cues is the extracellular pg, brevican. here we have demonstrated changes in brevican expression and turnover after ecl that are associated with the loss and time-dependent reinnervation of the oml of the dentate gyrus.

