BACKGROUND
chromatin immunoprecipitation  enables the identification of in vivo protein-dna interactions under a given condition or in a particular cell type. an important application is the detection of transcription factor binding sites to characterize the regulatory networks controlling, for instance, various cellular processes or physiological states. the high-throughput chip techniques are based on identifying on a global scale the sequences and genomic locations of the immunoprecipitated dna fragments that are bound by the transcription factor of interest. the most common approach until now has been to hybridize the dna fragments to a tiling microarray   <cit> . however, the fast development of the next-generation massively parallel sequencing technologies, which enable the direct sequencing of the dna , has recently challenged the microarray-based experiments, providing an alternative particularly useful to study organisms with less well characterized genomes  <cit> .

chip-seq involves the sequencing of the chip-enriched dna fragments for ~ <dig> bp from their ends. these short sequence reads  are then aligned to a reference genome and binding sites are identified on the basis of their significant accumulation at particular genomic loci using various peak detection algorithms  <cit> . in addition to a list of genomic regions predicted to be bound by the transcription factor, each potential binding site is typically characterized by the number of reads it contains or the height of the peak determined by the number of overlapping reads. the predicted binding regions can then be used for downstream analyses, such as motif discovery and annotation, to provide further functional context for the biological interpretation.

together with the development of the chip-seq technology, a burst of methods has been introduced for analysing the resulting datasets. in general, these binding site detection algorithms can be divided into window-based approaches, which first define the start and end of a candidate region and then count the number of reads within it , or overlap-based approaches, which first identify the peaks on the basis of local maxima over read overlaps and then set the start and end of the corresponding candidate region . in addition, a method based on hidden markov models  is available, which describes the read accumulation along the genome as a sequence of two different states: binding sites and background  <cit> .

the chip-seq experiments, in turn, can be divided into those involving negative control samples and those that contain only chip samples. the main difference in analysing these datasets is that the former allow the statistical significance of the peaks to be estimated on the basis of an empirical background. accordingly, some of the current algorithms are applicable only when a control sample is available , while some are not designed to incorporate control data ; however, most of the algorithms provide different variants depending on the type of the data .

while several recent publications have introduced new algorithms for chip-seq data analysis and the authors have shown improved performance over the previous approaches in selected datasets, an independent comparison of their relative performance using common datasets is still lacking. at the moment, there is only limited information on the use of the different approaches in practical applications; what are their relative merits and limitations; or are there actually large differences between the methods.

the present study compares systematically the performance of the different peak detection algorithms in predicting transcription factor binding sites in chip-seq data. in particular, we compare nine publicly available algorithms that represent the current state-of-the-art of the field: peakfinder  <cit> , genetrack  <cit> , findpeaks  <cit> , sissrs  <cit> , quest  <cit> , macs  <cit> , cisgenome  <cit> , peakseq  <cit> , and hpeak  <cit>  . the focus here is on evaluation measures that are of practical interest to researchers when analysing their datasets. first, we point out potential differences in the biological conclusions made when different methods are applied. then, we evaluate the detections in terms of their reproducibility across biological replicates. finally, we investigate the overlap of the predicted binding sites with the corresponding sequence motifs or binding regions confirmed in independent qpcr experiments. since our aim is to give an objective and practical assessment of the algorithms, we apply each method using their default parameters and following the instructions provided in the software manuals. systematic comparisons are shown in four diverse datasets . in addition to three publicly available datasets, against which any future algorithm can be easily compared, we also include into the evaluations our in-house chip-seq data on the binding of the stat <dig> transcription factor to account for the fact that some of the datasets have been used to train particular algorithms and their default parameters may therefore be ideal for these data.

sissrs
quest
macs
cisgenome
hpeak
the column type indicates whether the method is applicable to a single sample analysis  or a two-sample analysis involving a control sample .

methods
peak detection algorithms
a short summary of the algorithms being compared in the present study is given below. for more details, the reader is referred to the original publications or the software websites . when applying the algorithms, we followed the instructions and recommendations given in the software manuals as closely as possible to provide a fair evaluation. in particular, the default values for the parameters were used, which is likely to be the choice of most average users.

peakfinder identifies candidate binding sites as aggregations of k or more chip reads not separated by more than n bp  and with an additional requirement that at least  <dig> of the reads are overlapping. if a control sample is available, then it is further required that there is at least an m-fold enrichment  of reads in the chip sample over the control within the same boundaries, and the data are recommended to be normalized into numbers on a per-million reads basis. following the default settings, we used k =  <dig> when a chip sample was analysed without a control, and k =  <dig> when a control sample was utilized. peakfinder does not provide any estimates for false discovery rate .

genetrack applies a gaussian smoothing procedure to represent the read densities along the chromosomes. more specifically, a normal distribution with a specified standard deviation  is utilized. peaks are identified by finding the local maxima in the smoothed data. the results are reported for both strands separately as well as for their composition . an optional exclusion zone parameter allows to determine a distance, within which only a single peak is identified. since no guidance is provided on how to optimally utilize the strand information nor how to define the exclusion zone parameter in the context of transcription factor binding, we focused here on the composite-strand detections with the exclusion zone set to  <dig>  to reduce the large number of identifications made due to these choices , we only considered peaks having a score over  <dig>  which is a compromise between the default overlap and count requirements of peakfinder. genetrack does not provide any options to estimate the fdr levels of the detections.

findpeaks extends each aligned read directionally to an estimated length of the dna fragment. the candidate binding sites are then identified on the basis of overlapping fragments  along the genome. the fdr is estimated using a monte carlo simulation, in which random locations are repeatedly generated for the reads and the number of peaks at a given height threshold in the randomized data is divided by the number of peaks observed at the same threshold in the real experimental data. as suggested in the findpeaks manual, the reads were filtered to remove duplicate hits, the fragment length distributions were estimated by assuming a triangle-based distribution with a median value of  <dig>  while enabling directional peak detection, peak trimming and subpeak detection modules. peaks at fdr <  <dig>  were identified.

sissrs  also starts by extending the reads to the estimated length of the dna fragment, similarly as findpeaks. it then scans the genome using a window of width w  and, for each window, it subtracts the number of antisense reads from the number of sense reads . binding sites are identified as transition points of this count from positive to negative, provided that the number of directional reads on each side of the inferred binding site is at least n . a poisson background or a negative control sample, if available, is used to estimate the fdr, which is determined as the ratio of the number of peaks indicated by the background model to the number of peaks observed in the real data. the default fdr threshold of  <dig>  was applied.

quest  shares with genetrack the idea of applying a gaussian kernel separately to both strands . the major difference is that quest estimates a peak shift between the strands before aggregating the results. moreover, while genetrack does not provide any practical guidance on how to choose a suitable threshold for a peak, quest determines peak calls based on the properties of separate control data. in particular, the ratio of the detected peak to the background is required to exceed a specified threshold value, called the rescue ratio . if the negative control has enough reads , then also fdr estimation is provided, in which the control sample is divided into two parts to mimic a random two-sample comparison and fdr is estimated as the ratio between the number of peaks detected in this random comparison and the number of peaks detected in the actual comparison in the real data with the same parameters. quest does not support analyses without controls.

macs  is another algorithm besides quest that takes advantage of the observed bimodal enrichment patterns of binding sites by empirically modelling the shift size. unlike quest, however, it is applicable also without negative controls. to capture local biases in the genome, a dynamic poisson distribution is used to model a local background. candidate peaks with p-values below a user-defined threshold  are identified. if negative control data are available, then also fdr is estimated. more specifically, the same parameters are used to determine the number of chip peaks over the control sample and the number of control peaks over the chip sample, and the fdr is defined by dividing the latter by the former. in the present study, the default p-value threshold was applied.

cisgenome scans the genome with a sliding window  and identifies regions with enriched read counts. the fdrs are estimated assuming that the background read occurrence follows a negative binomial distribution, which was suggested to provide a better fit to the real data than the  poisson distribution  <cit> . the fdr is determined by calculating the ratio between the number of peaks expected by the null model at a particular cutoff level and the observed number of peaks detected at the same level. in the present study, we identified regions at fdr <  <dig> , similarly as with findpeaks. in the presence of negative control data, a binomial model is used to determine whether the read enrichment relative to the control is significant. the distribution of the window-based read counts in the chip sample is compared with what is expected by a binomial distribution given the total count in the chip and control samples. the default fdr threshold of  <dig>  was considered. the directionality of the reads was utilized to refine the peak boundaries.

peakseq first constructs a similar read density map as findpeaks by extending the reads directionally to the average length of the dna fragments and determining their overlap along the genome. similarly as in macs, a candidate set of peak regions is then identified in a chip-sample assuming a local poisson background, taking into account also the variability in genomic mappability. finally, the significance of enrichment of these candidates is determined relative to a negative control sample using a binomial distribution, similarly as in cisgenome, assuming that under the null hypothesis the reads should occur with equal likelihood from the chip and control sample. to control fdr, the obtained p-values are adjusted using the procedure of benjamini and hochberg  <cit> . the default fdr threshold of  <dig>  was used.

hpeak identifies peaks using a two-state hidden markov model , whose states correspond to the binding sites and the background. the emission probabilities are described by two different poisson distributions. the significance of enrichment of the peaks is adjusted using the bonferroni correction for multiple testing. the default significance threshold of  <dig>  was applied.

datasets
to compare the peak detection methods across diverse studies, four different datasets were considered, which measure the binding of three human transcription factors, stat <dig>  nrsf  and foxa <dig> . the stat <dig> data are from our unpublished study, whereas the three other datasets are from publicly available sources. all the datasets were sequenced using the illumina's solexa sequencing technology  <cit> .

our in-house data measures the binding of stat <dig>  transcription factor in human t helper  cells. one of the samples is from naïve th precursor  cells, whereas the other two samples are activated and induced by il <dig> to polarize towards the th <dig> subtype . further details about the data and the biological conclusions will be presented elsewhere .

two of the public datasets measure the binding of the transcription factor nrsf  in jurkat t cells. the first nrsf dataset is from the study of  <cit>  and was downloaded from the illumina website  <cit> . it contains one nrsf chip sample and a corresponding negative control. the other nrsf dataset is from the study of  <cit>  and was downloaded from the quest website. it contains a monoclonal and a polyclonal nrsf chip sample as well as a control input sample. the foxa <dig> data measures the binding of foxa <dig>  transcription factor in mcf <dig> cells. it contains one foxa <dig> chip sample and one input control sample. the data were downloaded from the macs website  <cit> .

the stat <dig> read data were aligned to the human reference genome  using the short oligonucleotide alignment program soap  <cit> . the publicly available datasets were already aligned in the original studies and these preprocessed data were used. only uniquely mapped coordinates were considered for further analysis. the number of aligned reads for the different samples varied from  <dig>  to  <dig>  million .

evaluation procedure
the binding site detections with each algorithm were made using the individual chip samples alone  as well as with the corresponding negative controls . thus, in total, fourteen peak lists were generated for each chip sample. in the following, we refer to the results involving the control data by adding an additional c to the name of the method . in the stat <dig> data, the thp sample was used in place of a negative control, although it may contain also some true biological signal. this choice was motivated by the assumption that the relevant binding events do not yet occur in the thp samples  <cit> .

first, we evaluated the reproducibility of the methods across biological replicates in the nrsf datasets. this gives indications of the robustness of the methods, as the biologically relevant binding sites are expected to be detected in each replicate. the reproducibility between two peak lists was defined in terms of their overlap, following the approach of  <cit>  to deal with the ambiguity that a peak in one dataset may overlap multiple peaks in another dataset. more specifically, the peak regions from the two peak lists under comparison were first merged into a union set of n regions. these were then compared to the original two lists to determine the number of regions identified in both lists n <dig>  finally, the reproducibility was defined as n1/n, which obtains the value  <dig> if all the peaks are overlapping and the value  <dig> if none of the peaks overlaps.

second, the detected peaks were evaluated in terms of their overlap with high-scoring sequence motifs. it is known that transcription factors exhibit binding sequence specificities, and hence, the genomic coordinate of a peak should be marked by a canonical binding site motif  <cit> . since such motifs are known for the three transcription factors considered in this study , they were used as an external source of information to assess the performance of the peak detection algorithms. for each sample, the overlap of the predicted binding sites with the known motifs was determined using the genomatix regionminer tool with default settings  <cit> . to deal with the potential biases caused by the different peak widths, the motif z-scores were considered, which measure the overrepresentation of a motif against an equally sized sample of the genomic background. with genetrack and quest, which reported only a single coordinate for each peak,  <dig> bp sequences from around the peak calls were utilized, similarly as in  <cit> . these same regions were also used in the other overlap calculations.

finally, the performance of the peak detection algorithms was evaluated with respect to regions that were confirmed in independent qpcr experiments to be bound by the particular transcription factor  as well as regions that did not show binding  in these experiments. for nrsf, we used the  <dig> true positives and  <dig> true negatives given in  <cit> . for foxa <dig>   <dig> true positives and  <dig> true negatives were obtained from  <cit> . for stat <dig>  we have tested a total of  <dig> regions at various levels of read enrichment selected on the basis of manual inspection to verify the chip-seq results at  <dig> h . of these regions,  <dig> were confirmed to be bound by stat <dig>  the known true positive and true negative regions in each data allowed us to assess the performance of the methods in terms of their receiver operating characteristics , which consider both the sensitivity and specificity of the detections. additionally, an empirical fdr estimate was calculated as the proportion of false positives among the identified candidate peaks.

RESULTS
characteristics of the detected binding regions
we first investigated the characteristics of the detected binding sites in terms of an example region in the stat <dig> data . although the same region was detected with all the algorithms, there were marked differences in the region boundaries reported by the different software. in this example, peakfinder, peakseq and hpeak identified a relatively long region, whereas findpeaks, sissrs, macs and cisgenome reported shorter regions. genetrack and quest identified only single coordinates without boundary estimates. as genetrack was allowed to detect multiple peaks close to each other, three separate detection calls were produced. notably, the ~ <dig> bp region shared by all of the methods contained also a high-scoring stat <dig> sequence motif, suggesting that the detection is likely to be a true binding site. this was further supported by the control thp sample, which did not show any enrichment of reads in the region, and the detection was finally confirmed with qpcr. interestingly, another high-scoring binding motif was detected in the lower-enrichment region that was covered only by the peakfinder, peakseq and hpeak detections but missed with the other algorithms. the correctness of this detection remains to be shown in future experiments. in addition to being an example of a binding site, figure  <dig> provides also a representative illustration of the typical bimodality of the peak patterns caused by the fact that short reads are sequenced from both ends of the chip dna fragments.

to get a more general picture of the binding sites identified by the different algorithms, we calculated the average peak width for each nrsf, foxa <dig> and stat <dig> sample listed in table  <dig>  in general, peakfinder and peakseq gave the widest regions , whereas sissrs and cisgenome identified the narrowest peaks  among the methods that estimate the boundaries. the average differences between findpeaks, macs and hpeak were minor , but macs showed largest variability between the samples. in particular, macs resulted in narrow peaks  in our stat <dig> data, whereas it produced wider peaks  in the other datasets. the use of a control sample did not dramatically affect the average peak widths with any of the methods.

number of identifications
the number of detected binding sites varied greatly depending on the algorithm . peakfinder and quest produced systematically the lowest numbers of detections, whereas findpeaks, sissrs and macs tended to identify a larger number of peaks. genetrack, sissrs, cisgenome and hpeak showed enormous variability in the numbers of detections even between the samples measuring the same transcription factor. for instance, in the nrsf samples, the number of identifications ranged from ~3000- <dig> to over ~ <dig>  the investigation of the average overlap between the algorithms showed that most of the binding sites identified with the methods producing the shortest lists were also detected with the other approaches . for instance, nearly all the binding sites identified with peakfinderc were also identified with most of the other algorithms.

differences in biological 
CONCLUSIONS
a closer investigation of the binding site detections in the stat <dig> data revealed the more practical differences between the algorithms in real applications. strikingly, approximately half of the algorithms  suggested that there were more binding sites at  <dig> h than at  <dig> h, whereas another half  identified more binding sites at  <dig> h . the extreme cases were cisgenome/peakseq and sissrs/hpeakc, whose results varied from an ~8-fold decrease to a ~2-fold increase in the numbers of detections from  <dig> h to  <dig> h. this example demonstrates how the differences in the peak identification algorithms may lead to a notably variable overall picture of the dataset under analysis, emphasizing the importance of careful assessment of the resulting peak lists. a plausible technical explanation for the differences in the numbers of peak detections in different samples with different read distributions lies in the preferences of the algorithms. for instance, cisgenome and peakseq rely strongly on the peak heights, whereas sissrs and hpeak consider more the local statistical enrichment patterns. the biological significance of the identified stat <dig> binding sites and further analysis of the binding kinetics remains to be addressed in further studies.

in addition to the number of detected peaks, another practical question is their physical location in the genome. accordingly, we divided the detections into groups on the basis of their location within  <dig> kb upstream/downstream of a transcription start/end site, within a gene , or over  <dig> kb from a gene  using the cisgenome software  <cit> . again, drastic differences were observed between the algorithms . for instance, genetrack, quest and cisgenome suggested that only less than 40% of the stat <dig> binding sites at  <dig> h reside within  <dig> kb of a gene or are intragenic, whereas with peakfinderc, sissrsc, peakseq and hpeakc the corresponding estimate was over 70%.

reproducibility of the detections
the two nrsf datasets with biological replicate samples provided an opportunity to assess the performance of the algorithms internally by investigating their ability to reproduce the detections robustly across the replicates. when all the peaks were considered, the best reproducibility was observed with peakfinderc and quest . with each method, the use of a negative control sample improved consistently the reproducibility of the detections. in general, genetrack, sissrs, cisgenome and hpeak gave the lowest reproducibility values, which could to a large extent be attributed to the fact that huge differences were observed in the numbers of detections across the replicates. with these algorithms, the nrsf polyclonal sample produced markedly more detections than the other nrsf samples . peakfinderc and quest, on the other hand, identified only a relatively small number of peaks  and the number of peaks was consistent across all the three samples.

when considering only the top  <dig> or top  <dig> peaks with each algorithm, all the algorithms showed high reproducibility and the overall differences between the methods were typically negligible. only sissrsc showed somewhat lower reproducibility values than the other algorithms. the lower reproducibility of macs with top  <dig> peaks disappeared when the top  <dig> detections were considered.

external validation using binding motifs
a comparison of the detected peaks with high-scoring sequence motifs confirmed that all the algorithms identified binding sites at a highly significant overlap with the corresponding sequence motif . when the whole set of detected peaks was investigated with each algorithm , in the nrsf data, the most significant overlap was observed with quest, while there were no systematic differences between the other methods. with genetrack, sissrs, cisgenome and hpeak, however, the variability between the samples was large, the nrsf polyclonal sample performing considerably worse than the other two samples. in the foxa <dig> data, macsc was the best-performing approach in terms of the sequence motifs, whereas peakfinderc showed the least significant motif overlap. in the stat <dig> data, the most significant overlap was observed with findpeaks, while macs, which was among the best methods in the foxa <dig> data, was among the poorest approaches together with sissrs and cisgenome.

when focusing only on the top  <dig> candidates , the best-performing approaches in the nrsf and foxa <dig> datasets were quest and cisgenome, which produced typically relatively narrow peak regions. this is in line with the observation that all the methods are likely to perform reasonably well when detecting the most prominent peaks , in which case a more specific detection of the actual binding site can be considered as a benefit and is captured also by the motif z-score. in principle, a narrower peak width can indicate a better resolution and can be beneficial, for instance, for the discovery of de novo binding site motifs  <cit> . the top list size  <dig> produced similar results . in the stat <dig> data, the overall number of peaks was much lower than in the nrsf and foxa <dig> datasets , and several algorithms could detect only less than  <dig> peaks even if the detection thresholds were lowered from their default values. in the stat <dig> data, findpeaks remained the best-performing algorithm also when the top  <dig> detections were evaluated.

external validation using qpcr
to complement the motif overlap evaluations, qpcr-validated regions were used to assess the sensitivity and specificity of the methods . in the nrsf data, all the algorithms performed rather similarly in identifying the validated positive and negative regions both when considering the whole set of detections as well as when focusing on the top peaks only. in the foxa <dig> data, the qpcr validations supported further the good performance of macsc when all the detections were used in the evaluation, while only one of the top  <dig> binding sites was included in the set of validated regions. also in the stat <dig> data, the qpcr validations were well in line with the motif analysis results, suggesting the good performance of findpeaks in these data. importantly, besides demonstrating the impact of the dataset on the relative performance of the algorithms, the qpcr analyses supported the utility of the motif significance assessments in choosing a suitable algorithm for peak detection in cases in which the binding motif is known. in each dataset, the method with the most significant motif overlap was among the best algorithms in terms of the qpcr validations.

the qpcr validations enabled also to determine an empirical fdr for the detections. in the nrsf data, the empirical fdr was below  <dig>  with all the algorithms. in the foxa <dig> data, no negatives were detected with any of the algorithms, giving an empirical fdr estimate of  <dig>  in the stat <dig> data, the estimated fdr remained typically below  <dig> . notably, however, these values were often markedly higher than those suggested by the background models of the algorithms, supporting the earlier observation that especially the poisson-based randomization model can severely underestimate the fdrs  <cit> .

discussion
the present study evaluated from a practical point of view the performance of the currently available open source software for detecting transcription factor binding sites in chip-seq data. a main observation was that the choice of the algorithm may considerably affect the overall conclusions made from the data . moreover, there was no clear winner among the methods that would have outperformed the other approaches systematically in each dataset. instead, the choice of the best method was strongly dependent on the data under analysis . while quest performed well in the nrsf data, macs may be a better choice in the foxa <dig> data, whereas findpeaks showed good performance in the stat <dig> data. below we discuss some practical guidelines for the researchers, including  the choice of an appropriate algorithm for different study objectives,  the use of a negative control sample, and  the use of empirical validations.

in most of the currently published chip-seq studies, the choice of the peak detection algorithm lacks detailed motivation or description . our comparison demonstrates, however, that this choice warrants careful attention. while most computational methods perform well under some circumstances, their behaviour can vary markedly depending on the dataset under analysis. this is especially true when the aim is to detect all the potential binding sites of a particular transcription factor of interest. if only a small set of best candidate targets are to be detected, then all the methods performed relatively well in our comparisons . to identify the best candidates, the candidate binding positions can be prioritized using the peak magnitude scores or their p-values, provided by the peak detection software.

transcription
representative examples of recent chip-seq studies with publicly available datasets were collected from the gene expression omnibus . additionally, the public datasets used in the present study were included. the column algorithm indicates the algorithm applied in the original study. if other algorithms were also considered, they are listed in the brackets. the column qpcr validations indicates the level of experimental validation in terms of the numbers of validated regions.

when the goal is to identify a comprehensive set of regulatory interactions, the major challenge is to determine a suitable threshold to discriminate true binding sites from background noise. this was exemplified by the large differences in the numbers of peak calls observed with the different approaches . peakfinder and genetrack do not provide any statistical estimates of the fdr, making it difficult to choose an appropriate cutoff. although the other algorithms estimate also the statistical significance of the detections, the accuracy of the estimation can depend heavily on the choice of the selected null model  <cit> . while the simplest model assumes that the background read density is uniform along the genome and independent between the strands, several authors have observed that the sequenced control samples show highly non-uniform behaviour and, in some cases, their read density patterns are close to those expected from true binding sites  <cit> . this can be due to various reasons, such as sequencing and mapping biases, non-specific immunoprecipitation or differences in the chromatin structure  <cit> . therefore, the use of separate control samples has been suggested  <cit> , and was also supported in our comparisons . if experimentally determined true positive and true negative binding sites are available, then it is possible to calculate also an empirical fdr for the detections .

besides the inclusion of a control sample, another important decision concerns the type of an appropriate control. at least three types of controls have been considered: a non-immunoprecipitated fragmented dna sample   <cit> , a chip-seq sample using an unspecific antibody   <cit> , or a chip-seq sample under a different cellular condition   <cit> . further study is needed to determine which control sample type provides the best outcome in different algorithms. in addition, as the quality of the immunoprecipitating antibody critically affects the results, the actual chip experiment may also be repeated with different antibodies  <cit> .

if the binding motif of the transcription factor of interest is known, then it can provide useful information about the relative performance of the different approaches . however, there are also transcription factors that do not require a specific binding motif  <cit> . further information about the adequacy of the peak detection methods can be obtained by experimental validations . since confirmation studies on candidate binding sites are expensive and time-consuming, however, thorough experimental validations are relatively rarely done when reporting large-scale findings. moreover, it is worth noting that building an appropriate set of true negatives is a difficult task, and it has been suggested that the sets of the previously utilized true negatives may actually contain also true positives despite their low enrichment ratios in the qpcr validations  <cit> . how to choose the best method directly from the data remains a challenging future research question.

from the point of view of an ordinary user, a major complication of the peak detection software is the typically large number of adjustable parameters. while the default parameters are a natural choice and were applied also by us, they may not be optimal for the particular data under analysis. on the other hand, if an algorithm lacks the possibility to easily adjust the parameters properly, it can be regarded as a weakness of the method. other critical issues in chip-seq data analysis are the memory requirements for the computer and the diversity of the current data formats. the required input formats of the peak detection software as well as their output peak lists are far from being standardized, neither are the output formats produced by the different read alignment software. further technical challenges include, for instance, the quality of the aligned reads and the required depth of sequencing  <cit> . also the interpretation of the results poses its own challenges. even if a comprehensive and unbiased set of binding sites could be determined with chip-seq, the identified sites may not all be functional regulatory elements that have an impact on transcription. instead, it is possible that several non-functional detections are made as a consequence of biological noise  <cit> .

despite the challenges, the next-generation dna sequencing has a great potential to accelerate biological and biomedical research by enabling a comprehensive analysis of genomes, transcriptomes and interactomes to be performed routinely without having the resources of large genomic centres  <cit> . while several issues remain to be solved regarding, for instance, the optimization of the peak detection algorithms, already the current results support the utility of the chip-seq technique. in our comparisons, for example, all the algorithms identified binding sites with highly significant overlap with the corresponding known sequence motif , and the most prominent peaks were typically detected robustly across independent experiments . in addition to transcription factor binding, a wide range of other biological phenomena can be investigated, such as chromosome conformation, genetic variation, and rna expression  to detect, for instance, differential splicing, microrna and other non-coding rnas  <cit> .

with the growing importance of the technology, rigorous computational approaches to transform the large datasets into biological knowledge are required to truly leverage the potential of these data. rather than introducing a number of closely related algorithms, it is critical to objectively evaluate their performance to provide practical guidance to the researchers analysing their data and to the developers of the algorithms to evaluate their new ideas. an important future direction is also to effectively integrate chip-seq data with other types of datasets, such as those generated in sirna interference experiments, to improve the detection of target genes.

