BACKGROUND
the bacterial flagellum is an apparatus that projects outward from the cell membrane, and employs rotation of a flexible filament attached to a universal joint  for propulsion. the flagellum is made up of four components: the basal body, which houses the flagellar rotary motor and export apparatus; the rod, which spans the periplasm, peptidoglycan, and outer membrane; the hook, which acts as a universal joint; and the filament, which acts as the propulsion device . in order to construct a functional flagellum, the constituent proteins must first be synthesized in the cytoplasm and then be transported to their site of incorporation in a temporally and spatially regulated manner. a specialized type iii secretion system called the flagellar export apparatus is used to transport the individual components of the flagellum across the two cell membranes of gram-negative bacteria  <cit> . the bacterial flagellar export apparatus  is composed of a number of proteins, including two integral membrane proteins flha and flhb, that also contain globular cytoplasmic domains, four additional integral membrane proteins flio, flip, fliq, and flir, and two membrane-associated cytoplasmic proteins, flih and flii. other structural components of the flagellar basal body , and c-ring  are also required for flagellum assembly. in addition, enteric gram-negative bacteria have a number of substrate-specific chaperones associated with the flagellar export apparatus . these proteins act in concert with the flagellar export atpase flii in translocating partially unfolded substrates, such as the filament component flagellin, in an export-competent state through the basal body pore. ultrastructural and biochemical investigations of the flagellar basal body and the type iii secretion system indicate that these systems have evolved from a common ancestor  <cit> . in support of these observations, most of the flagellar export components have conserved orthologues  in the type iii secretion system of gram-negative pathogenic bacteria  <cit> , including flii , flih , flin , and flha   <cit> .

functions and molecular interactions similar to their flagellar counterparts have been demonstrated for some of the type iii export proteins   <cit> , and are generally assumed for the other components. for example, the salmonella and h. pylori flih proteins have been shown to interact with the highly conserved flii atpase  <cit>  and the flagellar rotor c-ring protein flin is also known to interact with flih in salmonella  <cit> . in type iii secretion systems, the flih homologue  has been shown to interact specifically with the respective flii homologue , as well as the corresponding flin homologue, hrcqb  <cit> . salmonella flih forms an elongated dimeric structure in solution  <cit> , and forms a 2flii complex  <cit> . residues 100– <dig> of salmonella flih are required for interaction with flii, residues 101– <dig> of flih are required for flih dimerization, and flih n-terminal residues contribute to binding to the enterobacterial flagellar chaperone flij  <cit> . in addition residues spanning amino acids 60– <dig> of flih appear important for inhibition of flii atpase activity as deletion of residues 60– <dig> enhances flii atpase activity in vitro  <cit> . furthermore, deleting either residues 70– <dig> or 90– <dig> of salmonella flih reduce the magnitude of flii atpase inhibition  <cit> . however, it is unclear how amino acids spanning residues 60– <dig> of salmonella flih affect flii atpase activity, although inhibition appears to be non-competitive in the related type iii system  <cit> . furthermore, a conserved axxxgmxxxa motif, which is the focus of this report, spans residues 59– <dig> in salmonella flih , suggesting that these flih gxxxg repeats may have a role in flii atpase regulation. in addition, the precise role of flih in flagellar protein secretion is not presently understood. a recent study examining the motility of bacteria with mutant flagellar proteins found that flii-null mutants are non-motile, flih-null mutants are weakly motile, and, interestingly, that flii/flih double mutants displayed greater  motility than flii-null mutants after extended incubation  <cit> . motivated by the realization that the mode of interaction between flii and flih is strikingly similar to that of the n-terminal α-helix of the f <dig> atpase α-subunit with the globular domain of the f <dig> atpase δ-subunit  <cit> , we have previously suggested that flih may function as a molecular stator in combination with flii during the export of flagellum components  <cit> . in support of this idea, we and other researchers have noted weak but significant sequence similarity between flih/yscl and the b-subunit of fof <dig> atpases .

the present study investigates a conserved gxxxg  sequence motif unique to the flagellar flih/yscl family of proteins. naming conventions for yscl-like proteins are rather inconsistent, as this protein often has different names in different organisms; for ease of reference, all yscl-like proteins will be referred to in this paper simply as "yscl". an alignment of the complete sequences of a representative group of flih and yscl sequences along with a schematic domain organization is provided in figures  <dig>   <dig> and  <dig>  the extreme n-terminal region of flih is very poorly conserved, but some sequence conservation is evident in the various bacterial groups , but not the yscl protein family. a gxxxg segment of variable length follows, then a poorly conserved segment likely to be helical in structure, followed by a well-conserved c-terminal domain known to be responsible for the interaction with the n-terminus of the flagellar/type iii atpase .

when we noticed the presence of conserved consecutive gxxxg repeats in flih/yscl, we asked if this motif had been previously observed in other types of proteins. lemmon et al.  <cit>  first discovered that specific interactions are required for the transmembrane helix-helix dimerization of glycophorin a. it was later shown that dimerization was mediated by a gxxxg-containing motif  <cit> . the gxxxg motif has been identified as the dominant motif in the transmembrane regions of hundreds of proteins  <cit> , and appears to play a critical role in the stabilization of helix-helix interactions. such motifs were subsequently observed in many soluble proteins  <cit> . the amino acid composition of the variable positions in the glycine repeats of soluble proteins is certain to be very different from that of transmembrane proteins; transmembrane proteins would contain mostly hydrophobic residues in the variable positions of the repeats, while the variable positions in soluble proteins would contain mostly hydrophilic residues. as such, the only commonality between glycine repeats in transmembrane proteins and glycine repeats in soluble proteins is likely to be the glycines found at every fourth residue. as glycine lacks a side chain, it is suitable for allowing the close packing of helices, and could hence facilitate helix-helix dimerization.

most annotated flih sequences contain a segment of repeats of the form axxxgmxxxa, where m can vary on average between  <dig> and  <dig> depending on the bacterial species. while there is some variation to this pattern, not all sequences contain the n-terminal-side axxx or the c-terminal-side xxxa, and flih proteins from some species have no gxxxg repeats at all. nevertheless, a significant proportion  of flih proteins extracted from the non-redundant sequence database  do exhibit the axxxgmxxxa pattern. in addition to this long axxxgmxxxa repeat segment, most flih proteins also contain one or more shorter repeat segments elsewhere in the primary sequence , which usually contain just a single axxxg, gxxxg, or gxxxa. these shorter repeat segments are very poorly conserved, do not contain an obvious preference for particular amino acids at any of the three middle non-glycine positions, and often contain proline. hence, these non-conserved gxxxg segments are unlikely to be either helical or biologically significant. to differentiate the two patterns, we will refer to the longest repeat segment in a particular flih protein as its "primary repeat segment". yscl proteins exhibit similar patterns, except that they generally have shorter primary repeat segments.

we report here a statistical characterization of the amino acids composing the variable positions in the primary repeat segments of a varied collection of flih and yscl sequences from different bacterial species. as they are analyzed separately, the specific portion of the repeat segments being discussed – axxxg, gxxxg, or gxxxa – will be referred to as the "repeat type". additionally, we make the distinction between the first, second, and third variable residue in a given repeat, which will be denoted as positions x <dig>  x <dig>  and x <dig>  respectively. below, we describe the analysis performed on flih, which is of primary interest due to its uniquely long primary repeat segments. some of the analysis described below was also performed for yscl; full details are provided in the results and methods sections.

to provide a general characterization of the glycine repeats in flih, some initial data were gathered, such as the number of proteins having a repeat segment flanked by axxx and xxxa, and the lengths of the primary repeat segments in each sequence. next, secondary structure prediction programs were employed to predict whether the glycine repeat segments are likely to adopt a helical conformation, as would be expected given the amino acid compositions of these repeats, as well as previous results concerning the role of glycine repeats in helix-helix dimerization. a multiple alignment of the glycine repeat segments of flih and yscl was then created, which provides insight into how flih/yscl proteins from different bacterial species relate to each other in terms of the length and composition of their primary repeat segments. the distribution of amino acids in the three variable positions in each repeat type was then determined. we hypothesized that the amino acid frequencies in the glycine repeats would differ significantly from the amino acid frequencies in the entirety of all the flih/yscl proteins; to provide support for this hypothesis, statistical tests were used to determine the probability that any differences found could have occurred by chance. to ensure that the tabulated amino acid frequencies and positional correlations were not simply the result of high sequence similarity due to sampling sequences that are phylogenetically closely related , we employed an overall 25% amino acid sequence identity cut-off to filter out highly similar flih sequences and select an approximately even sampling of the available flih sequences. this results in very little observable sequence similarity throughout the aligned flih sequences that were ultimately selected for the analysis . for the gxxxg motif region, there is always going to be evidence of phylogenetic signal due to the strongly conserved glycine residues  and there is certainly some conservation in the lengths of the repeats in sequences that are more closely related . however, the imposed 25% sequence identity cutoff in our data analysis has filtered most of the apparent sequence similarity in the variable regions of the repeat. this can be seen by comparing the similarity between any two aligned sequences both within the repeat region  and outside of the repeats . for flih, we calculated correlation coefficients between all possible pairs of amino acids, in all possible combinations of positions in the repeats, and used statistical methods to determine whether certain pairs of amino acids in specific positions are found together significantly more often than would be expected by chance. we hypothesized that certain pairs of amino acids in nearby positions, such as positions within the same repeat, or in adjacent repeats, would be highly correlated, while amino acids in positions farther away from each other would be unlikely to be strongly correlated, and that the correlations are due to selective pressure imposed by structural constraints on the gxxxg motifs. for instance, in α-helices, there is a well known incidence of oppositely charged residues  occurring in i, i+ <dig> or i, i+ <dig> pairs, therefore forming stabilizing intra-helical salt bridges, and these are typically not highly conserved interactions. rather they appear to be the result of random mutations and selective pressures to stabilize nearby charged residues within the context of the helical structure. similar results have been found for pair correlations in β-sheets  <cit> .

finally, we sought to determine how prevalent long glycine repeats are in other types of proteins not related to flih, and to identify a protein of known three-dimensional structure that contains a flih-like repeat segment that is involved in helix-helix dimerization. to address both goals, a large number of protein structures were downloaded from the protein data bank . these structures were searched for the presence of helices with glycine repeats, and one protein with a flih-like glycine repeat segment was chosen as a molecular model for the types of interactions that might occur in flih proteins.

the work presented here represents a comprehensive characterization of a relatively unusual primary sequence pattern. while this study focuses mainly on flih/yscl and their glycine repeat segments, the results should also add to our understanding of the general characteristics of glycine repeat-containing α-helices in water-soluble proteins.

RESULTS
sets of proteins acquired
flih proteins and yscl proteins were downloaded and filtered as described in the methods section to obtain a set of flih sequences and a set of yscl sequences where no sequence was more than 25% identical to any other sequence. after filtering,  <dig> flih sequences and  <dig> yscl sequences remained.

initial characterization of glycine repeat segments
initially, some general data regarding the composition of the  <dig> chosen flih sequences were gathered. the average number of gxxxgs found in a primary repeat segment was  <dig> , with a standard deviation of  <dig> ; the fewest number found in this set was  <dig>  while the greatest number was  <dig>  . although the longest repeat found in this dataset was  <dig>  there exist flih sequences with even longer repeats. for instance, the flih from e. coli strain  <dig>  contains a repeat of length 12; however, this sequence was excluded when imposing the 25% identity sequence cut-off. a histogram showing the number of flih sequences having primary repeat segments of different lengths is given in figure  <dig>  the majority of sequences have repeats with a length of  <dig> or less, while a few sequences have much longer repeats. interestingly, the distribution of the lengths of the primary repeat segments in a set of  <dig> flih sequences for which no sequence is more than 90% identical to any other sequence is very similar to that shown in figure  <dig>  indicating that bias arising from high sequence similarity in the available flih sequences used has little effect on the results. this histogram is available as additional file  <dig>  in contrast to flih, the primary repeat segments of yscl were much more uniform in length. five sequences had no repeat segment at all, while  <dig> sequences had a repeat of length  <dig> and  <dig> sequences had a repeat of length  <dig>  this stark difference in the distribution of the repeat lengths between flih and yscl invites speculation concerning the importance of the repeat in these two proteins. as flih apparently experiences selection pressure for longer repeats, but yscl does not, it suggests that longer repeats are advantageous to the function of flih, but not to yscl; however, the nature of this difference is unclear.

of the flih sequences that had at least one gxxxg , the repeat segments of  <dig> sequences were flanked by both an axxx on the n-terminal side and an xxxa on the c-terminal side. a lower number  contained only an initial axxx, while few sequences had only an xxxa at the end  or neither an n-terminal-side axxx nor a c-terminal-side xxxa . it thus appears that the initial axxx is more strongly conserved than the terminating xxxa. just two of the yscl sequences contained repeats with both the initial axxxg and the terminal gxxxa, and an equal number  contained only the initial axxxg or only the terminal gxxxa.

secondary structure prediction
several secondary structure prediction programs were used to predict the secondary structure of the primary repeat segments of selected flih and yscl proteins, and the prediction programs consistently and convincingly classified these regions as α-helical for all of the proteins tested. the tools used are given in  <cit> . thus, there is a strong basis for interpreting the sequence characteristics of the glycine repeat segments as being important either for helical stability, or for making helix-helix interactions.

multiple alignment of the glycine repeats
we have performed a multiple alignment of the glycine repeats in both flih  and yscl  to illustrate the composition of their repeat segments. the alignment was essentially carried out by hand and forces both the initial  and terminal  motif to be in the same register. one interesting observation in figure  <dig> is that sequences with shorter repeats appear to be more likely to have the initial axxx and the terminating xxxg than sequences with longer repeats, suggesting that longer repeats may compensate in some way for the absence of the alanine "caps".

calculating the amino acid distribution in the primary repeat segments
after this initial characterization of the glycine repeats, we then sought to determine the frequency of each amino acid in each position of each repeat type. figures  <dig> and  <dig> give these data for all three repeat types in flih, and just for gxxxgs in yscl . while the frequencies reported in figures  <dig> and  <dig> certainly appear to diverge significantly from what one might consider to be a "normal" distribution of amino acids, we confirmed this observation statistically. a χ <dig> test was used to determine whether the amino acid frequencies in each position – repeat-type combination was significantly different than the amino acid frequencies in the entirety of all the flih proteins. the x <dig>  x <dig>  and x <dig> positions in both axxxgs and gxxxgs all had p-values less than 10- <dig>  while those same positions for gxxxas had p-values of  <dig>  × 10- <dig>   <dig>  × 10- <dig>  and  <dig>  × 10- <dig> respectively. for yscl, the p-values for all three variable positions in the gxxxg repeats were less than 10- <dig> . thus, it can readily be seen that the amino acid distribution in the primary repeat segments is significantly different than the overall composition of the flih/yscl sequences. moreover, it is unlikely these frequencies are simply the product of phylogenetic signal as the sequence similarity between the proteins in the dataset is minimal, especially in the variable residues of the gxxxg repeats , rather we suggest that the observed amino acid frequencies at x <dig>  x <dig> and x <dig> more likely are the result of selective pressure arising from helical structural constraints imposed by the gxxxg motif and its possible structural role in flii atpase regulation. hence we suggest that the high frequencies of certain amino acids at positions x <dig>  x <dig> and x <dig> are simply the result of convergent evolution.

although the amino acid compositions in each position-repeat-type combination show distinct biases, there are also overriding similarities. the analysis below is specific to flih, but similar biases are seen with yscl. for instance, in the x <dig> position of axxxg repeats, arg is found at a much higher frequency  than it is in x <dig> of gxxxg  . tyr or phe account for more than 30% of the residues found in position x <dig> of axxxg but are never found in positions x <dig> or x <dig> of axxxg or very rarely for x <dig> or x <dig> of gxxxg. more apparent still is the bias in position x <dig> toward glu, which accounts for more than a third of the residues found in that position.

in gxxxg repeats, tyr and phe account for over 45% of the x <dig> positions, leu with 15% compared to zero in axxxg, and then arg and lys together making up approximately 15%. glu, gln, and ala together account for about 2/ <dig> of the residues in position x <dig>  of note is that gln makes up over 15% of the residues in the x <dig> position of gxxxgs, while the similar amino acid asn, differing from gln only by virtue of having one fewer methylene group in its side chain, is rarely found in that position.

it is also interesting to examine how the amino acid distribution differs in each of the three repeat types. in general, the amino acid distribution in each repeat position is fairly similar, with a general preference for ala, glu, gln, arg, lys, and tyr. however, there are some obvious differences: axxxgs and gxxxgs have a very high frequency of tyr or phe in position x <dig>  whereas these are comparatively rare in gxxxas. ala is quite common in position x <dig> of gxxxgs, but is less common in gxxxas and rare in axxxgs. arg is quite common in positions x <dig> and x <dig> in axxxgs and gxxxas, but is less common in gxxxgs.

more generally, figures  <dig> and  <dig> suggest that, particularly for gxxxgs, positions x <dig> and x <dig> are basically equivalent in their amino acid preferences, while the amino acid frequencies in position x <dig> are significantly different than that of x <dig> and x <dig>  this observation suggests that position x <dig> has a fundamentally different structural role than either positions x <dig> or x3; one possibility is that the amino acid in position x <dig> facilitates helix-helix interactions, while the amino acids in x <dig> and x <dig> are involved in maintaining helical stability.

in addition, the frequencies obtained using these flih and yscl datasets are very similar to those obtained when using sets of sequences where the maximum pairwise identity is 90%, rather than 25%. the frequency distribution for the 25% identity sets depicted in figures  <dig> and  <dig> is also provided for the 90% identity sequence sets in additional file  <dig>  this observation is consistent with the hypothesis that positions x1-x <dig> in the gxxxg repeats have undergone extensive mutation during the course of evolution, but have reached an equilibrium amino acid composition that is consistent with the structural and functional constraints placed on these motifs. that multiple combinations of a few amino acid types are observed, and not a distinct conserved sequence pattern at x1-x <dig>  suggests that there are multiple permutations of amino acid residues that equally fulfil the structural/functional requirements of these repeats in flih protein and its role in the flagellar export apparatus.

finding correlations between pairs of amino acids in specific positions in the primary repeat segments
we sought to find pairs of amino acids in specific positions that occur together significantly more often than would be predicted by chance. this analysis was performed only for flih; due to their short primary repeat segments, the same analysis would not be meaningful for yscl proteins. the pair correlation, a value that is greater than one if a particular pair of amino acids in a given pair of positions occurs more often than would be expected by chance, was calculated for each possible pair of amino acids, and in each possible pair of positions, within the primary repeat segments. the statistical significance for each correlation was computed using a χ <dig> test.

as stated earlier, we hypothesized that certain pairs of amino acids in nearby positions  would be significantly correlated, while there would be very few significant correlations, if any, when the positions were farther apart. table  <dig> shows the most significant correlations found.

pairs of amino acids that occur together at a significantly higher frequency than would be expected by chance  are shown. 1the number of times that this particular pattern occurs. 2the number of times more often than would be expected by chance that this pattern occurs. the p-value is the result of a χ <dig> test; see the experimental procedures section for full details.

as expected, most of the significant patterns found in table  <dig> involve residues that are nearby in the primary sequence, although there is an important exception. the most significant correlation is gxaxgxxxgxaxg, which is surprising given that it is a longer-range pattern. it is possible that the ala residues in the x <dig> positions contribute to helical stability via hydrophobic interactions or by some other mechanism. some correlations are readily explicable; for instance, the pattern gqxxgyxxg seems plausible, as the ne <dig> amide hydrogen of the gln residue at x <dig> should be able to either donate a hydrogen bond to the tyr residue oh or provide its n-h group to make an amino-aromatic interaction. furthermore, the ne <dig> amide hydrogen of a gln residue in position x <dig> can also donate a hydrogen bond to the backbone carbonyl oxygen of the first gly residue in the neighbouring twofold related gxxxg helix segment presuming standard gxxxg helix dimerization  <cit> . however, other patterns are more difficult to explain. for instance, the pattern gyxxgfxxg is found twice as often as would be expected by chance, but the phe and tyr side chains are unlikely to interact directly with each other, as both side chains would presumably be in a χ <dig> = 180° conformation favoured by aromatic residues in helices, preventing van der waals stacking of the aromatic rings. the strong positive correlation may indicate that the combination of these two residues in these positions is conducive to forming helix-helix interactions through close contacts of the aromatic side chain on one helix with the glycine backbone atoms on the adjacent helix, again assuming standard gxxxg helix dimerization.

identifying glycine repeats in the helices of other proteins
a set of  <dig>  proteins were downloaded from the pdb, and the helices from each protein were examined to determine the presence and length of any glycine repeats. because gxxxg is the dominant motif in flih proteins, these helices were examined only for gxxxgs; axxxgs and gxxxas were ignored. this analysis is similar to that performed by kleiger et al.  <cit> , who examined another non-redundant pdb set and found that  <dig> % of the helices that they examined contained the gxxxg motif. in the present analysis, a total of  <dig>  unique helices were examined, and the frequencies of different lengths of glycine repeats are shown in table  <dig> 

a total of  <dig>  unique helices from  <dig>  pdb proteins were searched for the presence of gxxxg repeats. the number of helices containing a repeat of each length is shown.

the most obvious conclusion that can be drawn from the data in table  <dig> is that the long primary repeat segments found in some of the flih proteins are – at least as far as this dataset is concerned – absolutely unique, which is quite surprising given how nature has a tendency to reuse the same constructs. information regarding the seven helices that contained a gxxxgxxxgxxxg repeat is provided in table  <dig>  the amino acids in the variable positions of these repeats are predominantly hydrophobic, and it is obvious that none of these repeat segments are similar to those found in flih.

of the  <dig>  unique helices examined form pdb entries, just  <dig> contained the gxxxgxxxgxxxg motif. for each sequence, the corresponding pdb id is given, along with the identifier of the helix in which the motif is found.

the structure of glycine repeat-containing helices in other proteins as a model for flih
although no crystal structure has been solved for any flih protein, one can still obtain insight into the structure of the flih glycine repeats by examining the crystal structures of other proteins that also have glycine repeats. unfortunately, there are no solved structures of proteins having long glycine repeats. the best alternative would be to use one of the proteins given in table  <dig>  but unfortunately the amino acid composition of the glycine repeats in these helices is so unlike that of the flih proteins that none would make a good model for the type of interaction that might be formed between helices in flih.

thus, the remaining approach is to find a protein that contains a single gxxxg repeat having flih-like amino acids in the variable positions. in their analysis of helical interaction motifs in proteins, kleiger et al.  <cit>  provide a table of proteins that contain gxxxg repeats that mediate helix-helix interactions. the glycine repeat in each pdb file given by kleiger and co-authors was identified, and it was found that some of these contained amino acids in the variable positions that were similar to the amino acids that are commonly found in the glycine repeats in flih.

we chose e. coli site-specific recombinase  as a model for helix-helix dimerization in flih. this protein contains the glycine repeat gqarg, which – while not the archetypical flih repeat – contains residues in x <dig>  x <dig>  and x <dig> that are represented in at least moderate amounts in the same position in flih repeats. there are proteins given by kleiger et al. that contain repeats with variable amino acids more closely matching those usually found in flih . however, 1hjr was chosen because it features two identical glycine repeat segments  that dimerize, whereas the helix containing the glycine repeat in 1dbt dimerizes with a helix that does not contain a gxxxg. given that two flih proteins dimerize to form a heterotrimeric complex with flii  <cit> , and that many flih proteins contain several repeats throughout the protein, it seems likely that, in flih, dimerization would occur between two helices that both contain glycine repeats, making 1hjr a better model than 1dbt. see figure  <dig> for a molecular model of the gxxxg helix-helix dimer in this protein.

parts  and  of figure  <dig> suggest that interactions between adjacent glycine residues may have an important role in the dimerization process, as the lack of a bulky side chain in this residue allows a c-h... o hydrogen bond to form between the two gly residues. in addition, the closest contacts between residues with side chains appear to be between the x <dig> position in the first helix and the x <dig> position of the second twofold symmetry-related helix. in the case of 1hjr, the ne of the arg residue in position x <dig> donates a hydrogen bond to the oe <dig> oxygen atom of the gln residue in x <dig> on the opposite helix. although residues in positions x <dig> and x <dig> can also make interactions with the adjacent twofold symmetry-related helix, they do not appear to be as close together in space.

discussion
functional significance of the variability in length of glycine repeats in different flih proteins
given the large amount of variability in the lengths of the glycine repeat segments in different flih proteins, it begs the question as to whether helix-helix dimerization or some other property inherent to the gxxxg sequences is functionally important in flih. if so, it would imply that one of two things is true: either the flih proteins with few or no glycine repeats are able to form helix-helix dimers anyway, perhaps due to the presence of some other motif, or that these flih proteins assume some other structure that happens to be functionally equivalent to the helix-helix dimers that are presumably found in the gxxxg repeat-rich flih proteins. it seems possible that this distinction could be the result of flih genes ancestrally acquiring a gxxxg segment that has over time undergone convergent evolution, with two or more ancestral proteins evolving semi-independently into a functionally similar end product – some evolving into the glycine repeat-rich flih proteins, and others evolving into flih proteins lacking these repeats. the extremely low sequence identity between many flih proteins would also support this hypothesis. this also raises the question of how such repeats might evolve. comparison of closely related flih gxxxg sequence repeats from blast searches  suggests that additional repeats are likely added one at a time in four residue steps. how this might occur during dna replication or recombination is not known. the evolution of multiple short sequence motifs, although a challenging problem, is outside the scope of this analysis, but is certain to attract the attention of other researchers in the future.

comparison of glycine repeat frequencies with quantitative α-helix propensities
it is interesting to compare the amino acid frequencies given in figures  <dig> and  <dig> with the experimentally-derived propensity of each amino acid to be in an α-helix. the scale derived by pace and scholtz  <cit>  assigns a number between  <dig> and  <dig> kcal/mol to each amino acid, with higher energies reflecting decreased helix propensity. according to their scale, ala has the highest helix propensity, while pro has the lowest. consistent with this scale, figures  <dig> and  <dig> show that four of the nine position – repeat-type combinations contain ala at a relatively high frequency . in contrast, leu, the second-most favourable helix-forming residue, is present at high frequencies  only in position x <dig> of gxxxg repeats. glu and gln, which are found at high frequency in the glycine repeats, have only moderate helix propensity according to pace and scholtz's scale .

it is possible that the amino acid composition required for helix-helix dimerization is distinctly different than that found in a typical α-helix. for instance, we have argued above that the hydrogen bonding capability of side chains  in positions x <dig> and x <dig> may be very important in side chain-side chain or side chain-backbone interactions in dimeric gxxxg helix-helix interactions. further work would involve careful structural and biochemical characterization of various idealized gxxxg motifs in peptides and proteins.

it is important to acknowledge that many different scales have been developed for measuring the α-helix propensity of the amino acids, and although they are mostly consistent with one another, each scale is derived from a unique set of experimental parameters. in this case, we have chosen to compare our results with pace and scholtz's scale, but other scales are qualitatively very similar, with ala, glu, met, leu, phe, lys and gln generally acknowledged as being helix forming residues. for instance, one secondary structure propensity scale that is commonly found in biochemistry textbooks lists glu as the most favorable helix residue, which is more consistent with the composition of the glycine repeats in flih. however, this same scale also lists tyr as being somewhat unfavourable in helices, whereas in flih tyr is strongly favoured in position x <dig> of axxxg and gxxxg motifs. this underscores the often stated caveat that context is everything in protein structure. the presence of glycine in such helical segments reinforces this point, as glycine residues are not normally acknowledged as being helix formers except within certain local sequence contexts.

looking beyond the pdb to find proteins with glycine repeats
we report that there are no sequences found in the pdb set that we downloaded containing helices with glycine repeats anywhere near the length of those found in some flih proteins. as a relatively small fraction of all known protein sequences have had their structures solved, one would have a better chance of finding long glycine repeats by searching a larger database of protein sequences , such as the swiss-prot database. some preliminary analysis was performed as a starting point for addressing this problem. the entire swiss-prot database, which consisted of  <dig>  sequences at the time that it was downloaded, was searched for flih-like glycine repeat segments. of course, since these sequences do not contain secondary structure information, there was no way to limit the search to α-helices. eighteen sequences were found that contained repeat segments of length  <dig> or longer; however, all of these segments consisted of low-complexity repeats , and thus were in no way analogous to repeats in flih. the longest glycine repeat segment that was not a low-complexity repeat was of length  <dig>  which was found in a presumably uncharacterized protein from rickettsia japonica simply called " <dig> kda surface antigen" . further analysis would have to be done with this swiss-prot-derived sequence information in order to identify repeat segments that are similar to those found in flih.

CONCLUSIONS
while many different short protein sequence motifs have been characterized, the glycine repeats in flih and yscl are an unusual example. firstly there is an obvious structural hypothesis to put the general features of the sequence motif in context and amino acid secondary structure preferences for residues found in the repeats strongly suggest an α-helical structure. however, not all observed pairwise residue correlations in adjacent repeats are entirely well-explained within the context of the presented structural model. in addition we have no plausible explanation for why only flih proteins, and no other sequences, contain these unique gxxxg repeats. there is also no obvious reason or explanation for the highly variable number of repeats in different flih sequences. however, sequence deletions in salmonella flih that affect in vitro atpase hydrolysis assays for a flii:flih complex  overlap with one or more of the salmonella flih gxxxg repeats   <cit> . this suggests that secondary interactions between flii and flih, in addition to the well-known interaction between the c-domain of flih and the n-terminal  <dig> residues of flii, may depend critically on the presence of the gxxxg motif  <cit> . studies on the atpase activities and/or export capability of flii:flih pairs from other motile bacteria with engineered deletions in the flih gxxxg repeats would likely shed light on the importance of the gxxxg repeats in flagellar protein export. while the extremely long length of the repeats in some flih proteins implies that the repeats may cooperate to perform an important functional or structural role, the fact that other flih sequences have short repeats segments, or even no repeat segment at all, would suggest otherwise. alternately, another unidentified protein involved in the flagellum export pathway may be able to compensate for deletion of the gxxxg motifs in flih. given the likely structural constraints on flih participating in the flagellar export pathway via interactions with flii, flin and other proteins at the base of the flagellar export pore, it will be interesting to see if more than one protein participates in interactions with the flih gxxxg motifs. it is also interesting that extremely long glycine repeats evolved in flih, but not in its type iii secretion homologue yscl, and this may actually tell us something, albeit cryptically, about differences in the two export systems. the extremely biased amino acid composition of the glycine repeats suggests that these regions may adopt nonstandard helix-helix tertiary or quaternary interactions that will be of interest for structural biologists to elucidate. lastly, and perhaps most interestingly, the extreme rarity of this motif in other proteins is very surprising given that nature tends to find similar structural solutions to a biological problem multiple times. crystal structures and careful biochemical/biological analysis of these proteins should ultimately be able to address these fascinating issues.

