BACKGROUND
scarless, site-directed mutagenesis on a bacterial chromosome is often a preferred method for studying a particular region of dna. this is due to the locational relevance and stability of the construct. the approach of constructing mutations on plasmids is still used consistently for many applications but is not always appropriate in the case of deletion mutations and vaccine therapy. in the case of live bacterial vaccines, inserting heterologous antigens on surface expressed proteins of bacteria has provided an efficient means to display immunogenic antigens. however, using plasmids for expression of these antigens comes with the risk of posing a metabolic burden on the bacterial cell, which causes decreased fitness or loss of the plasmid.

still, several challenges exist for bacterial genomic mutagenesis and include the following: designing and creating delivery vectors that carry target genes with desired modifications, overcoming the host restriction system, avoiding the cause of a polar effect on downstream sequences, and eliminating unwanted scar sequences or antibiotic genes on the genome. all of these challenges have been confronted and either completely or partially overcome using a set of similar techniques. for example, a mutational strategy using red recombinase was introduced in escherichia coli as well as in salmonella typhimurium which resulted in site-directed, chromosomal insertions or deletions but still had the problem of extraneous dna left behind on the genome  <cit> . additionally, another method was designed in which foreign epitopes were added to the c-terminal end of genes in s. typhimurium, yet, as before, an antibiotic gene or frt scar sequence will remain on the genome  <cit> . more desirable would be a design scheme which would allow the epitope insertion at any location within a gene but without any additional scar sequence remaining. therefore, improvements to this method were made, using the sce-i endonuclease as a counter-selection tool, which could produce a scarless mutation and eliminate extraneous dna or antibiotic resistance genes in the final mutational construct  <cit> . by a stimulated, double-strand break of the dna, markerless mutations were constructed on bac clones  <cit>  as well as on the e. coli genome  <cit> . yet, these protocols using sce-i counter-selection require cloning and designing repeat sequences flanking the dna of interest. the repeat sequences are the key elements of intramolecular recombination, and, in some cases, the variability of chromosomal recombination requires extra screening by pcr to determine which clones are positive mutants. finally, a transposon-based method has been established which also uses red recombinase and sce-i counter-selection to construct site-directed mutations but without the need for cloning or designing repeat sequences  <cit> . this protocol for transposon mutagenesis requires amplifying open reading frames of genes from e. coli and performing in vitro transposition using these pcr products. because pcr products ranged from 102– <dig> bp in length, the transposon could be flanked by approximately 50– <dig> bp of homology to the corresponding genomic site. the flanking sequences provided by pcr products reduce the need for designing sequences to facilitate recombination and also has the potential for providing greater lengths of homology. this might be more important for organisms, other than e. coli, to overcome unique restriction systems. for example, homologies ranging from 36– <dig> nucleotides are significant enough to allow recombination in e. coli by red recombinase  <cit> , but it has been reported that salmonella enteritica serovar enteritidis  may require  <dig> bp –  <dig> kb of sequence homology for recombination to be efficient  <cit> .

presently, we have applied techniques from the afore mentioned transposon-based method that allows scarless mutations  <cit>  with an overlapping extension pcr strategy to chauffeur linear dna fragments into a specific location on a bacterial genome  <cit> . pcr products were designed to carry insertion sequences flanked by 200– <dig> bp of homology to the target site on the chromosome. the resulting method uses the tailored-designed pcr products to conduct a two-step, site-directed mutation inserting a specific nucleotide sequence into the s. enteritidis genome without leaving a scar. in the present study we inserted a section of the m2e epitope   <cit>  from influenza a virus, a domain of cd <dig>   <cit> , also known as cd <dig> ligand, or a combination of both into the outer membrane protein lamb gene of s. enteritidis in order to investigate the potential for a salmonella-based vaccine against avian influenza virus.

RESULTS
overview of mutational strategy
the goal of this study was to devise an efficient strategy to make markerless, site-directed mutations on a bacterial genome, using s. enteritidis as a model organism. the experimental method made use of overlapping extension pcr, the red recombinase system, and an intermediary insertion of the i-scei endonuclease recognition site as a counter-selection marker. the overall strategy is shown in figure  <dig>  overlapping extension pcr was used to produce linear dna with long flanking homology to the genome. the red recombinase system was used to mediate recombination between incoming linear, pcr-generated dna with the bacterial genome. in the two-step mutation process, the i-scei site/kanamycin resistance  cassette was first inserted into the chromosome in the lamb gene by homologous recombination. then, this mutation was replaced with the desired insertion sequence . to make the replacement, a pcr product carrying the desired insertion sequence was added simultaneously with a plasmid encoding the i-scei endonuclease enzyme used for counter-selection between the first and second mutations.

i-scei site/kmr insertion mutation
the first mutation step involved designing a pcr fragment, pcr-a, which would serve as the carrier of the i-scei site/kmr cassette to be inserted into the lamb site. pcr-a consisted of the i-scei enzyme recognition site adjacent to the kmr gene with approximately 200– <dig> bp of flanking dna on each end homologous to the upstream and downstream regions of lamb loop  <dig> insertion site . the fragment was introduced into s. enteritidis cells expressing red recombinase enzymes. this step proved to be straightforward, and selecting for kmr colonies was the first criteria for identifying potential positive clones. after screening a few colonies by colony pcr, positive clones were sequenced for the desired inserted i-scei site/kmr sequence, and the identified mutants in s. enteritidis were designated se <dig> 

genomic replacement of i-scei/kmr with lm <dig>  cd154s, combination sequence i or combination sequence ii
the second mutation step required constructing a pcr fragment, referred to as pcr-b, consisting of the final insertion sequence  flanked by lamb homologous fragments. pcr-b amplicons have no selection marker and must be counter-selected after replacement for the previous i-scei site/km r mutation in se <dig>  plasmid pbc-i-scei encodes the chloramphenicol resistance  gene and the i-scei enzyme, which will cut the genome at the i-scei site of se <dig>  therefore, pbc-i-scei was electroporated into se <dig> along with pcr-b. after recombination of pcr-b to replace pcr-a, positive clones were chosen based on the ability to grow on chloramphenicol  but not on kanamycin . after dna sequencing of mutants to confirm successful recombination of pcr-b into se <dig>  the strains were designated se <dig>  se <dig>  se180a, and se <dig> for insert sequences lm <dig>  cd154s, 3-cd154s-3-lm2- <dig>  and 4-m2ea-4-m2ea-4-cd154-4-lm2-4-lm2- <dig>  respectively. for electroporation of lm <dig> and cd154s pcr-b products, at least  <dig> colonies were cmr. to test efficiency of counter-selection, fifty cmr colonies from each the lm <dig> and the cd154s electroporation reaction were screened by restreaking on km plates. for both lm <dig> and cd154s clones, 96% of each proved to be cmr but km sensitive . ten random clones for each the lm <dig> and cd154s insertion were used for pcr with lam 3f and lam 3r then digested using unique restriction enzymes sites for each insertion sequence. 100% of clones tested by digestion were positive for the desired mutation sequence, concluding the reliability and high efficiency of this selection scheme. sequencing results in figure  <dig> prove the replacement of the new sequence  exactly into the loop  <dig> region without the addition of extraneous nucleotides.

lm <dig> antibody responses in chickens
after introducing attenuating mutations in the aroa gene of se <dig> and se180a and in the aroa and htra genes of se <dig>  the resulting strains were designated se <dig>  se180b and se <dig>  respectively. lm <dig> antibody responses were analyzed using serum from chickens challenged with saline, s. enteritidis Δaroa, se <dig>  se180b or se <dig>  elisa results showed  <dig> ,  <dig>  and  <dig>  fold increases for se <dig>  se180b and se <dig>  respectively in production of lm <dig> antibodies compared to s. enteritidis Δaroa alone . this clearly indicates the ability of the inserted epitopes to be properly expressed.

CONCLUSIONS
here, we have reported scarless, site-directed mutagenesis performed in s. enteritidis. the described protocol proves the ability of making exact mutations by inserting short sequences ranging from 24– <dig> nucleotides, without any excess sequence, into the lamb gene of s. enteritidis genome. the basis for this method, which uses pcr products consisting of long homologous fragments flanking an insertion sequence along with the functions of red recombinase, helps dodge the s. enteritidis restriction system. more significantly, we have provided a means to quickly produce bacteria expressing heterologous epitopes on the cell surface, which can then be tested for vaccine potential. this scarless, site directed mutation strategy overcomes the difficulties of chromosomal mutation and is simple in the design and methods used. first, primers for overlapping pcr must be designed. then conventional techniques using pcr, dna purification and electroporation can complete the project. electroporation results as well as screening for mutants on antibiotic media are effective and convenient. one potential drawback of the experimental design is that the final mutants will still carry the pbc-i-scei plasmid which has the cmr gene. to make this mutational strategy more significant for vaccine development, constructing a temperature-sensitive plasmid expressing i-scei enzyme to replace pbc-i-scei would allow for a final bacterial vector free of antibiotic genes. however, we found that pbc-i-scei is not stable in the cells upon infection of chickens. when we recover these strains after vaccination of chickens, usually most of them do not retain cm resistance, indicating frequent loss of the plasmid during infection. such colonies isolated and verified to have lost pbc-i-scei could be considered directly as vaccine candidates. on the other hand, an alternative method has been described which uses suicide plasmids to introduce simultaneously the foreign insert sequence plus the i-scei site and i-scei enzyme  <cit> . the disadvantage is that these plasmids result in wild type and mutant alleles causing decreased efficiency of positive mutant selection. also, extra cloning is required for plasmid construction, and a modular intermediate, allowing for various epitope insertions, would not be available due to the design scheme.

when creating insertion mutations, the length, nature and location of the inserted sequence will be a factor of proper expression and sustained fitness of the organism. a possible hindrance in expressing foreign dna in bacterial cells is the unknown ability of the organism to properly express functional eukaryotic proteins or peptides in the same fashion as the native organism. when applicable, our strategy of inserting into the genome short, foreign epitope sequences, which have been codon-optimized, as a fusion protein may largely circumvent this potential problem. currently, we cannot confirm an upper limit on the added nucleotide capacity of loop  <dig> but are continuing to make more mutations with longer sequences. we have already successfully inserted sequences of length  <dig>   <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> nucleotides in this loop  <dig> region, yet experimental results seem to indicate that longer inserts may have decreased the invasive ability of s. enteritidis during chicken infection . on the other hand, chicken serum antibody responses testing the in vivo expression of all ranges of insertion sequences have shown significantly increased lm2-specific antibody titers in chickens challenged with the epitope mutants compared to those challenged with saline or s. enteritidis Δaroa alone . experiments are underway to further characterize the immunogenic potential of the vaccine strains developed in this study.

finally, this site-directed, scarless genomic mutagenesis strategy has opened up many opportunities to manipulate and examine the genome of s. enteritidis with acute specificity. the possibilities for vaccine prospects include targeting other genes of interest with immunogenic flagging potential as has been done with flagellin and secreted proteins  <cit> . also, live attenuated vaccines can be produced by conducting scarless deletions of virulence genes.

previously, it was demonstrated that transposons, containing the kmr gene and the sce-i site, could be inserted into random chromosomal locations, including  <dig> genes  <cit> . therefore, the sce-i site could serve well as a counterselection marker, replacing altered alleles regardless of the location, directly supporting the feasibility of this newly described mutagenesis protocol working in other chromosomal contexts as well. thus, this protocol could be used to explore other areas of research by adding epitope tags to proteins, adding or deleting promoters to assess gene contribution and function or creating site-specific insertion or deletion mutations. furthermore, this method for conducting scarless, site-directed mutations has potential in other gram-negative bacteria and would be especially helpful for those organisms, other than e. coli, which may also need long sequence homology for efficient recombination.

