BACKGROUND
the widespread occurrence of outcrossing sexual reproduction has puzzled evolutionary biologists since darwin, as reproduction either through self-fertilisation or parthenogenesis provides immediate advantages  <cit> . one of such key advantages is evident during the colonisation process  <cit> , as a single selfing hermaphrodite or parthenogenetic individual can found a new population. organisms with mixed reproductive strategies allow a unique direct comparison of the relative advantages of different reproductive modes  <cit> . mixed strategies often have a geographic component  which reflects the interplay between historical and selective factors  <cit> . the process of recolonisation of northern areas during interglacial periods of the pleistocene might have favoured passively dispersing parthenogens or selfing hermaphrodites. as a consequence, in temperate organisms with mixed reproductive strategies, hermaphroditism is often found in areas previously covered by glaciers or permafrost and therefore, recolonisation must have taken place after the last glacial maximum. despite this, ecological correlates have been intensively sought to explain such geographic patterns adaptively  <cit> , whereas the phylogeographic context of mixed reproductive patterns has only recently begun to be investigated  <cit> .

the eurasian tadpole shrimp triops cancriformis  has a mixed reproductive strategy which includes hermaphroditism, androdioecy  and bisexuality  <cit> , the latter being considered to be the ancestral condition  <cit> . the currently recognized subspecies t. c. simplex  and t. c. mauritanicus  are considered to be bisexual, with equal or male biased sex ratios  <cit> . the nominal subspecies t. c. cancriformis, occurring in central and northern europe and a disjunct area in japan, includes hermaphrodite and androdioecious populations  <cit> . the reproductive strategy in t. c. cancriformis populations is controversial, although there is evidence to suggest that 'females' are in fact hermaphrodites as they can reproduce in isolation  <cit>  and ovotestes are present  <cit> . however, females from a german t. c. cancriformis population apparently lacked testicular tissue  <cit>  suggesting that parthenogenesis – or a mixture of bisexual and hermaphroditic reproduction in some populations – cannot be ruled out. our preliminary microsatellite data  <cit>  show significant heterozygote deficiencies in many populations, and genotyping of individuals reared in isolation and their offspring supports hermaphroditism. thus, and following sassaman  <cit>  we consider some t. c. cancriformis populations to be androdioecious, as populations consist of variable proportions of hermaphrodites and males, with some populations being made solely of selfing hermaphrodites. as in other androdioecious branchiopods, t. c. cancriformis hermaphrodites can reproduce either by selfing or by outcrossing with males.

t. cancriformis inhabits temporary freshwater ponds and all three reproductive modes lead to the production of resistant diapausing cysts, which survive in the pond sediments during drought periods. these cysts are also the means of passive dispersal by wind, water currents or downstream floods, and birds  <cit> , amphibians or hoofed animals  <cit> . an indication of the vagility of such cysts is that populations occur on remote islands, and are apparently found wherever suitable habitats are available  <cit> . evidence for wide notostracan distribution before the pleistocene can be derived from its abundant fossil record dating back to the carboniferous or possibly up to the devonian period  <cit> . in fact, the striking morphological similarity of some upper triassic triops sp. fossils from germany and extant t. cancriformis  <cit>  makes this notostracan one of the best examples of morphological stasis and 'living fossils'  <cit> . thus, the potentially high dispersal abilities of their diapausing cysts and the possibility of hermaphrodite reproduction could account for the wide distribution of t. cancriformis.

here we present a phylogeographic analysis of european t. cancriformis in the context of its reproductive mode variation. so far, attempts at investigating the genetic variability of t. cancriformis have been hampered by its low genetic variability  <cit> , therefore our phylogeographic survey of t. cancriformis is based on sequence variation on over  <dig> bp of mitochondrial dna containing highly informative mitochondrial genes. we hypothesize, in agreement with longhurst  <cit> , that hermaphrodite or androdioecious populations should occur in areas unsuited for the species during pleistocene glacial maxima , and that therefore must have been recently colonised. further, n european populations should be composed of one or few closely related lineages reflecting a recent range expansion of hermaphroditism and/or androdioecy. in contrast, glacial refugia in s europe should contain bisexual populations with high haplotype diversity and high population structuring. to test these hypotheses, we analysed the geographic distribution of inferred reproductive modes based on reviewed and re-analysed data concerning sex-ratio in this species and new critical data of our own. in addition, we screened a large sample of populations of the three recognised subspecies for nucleotide sequence variation in two mtdna genes . the phylogeographic pattern is interpreted in the context of the inferred population reproductive mode. our results provide insights into the evolution of reproductive mode and population diversification in triops.

RESULTS
mtdna haplotype diversity
a total of  <dig> t. cancriformis individuals from  <dig> ponds were sequenced for two mitochondrial gene fragments: a  <dig> bp sequence of the cytochrome c oxidase  <dig> gene  and a  <dig> bp fragment comprising partial sequences of atp synthase fo subunits  <dig>  and  <dig>  genes . given that the partition-homogeneity test did not find significant differences between both fragments , we combined them into a single alignment with a total length of  <dig> bp for phylogenetic analysis.

p, preserved individuals collected in the wild; h, preserved individuals from laboratory rearing; c, cyst

overall  <dig> variable nucleotide sites,  <dig> of them parsimony informative, were identified in the combined alignment. excluding the iberian  and moroccan  t. c. mauritanicus specimens,  <dig> sites remained variable and  <dig> sites were parsimony informative. comparing the coi and atpase  fragments separately we found within the coi fragment a total of  <dig> substitutions on 1st codon position,  <dig> on 2nd and  <dig> on 3rd positions, which resulted in nine amino acid changes. the atpase fragment is characterised by  <dig> changes on 1st codon position,  <dig> on 2nd and  <dig> at 3rd codon position which result in  <dig> amino acid changes. the combined alignment was moderately a+t rich .

despite sequencing over  <dig> bp of mtdna, overall haplotype diversity was low, with only  <dig> mtdna haplotypes identified in the combined alignment. eleven of those haplotypes were found in the  <dig> t. c. cancriformis populations sampled. fourteen out of the nineteen identified haplotypes were found in single populations , while one haplotype  was found in two nearby populations in germany , h <dig> was found in a set of four nearby ponds in the area of königswartha, and h <dig>  h <dig> and h <dig> were common and widespread, found in six, nine and three ponds respectively. h <dig> was found in the iberian individuals from espolla  and el puig , which had been previously identified as t. c. simplex  <cit> , as well as in individuals of the nominal subspecies from döberitzer heide , königswartha pond  <dig> and  <dig>  and rhine .

the number of haplotypes per population ranged from 1– <dig> , with the maximum found in königswartha  . given the low level of genetic diversity found in our preliminary analysis, we optimised our resources by increasing the number of bp sequenced per individual and the number of populations surveyed, instead of the number of individuals sequenced per population.

phylogenetic relationships
both maximum likelihood and bayesian analyses produced identical topologies showing two highly divergent and strongly supported monophyletic lineages . the first lineage is represented by t. c. mauritanicus haplotypes  . the second lineage includes all haplotypes from the subspecies t. c. cancriformis and t. c. simplex . despite the low genetic diversity within t. c. cancriformis/simplex, two divergent clades  were identified. the closely related haplotypes h <dig> to h <dig> within clade a occurred from e spain to n and c europe and the japanese population  . this group includes the three most common and widespread haplotypes  and a cluster of rare, geographically restricted haplotypes differing from them in single substitutions. in contrast, haplotypes from the southern populations within clade a  are more divergent and differ in  <dig> and  <dig> respectively substitutions from h <dig>  the two morphologically described subspecies t. c. cancriformis and t. c. simplex, which show different reproductive modes, are not represented by distinct monophyletic lineages, as t. c. simplex individuals from some east iberian populations  share haplotype h <dig> with five t. c. cancriformis individuals from four different populations in germany. clade b was only found in three disjunct locations . haplotypes from clades a and b were present in königswartha populations. population uba from eastern spain contained the basal haplotype of clade a  – the most internal haplotype in the network – and a haplotype of unresolved position  according to the phylogenetic analyses, but which appears as most closely related to clade b from our network analysis under the limits of parsimony , and therefore was included in clade b. the root of the t. c. cancriformis/simplex lineage lies in between both haplotypes in this population, which seems to have retained ancestral polymorphisms in the species.

sequence divergence and approximation of divergence times
based on the combined alignment, pair-wise nucleotide differences among all t. cancriformis haplotypes ranged from  <dig> to  <dig> bp which translate into a maximum distance  of  <dig> % . the mean corrected distances between clades for the combined alignment and for the coi and atpase fragments separately are shown in table  <dig>  the genetic distance between clades a and b, including the two recognized subspecies t. c. cancriformis and t. c. simplex, is less than  <dig> %. the mean genetic distance was considerable higher  between haplotypes from clade a and b together  and clade c .

calculating the corrected distances separately for the coi and atpase fragment resulted in higher values for the atpase alignment. this illustrates, that atpase is evolving faster and provides more information regarding intraspecific relationships than coi .

the crustacean coi calibration applied to obtain an approximate time of divergence between the t. c. cancriformis/simplex group  and t. c. mauritanicus , yielded  <dig> – <dig>  mya  . the divergence time between clades a and b was estimated to have happened during the early pleistocene .

distribution of inferred reproductive modes in triops cancriformis
bisexuality was supported in two portuguese populations of t. c. mauritanicus  and one spanish population of t. c. simplex  . androdioecy was inferred for populations in central and e europe . populations with male proportions above  <dig>  were identified mainly from eastern european populations . as listed in table  <dig>  male-less populations occur in germany, france, poland and united kingdom, and no males have been reported from italian, polish and japanese populations   <cit> . as androdioecious populations can have low proportion of males it can not be excluded that those population are actually androdioecious. in populations where males have been recorded male proportions ranged from  <dig>  to  <dig>  . as shown in figure  <dig> both androdioecious and putatively hermaphrodite populations are distributed where no suitable habitats for t. cancriformis were found during the pleistocene ice ages.

discussion
as we predicted, t. cancriformis haplotypes from most n european populations and the disjunct japanese population – clustered in clade a – are closely related, with a few, widely distributed haplotypes. the reduced genetic diversity in t. cancriformis is a consistent and remarkable result of our data. this can be supported by the large mitochondrial fragment we investigated, the selection of the most rapid evolving gene in triops and extensive sampling. a low mitochondrial diversity in t. cancriformis was noted by mantovani et al.  <cit>  and korn et al.  <cit>  based on 16s and 12s sequences, which are slowly evolving compared to our fragments. furthermore, preliminary data on diversity of nuclear microsatellite loci  <cit>  suggested low genome wide polymorphism in t. c. cancriformis/simplex  <cit> . this pattern supports postglacial range expansion of t. c. cancriformis/simplex lineages into areas which were unsuitable for this species during the last glacial maximum. when we take the phylogeographic and reproductive mode results together, the predominance of androdioecious and potentially hermaphroditic populations in formerly glacial or permafrost regions strongly suggests that lineages with alternative reproductive modes were responsible for the postglacial recolonization of n europe, as hypothesized by longhurst  <cit> . our results with t. cancriformis closely resemble the pattern found in geographic parthenogenesis. the term geographical parthenogenesis is used for the tendency of parthenogenetic populations to be distributed in high latitudes reflecting an association between parthenogenesis and environments that were strongly affected by the pleistocene glacial cycles  <cit> . several organisms have been described having parthenogenetic populations in n and c europe and sexual populations in restricted southern areas  <cit> . although t. cancriformis populations, being hermaphroditic, do not fulfil the geographical parthenogenesis concept, they would enjoy the colonisation advantage in a comparable way. therefore we suggest broadening the concept of geographical parthenogenesis by introducing the term 'geographical hermaphroditism'.

in contrast to the pattern found in n europe with populations of low genetic diversity and alternative reproductive modes, southern t. cancriformis populations, including all the identified bisexual populations, show high and geographically structured haplotype diversity. these results support the hypothesis that bisexual populations are characterised by reduced gene flow and high interpopulation divergence , possibly because the areas inhabited by these populations have been suitable for longer. similar strong geographic structuring of genetic variation with very isolated populations has been reported from other sexual european large branchiopods   <cit> . these strong population structures despite high potential for gene flow through their diapausing propagules suggests that triops populations and other large branchiopods, in a similar way to continental zooplankton undergo a process of 'monopolisation' of their habitats  <cit> . the presence of ancestral haplotypes and strong genetic subdivision in the iberian peninsula, strongly points to this area as a pleistocene refugium for t. cancriformis. this inference is further supported by the presence of bisexual populations for t. c. mauritanicus and t. c. simplex in the iberian peninsula. however, the genetic divergence between clades a and b and their geographic distribution indicates that the phylogeographic history of european t. cancriformis is more complex as these clades are likely to have diverged earlier than the last glacial cycle. clade b is especially puzzling as it is present only in three locations including northern and southern populations. different scenarios could explain this pattern. one of these is the possibility that n european populations from clade b are derived from an early postglacial expansion which left relict populations in an eastern refugium – balkans, middle east – which we did not sample, a pattern that has previously been reported for the european fire salamander  <cit> . another explanation could be long distance colonisation events facilitated by the passive dispersal of triops diapausing cysts as reported for other aquatic invertebrates  <cit> . either way, this possible range expansion/long distance colonisation event – comparable to clade a – was linked to androdioecious lineages, which is the reproductive mode, present in clade b. in summary we suggest a split in the late pleistocene that originated clades a and b in t. c. cancriformis/simplex, with an early refugium in the iberian peninsula and possibly a second one. further sampling from eastern populations and further mediterranean islands where the species is known to occur should shed light into this issue. subsequently these lineages underwent possibly two episodes of range expansions/long distance colonisation, in both cases involving hermaphroditic and/or androdioecious populations. interestingly, those populations we infer to be androdioecious, occur in the area where both clades coexist in germany. the occurrence of hybridisation between these clades is suggested by our microsatellite data  <cit>  as two of the populations where both lineages coexist  and have been analysed with microsatellite loci display hardy weinberg equilibrium  <cit> .

we suggest that geographic isolation within the iberian peninsula, possibly dating back to the miocene-pliocene boundary, led to the initial divergence between t. c. mauritanicus and t. c. cancriformis/simplex lineages and also to genetic isolation among t. c. mauritanicus populations in the northwest and southeast iberian peninsula. such regional persistence suggests that long-term suitable habitats were available in separate areas within the iberian peninsula throughout the pliocene and pleistocene. deep phylogeographic splits within the iberian peninsula have been observed in a wide range of taxa, indicating either the existence of several independent pleistocene refugia within this area  <cit>  or colonisation of the southern iberian peninsula from north africa  <cit> . our analyses, containing moroccan samples, indicate that the iberian populations of t. c. mauritanicus are basal, which supports a scenario in which t. c. mauritanicus would have colonised north africa from the iberian peninsula, possibly during the early pliocene. a similar pattern of colonisation from the iberian peninsula into north africa has been documented for lizards and amphibians  <cit> . therefore, we suggest that the iberian peninsula provided a long-term subdivided glacial refugium for both t. c. mauritanicus and t. c. cancriformis/simplex.

the combined alignment of coi and atpase sequences showed that t. c. mauritanicus and t. c. cancriformis/simplex form two highly divergent monophyletic lineages, as also suggested by a 16s and 12s analysis  <cit> . the estimated  <dig> % sequence divergence between both lineages is within the range separating other notostracan  <cit>  and crustacean species  <cit> . our data therefore provide strong support to the proposal of korn et al.  <cit>  to reinstate t. c. mauritanicus to species status, as originally described by ghigi  <cit> . in contrast, the traditional subdivision into the subspecies t. c. cancriformis and t. c. simplex sensu longhurst  <cit>  could not be supported by our data as the populations representing t. c. simplex  shared either a genetic haplotype with t. c. cancriformis populations or were very closely related to them. we propose that the validity of t. cancriformis simplex should be reconsidered.

CONCLUSIONS
our analysis of t. cancriformis reproductive mode in the context of its phylogeography allowed us to gain insights into the role of alternative reproductive modes during pleistocene range shifts. we suggest that hermaphroditism/androdioecy has evolved recently, possibly in the late pleistocene and has facilitated the postglacial colonisation of northern europe from one or two refugia, one of them likely placed in the iberian peninsula. despite generally low genetic variability in t. cancriformis we were able to identify mitochondrial regions which provided sufficient resolution to reveal phylogeographic patterns across europe. our data support a taxonomic revision of t. cancriformis. the occurrence of three different reproductive modes within closely related genetic lineages of a single species make t. cancriformis a good model to investigate the evolution of mixed reproductive strategies.

