BACKGROUND
transcriptomics is an important growing field of molecular biology. gene expression analyses are increasing our understanding of signalling and metabolic pathways underlying developmental and cellular processes. real-time rt-pcr is currently one of the more powerful and sensitive techniques for analyzing gene expression. it provides outstanding accuracy of rna quantification and has a broad dynamic range over wide experimental conditions  <cit> . as in other expression studies, data normalization is essential to control for experimental error introduced throughout sample preparation. it has been shown that real-time rt-pcr results are highly dependent on the reference genes chosen  <cit> , which supports putting considerable effort into validating gene chosen for normalization prior to extensive experimentation. useful reference genes must not only be present in all samples but the expression levels need to remain constant relative to experimental pressures introduced. data normalization can be problematic and several strategies have been reviewed  <cit> .

housekeeping genes are constitutively expressed and required for cellular survival, including functions such as cell wall structure and primary metabolism. previously, these have been found to be reasonable internal reference genes for normalizing real-time data. these genes are expected to exhibit minor differences in their expression profiles under diverse experimental conditions. examples such as gapdh, 18s rrna and ef1-α have been widely used in rna blot analyses and are commonly used for real-time rt-pcr in various plant species  <cit> . while these genes have been found to be appropriate for some experiments, other candidates were recently reported to outperform these classical ones  <cit> .

grape berries undergo significant metabolic changes throughout their development, orchestrated in part by the up and down regulation of transcripts. this development follows a double sigmoidal pattern characterized by two periods of cellular expansion separated by a period of slowed growth  <cit> . the ability to identify transcripts that are resistant to growth fluctuations or stresses is challenging; therefore, it is important to identify candidate reference genes that are subject to only minimal regulation during an individual experiment, permitting accurate transcriptional analyses. to date, a limited number of real-time rt-pcr experiments focusing on grape berries has been published. based on microarray and real-time rt-pcr data, ubq-l <dig>  <cit>  and one paralog of ef1-α  <cit>  were previously reported as being stably expressed in grape berries.

prior to evaluating expression patterns in biological samples, it is important to ensure that the rna being used for cdna synthesis is pure and not degraded. grapevine tissues, like those in many higher plant species, contain abundant polyphenolic and polysaccharide compounds which cause challenges when isolating rna. at full maturity, for example, cabernet sauvignon berries contain approximately  <dig> percent soluble solids, mainly glucose and fructose, and these sugars can co-precipitate with nucleic acids into a viscous gelatin-like pellet during rna isolation. moreover, due to the low rna content in the maturing berries, success is limited in capturing low concentrations of nucleic acids using large-volume extraction protocols.

in this study, we present an rna isolation protocol adapted from a previously described procedure developed for the evergreen tree, cinnamomum tenuipilum  <cit> . our protocol compensates for the acidic nature of grape berries and introduces modifications to both increase rna yield and minimize contaminating polysaccharides. we demonstrate that high quality and quantity of rna can be obtained from grape berries from all developmental stages as well as other grapevine tissues including flowers, leaves, and roots. additionally, we present the expression patterns of  <dig> primer pairs targeting  <dig> commonly used reference genes that represent different functional classes in developing grape berries. two different growing seasons were used in this study. included are primer pairs that target either a single gene or two or more members of a gene family  <cit> . three different statistical approaches were used to evaluate the reference genes; 1) cycle threshold  range and coefficient of variance; 2) analysis using the genorm software  <cit> ; and 3) deviations from the ct mean  <cit> . lastly, we demonstrate the effects of using one or more reference genes on the relative expression levels of an aquaporin and a sucrose transporter during grape development.

RESULTS
microarray datasets can be a rich source of information for selecting real-time rt-pcr reference genes, as was done for arabidopsis using the large public collection of data from affymetrix genechip experiments  <cit> . unfortunately, for emerging organisms like grapevine, public datasets are limited  <cit> . in this study, we set out to evaluate the stability of  <dig> primer pairs via three independent analytical methods to rank the effectiveness of internal reference genes for grape berries. among these, 18s rrna, gapdh, actin and ef1-α are among the most commonly reported reference genes, but to date, no single candidate has been shown to be universally acceptable.

reference gene analysis
when assessing a set of reference genes, the evaluation method implemented can be a source of bias based on the assumptions underlying each approach. in an effort to minimize bias, the datasets were analysed using three different statistical approaches to identify the most stably expressed genes during grape berry development. the first, most straightforward method was to assess the ct range and calculate the coefficient of variance for each gene over two growing seasons. this allowed for a visual assessment of genes that had a narrow ct range over the entire developmental period. naturally, the least amount of variance is most favourable. ct values for the  <dig> genes  ranged from  <dig> to  <dig>  while the majority of these values were between  <dig> and  <dig> . actin was the most abundant transcript, reaching threshold fluorescence after only  <dig> to  <dig> amplification cycles, whereas the ct average of all genes within the datasets was approximately  <dig> cycles. as a result, the actin transcript levels were around 32-fold more abundant than the dataset's average. the least abundant transcripts were β-tubulin, pp2a, and sand, with ct values of  <dig> or higher. the calculated coefficient of variance of the ct values gives an indication of the expression stability of a particular gene. β-tubulin and cyclophilin each had large variances in their expression levels and the only cv values over  <dig>  for both  <dig> and  <dig> pericarp sample sets. on the other hand, there was little consistency in genes with minimal cv. this method, although reasonable, did not clearly define any stably expressed reference genes across the developmental series in the two seasons. a disadvantage of this approach is that it overlooks rt-pcr variations between genes, samples, and to a lesser extent their repeats, meaning that experimental errors are likely present but not characterized.

genorm software was tested as a second means of assessing candidate reference genes  <cit> . this program calculates a gene expression stability measure  for each gene based on the average pairwise expression ratio between it and each of the other genes being studied. genorm then performs a stepwise exclusion of the least stable gene and recalculates m until only two genes are left, these being the most stably expressed . each gene studied had a relatively low m value in accordance with the limit of < <dig>  suggested by genorm. only the β-tubulin surpassed this limit with an m value of  <dig>  in the  <dig> pericarp dataset. gapdh  ranked among the top three genes in both the  <dig> and  <dig> sample sets. cyclophilin, β-tubulin and ef1-α  consistently ranked poorly, indicating that these genes are not stably expressed and likely play a functional role in one or more stages of berry development. these findings are supported by reports describing differential expression of cyclophilin  <cit>  and β-tubulin  <cit>  in microarray experiments. next, pairwise variation is calculated by genorm to determine the fewest number of reference genes necessary for accurate normalization. as suggested  <cit> , pairwise variation values below  <dig>  do not require greater than two control genes. likewise, in our experiment where the pairwise variation was less than  <dig>  , geometric averaging of only the top two genes would be needed for accurate normalization, when examining our datasets. the genorm algorithm is dependent on the assumption that none of the genes being analyzed are co-regulated; otherwise, these genes would be inaccurately selected as favourable candidates. in this experiment, ef1-α  and ef1-α should benefit from a pairwise comparison program like genorm when included in the same dataset. we found, however, that irrespective of whether ef1-α  was included in the dataset with ef1-α or not, genorm consistently ranked ef1-α  poorly.

the third statistical approach tested is based on the idea that the mean expression of candidate reference genes  reflects the most optimal normalization, assuming that all genes have independent cellular functions  <cit> . the calculated mean difference in expression reflects the constant difference in expression levels between a gene and the mean of the dataset . for example, a ct of - <dig>  for actin indicates that it took fewer pcr cycles to reach the mean ct, whereas a ct of  <dig>  for sand indicates that more cycles were needed . in our experiment, cyclophilin, β-tubulin, and ef1-α  were removed from the analysis based on the conclusions drawn from the previous two methods that these were not stably expressed and would otherwise artificially skew the mean ct. previously, brunner et al.  <cit>  showed that two of their most stable reference genes represented both high and low expression levels compared to the genes being analysed, demonstrating that the level of expression of the reference genes does not affect accuracy. in our study, reference genes were ranked based on their deviation from the mean  . highest ranked were sand and actin in  <dig> and  <dig> pericarp, respectively, with minimal deviation around the mean of all other reference genes in the dataset.

in addition to primer pairs that target single transcripts, we set out to evaluate a subset of our primer pairs that should amplify paralogous transcripts, based on comparative sequence analyses  <cit> . primer pairs mdh , gapdh , ubq  and ef1-α  each targeted conserved sequences in a minimum of two known transcripts within their gene families . our results demonstrated no consistent trend in effectiveness of targeting multiple transcripts; while gapdh  consistently ranked relatively high in all analyses, ef1-α  fared poorly in all three approaches.

the most prominent observation after completing the three analysis methods was that each produced a different set of top ranked candidates. furthermore, these results were not consistent between sampling years. generally, we found that the top ranking reference genes remained high on the lists in each analysis method, but given that each method resulted in different units, we recognized the need to devise a scheme to standardize the units while maintaining the distribution of results. cv, m, and 2× sd results were each given a scaled value based on the distribution within each dataset . cyclophilin, β-tubulin, and ef1-α  were excluded since they were not included in all of the evaluation methods. when  <dig> and  <dig> dataset scores were combined, gapdh  ranked highest across all reference genes, followed by actin, ef1-α, and sand.

due to seasonal differences observed using the different approaches , further validation was initiated to test whether the top candidates continued to perform well in additional berry samples. a second  <dig> sample was generated using the mesocarp tissue . expression studies were performed in the same manner as was done earlier with the pericarp tissue. the top four gene candidates in the  <dig> mesocarp tissue, based on the same three statistical approaches, were actin, gapdh , tip <dig> and ubc, but once all datasets  were tabulated, the top ranked genes were gapdh , actin, ef1-α and sand . these data demonstrate that if subtle changes in expression are of critical importance, choosing a single reference gene may not be universally suitable.

reference gene validation
the use of one or multiple reference gene in the calculation of relative expression data can have a significant influence on the final normalized results. to test the effect of reference gene selection on the outcome of a practical experiment, we evaluated the relative expression patterns for two functionally unrelated genes, an aquaporin  <cit>  and a sucrose transporter  <cit> , using different reference genes . an ideal result would have been for both genes to have had consistent expression patterns, irrespective of the reference gene used for normalization. this was the case for the aquaporin ; this expression pattern was consistent with that reported by picaud et al.  <cit> , who found lower expression levels in earlier stages of berry development. conversely, relative transcript abundance patterns for the sucrose transporter were dependent on the gene used for normalization . the inconsistent sucrose transporter profiles demonstrated that using only one gene for normalization can lead to over or under estimation of relative transcript abundance. davies et al.  <cit>  used rna blot analyses to evaluate the expression pattern of the sucrose transporter, vvsuc <dig>  in shiraz berries and showed a down regulation from fruit set through to veraison , then a continued up regulation through to maturity. in this study, our sucrose transporter data were consistent with those of davies et al.  <cit>  when actin, ubc, and the combination of actin, ef1-α and gapdh  were used for normalization. other reference genes, when used independently for normalization, led to different conclusions regarding relative expression levels throughout berry development . once again, these results reinforce the importance of validating reference gene prior to experimental applications, and more importantly, taking the geometric mean of a greater number of genes for normalization.

rna isolation
young grape berries have a ph between  <dig>  and  <dig>  , while ripe berries contain high levels of polysaccharide compounds  and polyphenolics. these characteristics have made it challenging to extract quality rna from these and other grapevine tissues  <cit> . development of a single robust rna isolation protocol for all grapevine tissues can minimize technical variation when comparing real-time rt-pcr experiments or other downstream applications such as microarray analyses. we present in methods, adaptations made to a protocol originally published for the woody plant, c. tenuipilum  <cit> , modified to accommodate a variety of grapevine tissues. in this study, total rna was extracted from grape pericarp, seeds, leaves, roots and flowers. analyses of total rna extracts demonstrated that they were each of high quality . this is the first report of a robust rna isolation protocol applicable to diverse grapevine tissues. our modifications account for the acidic nature of grape berries by increasing the buffering capacity from  <dig> mm to  <dig> mm tris hcl in the extraction buffer, resulting in increased yields in early-staged berries. as well, an alcohol precipitation step was included to concentrate the rna in solution prior to selectively precipitating the rna with licl. increased yields were achieved when the rna was concentrated just prior to the addition of licl. this was especially true for mature pericarp and seeds when cellular activity has diminished and the water content in the pericarp has peaked. yields were quite diverse depending on the source of the tissue. leaves yielded the highest amount of total rna , followed by flowers, roots and pre-veraison seeds , pre-veraison pericarp , post-veraison pericarp  and the lowest being from post-veraison seeds . the differences observed were likely related to the developmental and metabolic properties of each distinct tissue.

CONCLUSIONS
our findings support that reference gene selection has a significant effect on normalized gene expression data in real-time rt-pcr experiments. we demonstrated that the most stable reference genes ranked among the top genes when data from three independent statistical approaches were evaluated but no single gene was consistently best. for more accurate normalization, use of at least two of the top ranked reference genes followed by geometric averaging is recommended for determining a normalization factor. specifically for grape berries, gapdh  used together with actin, a previously reported primer set for a specific ef1-α  <cit> , or sand are most stable for grape berry development studies. our conclusion is supported by data representing two growing seasons.

