BACKGROUND
at the forefront of ecosystems adversely affected by climate change, coral reefs are sensitive to anomalously high temperatures which disassociate  photosynthetic symbionts  from coral hosts and cause increasingly frequent and severe mass mortality events . susceptibility to bleaching and mortality is variable among corals , and is partially determined  by a combination of environmental history  <cit>  and the interaction of symbiodinium-  and coral-specific  properties .

as photosynthetic performance of in hospite symbiodinium is often impaired during thermally-induced bleaching , the interaction of temperature and irradiance exacerbate the bleaching response . corals under thermal stress experience greater damage to the symbiodinium photosynthetic apparatus  and elevated bleaching response when exposed to supra-optimal solar irradiances, indicating that temperature reduces the light intensity threshold for photoinhibition  <cit> .

symbiodinium live within host tissues overlaying the coral skeleton, which can significantly increase light availability to symbionts through multiple scattering , and together with within-tissue scatter and dynamic light redistribution   <cit>  form one of the most efficient biological collectors of solar radiation  <cit> . this increase in light-availability is dependent on density and absorption properties of symbiont and host pigments and on diffuse reflectance of light from coral skeleton  and tissue, which is mainly reliant on light scattering and absorption in the skeleton and tissue as well as overall coral morphology . scattering in skeletons  is mainly due to light interaction with skeletal microstructures throughout the entire skeleton  and larger length-scale structures . furthermore, scattering in the superficial layer of coral skeletons  governs light-transport at sub-diffusion path lengths  and is affected by skeletal microstructures, but not larger length-scale structures  <cit> . thus μs,m′ can be described as μs′ of the skeletal material itself, within the top ~100 µm of the skeleton without voids  <cit> . although rs includes the effect of μs,m′, it is primarily determined by μs′, absorption, and overall coral morphology .

greater total skeletal reflectance, associated with higher μs′, has been demonstrated to increase light-absorption by at least six times for symbionts in hospite and in simulations compared to those in vitro  <cit> . by estimating absorption efficiency in differentially bleached corals and skeletal models , it has been shown that skeletal light amplification  is inversely related to symbiont concentration, leading to the prediction that skeletal μs′ could exacerbate the feedback of increasing photodamage for remaining symbiodinium as symbiont densities diminish during bleaching   <cit> . however, the rate of excess light increase as symbiont densities decrease has been demonstrated in models to be highly variable among corals, with high rates of excess light increase inversely correlated with skeletal μs,m′  <cit> . low skeletal μs,m′ values were significantly correlated with heightened bleaching susceptibility in a retrospective analysis of global bleaching events for  <dig> coral taxa, leading to the prediction that μs,m′  is a potential determinant of the severity of bleaching response for this mechanism  <cit> . in this previous study, neither μs′ nor rs were correlated with historical bleaching response  <cit> .

to consolidate previous findings and provide predictions about the bleaching process that can be experimentally assessed, we propose the optical feedback hypothesis based on the effect of short-path light-transport. although skeletal contribution to the endosymbiotic light microenvironment is normally small  <cit> , skeletal optical properties become increasingly important as symbionts are lost and the skeleton becomes more exposed to light  <cit> . as densities of light absorbers  decrease during the bleaching response, the coral skeleton becomes progressively exposed to downwelling light and dynamically becomes an increasingly significant source of excess light to remaining symbionts, compounding stress on symbiodinium and provoking a more rapid and severe bleaching response. this feedback loop may proceed at differential rates that are determined by the rate at which the skeleton increases excess light to symbionts, as symbiodinium and pigment concentrations decline  <cit> . as the optical property that is predictive of the rate of excess light increase as a function of pigment density, μs,m′ affects the rate of feedback and may therefore be a determinate of bleaching severity  <cit> . we therefore predict that, depending on skeletal μs,m′, corals that are bleaching should be differentially exposed to stress, and low-μs,m′ corals should experience:  increased rates and severities of bleaching response, with symbiodinium remaining in hospite showing increased rates and severities of light stress, and  increased skeleton-dependent light absorption by remaining symbiodinium. furthermore,  skeletal μs,m′ should be a good predictor of the light-dependent bleaching effect but a poor predictor of temperature-dependent bleaching. these predictions of the optical feedback hypothesis have not been experimentally demonstrated among corals with diverse skeletal optical properties ; which due to the dynamic nature of feedback, must be assessed as corals undergo bleaching.

here we describe a heat- and light-stress experiment that demonstrates the effect of skeletal μs,m′ on bleaching response using ten coral species selected for diversity of bleaching susceptibilities, skeletal optical properties, and symbiodinium thermotolerances. by following the dynamics of holobiont response to stress directly, and developing a novel empirical model of skeleton-dependent light-absorption for in hospite symbiodinium, we assessed the general predictions for coral bleaching under the optical feedback mechanism detailed above. the combined experimental and empirical modeling substantiates the predictions of the optical feedback hypothesis by establishing a connection between the dynamics of skeletal light amplification, bleaching response, in hospite symbiodinium light absorption, and photophysiology among a diverse group of corals.

RESULTS
skeletal and holobiont optical characteristics
microscopic scattering, μs,m′, varied between  <dig>  and  <dig>  mm− <dig> , with low-μs,m′ corals  averaging  <dig>  ±  <dig>  mm− <dig>  and high-μs,m′ corals  averaging  <dig>  ±  <dig>  mm− <dig>  consistent with the imperfectly-white coloration of the skeletons, rs varied between  <dig>  and  <dig>  . holobiont reflectance, rh, varied between  <dig>  and  <dig>  prior to the initiation of stress .table  <dig> optical, tissue, bleaching, and genetic data for individual corals

skeletal optical properties , and bulk scattering ], tissue thickness , bleaching response index , and genetic identity of corals and symbiodinium assessed in experiment. nucleotide sequences compared with genbank  and reported as percent match  with accessions for coral mitochondrial cytochrome oxidase i , cytochrome b , and nuclear internal transcribed spacer  genes; and symbiodinium nuclear internal transcribed spacer region  <dig>  and chloroplast 23s ribosomal  genes. shading of bars indicate the presence  or absence  of the target species in genbank, and low-  or high-thermotolerance  of symbiodinium  and indicated by parenthetical superscript number on the phylotype used to categorize thermotolerance]

fig.  <dig> dynamics of bleaching response variables. high- and low-μs,m′ corals  responded differentially to experimental light  and temperature  conditions . under temperature stress , symbiodinium
in hospite of low-μs,m′ corals experienced suppressed photosynthetic performance  and reduced cell density , and holobiont reflectance  of low-μs,m′ corals approached the level of bare skeleton . low-μs,m′ corals experienced progressively greater average rates of photochemical efficiency loss  as heat and light stress were combined . isolating the effect of light from temperature on photochemical efficiency , μs,m′ is correlated with the temporal rate of f
v
/f
m change Δpe∼Δ2fv/fmΔtΔi expressed as the difference between cl and hl  for corals exposed to ht  or ct . all error bars are standard error of the mean



although corals are highly complex structures, the variability detected in repeated measurements of μs,m′, rs, and rh is sufficiently small that we assume colonies can be characterized by mean values. the variability due to irregular surfaces and varying instrument positions is small, as is the coefficient of variation , compared to the observed change in reflectance during bleaching. the average standard error of mean for rh is <12 % , and its cov is 38 %  while the observed change in reflectance during bleaching increases as much as 300 % . this level of signal variability is sufficiently low to resolve changes in rh as small as ~24 %. the cov of μs,m′ for coral skeletons has been previously determined to be similarly small, at 12 % within a colony  and  <dig>  % within a species   <cit> .

low μs′, m corals experience increased rates and severities of bleaching and remaining symbiodinium experience increased rates and severities of light stress
corals in high temperature treatments  experienced responses consistent with bleaching, with low-μs,m′ corals bleaching at greater rates and severities. under the application of temperature  or light and temperature  stress all corals experienced significant  reductions in symbiodinium cell densities  and increases in rh, with the most severe responses among low-μs,m′ corals . additionally, low-μs,m′ corals experienced significantly  greater decreases in symbiodinium chlorophyll a densities , with the greatest response occurring under the ht-hl treatment . exemplar rh spectra over the visible  and near infra-red  regions are shown in  figure s <dig> for s. pistillata  and m. digitata  before and after combined thermal- and light-stress was applied. as symbionts are lost during bleaching of s. pistallata, values of rh approached the values of rs . corals in the high light treatment alone  did not experience responses consistent with bleaching and observed differences in the dynamics of rh, ρ, or chl a between low- and high-μs′, m corals  are insignificant.

symbiodinium that remained in hospite during bleaching experienced responses consistent with increasing light stress , however symbiodinium of low-μs′, m corals experienced greater rates and severities of light stress . symbiodinium associated with low-μs′, m corals experienced significantly suppressed photochemical efficiency  and elevated maximum-excitation pressure over psii  . specifically, the rate of reduction in photosynthetic performance  was significantly greater for symbiodinium of low-μs,m′ corals  and photosynthetic function diverged between low- and high-μs,m′ corals at four and 2 days  after stress initiation . although non-photochemical quenching  increased on average by  <dig> -fold for low-μs,m′ and  <dig> -fold for high-μs,m′ corals during bleaching, the dissipation of excess energy through non-photochemical mechanisms was not significantly different across high- and low-μs,m′ corals .table  <dig> hierarchical linear mixed models  analysis of photosynthetic performance


f
v
/f
m
high-μs,m′

q
m
high-μs,m′
results of clustered longitudinal analysis  of high- and low-μs,m′ corals. marginal analysis of f
v
/f
m performed with values normalized to initial because the dynamic inversion of values  makes marginal analysis insensitive to absolute differences over time

table  <dig> hierarchical linear mixed models  analysis of photosynthetic performance


f
v/f

q
m
results of marginal analysis of the photosynthetic performance  of high- and low-μs,m′ corals. marginal analysis of f
v
/f
m performed with values normalized to initial because the dynamic inversion of values  makes marginal analysis insensitive to absolute differences over time



symbiodinium of low μs′, m corals experience increased rates of light absorption
we developed an empirical model of light absorption by symbiodiniumin hospite by considering symbiont light-absorption  as the sum of skeleton-independent absorption  of downwelling light and skeleton-dependent absorption  of reflected light  . the model relates ia <dig> and ia <dig> with parameters that were experimentally measured: skeletal reflectance, rs, of the clean skeleton and holobiont reflectance, rh, measured at different time points throughout the bleaching experiment.

the results of the model of symbiodinium light absorption indicate that the estimated skeleton-dependent light absorbed per unit pigment  and its rate /Δt) were several fold higher in low-μs,m′ corals . this pattern remained  when the effect of downwelling light was isolated . as symbiont densities decrease, ia2/ρ increases at a rate of −Δ/Δρ, which follows an inverse-power law function of μs,m′ , consistent with previously published data on flat-coral models  <cit> . parameters chosen are valid at high per-cell pigment concentration, and ia2/ρ significantly underestimates actual values as ρ decreases. because ρ is reduced in low-μs,m′ corals during bleaching , our estimation of ia <dig> is conservative, and feedback effect is expected to be even more pronounced.fig.  <dig> dynamics of modeled symbiodinium light absorption in hospite due to skeletal backscattering . symbiodinium
in hospite of high-  and low-μs,m′  corals are  predicted by an empirical model to have differential skeleton-dependent light absorption per unit pigment . under a ct, the absorption of light in high- and low-μs,m′ corals is similar when exposed to cl  and hl . under b ht, the absorption of light in low-μs,m′ corals is several times larger under either light condition, but the increase under hl is dramatic. additionally, the increase in  estimated temporal rates of light absorbed per unit pigment Δia2ρΔt in low-μs,m′ corals  is progressively greater as heat and light stress were combined . all abbreviations follow fig.  <dig> and error bars are standard error of the mean



light and temperature dependent bleaching effects
the light- or temperature-dependent bleaching effects were evaluated for one parameter in particular; the rate of reduction in photochemical efficiency of symbiodinium with bleaching . in the case of light-dependent bleaching effect, Δpe for corals exposed to cl were subtracted from those exposed to hl for either control  or high  temperature . thereby, the effect of light on bleaching was determined by calculating the increased light stress  in the absence and presence of thermal stress. the rate of light-induced reduction in photosynthetic efficiency Δpe is positively correlated with μs,m′, approaching  <dig>  at the highest values of μs,m′, under high  or control  temperature . taking a similar approach to isolate the effect of temperature on the rate of reduction in photosynthetic efficiency, Δpe of corals exposed to ct were subtracted from those exposed to ht for either control  or high  light . temperature-induced loss of fv/fm over time, Δpe, is not significantly correlated with μs,m′ . although all corals experienced some reduction in fv/fm  under single stressor treatments , larger reductions were observed under combined heat and light stress with the greatest decline among low-μs,m′ corals .

factors that did not influence bleaching response
the diversity of corals and symbionts included in these experiments permitted examination of the effects of several factors that have been previously described as determinants of bleaching response  and confounding factors of μs,m′ . none of these factors were significantly correlated with the changes in photosynthetic performance observed in bleaching corals.

corals examined included substantial diversity in rs, bulk-μs′, coral tissue thickness, colony morphology, and symbiodinium thermotolerances . skeletal reflectance was not significantly associated with changes in fv/fm or qm . bulk-μs′  was not significantly associated with the rate of reduction in photosynthetic efficiency Δpe . the experimental corals included thin , medium , and thick branching  colony morphologies, as well as laminar  and massive  forms; however colony morphology was not significantly associated with light-  nor temperature-  dependent Δpe. coral tissue thickness varied between  <dig>  and  <dig>  mm , but was not significantly associated with light-  nor temperature-  dependent Δpe. experimental corals hosted some of the highest  or lowest  thermotolerance phylotypes known . however symbiodinium thermotolerance was not significantly associated with fv/fm or qm , and the observed trends have greater losses of photosynthetic performance among high-thermotolerance physiotypes .fig.  <dig> effects of skeletal reflectance  and symbiodinium thermotolerance  on photosynthetic performance dynamics. high- and low-  r
s and symb
thermo corals responded similarly to experimental light  and temperature  conditions . photosynthetic performance was similarly suppressed under increased stress in corals grouped by r
s  and was modestly  more suppressed for corals hosting high-thermotolerance symbiodinium . both low- and high-r
s corals experienced a progressively greater average rate of photochemical efficiency loss  as heat and light stress were increased , and both low and high-symb
thermo corals experienced a progressively greater average rate of photochemical efficiency loss  as heat and light stress were increased . all error bars are standard error of the mean



physiological differences between low- and high-μs,m′ corals were detected in the absence of stress: low-μs,m′ corals had higher baselines for fv/fm  and chl a  and lower baselines for symbiodinium density, ρ,  during monitoring prior to experimental manipulation . only baseline-fv/fm had a significant correlation with fv/fm , and also correlated with Δpe under ht . however, this correlation was unstable and primarily caused by a single datapoint , without which r <dig> dropped to  <dig> . baseline-fv/fm could not predict Δpe under ct , and the difference between mean Δpe of baseline-low- and baseline-high-fv/fm was not significant .

discussion
results of the bleaching experiment and empirical light-absorption model are consistent with predictions of the optical feedback hypothesis. bleaching corals with skeletal nanostructures that scatter light at relatively low μs,m′ experienced increased rates and severities of bleaching response , light stress on retained symbiodinium , and amounts and rates of skeleton-dependent light absorption by remaining symbiodinium  relative to corals with skeletal nanostructures that scatter light at relatively high μs,m′.

low μs′, m corals experience increased rates and severities of bleaching and remaining symbiodinium experience increased rates and severities of light stress
although all corals experienced some response to increased temperature, differentially increased bleaching was detected among low-μs,m′ corals as early as day  <dig>  and no later than day  <dig>  after initiation of stress . similarly, differentially decreased photosynthetic performance of retained symbiodinium was nearly simultaneous with bleaching  and was detected among low-μs,m′ corals as early as day  <dig>  and no later than day  <dig>  of the experiment .

change in photosynthetic performance was evaluated by measuring changes in fv/fm and qm of all corals before and after the application of stress. fv/fm indicates the proportion of potentially active psii reaction centers under dark-adapted conditions  <cit>  and significant decreases in fv/fm over time under light- and heat-stress have been measured in bleaching corals . qm  <cit>  is sensitive to effective quantum yield  oscillations as a result of the induction of multiple photoprotective pathways that compete for energy dissipation when light absorption exceeds photochemistry and indicates the proportion of active  psii reaction centers under peak irradiance  <cit> . values approximating  <dig> indicate light-limitation with most reaction centers open, ≈ <dig> indicate photoinhibition with most reaction centers closed, and photoacclimation is indicated when qm remains unchanged during suppressed photochemical efficiency  <cit> . differential rates of divergence of photosynthetic performance  indicate that symbiodinium associated with high-μs,m′ corals were experiencing photoacclimation  while those associated with low-μs,m′ corals were experiencing photoinhibition ; consistent with observations of bleaching corals  <cit> .

all corals dissipated excess energy through Φnpq at similar levels . this finding may seem unexpected as Φnpq is mainly affected by photoprotective pathways   <cit> , and given the increased light stress experienced by low-μs,m′ corals, a greater increase in Φnpq would be expected compared to high-μs,m′ corals. however, while suppressed fv/fm and elevated qm are often associated with severe bleaching response , there is no consensus  that variation in npq is indicative of resistance  <cit>  or sensitivity  <cit>  to thermal stress and photoinhibition.

symbiodinium associated with low-μs,m′ corals absorb light at higher rates and amounts
we developed an empirical model of light-absorption for inhospite symbiodinium to test the assumption that the susceptibility of low-μs,m′ corals is driven by a feedback-loop between absorber loss  and the rate of light amplification increase, which exposes remaining symbionts to rapidly increasing light. the rate of light amplification increase is modeled as: -diaia1dρ; where ia is the fraction of incident light absorbed in tissue and ia <dig> is the fraction incident absorbed on its first pass through tissue. change in the rate of light amplification increase is a consequence of a higher rate of light absorption per pigment due to skeletal reflectance, which is modeled as: dia2ρdρ; where ia2 = ia − ia <dig> is the fraction of incident light not absorbed on the first pass, scattered by the skeleton back into the tissue and subsequently absorbed.

the empirical model of light-absorption for in hospite symbiodinium is a generalization of prior models  <cit> , however it differentiates between downwelling  and reflected  light-absorption so that the effect of skeletal optical properties on light intensity experienced by symbionts is explicitly estimated and repeated passes of light between tissue and skeleton can be accounted for. the model expresses ia, ia <dig> and ia <dig> through experimentally determined values for rs, rh, and three model parameters describing light transport properties of the holobiont . downwelling light that is not absorbed during the first pass can be returned to tissues by the skeleton, lost to absorption, or diffusely scattered out of the colony  <cit>  and may repeatedly pass between skeleton and tissue . thus, ia <dig> may be the result of multiple passes of light through tissue caused by multiple reflections of the skeleton  <cit> . for a flat coral model , and neglecting absorption of light reflected by the skeleton in tissue, our model  converges to the approximate solution used to estimate the absorption of light based on holobiont and skeletal reflectance values  <cit> .

the estimated symbiodinium light absorption indicates that the effect of μs,m′ on light absorption by symbiodinium, ia, is substantial. skeleton-dependent light absorbed per unit pigment  and its rate /Δt) were several fold higher in low-μs,m′ corals . this pattern was even more pronounced for combined light and temperature stress  and remained when the effect of downwelling light was isolated  . parameters  chosen are valid at high per-cell pigment concentration and  significantly underestimates actual values as ρ decreases. because ρ is greatly reduced in low-μs,m′ corals during bleaching compared to high-μs,m′ , these calculations are expected to underestimate ia <dig>  and the feedback effect is expected to be even more pronounced.

μs,m′ is a robust predictor of light-dependent bleaching, but not of temperature-dependent bleaching
by mathematically isolating the effect of light on bleaching from temperature and other confounding factors, including those unknown , we found that the rate of reduction in photochemical efficiency during bleaching  is associated with μs,m′, indicating that μs,m′ is one of the determinants of light-dependent bleaching severity. the rate of light-induced loss of fv/fm is much more pronounced in low-μs,m′ corals; high-μs,m′ corals are nearly invariable under ht or ct conditions . while μs,m′ was a robust predictor of light-dependent bleaching as it explained 62 % of the variance in Δpe for ht , it was not a robust predictor of the temperature-dependent bleaching as μs,m′ explained only 18 % of the variance in Δpe for hl .

heat and light stress have a compounding effect on bleaching response; differential sensitivity to light is amplified by temperature  as excess light generated by skeletal scattering may overwhelm photosystems impaired by thermal stress. heat reduces the ability of symbiodinium to utilize light in photosynthesis  <cit>  and can uncouple energy absorption from photochemistry  <cit> ; resulting in excess energy independent of light increase. therefore, symbiodinium may perceive heat stress as an increase in excitation pressure over photosystem ii  <cit>  and experience an increase in excess light as a result of an increase in temperature. in the absence of increased temperature stress, the effect of light-transport in the surface of the coral skeleton seems low, but once temperature increases and bleaching is initiated, the effect of light stress becomes remarkable, in particular for low-μs,m′ corals  is two times lower for ct than ht;  <dig>  and  <dig> , respectively, fig. 1g). μs,m′ explained 35 % of light-and temperature-dependent bleaching variance Δpe for hl and ht . the ecological relevance of high- and low-μs,m′ remains to be fully understood, but current evidence points to very distinct ecological strategies. skeleton deposited by corals is made of calcium carbonate nanograins   that govern the scattering properties of the skeleton and present a fractal micro-morphology  likely reflective of their growth strategy and skeletogenesis. corals with higher rates of linear extension, rather than skeletal infilling , often have the lowest μs,m′ values and are typically thin branching, as opposed to corals with high-μs,m′ which often have higher skeletal density and are massive or thick branching  <cit> . a prior study of light scattering and skeletal fractality in  <dig> coral skeletons representing  <dig> coral taxa demonstrated that high and low-μs,m′ corals are important species in a variety of ecosystems. for example, s. hystrix and s. pistillata, two representatives of the pocilloporidae family with low-μs,m′, can be frequently found in central, eastern, and western indo-pacific reefs, while porites lobata and orbicella annularis of the poritidae and merulinidae families with high-μs,m′ are important species in eastern indo-pacific and caribbean reefs, respectively.

this study focused on the light scattering within skeleton and light absorbed by symbiodinium in hospite, but did not evaluate light scattering within coral tissue which has been shown to significantly modulate light availability to symbionts. light scattering causes lateral redistribution within tissue and increases light availability to symbionts  <cit>  while host fluorescent pigments  <cit>  or tissue contraction  <cit>  may reduce light stress by regulating light exposure and travel within tissue. direct evidence for the optical feedback hypothesis would require in vivo measurements of symbiodinium light-absorption rates as the coral undergoes bleaching and separation of skeleton-dependent effects, which has proven to be a technical challenge. however, combining the model of light absorbed by symbiodiniumin hospite developed in this study and light available to symbiodinium within the coral tissue measured with light microsensors  <cit>  will improve models of the optics of intact corals. in fact, integrating within-tissue light scattering with skeletal scattering will allow for a comprehensive evaluation of the mechanisms of light scattering by skeleton and tissue in modulating light to symbionts and their role in bleaching response.

factors that did not influence bleaching response
neither rs  nor μs′  were significantly correlated with the severity of bleaching response. light reflectance in coral skeletons is a complex process, and an important distinction must be made between μs,m′, which governs short-path light transport in the superficial skeletal layer, and the reduced scattering coefficient of the entire skeletal material, μs′. short-path transport is primarily driven by scattering of nanograins and fiber bundles of the top ~100 µm and is less influenced by larger structures such as overall morphology of corallites, optical properties of deeper skeletal material, or absorption. although rs includes the effect of short-path light-transport, it is primarily determined by μs′, absorption, and overall coral morphology . in agreement with this, μs′ assessed for the ten coral species in the present study was not a good predictor of bleaching response. this difference between μs,m′ and μs′ was also observed for  <dig> coral taxa  <cit> ; modeling of the effect of μs,m′ on bleaching showed that the rate of increase of light enhancement with decrease of absorbers is inversely dependent on μs,m′. although this model couldn’t be applied to test the effect of μs′ on bleaching in thin  polished skeletal laminae, integrating sphere measurements of μs′ for  <dig> coral taxa showed no correlation with their bleaching susceptibility, further supporting observations of the current study  <cit> .

skeletal rs and μs,m′ affect coral physiology through two opposing light-modulation pathways: μs,m′ is inversely related to the rate of light amplification increase  <cit> , rs is directly related to total light amplification  <cit> . both μs,m′ and rs have the potential to increase light availability to symbionts  and exacerbate the bleaching response  <cit> . while our results identified a connection between μs,m′ and bleaching response, no correlation between rs or μs′ and fv/fm was detected. parallel to the hypothesis that the threshold for bleaching is determined by temperature increase rate  <cit> , the threshold for light-enhanced bleaching appears to be determined by light-increase rate  rather than the total light .

even though symbiodinium thermotolerance  has been shown to increase holobiont thermotolerance  in a pattern that dominates current theory explaining differential bleaching susceptibility , it was not associated with bleaching response in these experiments. while three associations had similar tolerances and susceptibilities, the most thermotolerant symbionts  were hosted by the most bleaching susceptible corals , and the most thermosensitive symbionts  were hosted by the most bleaching resistant corals ; providing an opportunity to detect effects of symbiont physiotypes. similar to recent evidence that differential bleaching susceptibility cannot be explained by symbiont thermotolerance alone  <cit> , no positive correlation between symbiodinium thermotolerance and fv/fm or qm was detected . while thermotolerance is demonstrable within a single life-stage of an individual species  <cit>  or in isolation  <cit> , it is generally context-dependent within the physiological and physical properties of the coral host  <cit>  and environment  <cit> .

we evaluated potential confounding factors of μs,m′: in the absence of stress, low-μs,m′ corals had lower symbiodinium density, higher chlorophyll, and higher fv/fm , but these factors were not found to significantly associate with differential bleaching severity among the ten studied coral species. while this study cannot rule out the existence of other unknown potential confounders that may correlate with μs,m′ and better explain the differential bleaching severity among these species, we have proposed a mechanism that explains the association of μs,m′ with differential bleaching severity.

CONCLUSIONS
skeletal scattering was predictive of beaching susceptibility in these experiments and, if these results are representative of wider patterns, then they indicate that skeletal scattering is one of the key determinants of differential bleaching susceptibility. while symbionts associated with low-μs,m′ corals may receive less total light from their skeletons, they are predicted to experience a higher rate of  light increase once bleaching is initiated and absorbing bodies are lost; further precipitating the bleaching response. while μs,m′ explained 62 % of the light-dependent variance in bleaching response, it was a poor predictor of the temperature-dependent variance and it explained 35 % of the light- and temperature-dependent bleaching variance. therefore, the remaining variance must be explained by other determinants of bleaching susceptibility. symbiont phylotype can affect host physiology, holobiont fitness, and bleaching susceptibility  <cit> ; higher symbiont densities per coral cell increase the risk of coral bleaching  <cit> ; coral morphological and physiological properties modulate available light to the symbiont, determine early stress responses, and regulate symbiont photosynthetic demand for co <dig>  <cit> ; within-tissue light scattering increases light availability to symbionts  <cit>  and may reduce the threshold for bleaching. the challenge now is to discern the contribution of the key determinants of bleaching susceptibility in order to identify the most effective management and remediation strategies to protect the remaining diversity of coral-symbiodinium associations in a changing climate.

