BACKGROUND
alignment of proteins is one of the fundamental methods in bioinformatics. alignments are used to detect homology and to study evolutionary events. the ability to align distantly related proteins can be improved significantly by the inclusion of evolutionary information  <cit>  or predicted features  <cit> . although significant improvements of alignment qualities has been seen recently in casp  <cit> , it is not clear how much the improved performance is due to an improvement of alignment methodologies and how much is due to increased number of sequences and structures that can be used to span the distance between a query protein and a target structure. however, in a recent study we have shown that the average alignment quality, as measured by maxsub  <cit> , improved by 10% at the family level and 50% at the superfamily level by the use of profile-profile scoring instead of sequence-profile scoring  <cit> . these findings are comparable to the ones found in a number of recent studies  <cit> .

profile-profile alignments can be implemented in several different ways  <cit> . the fundamental difference between different profile-profile alignment methods lie in how they calculate the score between two profile vectors. a profile, as defined in this study, can be seen as a set of vectors where each vector contains the frequency of each amino acid at a particular position in a multiple sequence alignment. in traditional sequence-profile alignments the score is calculated by extracting  the probability for an amino acid in this vector. however, in profile-profile alignments it is necessary to compare two vectors and this can be done in several different ways, including; calculating the sum of pairs, the dot product or a correlation coefficient between the two vectors. in addition, information about the background frequency and substitution probabilities can be used. although, it has been shown that profile-profile methods using a probabilistic model seem to be superior to other methods  <cit> , it is quite likely that better profile-profile scoring functions could be developed.

here we present profnet, a method to develop novel profile-profile scoring functions. profnet is based on the ability to separate related from unrelated residue pairs, and it uses an artificial neural network  trained to identify pairs of residues from structurally aligned proteins. we show that profnet provides significantly better identification of related residues than prob_score  <cit>  and that it also can be used to provide a slight improvement of the alignment of distantly related proteins. another advantage of this approach is that it makes it trivial to add additional information to the scoring function.

RESULTS
it could be expected that a good profile-profile scoring function should provide high scores if two profile vectors have similar amino acid distributions that differs from the background distribution. in addition, the score should include information about what amino acids are more likely to be exchanged with each other. in an earlier study we found that one profile-profile scoring method, prob_score  <cit> , performed these tasks quite well  <cit> . however, it is quite possible that a better function could be found. in order to develop such a function we have develop the method profnet that separates residue pairs that should and should not be aligned. here, it is assumed that residue pairs aligned in a structural alignment should also be aligned by the profile-profile scoring function, while residue pairs belonging to proteins from different folds should not be aligned at all. therefore, the scoring function was trained to identify pairs of structurally aligned residues. finally, the ability to correctly align protein pairs using this novel scoring function was tested.

identification of related residues
a set of artificial neural networks  were trained to distinguish related, by structural alignments, and non-related residue pairs. the first set of networks were trained using a simple representation where all aligned residues were considered to be related and a set of unrelated residues were chosen from randomly selected positions in unrelated protein pairs. the anns were trained using different datasets containing proteins of varying degrees of similarity. the performance of the different profnet versions was measured using the matthews correlation coefficient  and the number of standard deviations separating the related and non-related residue pairs, i.e. the z-score. in table  <dig> it can be seen that the mcc values for prob_score drops from  <dig>  for family to  <dig>  for superfamily and to  <dig>  for fold related scores. no large difference in performance between the identification of superfamily and fold related pairs can be found, indicating that the physiochemical aspects of protein similarity is of greatest importance at this level of similarity.

for profnet_fam  a slight improvement over prob_score was seen. the z-scores increased by 5–20% while the mcc values show a marginal increase at the superfamily and fold levels. in contrast to prob_score the profnet_fam scores for family related residues have a non-gaussian distribution, see figure  <dig>  for profnet_su  the separation for distantly related residues got noticeable better at only a marginal lost performance at the family level, but when using only proteins from different superfamilies, but similar folds in the ann training,  the results are worse at all levels indicating that the evolutionary information is lost here. using a combination of proteins from all scop levels  did perform similar to profnet_su, most likely because the superfamily set contain a set of residues related at a similar level. in figure  <dig> it can be seen that profnet_fold hardly separates the pairs at all, while all other scoring functions clearly separates the family-related, and to some extent also the superfamily-related from the non-related pairs.

in the above tests, all aligned positions were treated equally. however, certainly some of the aligned positions in the structural alignment are more closely aligned than others. therefore, we also used a continuous function related to the distance between the two residues after the structural superposition. to measure the distance between two residues we used the s-score  <cit> . this profnet version, called profnet_s, performed quite well at the superfamily and fold levels, but did not distinguish the family related residues optimally. the z-score for the fold related scores shows an improvement over prob_score by 60% and all the curves show a gaussian like distribution, see table  <dig> and figure  <dig> 

a roc-plot was constructed the same way as in edgar  <dig>  <cit>  from the data used in the mcc analysis, figure  <dig>  it can be seen that profnet_s is slightly better on superfamily level for low error rates, and clearly better at fold level.

alignment quality
although the identification of related residues might have some practical value  <cit> , the real benefit from an improved scoring function would be if it could improve alignments and/or the detection of related proteins. it has earlier been shown that the alignment accuracy is increased by the use of profile-profile comparisons  <cit> . in an earlier study we noted a correlation between the ability to separate residues and the alignment quality if the gap-penalties were optimized for each scoring function individually  <cit> . in table  <dig> it can be seen that the best profnet versions performed on par with prob_score on the ability to align proteins related on family or superfamily level, while a small  increase in alignment qualities could be observed for the profnet_s and profnet_su versions for fold related proteins. the three profnet versions that provide the best alignments have the best identification of related residues. taken this into account there seems to be some truth in our assumption that there should be a relationship between the ability to separate related from unrelated residues and aligning proteins. these results imply that some of the information needed to optimally align distantly related proteins are better captured by profnet than by prob_score. furthermore, in figure  <dig>  it can be seen that the profnet alignments produce more correct models at a given error rate than prob_score. a slightly improved performance can be seen for profnet on superfamily level for error rates >  <dig>  and at error rates >  <dig> , at the fold level.

unfortunately, we did not see any significant improvement on the ability to detect related proteins using these novel scoring functions. the failure to increase fold recognition indicates that there still is work to do to find the optimal profile-profile scoring function. quite likely, the construction of the negative training set was not done optimally.

discussion
both prob_score and profnet provide a score for two profile vectors, that should be related to the similarity between the two  positions. in the following sections we will compare these two functions, where profnet_s is used as a representative of the profnet method.

the correlation coefficient between prob_score and profnet is  <dig> , indicating that the main features are similar but that there also exists differences. to understand the differences, the score from the scoring functions were examined for residues with varying degrees of conservation. the conservation was measured by the frequency of the most frequent amino acid in the profile vector. it should be noted that the frequency is not the directly observed frequency from the multiple sequence alignment but instead calculated from the psi-blast profiles. further, the residue pairs were sorted into four groups, pairs with identical conserved amino acids and pairs where the conserved amino acids in the two vectors had a positive, zero, or negative blosum <dig>  <cit>  score. in figure  <dig> it can be seen that for profnet the average scores for all groups increase with increased conservation, while for prob_score only the score for identical conserved residues increase. in table  <dig> the average score for the six groups, using a 30% conservation cutoff is shown. as expected both scoring functions score identical residues highest, while pairs of conserved unrelated residues score lower. however, it is notable that, on average, profnet provide higher scores than prob_score for all conserved pairs, regardless of the relationship between the two residues. profnet actually provides similar scores to a pair of conserved residues with negative blosum scores as to one conserved and one non-conserved residue. clearly, being conserved increases, for some reason, the chances to be structurally aligned.

to further investigate the differences in the scoring of conserved residues, substitution tables were derived from prob_score and profnet. the scores of the two tables were transformed into z-scores and plotted against each other in figure  <dig>  here, it can be seen that prob_score ranks the residue pairs similar to blosum <dig>  giving the highest scores to identical pairs, while profnet on the other hand does not rank the residue pairs the same way. the correlation coefficient between the blosum <dig> matrix and the scores from profnet was  <dig> , compared to  <dig>  for prob_score, see table  <dig>  figure  <dig> shows the same tendency that was observed in table  <dig>  i.e. that profnet score most of the conserved residue pairs higher than prob_score. clearly during the training of profnet other features than the blosum <dig> classification has been learned. in figure  <dig> some outliers exist that might aid the explanation of the differences. profnet score pairs containing either a cys or a trp high while these pairs are scored low by prob_score. trp and cys are among the least frequent residues and a conservation of 30%  might actually correspond to a higher degree of conservation than for a more common residue. therefore, these scores could be explained by the general trend that the profnet scores increase with conservation. another interesting outlier is the residue pair ile-val that is scored higher than many of the identical residue pairs by profnet. this indicates that the structural alignment might put more emphasize on physicochemical similarity than an evolutionary similarity.

the scores from the substitution tables gonnet  <cit> , jtt  <cit>  and sdm  <cit>  were also compared with the profnet derived substitution table, see table  <dig>  the first two substitution tables are based on sequence alignments, while sdm is a structurally derived substitution table, i.e. based on structural alignments. overall, prob_score showed a higher correlation to the substitution tables than to profnet, and profnet showed higher correlation with prob_score than with the substitution tables. this shows that profnet capture some of the substitution table information and some of the conservation information used in prob_score. it can also be seen that prob_score and profnet show comparable correlation with a substitution table created directly from the structurally aligned superfamily-related dataset.

future development
here, we have only used the most obvious information from the profiles, i.e. the frequencies in the profile vectors for the development of the scoring function. one possible advantage of the profnet method is that it is easy to include other types of information, such as gap-information and predicted features, into the scoring functions.

CONCLUSIONS
a novel method, profnet, to derive a profile-profile scoring function is shown to improve the discrimination between related and unrelated residue residues pairs. further, profnet can be used to marginally improve the alignment quality of proteins related at the fold level. one benefit of this method is that it is easy to use and fast to evaluate, while one drawback is that a good and well balanced training set has to be used, and it is slower than prob_score. when choosing the training set, it seems as if the family related set is too focused on sequence similarity while the fold related training set on the other hand does not seem to include enough closely related pairs. the superfamily related training set could be seen as an intermediate, where the network will learn the features in the residue pairs that are essential when scoring unseen residue pairs. it was also found that using a binary classifier is not the best way to classify the training data, but instead some continuous classifier could be used. when using the superfamily related training data and profnet_s we see an improvement over prob_score by 31% in mcc  and 14% in average alignment quality for the fold related proteins. interestingly, profnet clearly scores all conserved residues higher than prob_score does.

