BACKGROUND
models for codon substitutions are used in computational biology for a wide range of applications such as reconstructing ancestral dna sequences, determining ka/ks ratios to identify periods of adaptive evolution and aligning coding dna.

methods for estimating mutation matrices from observed substitutions in sequence alignments of proteins were established by dayhoff  <cit> . these matrices contain the probabilities of amino acid mutations for a given period of evolution and have long been used for scoring protein sequence alignments, evolutionary studies and homology searches.

more than a decade ago, when large-scale protein databases became established, several amino acid substitution matrices based on observed mutation counts in protein alignments were constructed  <cit> , replacing the original dayhoff matrices that were based on relatively few alignments.

however, to describe substitutions at the codon level, parameterized models have been developed  <cit>  and are widely used in the study of molecular evolution.

in the same way that the growth of protein databases allowed refined construction of amino acid substitution matrices, the recent increase of nucleotide sequence data made it possible to apply these methods at the codon level. the matrices presented here were constructed using the approach of gonnet  <cit> . this implies that pairwise alignments using full dynamic programming  <cit>  were used in order to count the observed transitions between codons. the sequence data was taken from the complete vertebrate genome databases of ensembl  <cit> .

RESULTS
the additional files contain the  <dig> ×  <dig> matrices presented here. various aspects of the matrices will be discussed in this section. we present the matrix with the exact counts of the observed substitutions , the matrix containing the substitution probabilities derived therefrom  and a matrix containing similarity scores for all possible substitutions .

substitution counts
the  <dig>  alignments that have been used to construct the matrix presented here contained  <dig>  million aligned codon pairs. from each of these aligned pairs, the number of each of the  <dig>  possible substitutions were counted. the difference between the numbers of frequent and rare substitution is high with the most frequent substitution  being observed  <dig>  times, and the rarest substitution, between tgg and gag, being counted only  <dig> times, about  <dig> times less often.

to estimate the precision of the count of the rarest substitution, a binomial distribution of the counts can be assumed. the substitution with minimal count cmin occurs with probability p = 45/ =  <dig> ·10- <dig>  the variance of a binomial distribution is σ <dig> = np and thus for very small p, the variance of cmin is almost equal to cmin =  <dig> and the standard deviation σ is  <dig> .

this means that although a very large amount of data is used to construct the matrix, it is just enough to produce codon counts that are of a tolerable accuracy for rare transitions. only a further increase of high-quality genomic data will allow the clustering of the data into specific subsets. these possibilities will be discussed below.

substitution probabilities
the mutation matrix m constructed from the counts contains the substitution probabilities for the individual codons. entry mi,j gives the probability that codon j mutates to codon i. .

a convenient measure to express the amount of mutations in a matrix is the percentage identity



with fi being the natural frequencies of the codons. for the matrix reported here, p is . <dig>  meaning that in the alignments used, 65% of the codons have undergone substitution .

it is also possible to calculate the percentage of identical amino acids resulting from this matrix:



in the second sum, i goes over all codons that code for the same amino acid as j does. the result for paa is . <dig>  therefore 31% of the amino acids are expected to mutate. this allows the determination of the relationship between the codon substitution matrices and amino acid substitution matrices, because the amino acid pam distance can be derived from the percentage of amino acid identity.

analogously to the definition of  <dig> pam,  <dig> codon-pam can be defined as the distance at which 1% of the codons undergo substitution. again, a codon substitution can involve up to three nucleotide base changes. the substitution matrix for any distance d is approximated by raising the  <dig> codonpam matrix to the power of d.

the relationship between codonpam, pam and f <dig> is shown in figure  <dig>  it shows that amino acid pam increases almost linearly with codonpam. the curve is slightly steeper for the low distances and flattens with increasing distance. the amount of synonymous substitution decays from  <dig> to . <dig> .

mutation scores
since the substitution probabilities are influenced by the codon frequencies, it is not possible to see directly which substitutions occur more than expected and which occur less. this issue is corrected in the scoring matrix d, where entry di,j expresses how much more likely it is that codons i and j were derived from a common ancestral codon compared to a random pairing of them. a higher score for a transition means that this transition is indeed more likely than one with a lower score. the scoring matrix is symmetric, i.e. the transition from codon i to j has the same score as the transition from j to i.

discussion
synonymous mutations
it has been observed that different genes have different ka/ks ratios and therefore the fraction of synonymous substitutions will differ between different gene pairs having a certain pam distance. this is because there are no strong selective constraints on synonymous substitutions and therefore the number of these substitutions accumulates in a clock-like manner  <cit>  while the number of nonsynonymous substitutions is governed by functional constraints.

increasing amounts of genomic data would allow the construction and comparison of matrices from alignments with differing amounts of synonymous and non-synonymous substitutions, representing a two-dimensional array of matrices, where one dimension is the evolutionary distance and the other corresponds to the amount of synonymous change. unfortunately, the current size of the nucleotide databases does not yet allow such a clustering of the available data. instead, the alignments selected to construct the matrices were filtered to fall within a window of synonymous mutations, thereby excluding the most extreme values. . figure  <dig> shows the distribution of the alignments' f <dig> values.

range of applicability
one possible application of scoring matrices is protein and coding dna alignment. in order to compare alignments based on amino acid substitution matrices and the codon matrices presented here, the likelihood scores are compared. since these scores express the probability ratios of the two sequences having evolved from a common ancestor to them being aligned by random chance, they serve as a confidence measure of an alignment. the higher the score, the higher the likelihood that the alignment is by reasons of ancestry than by random chance.

as the likelihood scores serve as an indicator of alignment quality, orthologous sequences for species pairs of various distance and classes were used to determine when codon matrix based alignments produced higher scores than amino-acid pam matrices.

the result is that for closely related species, the codon based scores are always higher, but the more distant two species are, the better the performance of the amino acid based alignments. an interesting point is that although codon mutations in different sets of species were found to be significantly different , the above finding holds not only for the vertebrates, from which the matrices were constructed, but also for the invertebrates, yeasts and even bacteria.

from the results in table  <dig>  a pam distance smaller than  <dig> would favor the use of codon substitution matrices instead of amino acid based matrices.

CONCLUSIONS
because codon substitution matrices are substantially bigger than amino acid matrices and also because some of the substitutions are extremely rare compared to the most frequent ones, large amounts of genomic data are necessary to model the transitions accurately. the  <dig>  alignments used here produce enough aligned codons to fulfill this criterium, but do not allow further clustering of the data set in order to create more specific matrices.

the codon substitution matrix presented here is to our knowledge the first based entirely on empirical data and can serve in many fields of computational biology. we have found that at long distances, when the synonymous mutations have reached saturation, amino acid matrices are better suited for alignments and long-distance homology searching. codon mutation matrices have advantages for alignment up to medium evolutionary distances and for usages that require dna such as ancestral reconstruction of dna sequences and the calculation of ka/ks ratios.

