BACKGROUND
free-living amoebae are environmental protozoa, which are important predators that contribute to the control of microbial communities  <cit> . they feed by phagocytosing bacteria and other large, energy-rich particles that are present in their environment  <cit> . several microorganisms have adapted to become resistant to amoebal phagocytosis and are able to escape the phagocytic pathway and multiply within phagocytic vacuoles  <cit> . certain bacteria that live naturally in amoebae have been proposed to be amoebal pathogens  <cit> . these organisms are phylogenetically diverse and belong to chlamydiae; α, β and γ-proteobacteria; and bacteroidetes  <cit> . the similarities in the strategies used by phylogenetically distantly related intracellular pathogens are most easily explained by convergent evolution  <cit> . recently, schmitz-esser et al.  <cit>  reported  <dig> functional domains that are significantly enriched in amoeba-associated bacteria; half of these domains are more frequently associated with eukaryotic proteins. however, the genomic characteristics associated with an intra-amoebal lifestyle remain largely unknown.

to date, few bacterial genomes from natural pathogens of amoebae have been fully sequenced, including those from  three strains of chlamydia-related bacteria, i.e., "candidatus protochlamydia amoebophila"  <cit> , parachlamydia acanthamoebae  <cit>  and waddlia chondrophila  <cit> ;  five strains of legionella pneumophila  <cit>  and two strains of l. longbeachae  <cit> ;  rickettsia bellii  <cit> ; and a member of bacteroidetes, "candidatus amoebophilus asiaticus"  <cit> .

recently, the new legionella species l. drancourtii, initially named legionella-like amoebal pathogen  <dig> , was described within an acanthamoeba sp.  <cit> . this bacterial species, known to be a strict intracellular pathogen of amoebae, exhibits a genome that is distinctly larger than its closest relatives, francisella tularensis and coxiella burnetii  <cit> . despite its strict intracellular lifestyle, p. acanthamoebae exhibits a 3-fold larger genome than members of the chlamydia genus  <cit>  which includes human and animal pathogens that do not grow in amoebae  <cit> . these characteristics contrast with the observed genome-size reduction that is associated with the transition from a free-living to an intracellular lifestyle  <cit> . it has been proposed that the larger genome size might be linked to the sympatric lifestyle of intra-amoebal bacteria and to gene exchange among amoeba-resistant microorganisms inside the amoeba or between these microorganisms and the amoeba itself  <cit> .

a major mechanism involved in genetic exchanges between amoeba-resistant bacteria and their host is the type iv secretion system   <cit> . this widespread system can be divided into three major subtypes: those that mediate dna transfer , and those that translocate proteins and nucleoprotein complexes   <cit> . all of the studied genomes of intra-amoebal bacteria, including legionellae, r. bellii and pr. amoebophila, exhibit a t4ss of differing subtypes  <cit> , except for w. chondrophila, in which no such system has been identified  <cit> . interestingly, a partial f-like conjugative system has been identified in the draft genome of p. acanthamoebae  <cit> .

in this study, we sequence the genome of the l. drancourtii strain llap- <dig> and compare it to the genome of the p. acanthamoebae strain hall's coccus in order to identify genes that could have been exchanged between these two amoebal pathogens and, more widely, between chlamydiae and legionellae.

RESULTS
dirty genomes of l. drancourtii and p. acanthamoebae
sequencing reads from l. drancourtii strain llap- <dig> obtained from  <dig> pyrosequencing were assembled into  <dig> contigs that were further organized into  <dig> scaffolds . the genome had a total size of  <dig> , <dig> bp and a g+c content of 39%. a total of  <dig>  protein-coding orfs with an average size of  <dig> bp were identified and cover  <dig> % of the genome. the published genome of the p. acanthamoebae strain hall's coccus  <cit>  comprises  <dig> contigs and has a total of  <dig> , <dig> bp with a g+c content of 38%. the  <dig>  predicted genes have an average size of  <dig> bp and encompass 89% of the genome. the genome of legionella drancourtii and parachlamydia acanthamoebae have been deposited in genbank under accession number acul <dig> and nz_acze <dig>  respectively.

orthologues identification
to identify orthologous genes that might have been acquired by lateral gene transfer, proteins of p. acanthamoebae and l. drancourtii were subjected to reciprocal blastp searches. a total of  <dig> orthologous proteins were identified as exhibiting a reciprocal similarity percentage > 30% and an alignment length coverage > 60% . each orthologue was subjected to blastp homology searches against one amoebal and six bacterial genomes and was considered present if it fulfilled identical cutoffs for similarity and coverage. a clustering analysis according to the presence or absence of the orthologues in the different organisms was used to categorize the genes into eight different categories, as illustrated in the heatmap in figure  <dig>  the clustering of bacteria in the horizontal top tree indicates that consistent results were obtained when using p. acanthamoebae or l. drancourtii orthologues as queries against the other genomes. cluster a consists of core genes that are present in nearly all bacteria. clusters b and c represent core genes generally absent in c. trachomatis and/or r. baltica but respectively absent and present in the amoeba dictyostelium. the absence of an ortholog in c. trachomatis is likely due to the genome reduction that arose in the chlamydia genus, whereas the absence of an ortholog in r. baltica might reflect the divergence of the species. the remaining clusters are made of differently conserved genes. genes in cluster d are mainly present in pr. amoebophila, l. pneumophila, and in c. burnetii. the small cluster e contains genes mainly present in pr. amoebophila. genes in cluster f are mostly present in l. pneumophila, c. burnetii and r. baltica and to a lesser extend in e. coli. cluster g is formed of two subsets: one subset of genes absent from all compared genomes, and another subset containing genes present in pr. amoebophila and e. coli. cluster h mainly represents genes encoded by the gamma-proteobacteria and the amoeba dictyostelium but absent from chlamydiales and planctomycetales. the genes were classified according to the number of hits obtained against each of the six bacterial genomes used .

this table indicates the total number of proteins with a score of  <dig> to  <dig> based on their presence in the six bacteria when using p. acanthamoebae or l. drancourtii orthologous proteins as queries for the blastp searches. the number of corresponding genes present in each bacterium is detailed in the following columns. the bacteria in the first three columns are decreasingly related to l. drancourtii, andthose indicated in the last three columns exhibit diminishing relatedness to p. acanthamoebae.

conservation of orthologous genes
core gene identification: of the  <dig> orthologues,  <dig> were found in the genomes of pr. amoebophila, c. trachomatis, r. baltica, l. pneumophila, c. burnetii, and e. coli . of these orthologues,  <dig> coding sequences  were considered essential genes  <cit>  and, notably, encode for  <dig> ribosomal proteins and  <dig> trna synthetases. in addition,  <dig> genes were present in five of the six screened genomes , of which  <dig>  belonged to the minimal gene set. these sequences included  <dig> ribosomal proteins and  <dig> trna synthetases due to their borderline values for identity and alignment coverage. of these  <dig> coding sequences,  <dig>  were absent from the c. trachomatis genome, reflecting the important genome reduction that has occurred in this bacterial clade, especially among genes encoding for metabolic functions . in addition,  <dig> genes  were absent from the r. baltica genome, probably as a result of its greater phylogenetic distances to parachlamydia and legionella than the other bacteria screened. only  <dig>   <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> genes were missing in the genomes of c. burnetii, e. coli, pr. amoebophila and l. pneumophila, respectively. finally,  <dig> genes were present in four of the six studied genomes  and  <dig> of them  belonged to the minimal gene set  <cit> . all of the coding sequences with a score of  <dig> or above were considered to be common genes found in most bacteria and were therefore not further investigated for potential hgt.

accessory orthologues: of the  <dig> remaining genes,  <dig> were identified in three screened bacterial species . there was no obvious logical pattern of distribution among the bacteria because no genes were common to the three amoebal pathogens included in the analysis , and only ten coding sequences were common to γ-proteobacteria . moreover, bacteria belonging to the chlamydiae-planctomycetes superphylum  encoded for no common gene in this category. thirty-seven orthologues exhibited homologues in two species . unsurprisingly, l. pneumophila contained 76% of these genes indicating its close phylogenetic distance to l. drancourtii. in contrast, none of these genes were found only in bacteria belonging to the chlamydiales order , while  <dig> genes were only found in bacteria belonging to the legionellales order .

in addition,  <dig> genes harbored similarities to a single species : l. pneumophila , e. coli  or pr. amoebophila . finally, as visualized in figure  <dig> ,  <dig> genes were only present in p. acanthamoebae and l. drancourtii . only one of these was also present in d. discoideum: a conserved protein of unknown function that was also encoded only in the corby strain of l. pneumophila and not in the paris strain of l. pneumophila that was used in blast analyses. interestingly, this category included an operon for histidine biosynthesis, which was composed of four genes , that was only found in p. acanthamoebae and the recently sequenced w. chondrophila  <cit>  but not in the more closely-related pr. amoebophila. the corresponding genes in l. drancourtii were encoded at two different genomic regions and the four genes exhibited divergent phylogenies that render an acquisition of the entire operon from legionella implausible.

horizontal gene transfers
to identify potential gene transfers, the  <dig> genes with scores of  <dig> to  <dig> were subjected to phylogenetic reconstruction using the  <dig> best blast hits from each p. acanthamoebae and l. drancourtii orthologues. the topology of the trees deviated from the expected taxonomic distribution of representatives from the chlamydiales and legionellales orders in  <dig> cases that are detailed in table  <dig>  overall, both p. acanthamoebae and l. drancourtii genes clustered together in  <dig> phylogenies . interestingly, four of these genes  were organized in an operon that encodes for a permease and a membrane anchored atp-binding protein of an abc- <dig> type transporter, an hlyd family secretion protein and an outer membrane efflux protein . similar systems that are widespread among gram-negative bacteria such as e. coli, serratia marcescens and pseudomonas aeruginosa form a specialized secretory system for proteins, such as pore-forming toxins, proteases, lipases and s-layer proteins  <cit> . among the six bacteria screened, a partial operon was found only in e. coli, where the first three coding sequences had strong homologues, but the fourth gene encoding for the outer membrane efflux protein exhibited a homologue at a more distant locus. notably, the tree topology was similar for all of these proteins  suggesting that the entire operon was exchanged between l. drancourtii and p. acanthamoebae in a single event.

* clustering with legionella pneumophila only, pah = parachlamydia acanthamoebae, llap = legionella drancourtii

this table presents the classification by score and id numbers of the l. drancourtii and p. acanthamoebae orthologues that exhibit a phylogenetic reconstruction suggesting horizontal gene transfer events. the gene product annotation, cog accession number and cog group are indicated for each gene.

l. drancourtii never clustered with several members of the chlamydiales order. however, p. acanthamoebae branched with the legionellales clade in 10% of the trees  . a good example of this clustering is a hypothetical protein , where p. acanthamoebae clustered with a branch containing francisella and two legionella species, suggesting that a transfer occurred before the divergence of the legionella and francisella genera. in three additional instances , p. acanthamoebae clustered specifically with l. pneumophila and far from other legionellales  suggesting a transfer between these two species. these genes were located on different contigs and encoded a permease, an hlyd family protein belonging to an abc-transporter, and a putative transcriptional regulator. an example of a protein wrongly considered only to be present in l. drancourtii and p. acanthamoebae is an acetyltransferase  that has a borderline similarity value of  <dig> % with l. pneumophila. in fact, the corresponding gene was found in several members of the rickettsiales order , in legionella species and in p. acanthamoebae. we hypothesize that this protein's presence in parachlamydia results from a hgt with an ancestor of the legionellales order.

furthermore, the legionellales and chlamydiales orders were directly related in the tree that was inferred from four genes  that encode for a multidrug resistance protein, a 7-dehyrocholesterol reductase, a protein that protects dna during starvation and a conserved hypothetical protein, respectively . the gene involved in the protection against oxidative stress  presented a particular topology. a phylogenetic tree inferred from an analysis with the  <dig> best blast hits indicated that this gene was recently exchanged between rickettsiales and legionellales and that an exchange between legionellae and chlamydiae had occurred earlier . notably, two different copies of this gene were also present in the cyanobacterium synechococcus, one of which branched closely to chlamydiales, suggesting an exchange with an ancestral chlamydiae, and another copy clustered with other cyanobacterial genomes and β-proteobacteria.

the phylogenetic analysis identified  <dig> cases of potential gene transfer between p. acanthamoebae or l. drancourtii and rickettsia, orientia, wolbachia and ehrlichia . of these cases, five genes  may have been horizontally transferred between l. drancourtii and rickettsia, including a beta-lactamase . the analysis of the id 387-encoded hypothetical protein clustered p. acanthamoebae, legionellales and orientia together. the close relationship between l. drancourtii and orientia suggests a transfer to the latter species . the tree of the aminoglycoside transferase  illustrates a complex situation where all of the intracellular bacteria were grouped in a single cluster, suggesting a common ancestral source for this gene. the atpase and permease subunits of an abc-type transporter  exhibited the remarkable phylogenetic pattern of being nearly exclusive to intracellular species. however, this tree exhibited an atypical configuration that showed no monophyly among legionella and parachlamydiaceae. indeed, l. drancourtii clustered with l. pneumophila str. paris and parachlamydia, whereas another gene from l. pneumophila clustered with protochlamydia. this topology suggests the presence of multiple paralogues within the l. pneumophila genome. we hypothesize that duplication events first occurred in l. pneumophila and that one paralogue was subsequently horizontally transferred to protochlamydia and another paralogue to parachlamydia. finally, the tree for a proton/sodium-glutamate symport protein  suggests an exchange between chlamydiales and an ancestral rickettsiales .

in three cases , similarity searches retrieved eukaryotic proteins matching l. drancourtii and p. acanthamoebae proteins, including a 7-dehydrocholesterol reductase and a conserved hypothetical protein  from l. drancourtii that seem closer to eukaryotes than to bacteria with the exception of l. longbeachae and a pyruvate dehydrogenase e <dig> alpha subunit  . interestingly, blast searches with the 7-dehydrocholesterol reductase retrieved a protein from the amoeba naegleria gruberi that clusters with l. drancourtii in the phylogenetic tree. in a recent study, this gene was proposed to have been acquired from viridiplantae  <cit> , but this earlier phylogenetic reconstruction did not include naegleria. finally, two widely conserved enzymes  that encode for a malate synthase and an isocitrate lyase are syntenic in both genomes. a phylogenetic reconstruction with their twenty best blast hits and amoebae showed that the malate synthase of l. drancourtii clustered with dictyostelium discoideum, suggesting a gene exchange from a legionella ancestor to amoebae, as previously reported  <cit> .

the genomes of l. drancourtii and p. acanthamoebae harbor respectively  <dig> and  <dig> insertion sequences , a number probably underestimated due to the likely presence of such elements in gaps of the genomic sequence. one is of type isnpu <dig> is located  <dig> bp upstream the gene lgd_ <dig>  that encodes an acetyltransferase. there were no iss close to other genes identified as potentially acquired by hgt .

the genomic nucleotide composition, notably the gc content and codon usage, varies widely among the organisms. as a consequence, regions that were exchanged recently present an imprinting with the donor's characteristics. however, mutational pressures tend to adapt the compositional features of foreign dna to that of its host over time, thus making the transferred region indistinguishable  <cit> . in our analysis, the gc content of the  <dig> genes suspected to have been acquired by hgt based on phylogeny did not show a marked difference in the gc content compared to the rest of the parachlamydia or legionella genes . the mean gc content for parachlamydia and legionella is respectively  <dig> % and 39% for all genes and, more precisely,  <dig> % and  <dig> % at the third codon position, which is less constrained for the conservation of amino acid properties. an interesting case was the operon that encodes an abc transporter that showed the highest gc content, exhibiting values between 41% and 45% in p. acanthamoebae. in contrast, the gc content of this operon in l. drancourtii was less distinguishable from the mean gene gc values. this finding suggests that p. acanthamoebae acquired this operon by hgt with a partner that has a higher gc content than l. drancourtii.

most exchanged genes encode poorly characterized functions represented by cog category r. however, several genes that belong to the overrepresented categories r, v, m and p encode putative functions linked to the transport of various molecules and resistance to toxic compounds.

discussion
in this study, the genes in the draft genomes of p. acanthamoebae and l. drancourtii were compared; we identified  <dig> orthologues, which were subsequently searched for in increasingly distantly related organisms. although limited by the small number of related organisms that we used to define conserved core genes and less-conserved genes, our approach allowed us efficiently to discard 72% of the orthologues that are widespread within bacteria. the remaining 28% of the genes were submitted to phylogenetic reconstructions, which enabled us to detect  <dig> putative hgts between p. acanthamoebae and l. drancourtii. in addition,  <dig> genes were potentially transferred from legionellales to p. acanthamoebae, whereas no genes were transferred from chlamydiales to l. drancourtii. as expected, half of these potential hgts encode for transporters and resistance mechanisms that could be of particular importance for the bacteria to resist to the microbicidal defences of its amoebal host and to survive with high concentrations of toxic compounds. the remaining hgts encode for metabolic functions or members of poorly characterized protein families. their importance and their role regarding the amoebal pathogenicity of l. drancourtii and p. acanthamoebae remain to be determined.

we acknowledge the fact that the stringent reciprocal identity and coverage cut-offs constitute one major limitation of this method, as they may falsely classify some genes as absent from one of the selected related species when they are, in fact, present. genes that were probably acquired by hgt showed a large distribution in their percentage of identity, ranging from 30% to 71%, but they all exhibited an alignment coverage greater than 80% indicating that a more stringent criterion could have been used . the phylogenetic reconstructions enabled us to pinpoint such cases because closely related sequences were retrieved by blast searches. one major cause of these false negatives are borderline values in one of the variables, as highlighted for the previously mentioned acetyltransferase , in which the percentage identity was  <dig> %, and the coverage 81%.

another bias may stem from the sequencing technology  and the gene prediction method used for both genomes; other approaches may have been used in the other six genomes screened. a particular example is the case of two orthologues  that correspond to a single gene that was artificially split in two different coding sequences. after manual visualization of the sequencing data from both genomes, it appeared that frameshifts were caused by two homopolymer errors due to the sequencing technology at similar positions in the two bacteria. this artificially split gene encodes an atp-dependent clp protease  that is, in fact, present in three species: l. pneumophila, c. trachomatis and pr. amoebophila, although it was considered to be absent from the six genomes screened.

in addition, a number of proteins that are considered orthologues in l. drancourtii and p. acanthamoebae do not share a common history. in these cases, blast searches retrieved proteins from completely different organisms and the phylogenies clearly showed a divergent history, with the parachlamydia and legionella hits being grouped in distinct clusters . the phylogenies exhibiting this topology are easily identifiable and, therefore, do not cause a bias in the results. one option to avoid misidentifying orthologues would have been to perform a blast comparison versus the non-redundant database and to assign orthology only if the gene occurred within the best blast hits.

we did not identify any gene transfers from chlamydiales to l. drancourtii. however, this finding may be due to the limited number of genomic sequences from chlamydia-related bacteria available in the non-redundant database. indeed, most published genomes belong to the family chlamydiaceae, which includes bacteria that are highly adapted to their non-amoebal eukaryotic hosts and exhibit small genomes that typically range from  <dig> mbp to  <dig>  mbp. additionally, the chlamydiales order presents a biphasic developmental cycle the relatively inactive extracellular form is surrounded by a highly cross-linked extracellular matrix  <cit>  that might relatively non-permissive to genetic exchanges. the replicating form, possessing a larger size and reduced extracellular matrix, might be more permeable to such exchanges that should subsequently arise within the host inclusion. the ability of chlamydia-related bacteria to grow within amoebae would thus facilitate gene exchanges with other amoeba-infecting microorganisms. this hypothesis would be strengthened by in vitro evidence of co-localisation in amoebae of p. acanthamoebae, or any other amoeba-resistant chlamydiae, with legionella.

ogata et al.  <cit>  suggested that gene exchanges among amoeba-resistant bacteria are an important mechanism for triggering the evolution of intracellular microorganisms. the recent analysis of the amoebophilus asiaticus genome identified a large prevalence of gene transfer events among amoeba-resistant bacteria  <cit> . in our study, several phylogenies indicated possible hgts between amoeba-associated bacteria  and arthropod-associated bacteria, such as rickettsia, orientia, wolbachia, and ehrlichia. the presence of these genes in insect and arthropod endosymbionts suggests the possibility of intra-insect transfer because the chlamydiales order also comprises the genera fritschea and rhabdochlamydia, which feature members that can infect arthropods  <cit> . thus, as proposed by thomas et al.  <cit> , gene exchanges might be a common mechanism in intracellular bacteria that exhibit a sympatric lifestyle and may occur not only between amoebal symbionts but also between those found in arthropods. in addition, we identified a significant blast match with mimivirus, a large amoeba-infecting virus, for a hypothetical protein , thereby supporting the hypothesis that intra-amoebal viruses are also capable of genetic exchanges with other microorganisms found in this environment  <cit> .

in most cases, the legionella or parachlamydia proteins were largely diverged from their closest neighbors, suggesting that the gene transfers were evolutionarily ancient events. the inclusion of the best blast hits vs nr in the phylogenetic reconstruction identified the putative partner of transfer among all available sequenced genomes. as an example, the phylogenetic reconstruction of the pebp family protein  clustered l. drancourtii with the amoebal symbiont amoebophilus asiaticus . due to the lack of sequenced genomes in species closely-related to l. drancourtii or p. acanthamoebae, the direction of the transfer and the period of exchange relative to bacterial speciation cannot be unequivocally established. there is no strong evidence for recent hgt events that can enable us to pinpoint the exact partners of the transfer, and an intermediate host that has not been sequenced yet might be implicated in the future.

no genes were surrounded on both sides by is but, since no recent hgt was identified, insertion sequences might have diverged over time sufficiently to impair their identification. the close gc content values between the l. drancourtii and p. acanthamoebae species and the large divergence in the gc content among genes prevent us from confirming gene exchanges between these two partners by this method. moreover, the large range of gc content within a bacterial order makes the use of this measure difficult for discriminating a potential origin of transfer because the phylogenetic tree usually shows distant relationships between our candidate partners.

CONCLUSIONS
this study presents a first genome-scale analysis that provides evidence for numerous hgt that occurred among three major intra-amoebal bacterial phyla. moreover, this article reports a new genome of an amoebal pathogen, l. drancourtii, that opens new possibilities for the investigation of such important horizontal transfer events and provides data for researchers interested in the biology of this species. with the availability of additional genome sequences, a complete study of all sequenced intra-amoebal genomes would be of large interest and will bring in the future a more complete picture of gene exchanges occurring between amoeba-resistant microorganisms. as previously suggested  <cit> , the amoebae probably have a major role in bringing amoeba-associated microorganisms close enough to facilitate genetic exchanges. the occurrence of hgt between intra-amoebal pathogens is of importance, since such gene exchanges may play an important role in the selection of bacteria able to resist both the amoebae and other phagocytic cells such as the macrophages, which thus represent good candidates as new pathogens

