BACKGROUND
the approach to analyzing a single gene  has proved itself to be a powerful tool in molecular phylogenetic studies. however, it may not be suitable for deriving the phylogenetic history of organisms because it sometimes provides insufficient resolution in the derived tree due to limited phylogenetic information in a single gene, or it gives rise to conflicting trees when applied to different individual genes due to different evolution rates or horizontal gene transfer  <cit> . the recently advent of high-throughput sequencing techniques has made it possible and reliable for evolutionary biologists to reconstruct phylogenetic trees of organisms  using the overwhelming amount of genomic information extracted from their complete genomes. it is also believed that the created genome trees are less affected by variable mutation rates or horizontal gene transfer events. so far, many different methods on the basis of this principle have been proposed  <cit> , such as gene content based on the presence and absence of genes  <cit>  and gene order based on the presence and absence of gene pairs  <cit> . gene order basically evolves faster than gene content  <cit> . to gain a high-resolution genome tree, therefore, gene order is more suited for closely related organisms, whereas gene content is more suited for distantly related organisms.

recently, luo et al.  <cit>  have proposed a new method, as well as a server named bphyog, for reconstructing the genome trees of some prokaryotes only based on the content of overlapping genes. the so-called overlapping genes  are defined as adjacent genes whose coding sequences  overlap partially or entirely. in their studies  <cit> , luo et al. have reported that ogs can serve as a useful phylogenetic character by providing interesting additional insights into phylogenetic relationship among prokaryotes. their rationale for doing this is as follows. as phylogenetic characters, ogs may not evolve as slowly as gene content, because they can be observed frequently in all prokaryotic genomes and may also mutate at a universal  rate  <cit> . on the other hand, ogs have more evolutionary conservation than gene order because the linkage may be preserved between two functional-related ogs  <cit> . however, we have found that some prokaryotic genome trees constructed using bphyog are not greatly consistent with those produced by traditional phylogenetic approaches based on ribosomal rnas and/or concatenation of multiple protein sequences  <cit> .

to address this problem, we have recently implemented a new server, called ogtree  <cit> , which allows evolutionary biologists to reconstruct more reliable genome trees of some prokaryotes by using not only their og content but also their og order. it has been widely accepted that during evolutionary course, species genomes are subject to rearrangements, such as reversals , transpositions and translocations, all of which can alter the order and/or the orientation of genes in the genomes. as a consequence, the orders of orthologous og pairs even between two closely related organisms may not be conserved. this suggests that we should take into account both og content and orthologous og order when reconstructing the genome trees of prokaryotes using the information of ogs. in our previous study  <cit> , therefore, we have defined an overlapping-gene distance between two genomes based on a measure of combining og content  and og order  in their whole genomes and also implemented our ogtree according to the pairwise og distances between prokaryotic genomes. our experimental results for a set of closely related proteobacteria showed that our ogtree outperformed bphyog in the quality of reconstruction of their genome trees.

in this study, we further improve the accuracy of our ogtree by extending the genes retrieved from their complete genomes to include their regulatory regions and redefining the distance measure between two orthologous og orders using genome rearrangements rather than breakpoints caused by the absence of orthologous og pairs. the reasons for doing so are as follows. for some distantly related prokaryotic genomes, the amount of their overlapping cdss is limited so that it is hard to find enough og pairs to properly evaluate their pairwise og distances and accurately reconstruct their genome trees. actually, the term "gene" defined in modern genomics should include not only its coding region, but also its regulatory regions, such as promoter  and terminator   <cit> . in addition, overlapping of regulatory regions of distinct genes should be of certain interest, because the regulation of expression for these genes is more or less interrelated  <cit> . in this study, therefore, we expand the region of a gene to include both its cds and regulatory regions so that two adjacent genes whose cdss or regulatory regions overlap with each other are considered as a pair of overlapping genes.

on the other hand, the orders of orthologous og pairs between two prokaryotic genomes, as mentioned above, are often different due to genome rearrangements. the distance measure between two orthologous og orders we previously defined was analogous to the breakpoint distance between two gene orders, which has been widely used as a rough measure of genomic distance  <cit> . in contrast to the genome rearrangement distance, however, the breakpoint distance may not correspond to an optimal series of events that accounts for the rearrangements of one genome with respect to another. moreover, it is still not clear how to adapt the breakpoint analysis to multi-chromosomal genomes  <cit> . in this study, therefore, we try to use the genome rearrangement distance involved with reversals, block-interchanges  and translocations  <cit>  to re-define the distance of the orthologous og orders between two prokaryotic genomes.

RESULTS
to demonstrate the accuracy improvement achieved by our new ogtree <dig>  we have selected  <dig> genomes of proteobacteria, which consist of one α-proteobacteria, three β-proteobacteria and  <dig> γ-proteobacteria, as the testing dataset . this dataset was previously used by comas et al.  <cit>  for their phylogenomic study on the monophyletic origin of insect endosymbionts from the γ-proteobacteria, a debated issue with several conflicting reports. in addition, we used the phylogenetic tree constructed by comas et al.  <cit>  based on concatenated sequences of  <dig> homologous proteins as a reference tree  and compared the genome tree obtained by our ogtree <dig>  to those phylogenetic trees predicted by bphyog   <cit>  and our previous ogtree   <cit> . as was argued in  <cit> , the phylogenetic tree in figure  <dig> can be considered as a good reference tree because it coincides with the taxonomy accepted by biologists for these proteobacteria. in particular, the three buchnera species in this reference tree form a monophyletic group with the other insect endosymbionts of b. floridanus and w. glossinidia. in addition, this group of endosymbionts is a sister clade to the cluster of the other five enterobacteria of yersinia, esherichia and salmonella. however, it is worth mentioning here that the phylogenetic tree created by using 16s rrnas, as shown in figure  <dig>  is different from that in figure  <dig>  in this 16s rrna tree, the γ-proteobacteria of x. axonopodis, x. campestris and x. fastidiosa were placed in the β-proteobacteria branch and the species of v. cholerae was placed away from p. aeruginosa. this evidences that the single-gene approach to analyzing the 16s rrnas is not suitable for inferring the phylogenetic relationships between these proteobacterial organisms.

in our experiment, the topologies of both the neighbor-joining  and fitch-margoliash  trees  we obtained using ogtree <dig> were different from the one in the unweighted pair group method with arithmetic mean  tree  with respect to the positions of r. prowazekii, v. cholerae, h. influenzae and p. multocida. particularly, the α-proteobacterium r. prowazekii was placed in the branch of γ-proteobacteria in both the nj and fm trees. the two pasteurellaceae species  and v. cholerae were neighbors in the nj tree, while in the fm tree they formed a monophyletic group that was placed in the enterobacterial branch. as to the upgma tree, its topology was greatly congruent with that of the reference tree as shown in figure  <dig>  in particular, the upgma tree clearly and correctly divided the  <dig> proteobacteria into three monophyletic clades and it also reflected monophyly not only for the three buchnera species but also for a wider group including the other insect endosymbionts of b. floridanus and w. glossinidia with higher support values. however, v. cholerae in the upgma tree was placed a little away from p. aeruginosa, which is the same as the phylogenetic tree of 16s rrnas in figure  <dig>  as done in our previous study on ogtree  <cit> , as well as the studies by luo et al. on bphyog  <cit> , the upgma method in this experiment produced a genome tree that is much more congruent with the reference tree constructed using a trimmed alignment of  <dig> concatenated protein sequences, when compared to both the nj and fm methods. this characteristic may be due to that, as originally reported in  <cit> , evolution of ogs occurs at a constant mutation rate across bacterial genomes, suggesting that the upgma method is more suitable than both the nj and fm methods for the reconstruction of prokaryotic phylogenies on basis of og pairs.

as compared to the phylogenetic tree constructed by bphyog , our ogtree <dig> produced a more accurate phylogeny  for the  <dig> proteobacteria genomes used in this study. in the bphyog tree, the relationship of endosymbionts was paraphyletic, because the three buchnera species failed to form a monophyletic group and the two insect endosymbionts, w. brevipalpis and b. aphidicola, were separated far away from each other. in addition, the three β-proteobacteria were placed just as neighbor taxa rather than a sister cluster. in contrast, w. brevipalpis, b. aphidicola and other three buchnera species in our upgma tree , as well as in the reference tree , were placed as a sister group, suggesting that there should be a common origin for these five endosymbionts. moreover, our current ogtree <dig> indeed outperformed over its previous version ogtree in phylogeny reconstruction for prokaryotes, because in the genome tree predicted by ogtree using the upgma method , the α-proteobacteria of r. prowazekii and the β-proteobacteria of r. solanacearum were placed together as a sister group and the insect endosymbiont of b. floridanus was placed in the branch of enterobacteria.

as demonstrated above, as well as in other previous studies  <cit> , og pairs indeed can serve as a useful tool in phylogenetic inference of prokaryotes, because they are abundant and more conserved than non-overlapping genes in prokaryotic genomes and even may evolve at a constant rate across prokaryotic genomes. in fact, our algorithm for constructing the genome trees of prokaryotes using og pairs relies on successfully identifying orthologous genes, as well as authentic orfs and horizontally transferred genes, before we can compare the og content and order across organisms and calculate their pairwise og distances. therefore, more accurate identification of authentic orfs, hgt events and orthologous genes will definitely further improve the accuracy of our algorithm and software tool. on the other hand, we measured the og distance by taking into account of both the og content and order in a pair of organisms. particularly, we estimated the og order distance  by using the genome rearrangements involved with reversals , block-interchanges  and translocations   <cit> . although this rearrangement distance may underestimate the true distance, we believe that the difference between them for the proteobacteria we used in this study is small. the reasons for this small difference are as follows. first, the rearrangements we considered include not only reversals but also transpositions and translocations. second, bourque and pevzner  <cit>  have conducted simulations to compare the estimated reversal distances and the true ones, consequently showing that the reversal distance approximates the true distance very well as long as the number of reversals remains below  <dig>  n , where n is the number of genes being considered. according to the experimental results we obtained in this study, the normalized rearrangement distance  typically varies from  <dig> to  <dig>  for closely related prokaryotes .

CONCLUSIONS
previously, we have implemented a web server named ogtree to demonstrate that overlapping genes can be served as a useful genomic marker for reconstructing genome trees of some prokaryotes. in contrast to bphyog, the og distance we defined to measure the difference between two prokaryotic genomes in our ogtree was based on a combination of their og content and orthologous og order. in this study, we have further improved the accuracy of our ogtree in reconstruction of prokaryotic genome trees by extending the regions of genes to include their regulatory regions and redefining the distance measure between two orthologous og orders using genome rearrangements rather than simple breakpoints. our experimental results on a set of  <dig> proteobacteria have also shown that the above modifications indeed helped us to reconstruct a more precise and robust genome tree that coincides with the taxonomy accepted by biologists for these proteobacteria. this suggests that our current ogtree <dig> can provide interesting insights into the study of evolutionary relationships of completely sequenced prokaryotic genomes.

