BACKGROUND
the phyllostomidae  is the dominant family of bats in central and south america. this family has undergone an adaptive radiation unparalleled among other mammals in terms of ecological and morphological diversity  <cit> . starting from an insectivore ancestor in the late eocene  <cit> , the  <dig> extant genera in this family have diversified into specialized forms for insectivory, carnivory, frugivory, granivory, nectarivory, and sanguivory   <cit> . this ecological diversity and specialisation originates from an intricate partitioning of resources  <cit> , and is probably responsible for the high local species richness  observed for leaf-nosed bats. the evolution of specialised diets created functional demands, apparently determining changes in cranial and mandibular shape  <cit> . the magnitude of skull form  variation among phyllostomid lineages is large and has been assessed by correlational studies both qualitatively and quantitatively, using measurement ratios of functional relevance or traditional distance measurements  <cit> . one important aspect of phenotypic variation in the family is the snout elongation associated with nectarivory. this elongation is thought to be responsible for a trade-off between two functional demands: tongue support and bite force  <cit> . bats with longer snouts might have longer operational tongue lengths  <cit> , but are known to have weaker bites than bats with short snouts, what might restrict the dietary range accessible to them  <cit>  and lead to seasonal migrations  <cit> . nogueira et al.   <cit>  have shown that apart from the general elongation, other skull and mandible shape changes are associated with  bite force, such as the relative size of mandibular processes , zygomatic arch position and robustness and the relative position and sizes of tooth rows. the feeding behaviour is also relevant to the understanding of the biomechanics of feeding and resource partitioning in bats  <cit> , but is less studied than morphology.

the ecomorphological diversification of phyllostomids has long been considered the result of an adaptive radiation, but no specific tests of the responsible mechanisms have been performed, apart from the correlational studies mentioned before . an analysis of diversification rates indicated a significant shift at the base of the phyllostomid tree  <cit> , that could be associated with an adaptive diversification, but increased speciation is not an unequivocal evidence of adaptive radiation  <cit> . monteiro and nogueira   <cit>  provide indirect evidence of adaptive evolution, assessing the integration patterns in the phyllostomid mandible during evolutionary shape changes. the interspecific integration patterns  were independent from pooled within-species integration patterns , as expected during adaptive evolution on an adaptive landscape  <cit> . long term selection on species means  is expected to be independent from the structure of genetic correlations among morphological variables, depending only on selection gradients  <cit>  associated with specific adaptive peaks. in this context, we can move beyond the usual phenotype-ecology correlation approach, assessing the likelihood of different evolutionary scenarios through recent model-based approaches for comparative analyses  <cit> . it is possible to select between alternative adaptive models with different postulated selective agents or adaptive peaks  <cit> . it is also possible to estimate optimal phenotypic values for each adaptive peak to use as a basis for testing hypotheses regarding the adaptive evolution of lineages  <cit> , and to cast light on the evolutionary processes responsible for species diversity  <cit> .

we focus our study on the variation of mandible form , which is a model for the evolution of complex morphological structures  <cit> . the mandible can be used as a proxy for the facial skull due to developmental integration of jaw  parts  <cit> . unlike other parts of the skull that harbour different functions , the mandible's main functional demands are related to feeding, and dietary changes are expected to be the main selective agent for this structure. we combine ecomorphological correlations, patterns of disparity through time and a model-based comparative analysis to test evolutionary mechanisms and scenarios during the radiation of phyllostomid bats.

RESULTS
structure of morphological and dietary variation
the distribution of dietary preferences along the phylogenetic tree of phyllostomids  indicate that most dietary shifts occurred only once during the evolution of the family, but nectarivory seems to have evolved twice independently and a return to insectivory is observed in the ancestor of trinycteris and glyphonycteris. dietary specialisation has been a major theme in phyllostomid evolution, but the data from our literature review suggests that many species present mixed diets and will use both plant and animal food items, with geographical and seasonal variation in relative importance. sanguivores and some frugivores are more strict. a principal component analysis  of dietary preferences , shows a strong correlation between carnivory and insectivory as a feature of the first diet pc, suggesting that they might be considered a single group of animalivores. the first diet pc contrasts animalivory and frugivory as opposite trends. the summarisation of three diet variables in the first diet pc explains why there was strong multicollinearity in preliminary analyses of the diet data , justifying the pca transformation. the second diet pc separates sanguivores from the rest and the third diet pc separates the nectarivores from the rest .

the shape space for phyllostomid mandible evolution was assessed by superimposed coordinates of landmarks and semilandmarks . a principal component analysis  of superimposed coordinates returned five over-dispersed shape principal components, according to a parallel analysis . the first five shape pcs explained  <dig> % of total shape variation and are strongly associated with the divergence among dietary groups . mapping the phylogenetic tree  onto the space of the first three shape pcs , each dietary group represents an independent direction of shape variation, with few convergences in the separate lineages . this is observed both considering the dietary groups as discrete categories  and the relative contribution of diet items by multivariate regression . the regression of the five shape pcs on dietary pcs and skull length  was significant at the multivariate level, but the fifth shape pc was not particularly associated with any dietary pc or skull length . the principal component analysis of dietary variables worked satisfactorily to remove multicollinearity among independent variables, as indicated by the low variance inflation factors . it should be emphasised that the principal components of species means depict the major axes of shape change among species, without the constraint to depict shape changes associated with diet . however, the strong association of dietary pcs with independently derived shape pcs suggests common evolutionary processes behind the ordination patterns.

the partial regression  and partial correlation  coefficients and their significances  are depicted for each independent variable: cl - condylobasal length, and diet principal components. diet pc <dig> is a contrast between animalivores  and frugivores . diet pc <dig> separates sanguivores  from the rest. diet pc <dig> separates nectarivores  from the rest. the variance inflation factors were small, ranging from  <dig>   to  <dig>  . the multivariate model was significant .

the first shape vector is mostly associated with the second  and third  diet pcs in opposite directions . the patterns of shape change associated with the first shape pc are dominated by a relative lengthening  and shortening or deepening  of the mandible . this is not a uniform shape change, as the mandibular elongation is not evenly distributed throughout the mandible . the second shape pc is the only shape axis significantly associated with all three diet pcs . it is mostly associated with diet pcs  <dig> and  <dig>  , but showing a shared morphological change, rather than a contrast. this axis of shape change is more closely associated with sanguivory in its negative direction , depicting a noticeable relative decrease of the molar row and a relative decrease of the coronoid process . this decrease in the coronoid process is also evident in nectarivores hence its significant association with diet pc <dig>  the diets with stronger masticatory demands  present positive scores along shape pc <dig>  this direction of shape change is dominated by relatively larger molar rows and larger coronoids . the relative increase in the molar row is a feature of animalivores, hence the weak  correlation observed between the second shape pc and the first diet pc . the third shape pc is strongly associated with the first diet pc , which contrasts animalivores and frugivores. the shape change depicted by this shape axis is dominated by a change in the shapes of mandibular processes and relative differences in relative sizes of molar teeth . in the positive direction , the coronoid is wider, the angular relatively larger and the molar teeth row longer. in the negative direction , the coronoid is narrower, slightly curved posteriorly, the angular is relatively smaller and the molar teeth row shorter . there is also a weak but significant partial correlation of the third shape pc and the third diet pc . the fourth shape pc explains a small, but still over-dispersed, amount of the variation among species . the multivariate regression results indicate that this shape feature is correlated with mean size differences  and the first diet pc. the scatter of pc scores  ordinates apart six short-faced frugivore species  comprising the clade stenodermatina from baker et al.   <cit> . these species are strict frugivores and present high positive scores on shape pc <dig>  high negative scores on shape pc <dig> are observed among insectivores and the large carnivore bats . the shape changes depicted by the fourth shape pc  are related to the mandibular processes  and the anterior region. a noticeable aspect of the shape change is the "chin" formed in these short-faced frugivores, as well as changes in the relative sizes of molar and premolar rows. the fifth shape pc was not associated with any dietary pc or skull length.

patterns of phenotypic and ecological disparity through time
the scatterplot of morphometric  distances versus genetic distances shows a combination of two scatter patterns . for larger genetic distances , there is a positive linear relationship between the two types of distances, whereas for small genetic distances  there seems to be no relationship. this distance plot suggests at least two different evolutionary processes operating at different moments along the evolution of phyllostomids. the inference of evolutionary modes can be made qualitatively by comparison with polly's simulated patterns of morphological divergence   <cit> ). the linear relationship between distances with a steep slope is expected under directional selection, and the lack of relationship is expected under stabilising selection. the scatterplot comparing morphometric distances and time since divergence  shows a less clear pattern at large times since divergence due to species that are phenotypically and  genetically similar but diverged early  during phyllostomid evolution . this pattern suggests that the early period of phyllostomid divergence was marked by a combination of directional and stabilising selection.

the disparity through time  plots provide further evidence of a two-mode evolutionary history for shape and diet . these plots show average sums of morphometric and dietary distances  for lineages of a given  age range through the phylogenetic tree. the early evolution of phyllostomid lineages is marked by larger disparity  than expected by  <dig> neutral evolution simulations . during this initial period, there is a high average disparity within existing lineages. both shape and diet disparities peak above the expected neutral disparity around  <dig> mya. there is also a turning point after this early diversification , when observed disparity within lineages is smaller than expected under neutral evolution, suggesting that stabilising selection was the main evolutionary force constraining diversification within lineages after the main ecological divergence had taken place. size disparity through time follows a similar pattern initially, but there is a second peak above expected median disparity between 16- <dig> mya. this second peak is unique for size disparity and takes place after the main dietary categories were established. the relevance of this pattern is not so clear because the confidence limits for univariate characters are considerably large and much of the size disparity fluctuation within lineages falls inside the confidence intervals. the five panels  are complementary in the sense that they are indicating a duality of evolutionary processes at different times during the phyllostomid radiation, and that shape and size did not have a correlated pattern of disparity through time. the steep slopes observed in the right hand extremity of figures 5a and 5b are consistent with the larger than expected shape disparity in the deeper parts of the tree , and both are predicted under directional selection. the near zero slopes in the left hand extremity of figures 5a and 5b are consistent with the lower than expected disparity within younger clades , and both patterns are likely under stabilising selection.

evolutionary models of phenotypic divergence
we tested five alternative models of the evolution of mandible shape . the first model  was a neutral brownian motion along the phyllostomid phylogenetic tree, whereas the remaining models  incorporated a deterministic component  similar to adaptive radiations with varying numbers of fitness peaks , according to increasingly complex ecological assumptions, causing dietary types to be lumped together or split into separate peaks. the model-fitting results are summarised in tables  <dig> and  <dig>  the phenotypic variables used were the first three or five shape pcs . fitting multivariate models with different numbers of variables allowed for some insight into the sensitivity of results to model degrees of freedom. using more shape variables increases the amount of information about variation patterns in the model, but also increases the number of parameters, causing problems for estimation. the criteria used for model selection: weights of akaike information criteria corrected for sample size w and weights of schwarz information criteria w for a particular model mi can be interpreted as the probability of mi being the "best" model given the data and the set of candidate models . for the models with three pcs, according to all criteria used, the best fitting model was ou. <dig>  an ornstein-uhlenbeck process  with four adaptive peaks . for the models with five shape pcs, however, the increased complexity of the models  caused the model ou. <dig>  to have the higher w, but the brownian motion  to have the higher w. this is an expected result of model dimensionality, since the sic criterion penalises more complex models more severely than the aicc.

model names defined as follows: bm - brownian motion, ou - ornstein-uhlenbeck with two , three , four , and five  adaptive optima . aicc is the corrected akaike information criterion for small sample sizes, Δ is the difference relative to the model with smaller aicc, w is the akaike weight for each model. sic is the schwartz information criterion, Δ and w are the differences and weights as defined above. dof are the numbers of parameters estimated by each model. all models were multivariate. the upper part of the table shows models fitting the first three shape pcs simultaneously, whereas the bottom part of the table shows models fitting the first five shape pcs.

model names defined as follows: bm - brownian motion, ou - ornstein-uhlenbeck with two , three , four , and five  adaptive optima . aicc is the corrected akaike information criterion for small sample sizes, Δ is the difference relative to the model with smaller aicc, w is the akaike weight for each model. sic is the schwartz information criterion, Δ and w are the differences and weights as defined above. dof are the numbers of parameters estimated by each model.

the 95% confidence ellipsoids for predicted optimal shapes  from model ou. <dig> do not overlap in the space spanned by the first five shape pcs . their centroid positions correspond roughly to the averages of points with the same colours in figure  <dig>  there is some overlap between carnivore and insectivore ellipsoids , and the complete separation of the two peaks is only achieved in the scores of the fifth shape pc . this is consistent with the numeric results in table  <dig> where the "best" model with three pcs lumps carnivores and insectivores into an animalivore peak. the predicted optimal shapes for each dietary adaptive peak in the best fitting model ou. <dig>  reproduce the shape changes described above in the correlational analysis. the grand average shape  was used as reference for the grid deformations, but the patterns of shape changes are the same if using an estimated root shape for the phyllostomid tree , as the difference between the grand average and the estimated root shape are negligible . the earliest adaptive peak is the one for insectivores, with a relatively large molar series and well developed mandibular processes. the first off shoot to an alternative adaptive peak is towards sanguivory, where the molar series is greatly reduced and the mandibular processes are reduced . the carnivory optimum shape shares the enlarged molar series with insectivores, but the mandible is deeper. further changes occurred independently towards frugivory and nectarivory. the optimal shape for frugivores present a higher mandible with a smaller angle at the symphysis. the mandibular processes are relatively well developed and the posterior border of the coronoid forms a characteristic curve . the shift to the nectarivore adaptive peak involved an elongation of the mandible and a corresponding decrease of mandibular processes, particularly the coronoid.

we also tested five alternative models for the evolution of skull length . according to both aicc and sic weights, the best fitting model was ou. <dig>  an ornstein-uhlenbeck process with five adaptive peaks . in fact, ou. <dig> was the only model that performed significantly better than brownian motion. the five size optima  estimates and their 95% confidence intervals  show a considerable overlap with the exception of the optimum for carnivory, what explains the best fit presented by ou. <dig>  it is the only model that separates carnivores from insectivores. frugivores and nectarivores present smaller and larger skull length optima relative to insectivores, but these estimates fall within the confidence interval for insectivory. when interpreting these results, it is important to bear in mind that skull length is not a proxy for body mass and will be influenced by patterns of cranial elongation or shortening.

discussion
the combination of ecomorphological correlations, disparity analysis and model-based comparative techniques provided strong evidence for the evolutionary mechanisms responsible for the phyllostomid radiation. although there are a few instances of convergence in phyllostomids  <cit> , the dietary divergence presents a strong phylogenetic structure  <cit> , where most specialisations occurred only once and many of the main lineages  are relatively homogeneous morphologically and ecologically. convergence is an important part of the study of adaptation  <cit> , and its absence makes it harder to infer the role of natural selection in biological diversification. one has to be particularly careful with the comparative methods and evolutionary model assumptions, for using the wrong models or methods are likely to lead to erroneous conclusions  <cit> . for example, in the present study, forcing a brownian model of evolution into the phylogenetic regression model would lead to non-significant associations among shape and diet principal components . flexible approaches allowing for different evolutionary models  <cit>  provide more sophisticated and interpretable results  <cit> , as well as more interesting questions to be explored. the model-based approach used in this study shed light on the evolutionary mechanisms responsible for the evolutionary radiation of phyllostomid bats and makes it possible to generate predictions of optimal shapes  for dietary specialisations that can be used in the future to test hypotheses of biomechanical optimisation  <cit> .

the major axis of shape variation among phyllostomid species  ordinates species with contrasting degrees of rostral elongation. this shape change is regarded by freeman   <cit>  as one of the "cheap tricks" of mammal diversification, and studies on other groups of mammals such as domestic dogs  <cit>  suggest that this pattern of shape variation can arise in a microevolutionary scale  as a response to selective processes. rostral elongation in phyllostomids is associated with a trade-off between support for the elongated tongue and bite force   <cit> . this reduced bite force is a result not only of the increased out-lever  <cit> , but also of the relative decrease of muscle insertion areas and robustness of elongated skulls and mandibles  <cit> . the bite force constraint caused by morphological specialisation is known to limit the dietary scope  <cit>  and might have important ecological consequences, particularly regarding patterns of resource use and foraging strategies within guilds  <cit> .

mandible and palate length are generally good predictors of operational tongue length in most nectarivores  <cit>  . longer tongues are considered an adaptation for nectar extraction, not only because these will reach flowers with longer corollas  <cit> , but because they allow the nectar specialists to explore a larger variety of plant species more efficiently   <cit> , and possibly to maintain a longer distance from the flower during feeding   <cit> . it is currently established that nectarivory has evolved twice independently within phyllostomids  <cit> , and despite a superficial phenotypic convergence , there are many anatomical differences, particularly in tongue morphology  <cit> . all this morphological variation suggests that, in this system, there are many ways to achieve the same function  and that there is more variation in diet and foraging strategies among nectarivores than implied by the common use of such category. brachyphylla is a singular nectarivore in the sense that it presents a short mandible  and is phenotypically similar to phylloderma and sturnira, being ordinated between frugivore and insectivore species. the similarity between brachyphylla and the frugivore stenodermatine lineage has been recognised for other morphological characters in the dentition and cranial shape  <cit>  and could be the result of dietary changes to exploit open niches during island colonisation, as suggested by griffiths   <cit> .

the second principal component of interspecific shape variation depicts a common pattern of shape change for diets with low mastication  versus high mastication . both sanguivore and nectarivore specialists do present lower bite forces than expected for their sizes  <cit> . although nectarivores and sanguivores are in extreme opposites regarding the mandibular elongation pattern of shape pc <dig>  they do present similarities in the relative reduction of mandibular processes  and molar series . these shared features are consistent with developmental consequences of selection for morphological specialisations  <cit> . this is clear for nectarivores, where selection for a longer, narrower skull has limited the relative size of muscles and their areas of attachment  <cit> . the explanation for the pattern of shape changes in sanguivores is not as direct as that for nectarivores, as the evolution of different mandibular components towards this adaptive peak has been shown to disagree with expected developmental patterns  <cit> , where tooth bearing components and mandibular processes form almost independent modules. this is because the two tooth bearing components seem to change their shapes independently: a relative increase in the anterior alveolar , combined with a relative decrease in the posterior alveolar . this emphasis in anterior dentition is also observed in tooth development as well, and was hypothesised to be the result of selection to sanguivory  <cit> . therefore, even though a reduction of bite force and muscle masses is observed in both sanguivores and nectarivores  <cit> , the developmental consequences of these changes are more localised  in sanguivores than in nectarivores. this is probably due to stronger stabilising selection in the anterior region of the mandible of sanguivores  <cit> . the evolution of sanguivory has been discussed in the literature, but the current limitations of available data make it difficult to get past the delineation of general scenarios and hypotheses  <cit>  to actually testing functional predictions about agents of selection and phenotypic variation. sanguivore skulls did not evolve according to expected developmental integration patterns  <cit> , and do not meet traditional biomechanical predictions based on models of mastication  <cit> . the functional demands on the skull associated with sanguivory are not known in detail, but should include not only biting off flesh and lapping blood, but also sensorial tasks in finding and approaching potential bloodmeal sources. sanguivores are unique among phyllostomids in that there are no known intermediate forms , whereas for the species that specialised in plant items  there are plenty of intermediate species with mixed diets. this pattern suggests that the divergence of frugivores and nectarivores might have occurred along ridges and local maxima on the adaptive landscape, but the evolution of sanguivores has probably occurred via a leap over a fitness valley in a short period of time . because the transition period was very short, useful fossils documenting it would need to be obtained from this specific window on the late oligocene. however, all known fossils of vampire bats are plio-pleistocenic desmodus and diphylla  <cit> , which are the same or very similar to extant vampire species.

the first and second major axes of variation in the mandibular shape space of phyllostomids mostly contrast groups that present high and low masticatory demands. the phenotypic differences between dietary specialists with high masticatory demands  are depicted only on the third and fourth principal components of shape. these differences are associated with relative positions and sizes of mandibular processes , tooth row lengths , and the anterior region of the mandible . aside from large beetles , insects and fruit do not present significantly different hardnesses and there is a lot of variation within these general groups, mostly due to size differences of the dietary items . animalivores and frugivores do not present noticeable differences in size-independent bite forces  <cit> , and there is a considerable amount of behavioural plasticity that allows them to modulate the bite force according to food hardness  <cit> . the extensive shape changes in the skull, mandible and dentition  <cit>  observed in the evolutionary transition towards frugivory did not seem to be associated with changes in bite force  <cit> . different from sanguivores and nectarivores, frugivores needed to maintain the bite strength for mastication, while adjusting for their specific functional needs . the morphological changes observed in frugivores seem to sacrifice precision of dental occlusion  to favour skull and mandible robustness  <cit> , while maintaining a small body size  <cit> , particularly in the shorter, deeper mandibles observed in the small clade of specialist frugivores .

allometric variation is a controversial theme in phyllostomid evolution and ecology. there is no doubt that body size is the main factor causing differences of absolute bite force  <cit>  and will have a consequence on the dietary scope of particular species  <cit> . on the other hand, small frugivores, such as centurio are able to produce higher bite forces than expected for their sizes  <cit>  due to cranial shape changes. carnivory is traditionally associated with an increase in body size and is considered an allometric extrapolation of insectivory  <cit> . one small group of strict frugivores  presents small average size, but it is not clear whether their size evolution was associated with diet or with the postulated insular origin of the clade  <cit>  . no obvious size trends can be associated with nectarivores or sanguivores. the ecological evidence for size as a structuring influence in phyllostomid communities is equivocal  <cit> , even when considering more detailed dietary compositions. our results do show that the evolutionary trajectories followed by diverging phyllostomid lineages in mandible shape space were too complex to be explained by simple allometric changes, and the shape changes associated with size differences, as measured by skull length  were small, when compared to the drastic shape changes associated with nectarivory and sanguivory, which did not involve significant size changes. shape and size divergence patterns seem to be decoupled in phyllostomid evolution , but size is nevertheless a relevant dimension in the phyllostomid adaptive landscape. a measure of body size would probably be more suited for such ecological associations than cranial length.

the patterns of morphological and ecological divergence over time were informative regarding possible evolutionary mechanisms in the radiation of phyllostomid bats. when considering the parallel evolution of mandibular shape and diet, one sees clearly a two step radiation, marked by strong directional selection and divergence in the first phase  followed by stabilising selection and stasis in the second phase, after the main phyllostomid lineages  appeared. the scatterplots comparing morphometric distances with genetic distances and time since divergence can be qualitatively compared to patterns from polly's simulations  <cit>  of evolutionary mechanisms. different mechanisms are expected to leave distinctive imprints in the patterns of morphological divergence over time. in real data, noisy patterns are expected from the juxtaposition or superimposition of different evolutionary processes and it is harder to extricate the processes from the patterns. the scatterplots of genetic distances , time since divergence and morphometric distances in figures 5a, b show a two-phase pattern, which is more obvious in figure 5a  than in figure 5b  because of species that are phenotypically and genetically similar  but have diverged in beginning of the radiation. the disparity through time plots for mandible shape and diet suggest also a two-phased radiation, marked initially by larger disparity than expected by neutral evolution simulations and changing lo lower disparity than expected by neutral evolution after around  <dig> mya . at this transition point, the main lineages leading to dietary specialisations were established and most shape and diet disparity is observed among these lineages. size disparity presents a different pattern from shape and diet, with at least two distinctive peaks at different times in phyllostomid evolution. the first peak occurring between  <dig> and  <dig> mya, and it was probably caused by the large carnivores sharing the same branch with other groups until nearly  <dig> mya . the second peak happens between 16- <dig> mya and is likely to be caused by disparity within stenodermatinae  <cit>  . the stenodermatina  have the shorter skulls among the phyllostomids , the within lineage disparity only decreases after they separate from the other stenodermatinae  around  <dig> mya. because the confidence limits for the neutral simulations are very wide, the fluctuation of size disparity through time never exceeds the expected disparity. on the other hand, it is not clear whether these confidence limits are too conservative or realistic. therefore we have interpreted and discussed the size disparity results. this pattern of size disparity is clearly not associated with the mandibular shape disparity and dietary disparity. from the other analyses performed in this study, it is clear that evolutionary allometry is a significant but minor influence in mandibular shape diversification. on the other hand, the lack of correspondence between diet disparity and size disparity might also be explained by the lack of detail of the diet data within major categories.

the radiation of phyllostomid bats has commonly been referred to as an adaptive radiation  <cit> . however, a complete test of this hypothesis has not been thoroughly performed . according to schluter   <cit> , there are four criteria to determine if a radiation was adaptive: common ancestry, phenotype-environment correlation, trait utility and rapid speciation. the monophyly of phyllostomids  was long established by a number of studies using molecular and morphological data sets  <cit> . the rapid speciation criterion has been assessed by jones et al  <cit>  whose findings indicate a statistically significant shift in diversification rates in phyllostomids . these authors found two significant shifts in phyllostomids: one just after the vampire bats  branch out and one within the genus artibeus. the first diversification rate shift observed by jones et al  <cit>  within phyllostomids coincides with the morphological and ecological disparity peak observed by us at the base of the phylogenetic tree. the phenotype-environment correlation and trait utility criteria have been discussed before in the literature and in the present study. the radiation of phyllostomids in mandibular shape space occurred along axes leading to postulated adaptive peaks determined by the relative importance of dietary items. the shape changes along these main axes of variation have a clear functional relevance for the acquisition and processing of food, as discussed above and in the literature  <cit> .

the model-based analysis presented in this study provided quantitative evidence of evolutionary mechanisms and scenarios. the models describing phenotypic evolution on an adaptive landscape with five different peaks fit the data better than the neutral evolution model  and simpler models with less peaks. the favoured scenario combining all analyses would be one early burst of phenotypic and ecological diversification caused by directional selection towards five different adaptive peaks . in our interpretations, we gave more weight to the akaike information criteria corrected for sample size because in simulations, it performs better than the schwarz information criteria when reality is assumed to be infinitely dimensional and the true model is not in the candidate set  <cit> . the results for models with different numbers of variables  show how sensitive the methods are to the number of parameters being estimated. in the models with the first three shape pcs, the number of parameters being estimated  is never larger than the number of species , whereas with the first five shape pcs, ou. <dig> and ou. <dig>  do exceed the number of species and are severely penalised by the more conservative criterion . as a consequence, brownian motion is suggested as the best fitting model because it requires estimation of the smallest number of parameters. these results indicate that we were working at the limit of model complexity given our sample size, and more complex models would require considerably larger data sets  to avoid problems in estimation and model comparisons.

when using the first three shape pcs, model ou. <dig> was favoured, whereas model ou. <dig> was favoured by the models with five pcs. the separation of the carnivore from the insectivore peak is only accomplished when the fifth pc is added to the models. one might expect that five groups would span a space with four dimensions, however, because principal components do not maximise among group differences, there will be processes other than diet-related adaptive changes contributing to the observed interspecific variation patterns. these could be associated with neutral evolution or changes related to factors not measured in this study. in any case, it is a noticeable point that horn's parallel analysis used to choose the number of principal components to be considered in the comparative analyses, independently indicated the number of components needed to discern all possible adaptive peaks in the most complex model. parallel analysis is often shown by statistical simulations to be the best performing method to choose principal components  <cit> .

the early burst of phyllostomid divergence was followed by consistent stabilising selection keeping mandible shape relatively constant around postulated dietary optima. the apparent phenotypic and ecological stasis that persists from the early miocene  to the present was not followed by a lack of speciation, and the lineages of specialist nectarivores and frugivores seem to be particularly speciose  <cit> . this pattern suggests either a non-adaptive radiation  <cit>  or agents of selection not specifically examined in the present study. allopatry and biogeographic distribution patterns account for a considerable proportion of speciation within diverse phyllostomid genera where stabilising selection seems to constrain phenotypic and ecological variation  <cit> . in fact, niche conservatism and stabilising selection are expected to play a significant role in allopatric speciation processes  <cit> , what seems to fit well with the environmental changes during the tertiary  <cit> , when the global temperature decrease, tectonic processes  and sea level fluctuations created large expanses of dry open areas in south america and are linked with the diversification of many other mammal clades  <cit> . on the other hand, further selective episodes cannot be discarded, as there might be smaller adaptive peaks within the main dietary groups and the temporal and spatial variation in resource availability  might generate randomly fluctuating selection that is hardly discernible from a brownian motion  <cit> . frugivore phyllostomid species are known to largely occur in sympatry  <cit> , possibly due to further specialisation, such as the dichotomy between ground-story frugivores and fig-feeders  <cit> , or the recently discovered granivory  <cit>  associated with functional and morphological specialisations  <cit> . nectarivore guilds can also be diverse  <cit>  due to nomadic behaviour, seasonal and spatial changes in resource use  <cit>  and different degrees of specialisation and dietary item mixtures  <cit> . the radiation of phyllostomid bats is actually a number of radiation episodes nested within each other, caused by a mixture of adaptive and non-adaptive evolutionary mechanisms. this is expected as real data is more likely to fall along a continuum caused by a mixture of evolutionary processes, rather than fit yes/no definitions for the adaptive radiation metaphor  <cit> .

the radiation of phyllostomid bats is a unique example among mammals in terms of ecological and phenotypic diversity, and should be considered an important model system for studies of the evolution of functional optimisation due to the ecological diversity under the constraints imposed by powered flight  <cit> . further research should provide a deeper understanding of the myriad of evolutionary mechanisms at work in this lineage. the foundations of phyllostomid ecomorphology, based on rather limited morphological, ecological, phylogenetic and functional data painted an interesting picture and provided important references and new questions to be addressed. recent contributions comprise functional studies  <cit>  that go beyond traditional biomechanics to examine the functional consequences of shape change in terms of energy efficiency and structural resistance, comparative analyses of detailed morphological, functional, and ecological data  <cit> , comparative analyses combining field data on function, behaviour and ecology  <cit>  and phylogenetic diversification patterns using complete species-level trees  <cit> . whereas a lot of attention has been paid to the biomechanics of mastication and bite force, the functional demands associated with nectar and blood-feeding are still underrepresented in the literature. of particular importance would be the identification of functionally relevant measurements  with regard to different dietary compositions to be associated with phenotypic data. when comparing the abundance of phyllostomid species in scientific collections, freeman   <cit>  has pointed out that species with specialised phenotypes and diets are rarer than the species with intermediate phenotypes and mixed diets. are dietary specialisations equivalent to local optima on the adaptive landscape with lower fitness than optima for mixed diets? this is an important question for future research with possible implications for the dynamics of assemblages  <cit>  and biodiversity conservation. other promising areas are the ecological influences on cranial phenotypes outside dietary differences, such as echolocation and roost building  <cit> . the ever increasing literature is producing a massive database of morphological, ecological, functional and phylogenetic data that will be instrumental to elucidate the questions in future studies of phyllostomid ecomorphology.

CONCLUSIONS
the patterns of phenotypic and ecological divergence are consistent with an evolutionary scenario with at least five main adaptive peaks during the early radiation of phyllostomid bats. starting from an insectivore ancestor around  <dig> mya, different lineages specialised into carnivores, sanguivores, frugivores and nectarivores. some species are strict diet specialists with extreme morphologies, but a considerable number present intermediate diets and phenotypes, possibly as a result of adaptive ridges or multiple local optima  and geographical/temporal variation in resource availability. nevertheless, some trade-offs are clear, such as the mandibular elongation observed in specialised nectarivores, which supports a longer tongue but decreases bite force changing the scope of usable resources . size and shape have evolved almost independently in this family, where the major axes of shape change  in phyllostomid mandibular morphospace were not correlated with size differences. on the other hand, the most impressive size differences  are associated with minor shape changes. after the early burst of ecomorphological divergence, when directional selection was possibly a dominating evolutionary mechanism, some of the lineages went into a long period of stasis or non-adaptive radiations, but further selective episodes cannot be ruled out, particularly for size variation among frugivores, although the role of diet as selection agent is not entirely clear in this case. the radiation of phyllostomid bats was marked by a complex mixture of adaptive and non-adaptive mechanisms through a period of extreme environmental changes when new ecological niches were probably emerging and disappearing quickly. this led the leaf-nosed bats to present unparalleled morphological and ecological variation among mammals, which, together with the vast amount of information available in the literature, makes phyllostomids one of the most important model systems for the study of morphological, functional and ecological diversification.

