BACKGROUND
the g protein-coupled receptors  are seven transmembrane receptors coupled to g proteins and represent a major group of cell-surface receptors that constitute  <dig> % of the genome in vertebrates  <cit> . these receptors play a major role in intercellular communication and act as receptors for most hormones and neurotransmitters. the gpcrs are involved in the perception of the environment, being activated by taste compounds, pheromones, odorants and even photons  <cit> . several classes of the gpcrs have been defined based on sequence similarity  <cit> . the class c gpcrs are mainly composed of metabotropic glutamate receptors , gamma-aminobutyric acid type b receptors , ca2+-sensing receptors , taste receptors , pheromone receptors  and olfactory receptors <cit> . they play a key role in the physiology of various types of epilepsy as well as in nociception and drug addiction  <cit> . these receptors structurally possess an extracellular venus flytrap module  where agonists bind and a heptahelical transmembrane domain  which is responsible for g protein activation  <cit> . for most receptors, with the exception of gababr, the cysteine-rich domain  can act as a molecular link between the vftd and hd domains. moreover, the vftms share structural similarity with bacterial periplasmic amino acid-binding proteins , such as the leucine-binding protein  and the leucine/isoleucine/valine-binding protein   <cit> . interestingly, the bacterial pbps show extensive ligand-binding properties and can transport small nutritional molecules such as amino acids and vitamins  <cit> . in contrast, the class c gpcr vftm's physiological function is involved in shaping ligand-binding specificity and gb <dig> has even lost the ability to bind ligands . the class c gpcrs can form homodimers whereas gababr is a heterodimer and is composed of two homologous subunits, gabab <dig>  and gabab <dig>   <cit> .

although ligand-binding ability are a typical character of the class c gpcr vftms, different receptors have different ligand-binding specificities. moreover, the gb <dig> receptors have lost the ability to bind ligands but have maintained their function to can activate g proteins  <cit> . the overall structural similarity between gpcrs and bacterial pbps imply that there is a common origin among class c gpcrs via internal domain duplication. as a result, the vftms provide an interesting evolutionary case to investigate gene duplication and functional divergence events.

unlike the bacterial pbps which can bind various different ligands, most class c gpcrs expressed in the central nerve system can bind only one kind of natural ligand, implying that the vftms of class c gpcrs have undergone partial loss of function such as the ability to bind different ligands as well as gaining other unknown functions. meanwhile, it would be interesting to know whether functional alterations in the vftms were the result of extensive changes in selective constraints  at those sites involved.

in the present study we undertook an extensive phylogenetic analysis for the vftms of five typical groups of class c gpcrs. by inspecting the amino-acid sites, we report that altered selective constraints derived from positive selection resulted in the functional divergence in the vftm domains of class c gpcrs . our study provides a new insight into understanding the ligand-binding specificity and how the activation or modulation mechanism is refined in the class c gpcrs.

RESULTS
phylogeny inference of the vftms
a phylogenetic analysis of the aligned protein sequences showed that the vftms of class c gpcrs fell into three major classes: the mglur class, a second sensing receptor class consisting of the casr and the t1r, and a third less related class consisting of two homologous subunits of the gababr, gb <dig> and gb <dig>  a distinct group of bacterial pbps was used to root the tree dendrogram . in order to validate the tree, the ml dendrogram was inferred based from the reduced protein sequences. the results show that the nj tree and the ml tree had similarly identical phylogenetic topology . the monophyletic topology of the vftms suggests that there is a common originating ancestor for the class c gpcrs. the average sequence identity between gb1/gb <dig> vftms with bacterial pbps is lower , however, it's medium  between gb <dig> and gb <dig>  these phenomena implied that the vftms of gababr being related to the bacterial pbps and were distant homologous group of the class c gpcrs.

type i functional divergence of the vftms
in order to determine shifted selective constraints in the vftms of class c gpcrs, the coefficients of functional divergence  were calculated and based on pairwise sequence comparisons . the results show that all θ values were significantly greater than zero , supporting the hypothesis of altered selective constraints had occurred in the vftms of class c gpcrs. moreover, the functional branch lengths  of each vftm group were estimated according to the functional distance matrix, arbitrarily constraining bf =  <dig> was used to root the scale. the result statistically rejected the null hypothesis of equal functional branch lengths , which implies that the functional role of the vftms was different to their ancestral role. the rejection result statistically provides evidence for functional divergence in the vftms of class c gpcrs. in particular, bf produced the highest value suggesting that gb <dig> maintained a larger shifted evolutionary rate since the duplication events.

the upper-right triangle shows the functional divergence  values for all pairwise comparisons, data is presented as value ± standard error, the lower-left triangle shows the functional distance between two groups, the diagonal shows the functional branch length  values of each group, arbitrarily constraining bf =  <dig> 

the three continuous duplication events showed varying effects on shaping the site-specific altered selective constrains of the class c gpcr vftms. the result of functional divergence on each duplication event show that the first and second duplication events significantly induced site-specific altered selective constraints to generate the gababr and mglur groups, but the third duplication separating the sensing-receptors and the homologous subunits of gababr group failed to significantly change the site-specific shift of evolutionary rate .

i, ii and iii represent the first, second and third duplication events, ml and s.e. stand for maximum likelihood and standard error, respectively. the p values are the critical value of χ <dig> distribution with df =  <dig> . ns means not significant at 1% level.

for refining the sites involved in altered functional constrains in the vftms, the site-specific profile included  <dig> sites based on posterior probability  was used to identify the critical sites responsible for the functional divergence. the percentage distributions of qk frequencies showed that mass altered functional constraints existed between the class c gpcr vftm domains and bacterial pbps . the ad hoc high probability components  corresponding to the sites with a high probability of contribution to functional divergence were variable between different pairwise comparisons. by comparing mglur and gb <dig> with bacterial pbps,  <dig> sites  were detected, while casr, t1r and gb <dig> had  <dig> sites ,  <dig> sites  and  <dig> sites  respectively. interestingly, comparisons within the class c gpcrs showed that gb <dig> showed significant change in altered functional constraints, but little difference was observed between the gb <dig> and gb <dig> groups . by comparing with bacterial pbps, the sites involved in altered functional constraints with qk >  <dig>  were conserved in specific groups and generally determined the structural characteristics of the vftms. these sites were extremely variable for each different group but all were located around the ligand-binding pocket . moreover, there was little variation within a group and variability with bacterial pbps. accordingly, all  <dig> sites with qk >  <dig>  in gb <dig> were excluded under this criterion. these phenomena imply that gb <dig> and gb <dig> possessed dramatically different characteristics for altered functional constraints, with gb <dig> showing similarity with class c gpcrs, and gb <dig> showing similarity for bacterial pbps.

these results suggest that these sites probably played an important role in defining ligand-binding specificity for the vftms in class c gpcrs. in contrast, radical amino acid substitutions with very different chemical properties were found at the same positions in bacterial pbps, thus indicating that altered selective constraints is related to the functional divergence between bacterial pbps and the vftms in class c gpcrs.

the site-specific profiles were used to identify the sites that had functionally diverged after duplication events. the results showed that the majority of sites had undergone shifted rates after the first duplication event, as indicated by the high posterior probabilities. however, a small proportion of sites had undergone shifted rates after the second duplication event, while after the third duplication event there was no effect on shifted rates . these results imply that the first and second duplicate events were mainly responsible for functional divergence and characterizing the different groups, while the third duplicate separated different members within a group as exemplified by the gababr group and sensing receptors group.

positive selection in the vftm-coding dna sequences
the nonsynonymous/synonymous substitution rate ratio  of the vftms in class c gpcrs, measures the selective pressure exerted at the protein level and thus indicates its evolutionary characteristics, was conducted by pairwise comparison of the human and mouse vftm-coding sequences. the lrt comparison for variability in the selective pressure among vftm sites showed large variability in selective pressure amongst the vftm sites . with the selective pressure variation among vftm sites established, positive selection was tested by two model comparisons. in each comparison, the null model does not allow the presence of sites under positive selection, while the alternative model allows for selection. the test statistics of both comparisons showed high significance and resulted in the rejection of the null models. this indicates that the presence of these sites evolved under positive selection in the vftms. note that type i functional divergence may be detected under diversifying selection or a loss of selective constraints, which is known to be an important process affecting many gpcrs, these functional sites evolved positive selection may be not totally driven by positive selection, however, the model comparisons confirmed that positive selection contributed the functional divergence without doubt.

χ21% values are the critical value of χ <dig> distribution at 1% level with appropriate degree of freedom.

molecular time scale estimation of the vftms
the linearized nj tree of the orthologous vftms under the global clock model suggests that three continuous duplication events had occurred in early stages of vertebrates. based on the calibration of grlj in dictyostelium discoideum, the first duplication event occurred at  <dig> mya  resulting in the split of the gababr group and other class c gpcrs. the mglur group resulted from the second duplication, occurred at  <dig> mya . the third duplication estimated at 573- <dig> mya  gave rise to a split resulting in the sensing-receptors  and the gababr subunits  . note that many tissue-specific gene families follow similar patterns, raising the possibility of a large-scale duplication in early vertebrates  <cit> . because of differential selection pressures on different duplicate genes or groups, the time estimation in terms of the molecular clock was taken as an approximation.

reconstruction of the ancestral vftms
nine extinct ancestral amino acid sequences were derived from on  <dig> aligned present-day sequences and the nj tree topologies. to examine how sequence changes in the vftms during the evolutionary process might affect the chemical properties and the ligand-binding pockets, the ancestral three-dimensional  structures were homologous modelled on rat vftm mglur <dig> . the results show that some of the sequence changes in the vftms during evolution could cause substantial alterations between the interfaces of the ligand-binding pockets. considering the structural changes within the vftms and the different structural variation between groups together, the correlation between structure and function of the vftms suggests that molecular adaption was a result of functional divergence. these radical changes could affect the binding between specific ligands and the class c gpcrs.

discussion
gene or domain duplications have long been thought to be the primary driving events for producing evolutionary novel genes. in our study we have shown that gene duplication plays an important role in the evolutionary process of class c gpcrs. after undergoing three continuous duplications, the gb <dig> group retained their original structure and functions and are similarly related to bacterial pbps except for their ligand-binding abilities. in contrast, the other class c gpcr groups under relaxed evolutionary constraints and functional divergence, lead to the diversification and formation of the mglur, casr, t1r and gb <dig> groups. because of freely accumulating amino acid replacements, type i functional divergence events resulted in shaping the unique characteristics of each group within class c gpcrs. when sites at the periphery of the ligand-binding pockets were replaced by different amino-acids there was no serious deleterious effects on the survival, the rudiments of each group were fundamentally shaped. in contrast, the well-conserved sites in the ligand-binding pockets are highly variable, which may result in diversification and different ligand specification. in particular, the vftms of gb <dig> and casr groups appear to have acquired novel functions for binding new types of ligands, thus explaining the dramatic difference in amino acid composition. meanwhile, the gb <dig> group may have functionally diverged through gene duplication events, which would lead to the acquisition of unknown or loss of intrinsic functions.

although the vftms of class c gpcrs were distant originated from bacterial pbps, their basic ligand-binding ability was intrinsically identical. however, the role was changed from transporting nutrient substances in bacteria to initiating signal transduction in class c gpcrs. the functional alterations under the positive selected functional divergence evolved the complexity of the vftms of class c gpcrs.

according to darwinian theory, complexity derived by a stepwise process of elaboration and optimization under natural selection  <cit> . the vftms of the class c gpcrs provides an illustration of this theory. our results indicate that the functions of vftms were generated by molecular exploitation, which recruit of older molecules , previously constrained for a different role, into a new functional complex . the complexity in the class c gpcr vftms consequently arose the biological complexity by a stepwise darwinian process. in addition, further evidence indicate that positive darwinian selection played an indispensable role in the origin and evolution of the genes involved in brain development and perception  <cit> . our results provide an important insight on how the role of positive selection has a strong effect on the development on the evolutionary process of the class c gpcr vftm domains.

finally, the functional divergence rates shift for the class c gpcr hd domains show a similar pattern of stepwise change in amino acid replacement resulting in changes in g-protein coupling ability and different ligand recognition. despite the lack of experimental evidence for the origination of the hd domains, we observed a group of sites that was highly conserved in class c gpcrs, implying their common origination of seven transmembrane domains. according to the evolutionary pattern of class c gpcrs and the related duplicate events, we propose that an ancestor composed of the bacterial pbp-like domain and a rhodopsin-like transmembrane domain acted as the precursor for the class c gpcrs. the gababr group arose through a series of point mutations after the first duplicate event. consequently, two possibilities can result from the selective constraint differences for gene duplication: one being that it may become more conserved in groups such as mglur, casr, t1r or gb <dig>  which induced new functions; the other one may become more variable in groups such as gb <dig>  which resulted in functional relaxation or loss of functions.

CONCLUSIONS
our results demonstrate that type i functional divergence involved positive selection is partially responsible for driving the evolution of class c gpcrs. moreover, three internal duplication events had occurred within the class c gpcr vftms at the early stage of vertebrates, resulting in the present class c gpcrs. the sites involved in functional divergence may provide extra clues and widen our search for more candidates for further research on the relationship between structures and function, as well as shedding light on the activation mechanism of class c gpcrs.

