BACKGROUND
nucleosomes constitute the basic building blocks of dna chromatin structure and play a pivotal role in regulating genes. genome-wide examinations of nucleosome positioning in model organisms , as well as in humans , have uncovered a variety of associations among nucleosome positioning and spacing probabilities, underlying dna sequence composition, histone modification, tss distribution, gene expression, and rates of mutagenesis and repair in various tissue types in different organisms.

recent studies have identified arrays of positioned and phased nucleosomes downstream of tsss and eviction of nucleosomes upstream as permissive features associated with access of transcription factors to the dna  <cit> . weak and strong phased nucleosome arrays respectively associate with narrow and broad distributions of tsss upstream of individual genes in budding yeast  <cit> , human cd4+ t cells and fruitfly cells  <cit> . nucleosome spacing downstream of tsss is associated with differential expression levels and histone modification  <cit> ; as an example in a vertebrate system, crowding of tss-downstream nucleosomes is associated with higher expression in human white blood cells, with average spacing decreased at high expression levels from 195 bp to 190 bp in granulocytes and from 205 bp to 195 bp in cd4+ t cells  <cit> . transcription is just one of the forces that may influence and be influenced by nucleosome positioning. additional contributory factors include histone protein modifications  <cit> , distribution of histone sequence variants, a variety of chromatin remodeling complexes  <cit> , specific transcription factors, and regulatory rnas.

underlying all of these are effects of dna sequence composition including ~10 bp periodicities of at-dinucleotide and cg-dinucleotide frequencies around nucleosome dyads  <cit> , a higher poly-a incidence in nucleosome depleted region upstream of tsss  <cit> , a higher gc/gg/cc incidence surrounding nucleosome dyads and a higher aa/tt incidence around linker regions  <cit> . genome-wide nucleosome positioning is also relevant to rates of genetic variations that may contribute to sequence composition biases around nucleosomes . around nucleosome dyads in the entire human genome, somatic mutations are suppressed in cancer tissues  <cit> , and de novo germline mutations are less observed  <cit> . in budding yeast and medaka, spontaneous variants  in nucleosome core regions are decreased, potentially contributing to higher gc incidences around nucleosome dyads  <cit> . in the fruitfly genome, ~10 bperiodicities of at-dinucleotide and cg-dinucleotide frequencies are evolutionarily conserved  <cit> . in the human genome, prendergast and semple, through an analysis of inter-species divergence and intra-species polymorphism, observed higher rates of w  to s  mutations in core regions around nucleosome dyads and higher rates of s  to w  changes at linker regions, suggesting that genetic variation might be intrinsically biased to maintain high gc incidences around nucleosome dyads and lower gc incidences at linker regions  <cit> .

around tsss, chromatin-associated periodicity in genetic variation downstream of tsss has been reported in germline-like, early embryonic cells of medaka-fish  <cit>  and in various human cells  <cit> ; however, the relationships between nucleosome positioning, underlying sequence composition, and directions of mutations around tsss are largely unexplored, leaving unresolved some fundamental questions surrounding the mechanisms by which species maintain persistent features of chromatin organization while showing substantial sequence variability over evolutionary time. the medaka fish  provides an ideal genomic vertebrate resource to study these issues, in part due to the ready availability of strains with substantial sequence divergence but continued cross-fertility. in particular, the genomes of two inbred strains, hd-rr and hni, show high genetic variation of ~ <dig>  % , while the genome of an outgroup inbred strain hsok to hd-rr and hni can be used to allow a strong inference of the ancestral states at a large number of sites . the availability of germline tissues, as the site of any sequence changes that become fixed in a population, provides a particularly relevant context for examining the interactions between genome architecture and evolution. comparative studies of genomic and epigenomic organization, well served in the medaka model system, are amongst the best poised approaches to address the persistent and/or dynamic relationships between sequences and chromatin structure over evolutionary time. we observed atypical evolution around tsss with phased downstream nucleosomes  that differed from the characteristics of genome-wide nucleosome positioning.

RESULTS
transcription start sites: experimental approach, normalization, and definition
to characterize transcription start sites, we collected 36-nucleotide, 5′-end mrna tags from testes, blastulae, and liver  from two inbred medaka strains, hd-rr and hni, using a 5′sage method  <cit> . a total of ~ <dig> million reads was collected from each tissue type, of which 71 % could be aligned to unique positions in their respective genomes, hd-rr or hni . each tss was then associated with the normalized number of reads mapped to the location, providing a surrogate quantification of the expression level of the tss. starting with the working approximation that each cell expresses on the order of  <dig>  mrna molecules , our datasets of ~ <dig> million tags would yield roughly  <dig> tags for a single-copy-per-cell mrna. such a normalization is by nature arbitrary, with the application here being solely to provide an order of magnitude context in discussing comparisons between samples .fig.  <dig> 
a. focal tissue types during embryogenesis and lineage separation. b. venn diagram of the three sets of representative tsss that were detected in the respective tissue types in our sage data: blastulae, testes, and liver. numbers of tsss are labeled with individual subsets. c. schematic showing the periodicity of nucleosomes upstream or downstream of a representative tss using the autocorrelation analysis that quantifies the nucleosome positioning consistency . d. spearman’s rank correlation coefficient matrix for the data deriving from the hd-rr  and hni  strains. the individual values can be found in additional file 12: table s <dig>  the gene expression , breadth of tss cluster , nucleosome periodicity  and nucleosome positioning consistency  were monitored in blastula , liver , and testes . single nucleotide count of each nucleobase , nucleosome periodicity , and nucleosome consistency  were separately calculated in upstream  and downstream  tss regions. the difference of nucleobase counts upstream and downstream of tsss is called the sequence asymmetry of nucleotides . to exemplify the nomenclature used, hd_a_dw denotes the incidence in the hd-rr strain of nucleotide a downstream of tsss. we also report other sequence composition features, a+t , c+g, aa+tt, and cc+gg, and their sequence asymmetry values; however, we note that these are not independent of single base composition features  . we considered  <dig> combinations of  <dig> parameters as candidate hypotheses, with some of the comparisons showing positive or negative association due to technical aspects of the quantitation  while others showed positive or negative association due to their intrinsic definitions . a bonferroni correction, a typical multiple hypothesis testing method, is valuable to rigorously test each hypothesis. a significance level of 5 %/ <dig>  would require r  of |r|>  <dig> , achieving a p-value < 10− <dig> when |r|>  <dig> . the white box shows a high correlation among nucleosome consistency downstream of tsss in each tissue type , sequence asymmetry , a/t single nucleotide counts upstream of tsss , gene expression level  and breadth of tss cluster . the three yellow boxes imply high correlations among periodicity of nucleosome positioning upstream  of tsss in the three tissues of the two strains, and a high correlation among consistency of nucleosome positioning upstream of tsss. the cyan boxes mean that nucleosome positioning consistency upstream of tsss are negatively correlated with sequence asymmetry and count of a and t. the two purple boxes are similar to the white box except for the negative correlation of c/g single nucleotide counts upstream of tsss  with the other parameters in the white box



while some genes possess a single tss, most genes have clusters of tsss in their upstream region. to proceed with this study, we needed a list of tss sites for many genes, but wanted to avoid assumptions that this list would be unique or comprehensive. we thus defined the representative tss for each gene as the position associated with the maximum sequence tag count . activity patterns of tsss vary among tissues, thus it was not surprising that some tsss were observed only in one or two tissues from a given strain. figure 1b shows a venn diagram of the three sets of representative tsss that are expressed in the three individual tissue types of the hd-rr strain. a total of  <dig>  representative tsss were observed from all three tissues, and  <dig> were common in the three, but many tsss were only observed in one or two tissues.

we defined one-to-one correspondence between tss clusters in the hd-rr and hni genomes by carefully selecting reciprocally best pairs of alignments . a tss cluster in hd-rr may not have a counterpart in hni because the quality of the hni genome assembled from short reads was not sufficiently high . nevertheless,  <dig>  pairs of tss clusters in the two strains were available. thus, we measured the distance between pairs of corresponding representative tsss in the hd-rr and hni strains. the distance distribution in additional file 1: figure s1b shows that the distance is smaller than or equal to  <dig>   <dig>   <dig>  and 100 bp for  <dig>  %,  <dig>  %,  <dig>  %, and  <dig>  % of  <dig>  tss pairs, indicating that representative tsss are likely to be positionally conserved between the two strains.

periodicity and consistency of nucleosome positioning
we collected nucleosome positioning information for the three tissues from each of the two strains by processing 25-nt single-end reads from nucleosome cores . nucleosomes patterns are known to reflect transcriptional patterns in several systems; in particular, nucleosomes are positioned and phased downstream of many tsss while a lack of nucleosome reads over active promoters has evidenced their lability or eviction from promoters  <cit> . although mainly seen downstream, phased nucleosomes are also observed upstream of some tsss, potentially evidencing bidirectional promoter usage  <cit> . we measured the periodicity and consistency of nucleosome positioning within the two separate 500-bp regions downstream and upstream of a representative tss by using autocorrelation analysis . to minimize the effects of neighboring tss on nucleosome positioning and sequence composition, representative tsss were selected so that each tss was >500 bp distance apart from its neighbors .table  <dig> number of single-end reads of mono-nucleosome cores isolated from mnase-digested dna samples. alignment to the genome was performed using eland using default parameters. the genome coverage was estimated as the number of uniquely mapped reads multiplied by the length of mono-nucleosomes  divided by the sequenced medaka genome size . since single-end short reads of length 25 nt were collected from mnase fragments, the accurate length of individual fragment could not be estimated. to have an approximate picture of the distribution of fragments obtained from mnase digestion,  <dig> arbitrary fragments were inserted into a standard plasmid vector and sequenced using sanger sequencing. of  <dig> sequences that could be anchored to unique positions, the average length was  <dig>  nt with a standard deviation of  <dig>  nt. if we use the actual fragment lengths in place of the ideal length , the coverage would increase by ~2 %. the cumulative ratio of nucleotides covered by ≥ x  nucleosome core reads are shown in additional file 1: figure s1d, which indicates >50 % of the entire genome is covered by ≥  <dig> nucleosome core reads in all the tissue types except for hni testes 



underlying dna sequence composition
within defined regions of the genome, nucleosomes are known to preferentially associate with dna segments exhibiting high c + g and cc + gg content, with some degree of exclusion from corresponding a + t and aa + tt rich regions . although these underlying characteristics may be one of the sequence features specifying nucleosome positioning, it was nonetheless of interest to test their association with nucleosome positioning signals in the vicinity of tsss. to evaluate potential associations, we measured the count and asymmetry of each of the mononucleotides and dinucleotides around individual representative tss comparing a 500 nt window upstream and downstream of each tss. because some of these parameters were highly correlated , we eliminated the redundancy and used mononucleotide content.

features associated with the representative tsss
with each representative tss, we tested associations of a set of parameters: gene expression level , breadth of the tss, mononucleotide counts and mononucleotide asymmetry values upstream and downstream of the tss, and periodicity and consistency of nucleosome positioning upstream and downstream of the tss . figure 1d shows the spearman’s rank correlation of each parameter to the others, using data from liver, testes, and blastulae from the hd-rr and hni strains, providing us with the overall characteristics of the relationships among the parameters. among nucleosome-positioning parameters, the periodicity upstream and downstream did not highly correlate with the other parameters. the nucleosome positioning consistency upstream of a representative tss was negatively correlated with a/t nucleotide asymmetry and a/t count upstream of the tss. in contrast, the nucleosome positioning consistency downstream of a representative tss was significantly correlated with a/t nucleotide asymmetry and a/t nucleotide count upstream of the tss, gene expression level, and breadth of the tss .

a class of promoters with strong nucleosomal periodicity  show higher gene expression and a clear sequence composition boundary
we clustered representative tsss into three groups in terms of their nucleosome positioning consistency downstream of tsss in the hd-rr strain . group  <dig> has the strongest nucleosome positioning, and we called the tsss in group  <dig> “nucleocyclic.” nucleocyclic tsss are not common among genes active in the three tissues; many of them were specific to individual tissue types , reflecting representative tsss that have different nucleosome positioning consistency values and expression levels in individual tissue types  <cit> . we found that the nucleocyclic tsss had a significantly higher average gene expression level in all three tissue samples . the nucleocyclic tsss also showed a significantly asymmetric distribution of each mononucleotide around the tsss , average a/t nucleotide incidences upstream of the tsss were significantly higher than the incidences downstream .fig.  <dig> characteristics of nucleocyclic tsss in the testes. a. we clustered representative tsss into three groups  according to nucleosome consistency  downstream of the tsss in testes. a running average over 21-bp window is shown for smoothing of lines. the upper left box shows the number of tsss in each group. b. venn diagram of nucleocyclic tsss  in blastulae, testes, and liver. c. histogram of probability distribution of gene expression in log scale. the gene expression of the nucleocyclic tsss in group  <dig> is significantly higher than the distribution in group  <dig> or  <dig> . d. average incidences of nucleobase a, t, c and g at positions within 500 bp from representative tsss in groups  <dig>   <dig> and  <dig>  a running average over 41-bp window is shown. the small histogram in each graph shows the significance of asymmetry of each incidence in individual group . a p-value is depicted by –log  so that a lower p-value is represented by a higher bar to emphasize the higher significance of asymmetry. the difference between the mononucleotide compositions upstream and downstream of tsss is most pronounced in group  <dig>  the graphs also indicate that the base incidences around the first nucleosome dyads and linkers significantly differ from those incidences around nucleosomes in the entire genome. e. to verify this hypothesis, individual first nucleosome dyads  downstream of nucleocyclic tsss are identified . f. incidences of four bases in the region within 200 bp from nucleosome dyads in the entire genome  and first dyads downstream of tsss . lines are smoothed using a running average over 41-bp window. around nucleosome dyads in the entire genome, the a/t  incidences around dyads are smaller  than those around linkers, while this tendency is less pronounced around first dyads downstream of tsss. indeed, the difference in the tendency is significant, with p < 10− <dig> for any of a, c, g, and t by one-tailed wilcoxon’s ranksum test 



from these observations, we speculate that the greater a/t nucleotide incidence upstream of nucleocyclic tsss might repel or destabilize nucleosomes, with the c/g-rich character downstream accommodating arrays of well-positioned nucleosomes . the comparison between sequence composition around first downstream nucleosomes and nucleosomes not selected as being in transcribed regions suggests a unique local characteristic around the first downstream nucleosome with mononucleotide incidences varying little between the dyad and linker . as with yeast  <cit>  and human  <cit> , a genomewide analysis of nucleosome dyad and linker regions shows an enrichment in a/t content around the latter. for first nucleosome dyads downstream of individual nucleocyclic tsss in medaka , we observe that the mononucleotide incidence difference is significantly smaller than the difference for all  nucleosomes .

the combinatorial effect of the a/t and c/g biases around nucleocyclic tsss, the atypical sequence composition around the first downstream nucleosome, combined with processes such as rna polii stalling, could then induce the stable positioning of downstream nucleosomes, thereby potentially anchoring tsss and permitting a high level of transcription initiation at specific sites. considering the prevalence of transcriptional initiation at nucleocyclic tsss, we raise the possibility that nucleocyclic tsss may be more positionally conserved between the two strains than non-nucleocyclic tsss. indeed, we confirmed this tendency in testes , in blastulae , and in liver  using one-tailed wilcoxon’s ranksum test .

atypical evolution around nucleocyclic tsss
the conservation of the clear sequence composition boundary around nucleocyclic tsss led us to examine whether specific properties of the mutagenic landscape around these tsss might be involved in the maintenance of the boundary. the genomes of two medaka inbred strains initially used in this work, hd-rr and hni, provide an excellent resource to study this problem as the genetic divergence between the two inbred strains is very high . using another medaka inbred strain hsok as an outgroup to hd-rr and hni , we were able to obtain inferences for the ancestral bases of hd-rr and hni at positions where multiple alignments of the three strains were available . we compared the ancestral base x with the current hd-rr base y at each position to calculate the mutation rate of base change from x to y at each position within 500 bp from all representative tsss. we observed that the sequence anisotropy around tsss in each group was conserved from the common ancestor to hd-rr, with net average mononucleotide increase/decrease incidences quite small  both overall around the tss and as a function of position , although we saw a small increase in a/t incidences and a small decrease c/g incidences in testes, blastulae and liver . the base changes are more pronounced in downstream regions than in upstream regions.fig.  <dig> atypical evolution around nucleocyclic tsss in testes. a. average mononucleotide incidence changes from the common ancestor of hd-rr and hni to the current hd-rr genome upstream and downstream of nucleocyclic tsss . the a/t incidence increases and c/g incidence decreases are quite small . the mononucleotide compositions are almost conserved from the ancestor to hd-rr genome. the mononucleotide incidence changes are more pronounced in downstream regions than in upstream regions. b. the histogram shows “mutational flux”, average rates of base change from ancestral base x to current hd-rr base y upstream/downstream of nucleocyclic tsss. c. for each mononucleotide z , the histogram shows the sum of mutational flux, average mutation rates x to z , where x is a mononucleotide other than z, and the sum of z to x  upstream /downstream  of nucleocyclic tsss. d. rates of average base change at positions around nucleocyclic tsss . a running average over 41-bp window is shown in fig. 3d-e. the red arrow show the approximate positions of the first nucleosome dyads downstream of the nucleocyclic tsss, indicating that c to t, and t to c rates have peaks at the first dyads and valleys at the first linkers . e. we analyzed the apparent the nucleosome position-related mutational bias through analysis of mutational fluxes following alignment of first nucleosomes. after identifying the first nucleosome dyads downstream of tsss according to the method described in fig. 2e mutational fluxes are graphed in relation to the nucleosome dyad. first nucleosomes  and genomewide nucleosomes  show a significantly opposite trend around the dyads in the entire genome; namely, p =  <dig>  % and  <dig>  % for c to t and t to c, respectively by one-tailed wilcoxon’s ranksum test



consistent with previous findings across all categories of tss  <cit> , investigations of the mutagenic landscape confirm that single nucleotide mutation rates and insertion/deletion  rates had chromatin-associated ~200-bp periodic patterns downstream of nucleocyclic tsss in the testes, blastulae, and liver . higher genetic activity of nucleocyclic tsss compared to other tsss  might induce higher mutation and indel rates around nucleocyclic tsss.

we then analyzed individual base change categories to determine how sequence variation during evolution might contribute to the conservation of the clear sequence composition boundaries around nucleocyclic tsss. at each position in the genome, we calculated the ratio of the count of each base change x to y to the “total” number of bases at the position. this normalization allows us to compare the rates of a mutation  and its opposite direction , indicating a drive toward the observed sequence features both upstream and downstream of nucleocyclic tsss . the base composition drive is supported in each case of a reciprocal g/c to a/t pair, in that the corrected forward rate  is higher than the corrected reverse rate  downstream of nucleocyclic tsss, yielding the small increase in a/t incidences and decrease in g/c incidences shown in fig. 3a. we then compared the flow into each mononucleotide  and the flow out from the mononucleotide  in respective upstream and downstream regions. for this analysis, the normalization also facilitates the calculation of the flow into a, for example, as the sum of the breakdown of base change rates  as illustrated in fig. 3c. figure 3c shows that, although rates of three mutations in the flows vary widely, we observe a bidirectional, although not completely balanced, flow into and out from each mononucleotide, contributing to the conservation of the mononucleotide incidence from the common ancestral genome to the hd-rr genome . the small net flux toward a/t and away from g/c is notable in each case and would be expected to result in a net flux of genome sequence around nucleocyclic tsss.

figure 3d and additional file 9: figure s8a display a more precise picture of mutation rates at individual positions within 500 bp of nucleocyclic tsss using data from testes. figure 3d suggests that around the first nucleosome downstream of the tsss, rates of c to t, and t to c are maximal around the nucleosome dyad and minimal around the linker, motivating us to verify this trend around first downstream nucleosomes . remarkably, this tendency is significantly contrary to the general trend of genome-wide stable nucleosomes where rates of c to t and t to c base changes are minimal around the nucleosome dyad and maximal around the linker in the medaka genome  and in the human genome  <cit> . the trend is also seen using data from liver . other mutational classes that have the tendency in testes, blastulae, and liver are a to t, t to a, and g to t .

another atypical mutation pattern seen with nucleocyclic tsss was that rates of c to t base change were significantly higher than rates of g to a mutation downstream of nucleocyclic tsss in testes and blastulae, which maintain germline character . this pattern suggests a transcription-based polarity and a possible involvement of transcription-coupled dna repair  that could skew mutational spectra and/or protects transcribed regions from mutations , resulting in an excess of c to t mutations over g to a mutations downstream of tsss  <cit> . one underlying feature that might lead to such a pattern would be an ability of tcr to suppress mutations particularly effectively downstream of nucleocyclic tsss .

CONCLUSIONS
substantial information on tsss and nucleosome positioning from two highly divergent inbred medaka strains provided novel insights into a class of nucleocyclic tsss with relevance to transcriptional activity during embryogenesis, lineage separation, and genetic variation. we revealed atypical evolution around nucleocyclic tsss, which have higher gene expression and a clear boundary in sequence composition with potentially-nucleosome-destabilizing a/t-enrichment of upstream and nucleosome-accommodating c/g-enrichment downstream of the tsss. we found that the sequence anisotropy is highly conserved from the common ancestor to hd-rr due to near-equilibrium between the rates of specific mutation classes and their opposite counterparts. downstream of nucleocyclic tsss, the rates of c to t, and t to c increase around the first nucleosome dyad and decrease around the first linker, in contrast to base changes around genome-wide stable nucleosomes not selected for promoter presence, and c to t rates are higher than g to a rates, which suggests the involvement of transcription-coupled repair.

several different processes might contribute to the associations between tss expression and local discontinuity in sequence composition. we propose the following as possible ways that these processes may interact:the initial position of some tsss may be set by dna-binding factors that serve as recruitment sites for rna polymerase, with the initial pre-polymerase complex or the resulting polymerase-containing complex serving as an organizing boundary for subsequent nucleosome deposition.

along with functional roles for sequences in recruiting and positioning polymerase, it remains possible that conservation of a tss could arise solely as the result of barriers formed by discontinuities in dna sequence composition, potentially as a result of dna translocations that juxtapose sequences with very different characteristics.

however such a situation arises, an a/t nucleotide enrichment upstream of nucleocyclic tsss should contribute to the eviction of nucleosomes, while a c/g-rich downstream of the tsss may facilitate both occupancy and anchoring by arrays of positioned nucleosomes.

any nucleosomal or sequence-composition discontinuity may feedback  toward favoring biased mutagenic “drift” in each domain that could retain the overall sequence organization. such a passive stabilizing effect, combined with any active selection for maintenance of the tss, would combine to produce long-term stability in the 5′ structure of specific genes.



