BACKGROUND
the original assumption that all organisms use the same  genetic code to translate genes to proteins has been challenged by discoveries of code deviations in both prokaryotes and, particularly, eukaryotes . however, the richness of different genetic code variants in eukaryotes concerns primarily the mitochondrial translation system, whereas non-standard codes employed to translate plastid and nuclear genes have proven to be much rarer and less diverse  <cit> . discovering non-canonical genetic codes of eukaryotic nuclear genomes has a somewhat discontinuous history. the list of identified variants expanded steadily since the discovery of the first case in the mid 1980s  <cit>  until the early 2000s  <cit> , with ciliates being an especially rich source. the variants described in this first period could be classified into three main types:  simultaneous reassignment of both the uaa and uag stop codons  to encode glutamine  or glutamate ;  reassignment of the uga stop codon to encode tryptophan or cysteine in different ciliate lineages  <cit> ; and  reassignment of the cug codon to encode serine rather than leucine in a yeast clade typified by candida albicans  <cit> . in the subsequent period until very recently, a few new occurrences of the previously discovered code variants were reported from additional taxa  <cit> , most notably the stop-to-glutamine reassignment of uar found in amoeboaphelidium protococcarum, an algal parasite representing the fungi-related group aphelidea  <cit> . however, despite the dramatic rise of the amount of sequence data from diverse eukaryotes during this period, discovery of new variants of the nuclear genetic code lagged for 13 years.

the situation has changed dramatically in  <dig> with a publication of a cluster of papers that have increased the number of known nuclear genetic code variants by a factor of two. firstly, two independent studies  <cit>  demonstrated that the yeast pachysolen tannophilus uses cug to encode alanine rather than leucine. next, analyses of a wealth of new transcriptome sequence data from ciliates, also by two independent teams  <cit> , led to a discovery of additional code variants in this group. one has uar reassigned to encode tyrosine, others are unprecedented in that all three termination codons are employed to encode amino acids, specifically glutamine  and tryptophan . in condylostoma magnum , uag, uaa, and uga all have a context-dependent dual meaning, as they still signal translation termination when occurring at the end of a coding sequence  <cit> . in an unrelated ciliate, parduczia sp. , uar codons seem to exclusively specify glutamine, whereas uga is used dually as a tryptophan or a termination codon  <cit> . most recently, our group has reported a similar phenomenon from a somewhat unexpected area of the eukaryote phylogeny, a clade of trypanosomatids currently assigned to the genus blastocrithidia  <cit> . in these organisms, uar codons have a context-dependent dual meaning as either glutamate or termination codons, whereas uga seems to be exclusively used as a tryptophan codon.

in summary, explorations of eukaryote phylogenetic diversity have established several clear trends in the evolution of non-standard genetic codes in nuclear genomes. firstly, the most frequent changes concern the uar and uga codons. the only known exceptions, i.e., changes in the meaning of a sense codon, are the reassignments of cug from leucine to either serine or alanine, both of which occur in one broader group of yeasts and are thought to result from a unique underlying synapomorphy, a loss of a trna cognate for the cug codon in an ancestor of the whole group  <cit> . nevertheless, the apparent scarcity of genetic codes with reassignments of sense codons may reflect the fact that they are not immediately noticeable in sequence analyses.

secondly, both uar codons  always experience the same alteration of their meaning in nuclear genomes. reading uaa as a sense codon while keeping uag as a termination one copes with the problem of the uua anticodon recognizing not only the uaa codon, but also uag due to wobble pairing. analogous discrimination of the aua and aug codons, encoding isoleucine and methionine, respectively, is possible only thanks to the presence of specifically modified nucleotides  at the first anticodon position of ile-encoding trnas  <cit> . on the other hand, reading uag while maintaining uaa as stop is more readily achieved, since the former codon can be specifically decoded by a trna with the anticodon cua. this was experimentally demonstrated in tetrahymena, where trnagln interacts with uag but not with the uaa codon  <cit> . indeed, exclusive reassignment of uag as a sense codon has been documented in some mitochondria  <cit> , and certain prokaryotes employ uag, but not uaa, to encode pyrrolysine  <cit> . however, the fact that the meaning of the uag and uaa codons is the same in virtually all translation systems suggests the influence of additional constraints. these may relate to the critical role of release factors, i.e., proteins directly interacting with termination codons and liberating polypeptide chains from the final trna molecule. archaeal and eukaryotic release factors  recognize all three termination codons, whereas in eubacteria and eukaryotic organelles, rf <dig> reads uag and uaa and rf <dig> reads uaa and uga  <cit> . stop-to-sense reassignment of a codon thus requires a loss of a release factor  or specific modifications of a release factor to disrupt its interaction with the reassigned codon.

thirdly, the phylogenetic distribution of non-canonical nuclear genetic codes is extremely biased. for reasons that are still not completely clear, ciliates behave as a real evolutionary hot-spot for recurrent emergence of various code deviations, whereas most other eukaryotes are much more conservative in this regard. swart et al.  <cit>  systematically screened data from the marine microbial transcriptome sequencing project , a collection of deeply-sequenced transcriptomes from several hundreds of phylogenetically diverse protists  <cit> , but did not find any cases of a non-canonical genetic code outside ciliates. however, the recent discovery of a new code variant in trypanosomatids  <cit>  suggests that the final census of non-canonical codes in eukaryotes has not yet been reached.

here, we present a discovery of two variants of a new type of the nuclear genetic code, in which uag is translated as an amino acid, while uaa is kept as a termination codon . both codes were encountered in  endobiotic organisms – a hitherto unknown, uncultured rhizarian and a recently described member of fornicata , the anaerobic flagellate iotanema spirale. we discuss possible evolutionary scenarios for the origin of these novel code variants.

RESULTS
a new lineage of insect-dwelling rhizaria
as reported in záhonová et al.  <cit> , the non-canonical code of blastocrithidia spp.  was discovered accidentally by one of us noticing that a transcriptome shotgun assembly  from the heteropteran lygus hesperus  <cit>  is contaminated by trypanosomatid sequences including in-frame termination codons. surprisingly enough, looking for contigs in the tsa data from l. hesperus exhibiting in-frame termination codons revealed not only those with obvious trypanosomatid affinities, but also some that could not be readily assigned to any particular eukaryotic taxon when compared by blastx against the ncbi non-redundant protein sequence database. therefore, we probed the tsa data from l. hesperus with a set of conserved proteins employed in previous phylogenomic studies of the global eukaryote phylogeny  and detected  <dig> orthologs that clustered neither with metazoans nor with trypanosomatids in individual single-protein trees . most of them contained one or more in-frame uag codons;  <dig> of these sequences branched with bootstrap support  > 50% exclusively  with homologs from rhizaria, most often  as a sister group of the aggregative amoeba guttulinopsis vulgaris. the remaining nine sequences clustered with homologs from other groups, but only in two cases such a grouping was supported by bs > 50%, and in both cases the non-rhizarian homologs were nested in a broader clan comprising primarily rhizarian sequences . despite inconclusive or contradicting phylogenetic evidence for rhizarian affinity of the nine sequences, they all likely come from the same organism as those with clear rhizarian affinity, as evidenced by the presence of at least one in-frame uag codon in all of them. in addition, many of the genes in the reference set that we used for searching the tsa from l. hesperus  are highly expressed, so contamination of the tsa by more than one species would manifest by the presence of more than one ortholog of these genes. putting aside the previously detected trypanosomatid contamination  <cit> , no other eukaryotic orthologs were observed, as were no additional 18s rrna sequences. therefore, we assumed that the tsa from l. hesperus was contaminated by two different protist species – blastocrithidia sp.  and an unidentified rhizarian, “rhizaria gen. sp. ex lygus hesperus”, hereafter for simplicity referred to as the rhizarian exlh.

to further illuminate the identity of the rhizarian exlh, we carried out a maximum likelihood  phylogenetic analysis of a 70-protein supermatrix containing  <dig> orthologs from this organism . the resulting tree showed it branching with maximum support within rhizaria, specifically within filosa as a sister lineage to g. vulgaris . however, only very few representatives of filosa could be included in the phylogenomic analysis due to an extremely low number of sequenced genomes or transcriptomes of this diverse group. therefore, we sought to determine the phylogenetic position of the rhizarian exlh within filosa using the 18s ribosomal rna  gene, the most broadly sampled phylogenetic marker for rhizarian phylogeny. searching the l. hesperus tsa sequences revealed two contigs that proved to be chimeric sequences consisting from artificially merged parts of a different origin, including a 3’ segment of an 18s rrna dissimilar to any 18s rrna sequence in the genbank database . using the partial 18s rrna sequence as a seed and original rna-seq reads we assembled a complete 18s rrna sequence that fell phylogenetically into filosa, specifically into the group sainouroidea . this clade comprises several poorly studied free-living or coprophilic flagellates and amoebae, including g. vulgaris  <cit> . the result of the 18s rrna analysis is thus concordant with the phylogenomic analysis of protein sequences, supporting the assumption that the assembled 18s rrna sequence comes from the same organism as the protein-coding transcripts. furthermore, it specifically indicates that the rhizarian exlh is a previously undetected lineage of sainouroidea, presumably a separate genus.fig.  <dig> phylogenetic position of the organisms studied. a phylogeny of eukaryotes including the rhizarian exlh based on 18s rdna sequences. the maximum likelihood  tree was inferred with raxml using the gtrgammai substitution model. the values at branches represent raxml bs values followed by phylobayes posterior probabilities . b phylogeny of fornicata including i. spirale based on a concatenated data set of 18s rdna and ef-1α, ef <dig>  hsp <dig>  and hsp <dig> protein sequences. the ml tree was inferred with raxml using the substitution models gtrgamma  and protgammalg4x . the values at branches represent raxml bs values followed by phylobayes posterior probabilities . maximal support  is indicated with black dots. asterisks indicate support values lower than 50% or  <dig> , respectively, dashes mark branches in the ml tree that are absent from the phylobayes tree




the presence of sequences from a rhizarian species in the l. hesperus tsa may be explained by an accidental contamination or an error in data handling in the sequencing center. alternatively, it may reflect a specific physical connection between l. hesperus and the rhizarian, most likely with the latter being a symbiont of the former. to distinguish between these possibilities, we obtained several individuals of l. hesperus captured in the wild , isolated dna from whole individuals, and carried out a pcr reaction using specific primers designed on the basis of the assembled 18s rrna sequence of the rhizarian exlh. one of the reactions  yielded a product of the expected size of 1200 bp, and sequencing revealed that, except for two substitutions, it was identical to the respective region of the 18s rrna sequence obtained from the published transcriptomic data from l. hesperus. this result suggests that the rhizarian exlh is a natural inhabitant, perhaps an endobiont, of l. hesperus. the nature of this association  and the host range of the rhizarian exlh remain to be investigated.

the rhizarian exlh employs uag to encode leucine
we next investigated the identity and significance of the termination codons interrupting the coding sequences of the rhizarian exlh. in total, we identified  <dig> instances of in-frame termination codons in  <dig> genes ; the codon was uag in all cases. based on a comparison with orthologs from other eukaryotes, we identified the bona fide termination codons of the respective transcripts , which were exclusively represented by uaa  or uga  . this suggested that the uag codon has been reassigned as a sense codon in the rhizarian exlh and does not signal translation termination anymore. visual inspection of multiple protein sequence alignments revealed a conspicuous pattern in the distribution of in-frame uag codons – a strong tendency to occur at positions occupied by conserved leucine residues . we hypothesized that uag encodes leucine in the novel rhizarian, which was further formally tested by two approaches.fig.  <dig> in-frame uag codons in protein-coding genes of the rhizarian exlh and i. spirale. a an example of a rhizarian exlh gene with several in-frame uag codons: multiple sequence alignment of orthologs of the bat <dig> protein . b relative frequency of hyperconserved positions  corresponding to uag-containing sites in the rhizarian exlh transcripts. c an example of a i. spirale gene with several in-frame uag codons: multiple sequence alignment of orthologs of the polr2a protein . d relative frequency of hyperconserved positions  corresponding to uag-containing sites in the rhizarian exlh transcripts. e, f dominant amino acid identity at conserved alignment positions  in a broad-scale comparison of i. spirale sequences with eukaryotic homologs. e positions corresponding to in-frame uag codons in i. spirale sequences. f positions corresponding to canonical glutamine codons  in i. spirale sequences. in fig. 2a and c, only selected segments of the full alignments  are shown for simplicity. asterisks indicate positions with in-frame uag codons in the underlying coding sequences. in fig. 2b and d, the hyperconserved positions are sorted according to the respective hyperconserved amino acid residue . source tables for fig. 2b and d including data from read mapping are available in additional file 1: table s1d and s2c




for the first analysis, we inspected the alignments of orthologous protein sequences used for the phylogenomic analysis described above and identified  <dig> positions in well conserved blocks that corresponded to an in-frame uag in the sequences from the rhizarian exlh. from those positions,  <dig> were classified as hyperconserved, i.e., with at least 90% amino acid identity across all the sequences in the alignment; 95%  of which corresponded to a hyperconserved leucine . to ensure that the presence of the in-frame uag codons at these hyperconserved sites was supported by original sequencing data, we inspected raw rna-seq reads mapped onto the respective contigs. no conflicting signal concerning the identity of the nucleotides corresponding to any of these uag codons was apparent  . as an alternative to the hyperconserved position-based inference of the uag codon meaning, we devised a phylogeny-informed ml-based method that unselectively considers all uag positions . briefly, we first inferred an organismal phylogeny using a smaller dataset of eight conserved proteins , with the respective genes from the rhizarian exlh containing  <dig> in-frame uag codons, represented as an undetermined amino acid  in the alignment. we then prepared  <dig> modifications of the dataset, each with a different amino acid considered at positions corresponding to the in-frame uag codons in the genes from the rhizarian exlh. then, we calculated the best ml tree for each of the  <dig> datasets, using the same substitution model and the tree from the initial dataset as a constraint. the dataset where uag was translated as leucine showed the highest likelihood score, and the conditional probability that uag encodes leucine in the rhizarian exlh  is virtually  <dig> , whereas it is negligible for any other amino acid .table  <dig> phylogeny-informed maximum likelihood-based estimation of the uag codon meaning in the rhizarian exlh and iotanema spirale. see the main text for details on the procedure employed. note that the values of conditional probabilities for the most likely assignments  differ so little from  <dig>  that they must have been indicated as  <dig> subtracted by the sum of conditional probabilities of the  <dig> other assignments

i. spirale



based on these results, we conclude that uag is the seventh codon for leucine in the rhizarian exlh and does not serve as a stop codon in this organism. this is not without precedent, as the stop-to-leucine uag reassignment was previously reported from mitochondrial genomes of several green algae of the order sphaeropleales  <cit>  and of the chytrid fungus spizellomyces punctatus and its relatives  <cit> . interestingly, we noticed striking differences in the uag codon abundance between certain groups of genes from the rhizarian exlh. in-frame uag codons were overrepresented in genes encoding components of the 26s proteasome, where the uag codon was the most abundant codon for leucine . in contrast, uag was the rarest leucine codon in genes for ribosomal proteins. in total, we identified sequences corresponding to  <dig> ribosomal protein genes of the rhizarian exlh, but 50% of those sequences did not contain any uag codon, although they all branched with homologs from rhizaria, most often  sisters to those from g. vulgaris. genes for ribosomal proteins are highly expressed and typically exhibit a strong codon usage bias facilitating efficient synthesis of ribosomal proteins  <cit> . the low abundance of the uag codon in ribosomal protein genes in the rhizarian exlh thus suggests that this codon is not as efficiently translated as the six standard codons for leucine.fig.  <dig> relative codon frequencies in the rhizarian exlh and i. spirale. a relative codon frequencies in two different groups of genes  in the rhizarian exlh. b relative codon frequencies in a reference set of genes of i. spirale . the relative codon frequencies are calculated as the percentage of the codon among all occurrences of codons with the same meaning 




i. spirale  uses uag to encode glutamine
the second case of a novel non-canonical genetic code was unexpectedly encountered when we sequenced the transcriptome of i. spirale. it is a recently described anaerobic flagellate isolated from fresh feces of a gecko phelsuma grandis and is considered an intestinal endobiont  <cit> . phylogenetic analyses based on a fragment  of the 18s rrna gene sequence affiliated i. spirale to the previously defined “carpediemonas-like lineage 3”  in fornicata , although its morphology is highly unusual for a fornicate  <cit> . to corroborate this initial insight, we used the data from the newly sequenced transcriptome of i. spirale and carried out two multi-locus phylogenetic analyses. a 70-protein phylogenomic analysis  with the dataset including  <dig> orthologs from i. spirale showed this organism as a branch sister to, yet deeply diverged from, representatives of diplomonadida . this is consistent with the previous result based on the partial 18s rrna gene sequence and with the fact that no other non-diplomonad fornicate could be included in the analysis due to lack of genome-scale sequence data. the second analysis was based on a dataset comprising a complete 18s rrna sequence, which we identified as one of the assembled transcript contigs, and sequences of four conserved proteins used in a previous detailed study of the phylogeny of the fornicata  <cit> . this analysis placed i. spirale with maximum support as the sister lineage of the cl <dig> representative hicanonectes teleskopos , again congruently with the previously reported result. thus, it is now robustly established that i. spirale is an unusual fornicate. in addition, it is a lineage well separated from hexamitinae, a subgroup of diplomonads, which is a conclusion important for the interpretation of the evolution of the genetic code in fornicates .

while analyzing the assembled transcript sequences from i. spirale, we noticed occasional in-frame uag codons . in total, we scrutinized sequences representing  <dig> genes, which contained  <dig> in-frame uag codons . uag was not used as an apparent bona fide termination codon in any of these transcripts, as 3’-termini of coding sequences predicted on the basis of conservation with orthologous sequences were marked only with uga  and, significantly, uaa  . this suggested that uag, but not uaa, has been reassigned as an amino acid-encoding codon in i. spirale. we used similar approaches as employed for analyzing the genetic code of the rhizarian exlh to determine the identity of this uag-encoded amino acid . first, using a smaller subset of genes sampled broadly to include representatives from most major eukaryotic lineages we identified  <dig> hyperconserved positions with an in-frame uag in i. spirale ,  <dig> of which  corresponded to a hyperconserved glutamine . in the second analysis, a concatenated protein sequence alignment considering glutamine in place of in-frame uag codons in i. spirale sequences gave the highest likelihood among all  <dig> possible variants  when tested against a precomputed species tree, and the conditional probability that uag encodes glutamine in i. spirale was nearly  <dig> , with negligible probabilities obtained for any other amino acid .

to further test that uag is the only termination codon reassigned in i. spirale and that its meaning is to encode glutamine, we carried out a broader analysis of the available transcriptomic data . in total, we analyzed  <dig> contigs assigned to i. spirale  and exhibiting close homologs in other eukaryotes;  <dig> of them contained at least one uag codon within the region aligned to the homologs. considering positions with 90% amino acid identity across the alignment with  <dig> best blastp hits, we identified  <dig> positions that corresponded to an uag codon in the i. spirale sequence,  <dig>  of which were dominated by glutamine . although this value may seem low and ambiguous, a similar proportion of conserved alignment positions dominated by glutamine  was observed for positions occupied by canonical glutamine codons in i. spirale sequences . imposing a less stringent threshold for amino acid conservation across the alignment  yielded  <dig> positions with an uag codon in the i. spirale sequence,  <dig>  of which were dominated by glutamine. for canonical glutamine codons in i. spirale sequences the proportion was even lower . in addition, neither of the  <dig> examined transcripts included the uag codon as an obvious termination codon marking the end of the coding sequence.

all these results indicate that uag in i. spirale encodes glutamine and does not serve as a stop codon. in contrast, our procedure identified only two contigs  with candidate in-frame uaa or uga codons, but manual scrutiny revealed that these codons are located in regions representing obvious retained introns. thus, there is no evidence for reassignment or context-dependent dual meaning of the uaa or uga codons in i. spirale and both apparently serve solely as standard termination codons, with uaa being the predominant termination codon in i. spirale . in the past, such a genetic code variant  was attributed to the ciliate genus blepharisma by some sources, see, e.g., the code  <dig>  in the list of genetic codes at an ftp page of ncbi  <cit>  or a recent textbook on molecular and genome evolution  <cit> . however, this was an apparent error, as it is beyond any doubt that blepharisma spp. use both uaa and uag as stop codons, while they have reassigned uga as a tryptophan codon  <cit> . indeed, the most recent list of genetic code tables provided on another ncbi page  <cit>  omits the code  <dig>  thus, the code we here document for i. spirale is, to the best of our knowledge, truly unprecedented.

evolutionary origin of the non-standard genetic codes in the rhizarian exlh and i. spirale
rhizaria is an extremely diverse eukaryotic grouping, but our knowledge of even the general biology, let alone molecular details, of most of rhizarian groups is lamentable. the discovery of a new rhizarian lineage exhibiting a peculiar feature of their gene expression machinery is thus not so unexpected. our phylogenetic analyses place the new rhizarian with the stop-to-leucine reassignment of the uag codon into the group sainouroidea . we should, therefore, ask how widespread this feature is in sainouroidea or possibly a broader rhizarian clade. the closest relative of the rhizarian exlh, for which a substantial amount of sequences of protein coding genes  are available, is g. vulgaris. brown et al.  <cit>  sequenced its transcriptome using the  <dig> method, but did not mention any observation concerning the genetic code employed by this organism. therefore, we analyzed the  <dig> transcript sequences from g. vulgaris that have been released by brown et al.  <cit>  to the genbank database . only one of these sequences, jt <dig>  includes obvious in-frame termination codons , but checking unpublished illumina rna-seq data from g. vulgaris revealed that the occurrence of the two termination codons in jt <dig> is a sequencing error . interestingly, all but one available g. vulgaris transcript sequences that cover the 3’-end of the coding sequence use uaa as the termination codon, with the sole exception putatively employing uag . thus, g. vulgaris most likely does not share the stop-to-leucine uag reassignment with the rhizarian exlh, although the prevalence of uag as a termination codon needs to be investigated using more complete sequence data. little data is available on nuclear protein-coding genes of other sainouroids, specifically a single sequence for each of rosculus sp. , helkesimastix , and sainouron acronematica . neither of these sequences exhibits in-frame termination codons, and the gene from rosculus sp. uses uag as the bona fide termination codon, whereas the remaining two sequences have truncated 3’-ends. these sequences are, therefore, consistent with the notion that the genetic code has changed specifically in the rhizarian exlh lineage, but a systematic exploration of sainouroid transcriptomes or genomes is needed to pinpoint this evolutionary event with a higher confidence.

while our study uncovers the first case of a non-canonical nuclear code for the whole rhizaria, the departure from the standard code reported here from i. spirale is not unprecedented in the fornicata. specifically, hexamitin diplomonads  for example, members of the genera spironucleus, trimitus or trepomonas, also encode glutamine by non-standard codons  <cit> . however, in contrast to i. spirale, all hexamitin taxa investigated have reassigned both uag and uaa as glutamine codons. the non-hexamitin diplomonads of the genus giardia are known to employ the standard genetic code, and our inspection of the limited number of protein-coding gene sequences available from the various “carpediemonas-like” fornicates  <cit>  did not reveal any case of an in-frame uag  codon that would presumably encode glutamine. hexamitins and the i. spirale lineage thus apparently modified their genetic codes independently of each other . the closest i. spirale relative, from which sequences of protein-coding genes are available, is h. teleskopos. all four these sequences  lack in-frame uag codons, suggesting that the stop-to-glutamine uag reassignment occurred only after the iotanema lineage split from the one of hicanonectes. however, we need to be cautious, as the abundance of the uag sense codon may be low , and we also lack positive evidence for uag as a termination codon in h. teleskopos due to 3’-end truncation of all four sequences. it will be interesting not only to obtain more complete data for investigating the genetic code of h. teleskopos, but also to study the free-living unidentified isolate pcs  <cit>  that is phylogenetically closer to i. spirale than h. teleskopos  <cit> , and of members of the endobiotic genus caviomonas, whose relationship to i. spirale has been suggested by morphological similarities of their flagellar apparati  <cit> .

molecular mechanisms of codon reassignment in the rhizarian exlh and i. spirale
let us now touch briefly upon the actual molecular underpinnings of the changed specificity of the uag codon in the rhizarian exlh and i. spirale. the occurrence of uag as a sense codon implies the existence of a cognate aminoacyl-trna that translates uag into the proper amino acid. as this aminoacyl-trna must at the same time ignore uaa, which has been retained as a dominant stop codon in both taxa, we are left with a single possible anticodon, cua, which pairs with the uag codon but not with the uaa codon due to c:a mismatch at the first anticodon:third codon position. therefore, we predict that sequencing the genomes of the rhizarian exlh and i. spirale will reveal the presence of novel trnas with the cua anticodon and with attributes characteristic for trnas recognized by leucinyl-trna synthetase and glutaminyl-trna synthetase, respectively. genes for trnaleu were previously found in mitochondrial genomes of the chytrid s. punctatus  <cit>  and several green algae of the order sphaeropleales  <cit> , so the postulated existence of a similar gene in the rhizarian exlh is not without precedent. similarly, the occurrence of trnagln has already been documented, namely in ciliates with the stop-to-glutamine reassignment of uar codons, e.g., tetrahymena thermophila  <cit>  or c. magnum  <cit> , and in hexamitins, e.g., in the spironucleus salmonicida genome . notably, anticodons of these trnas differ in only one nucleotide position from anticodons of standard trnas carrying the respective amino acids, i.e., trnaleu decoding the uug leucine codon and trnagln decoding the cag glutamine codon.

hence, the simplest scenario for the evolutionary origin of the putative uag-decoding trnas in the rhizarian exlh and i. spirale is a mutation of pre-existing  trnaleu and trnagln genes, respectively. checking a test set of  <dig> nuclear genomes confirmed that trnaleu and trnagln commonly occur in eukaryotic genomes, often in multiple copies in the genome , which is conducive to the emergence of the postulated mutant variants required for reading the uag codon. in addition, leucinyl-trna synthetases generally do not recognize the anticodon as a trna identity element , suggesting that efficient charging by leucine of the newly emerged trnaleu does not necessarily require changes in the enzyme. in contrast, glutaminyl-trna synthetases do use the anticodon as a trna identity element, and indeed, trnagln from tetrahymena thermophila was not recognized as a substrate by a mammalian glutaminyl-trna synthetase  <cit> . unfortunately, to our knowledge, glutaminyl-trna synthetases from eukaryotes decoding uag  as glutamine have not been studied in detail, so the putative modifications needed for efficient charging of trnagln are unknown. nevertheless, the multiple independent cases of the stop-to-glutamine uag reassignment in various eukaryotes  by themselves suggest that such modifications are achieved readily.fig.  <dig> phylogenetic distribution of known non-canonical genetic codes in nuclear genes of eukaryotes. the schematic phylogenetic tree was drawn on the basis of phylogenetic and phylogenomic analyses for eukaryotes as a whole  <cit>   and for the relevant subgroups with non-canonical codes . multifurcations indicate uncertain or controversial branching order, dashed branches indicate different positions of metamonada within eukaryotes suggested by different studies, branches drawn as double lines indicate paraphyletic groupings. the types and occurrences of the different non-canonical codes are based on this study  and the following previous reports: fungi  <cit> ; amoeboaphelidium  <cit> ; oxymonads  <cit> ; blastocrithidia  <cit> ; ulvophytes  <cit> ; ciliates  <cit> . note that, for simplicity, code variants with a context-dependent dual meaning of uar or uga codons as sense or termination ones  are not distinguished from those with a “complete” reassignment. we also omitted some ciliate species with their putative non-canonical codes supported by little data that are specifically related to and possibly sharing the same code with better studied species. changes in the genetic code are mapped onto the tree primarily  using dollo parsimony . an alternative maximum parsimony scenario with reversions weighted the same as other changes is indicated by the respective code numbers in white circles. an alternative branching order to the one indicated in the figure was supported by some studies for some of the ciliate lineages, but the alternative topology does not decrease the minimal number of codon reassignments required to explain the distribution of non-standard genetic codes




identification of trnas cognate to the uag codon in the rhizarian exlh and i. spirale and elucidation of their evolutionary origin awaits sequencing the genomes of the two organisms. this will require identification and culturing the rhizarian exlh; work towards this goal is underway in our laboratory. sequencing the genome of i. spirale is complicated by the fact that it grows slowly and the culture is dominated by bacteria  <cit> , which by itself rules out direct sequencing of trna molecules as an alternative approach. moreover, it should be noted that identification of trnas responsible for reading reassigned termination codons may not be straightforward even when the genome sequence is available. for example, swart et al.  <cit>  failed to find a gene for the expected trnatrp in their draft genome sequence of the ciliate c. magnum when investigating the genetic code of this organism. the specificity of trnas is not necessarily obvious from the gene sequence itself, as post-transcriptional editing or base modifications may be involved, too. as a result, the actual trnas responsible for termination codon reassignments remain unknown for most of the previously described non-canonical codes in eukaryotic nuclear genomes.

an effective reassignment of any of the uag, uaa, or uga codons is commonly thought to also depend on specific changes in the mechanism of translation termination. in eukaryotes, translation termination is mediated by the interaction of all three termination codons with the same protein, erf <dig> , specifically with its n-terminal domain  <cit> . this domain includes several highly conserved motifs or individual residues directly or indirectly involved in the recognition or binding of the termination codons, namely gts, niks, yxcxxxf, e <dig>  and s <dig>  <cit>  . indeed, erf <dig> sequences in eukaryotes that have altered the meaning of uag, uaa, or uga codons proved to typically exhibit various alterations in these motifs when compared to erf <dig> sequences from organisms with the canonical code  <cit> , and some of these changes have been demonstrated as causally linked to an altered specificity of the erf <dig> protein towards the termination codons  <cit> .

we identified transcripts encoding erf <dig> in both the rhizarian exlh and i. spirale and compared the critical region of the respective erf <dig> protein sequences with homologs from diverse eukaryotes, including a wide selection of species with non-canonical genetic codes . the erf <dig> sequence from the rhizarian exlh does not display any obvious deviation in the conserved elements noticed above, but it notably exhibits an alanine residue at the leu <dig> position of the human erf <dig> protein. although this position is not particularly conserved among erf <dig> proteins, the substitution to alanine is unique for the rhizarian exlh  and a corresponding l69a mutation was shown to increase readthrough of all three stop codons, particularly of the uag codon, suggesting that this position is specifically important for the recognition of guanine of the third stop codon position by erf <dig>  <cit> . it is, therefore, possible that this substitution is partly responsible for efficient usage of uag as a sense codon in the rhizarian exlh. the most conspicuous feature of the erf <dig> protein from i. spirale is a mutation in the highly conserved gts motif, specifically t32g substitution . this seems to be significant. with adenosine in the second position of the termination codon, thr <dig> faces the base at the third position, making a hydrogen bond with the n <dig> atom of guanosine in uag  <cit> . hence, the t32g substitution presumably disrupts this interaction and weakens the affinity of the i. spirale erf <dig> to the uag codon. the analysis of the erf <dig> sequences from the rhizarian exlh and i. spirale thus provides interesting testable working hypotheses on how the translation apparatus of these two taxa has been modified to interpret the uag codon as a sense one.

CONCLUSIONS
since the discovery of the first non-standard genetic code in ciliates more than 30 years ago until our study, all known nuclear genetic code alternations have followed a regular pattern that evolutionary changes in the meaning of the uag and uaa codons are coupled. we mapped the distribution of documented non-standard genetic codes in eukaryotic nuclear genomes onto the species phylogeny and deduced the most parsimonious scenario explaining the origin of these codes . the analysis predicts at least  <dig> independent evolutionary changes in the meaning of coordinately in both uag and uaa . this is in stark contrast to the situation in mitochondria, which exhibit a plethora of different non-canonical codes, including those with stop-to-sense reassignments of uag  or uaa , but no known case of a simultaneous reassignment of both uag and uaa. there might be some inherent molecular predisposition for different evolutionary trajectories of the uag and uaa codons in nuclear and mitochondrial codes , but the discovery of the two new code variants in the rhizarian exlh and i. spirale finally indicates that this principle is not absolute. our study thus provides an important new perspective on the evolution of the genetic code in eukaryotes. in addition, we developed a new generally applicable phylogeny-informed method for inferring the meaning of reassigned codons that will facilitate characterization of non-standard genetic codes to be discovered in the future.

our research has also contributed to improving our knowledge of the phylogenetic diversity of eukaryotes. the discovery of a new insect-associated lineage of rhizaria, interesting in itself, may be of a special significance, because the host species, the heteropteran l. hesperus, is an important pest of several crop plants, especially cotton  <cit> . the second subject of our study, i. spirale, is also a biologically interesting organism from an underexplored area of the eukaryote phylogeny. no genome-level sequence data has been reported so far from non-diplomonad fornicates, so our sequencing of the i. spirale transcriptome fills in an important gap in the sampling of eukaryotic diversity and will enable us to investigate other aspects of the biology of i. spirale .

