BACKGROUND
the correlation between expression levels of protein and mrna in mammals is relatively low, with a pearson correlation coefficient of ~ <dig>   <cit> . suggested explanations for this low correlation include post-transcriptional regulation and measurement noise  <cit> . this low correlation makes it difficult to integrate protein and mrna data. tools for this integration are sparse and not yet adopted by the bioinformatics community . initial findings from such tools suggest that the transcriptional and the translational regulation evolved independently, except in the rare occasions where strong selection in favor of correlation was present  <cit> . however, such claims are based on data from perturbed systems, where the observed discordance between the transcriptome and the proteome is strongly affected by the lack of temporal synchronization between the transcriptional and translational regulation levels  <cit> . in this study we focus on the connection of mrna and protein levels in non-proliferating tissues, through the example of the mammalian inner ear. by performing joint analysis of rna-seq and protein mass spectrometry  data from the mouse cochlea and vestibule, we aimed to shed light on the regulation of these two expression levels, identify genes that are mainly regulated in one system, and infer their general features. the two tissues are quite similar in structure, but have distinct roles in hearing and balance. this allows us to ask questions about the contribution of each of these two systems of regulation with respect to different cellular roles.

we will refer to a gene’s protein level divided by its transcript level as the gene’s protein-transcript ratio or ptr, also called the gene’s translation efficiency  <cit> . we note that this measure is affected by both translation and protein degradation rates, and under steady-state conditions it should be equal to the ratio of the rates  <cit> . it was observed that across taxa, protein levels are more conserved than mrna levels  <cit> , although some exceptions exist  <cit> . also, it was noticed that differences in protein levels between primates are less common than differences in mrna levels  <cit> . while ptr was claimed to be highly conserved between tissues for each given protein  <cit> , it was demonstrated that it somewhat varies between tissues in a direction that buffers or compensates for the change in protein levels from changes in the transcript abundance  <cit> , similar to what was shown across taxa. however, these observations originated from a small number of tissues, and were based mainly on regression coefficients that are affected by regression dilution bias  <cit> . in the first part of this study we will ask whether this phenomenon is evident in our mammalian inner ear data, and in previously obtained transcriptomic and proteomic data from different tissues. we will then use our discoveries to improve the prediction of protein levels from mrna levels.

many experiments only measure transcript abundance in a tissue and use it as a proxy for protein levels. previous articles that predicted protein levels from mrna  <cit>  did not use ptr measured in other tissues, and relied mainly on sequence related features; they reached a correlation of  <dig>  between the predicted and the observed levels. it has been suggested to use the average ptrs measured in other tissues in order to predict the protein levels for the tissue in question  <cit> . this assumes the ptr of a gene is constant across tissues. we suggest, instead, a model that assigns a higher ptr in a tissue where the mrna level is lower.

in the second part of this study we use functional analysis to compare differential expression across tissues in mrna and protein. we give examples where inner-ear tissues maintain different levels of mrna and similar levels of protein at rest, and hypothesize that this is done in preparation for a stimulus.

RESULTS
previous examinations of mrna-protein relationships were mainly performed in yeast and in cancer cell lines. aiming to examine these associations in non-transformed cells and differentiated tissue samples, we analyzed four different paired datasets of mrna and protein. for the first dataset we generated transcriptomic and proteomics data from the cochlea and vestibule of mouse inner ear . the three other datasets were publicly available:  multiple mouse tissues ;  primate lymphoblastoid cells ; and  a panel of human cancer cell lines . the results obtained for the nci <dig> dataset were compared with those obtained for datasets of non-transformed cells.

the ear rna-seq analysis identified  <dig>  genes,  <dig>  of which have at least one read per million in three or more of the samples and were included in the analysis. ms analysis identified  <dig> proteins . six thousand eight hundred thirty-two genes were common between the two tissues.

the mmt dataset contains mrna and protein levels taken from mouse tissues. in the proteomic data  <cit> , the stable isotope labeling with amino acids in cell culture  technique was used as an internal standard for relative quantification of proteins across  <dig> mouse tissues. we used five tissues that had both mrna and protein data: brain, cerebellum, heart, kidney, and liver. there were three proteomic samples for brain  and two for kidney , and we weighted the samples’ contribution by the volumes of the subregions to obtain the tissue protein levels. mrna measurements had three replicates per tissue, and six for the brain.

the primate dataset includes transcriptomics  and proteomics  data from lymphoblastoid cell lines  derived from five human, five chimpanzee, and five rhesus macaque. the species is analogous in the subsequent analysis to the tissue. we downloaded the data from  <cit> , and processed it as described in the article, to obtain expression levels of  genes that have at least three measurements from each of the three species, for both mrna  and protein . three thousand three hundred ninety-four genes were common between mrna and protein.

nci <dig> is a panel of  <dig> diverse human cancer cell lines. the type of cancer is analogous in the subsequent analysis to the tissue. we note that we do not necessarily expect to see the same phenomena in cancer cell lines as in healthy tissues, due to the pathological state of the tissues, and as the cell lines of the same cancer are different samples and not real replicates as the healthy tissues. one manifestation of these differences is a lesser ability to separate nci <dig> samples based on their origin, compared to the ear and mmt datasets. indeed, multi-dimensional scaling  plots show better separation of the latter datasets on both mrna and protein levels, even between very similar tissues . moreover, poor results were reported when hierarchical clustering was used to perform such a separation for breast, ovary, renal, and prostate cancers using proteomic data  <cit> .

we refer to the tissue type , species , or cancer type  as a group. we refer to samples of the same group as replicates. we refer to mrna and protein as domains.

protein levels are more conserved than mrna levels
mrna and protein levels were log <dig> -transformed, and averaged across all samples from the same group, disregarding missing values. a comparison of the proteomic and transcriptomic data showed, in agreement with previous studies  <cit> , that the overall dynamic range of mrna is significantly lower than protein, as marked by a higher variability in protein expression compared with mrna in all datasets .

we calculated protein-mrna correlations for each group . the average correlations between the two layers were  <dig> ,  <dig> ,  <dig> , and  <dig>  for the ear, mmt, nci <dig> and primate datasets, respectively, similar to the mrna-protein correlations reported in the literature  <cit> . then, we calculated correlations between pairs of groups for mrna and protein separately. we observed that in all datasets, all the protein-protein and the mrna-mrna correlations between groups were higher than the protein-mrna correlations within each group . this last trend was somewhat weaker in the mmt dataset, which includes less similar tissues.

figure  <dig> demonstrates a comparison of the correlation between group pairs in each dataset. for the ear dataset the correlation in the protein between the cochlea and the vestibule is higher than the correlation in the mrna . this is also the case for the primate dataset , the mmt dataset , and the nci <dig> dataset . for the mmt and nci <dig> datasets the protein correlations were significantly higher . to account for some of the platform differences between rna-seq and mass spectrometry, which manifest in higher correlation between replicates of rna-seq , we applied the spearman’s correction in our calculations, except for mmt where it was inapplicable .fig.  <dig> protein and mrna correlation between group pairs. each subfigure describes the correlation between expression levels of different groups in one dataset. the upper and lower triangles show the protein-protein and mrna-mrna correlations between groups, respectively. darker color corresponds to higher correlation. pearson’s correlation coefficients  were corrected using spearman’s method except in the mmt dataset . see additional file 2: figure s <dig> for intra group protein-mrna correlations




ptrs vary in a direction that reduces protein divergence
the higher correlation between pairs of groups in the protein domain suggests that changes in transcription between tissues are coupled to protein-level changes that exert opposite effects on the final protein level, hence producing higher similarity between groups. we call the phenomenon of reduced  change in protein levels compared to the change in mrna levels buffering. spangenberg et al. showed this phenomenon in the initial phases of adipocyte differentiation of adipose-derived human mesenchymal stem cells, by comparing differentiating cells at two time points  <cit> . regressing the fold change  of the protein levels to the fc of the mrna levels on a log-log scale led to the observation of a slope lower than  <dig>  or, in other words, range compression between protein fc and mrna fc. they hypothesized that a trend of lower ptr with increasing mrna levels is the cause.

to test this hypothesis on our data, for all pairs of groups in all datasets, we regressed log fc
protein on log fc
mrna using a variant of major axis  regression, and tested whether the slope is significantly different from  <dig> . all slopes were significantly less than  <dig> for the ear and primate datasets, and for all except one pair in the mmt dataset . for the nci <dig> and brain-cerebellum  the slopes were significantly higher than  <dig>  when using ordinary least square  regression, all the slopes calculated were significantly less than  <dig> , consistent with the aforementioned range compression phenomenon . however, ma regression is not sensitive to regression dilution bias, which can severely lower the estimate of the slope in ols regression  <cit> . using ma, it appears that the range compression is a common phenomenon for pairs of tissues, or species. for cell lines, an opposite phenomenon of range expansion occurs.fig.  <dig> examples of range compression. comparing either the cochlea and the vestibule ear tissues , or the heart and the cerebellum mmt tissues , the protein fold changes  were regressed on the mrna fold changes . the fitted regression lines using ordinary least squares  and major axis regression  were plotted, along with their 95% confidence interval . the black line is y = x. both ols and ma slopes are significantly lower than  <dig>  suggesting range compression




next, we used a nonparametric approach to test whether genes that are up-regulated in one group versus the other in the mrna domain will show lower ptr in that same group versus the other. if this hypothesis is correct, it can explain the compressed ratios in the non-cancerous datasets. we formulated two complementary testing approaches: a global test that considers all the genes ranked by their mrna differential expression  values, and a local test that focuses on those that are de. importantly, we separated the repeats on which ptr and de values are computed in order to avoid bias in the significance evaluation . figure  <dig> provides an example of the de-ptr comparison in inner-ear tissues. the ptrs in the cochlea were plotted against the ptrs in the vestibule, with the genes de between the tissues highlighted. we observe that genes up-regulated in one tissue tend to have higher ptrs in the other tissue. this property is tested by the local approach.fig.  <dig> protein-transcript ratio  and differential expression between two inner-ear tissues. the ptrs in the cochlea  are plotted against the ptrs in the vestibule , where the ptrs were calculated using mrna data of samples sa <dig> and sa <dig> respectively. marked in red are genes that are up-regulated in the cochlea, and in green are genes that are up-regulated in the vestibule . samples sa <dig> and sa <dig> were excluded from the differential expression analysis. the black line is y = x. there is a clear tendency for the genes that are up-regulated in the cochlea  to have higher ptr in the vestibule , and vice versa. note that to emphasize the de status, significant  genes are drawn at the front and may occlude some non-significant ones




the global tests were significant for all group pairs in the ear, mmt, and primate datasets . the results were in complete agreement with those of the local approach. the positive results support the buffering observation for all these datasets, and those of the local approach specifically indicate that within these datasets reduced protein expression changes have a major effect on the de genes. for the nci <dig> dataset, none of the pairs were significant, and all the correlations were very close to zero. therefore, we cannot determine the presence of a compression or an amplification effect based on this approach. as mentioned before, the different cell lines have very similar expression profiles, and this might cause a low signal-to-noise ratio.

predicting protein abundance from mrna levels
next, we examined whether we can predict protein levels based on the mrna data. we compared three estimators all of which are trained on a subset of each dataset, and examined their ability to predict the protein level in the rest of the samples. the first estimator was built on the average ptr ; the second estimator, which is fold change based , assumes a constant compression ratio of the fold changes between protein and rna; the third infers the protein levels from the average protein  levels in other tissues. ap and aptr also have a weighted version, which gives higher weight to the tissues with higher similarity, and fcb has a relaxed version  that allowed for protein levels to change exponentially between groups, independent of change in mrna. this accounts for differences between groups in the activity of the translational mechanisms and in protein stability.

in all datasets, the fcb and rfcb models achieved better results than the others . for all models, the weighted/relaxed versions achieved better results than their unweighted counterparts. the difference was very apparent for the mmt dataset, where the presence of two related tissues, brain and cerebellum, lowered the prediction error dramatically for those tissues; analysis of this dataset after the removal of one of the two still showed an advantage for the weighted versions, albeit smaller . these findings support the use of a weighted estimator, which gives higher weights to tissues that are closer in their protein levels and ptrs.fig.  <dig> performances of methods for protein level prediction. boxplots show the distribution of the normalized root mean square error  in the prediction of protein levels, using six described methods: averaged protein , weighted average protein , average ptr , weighted average ptr , fc based , and relaxed fcb . in each tissue, rmse values are divided by the standard deviation of the protein levels in that tissue. the error sizes are averages over tissues of 10-fold cross validation. in the ear dataset there are only two groups, so the weighted/relaxed versions are irrelevant. boxplots show median, a box for the middle 50% and whiskers to the largest and smallest values that are not classified as outliers. if the distance of an observation from the box is higher than  <dig>  times the box size, it is classified as an outlier. outliers are labeled




the average improvement in the mean square error  using the rfcb model over the next best weighted/relaxed model was  <dig> %,  <dig> %,  <dig> %,  <dig> % in the ear, mmt, primate, and nci <dig> datasets. overall, the superiority of the fcb and rfcb supports the model of constant compression or expansion ratio between mrna and protein fold-changes. our previous analysis supports compression, at least for the ear, mmt, and primate. the value of the compression parameter, α, of the fcb model is directly linked to the extent of compression. high variance between datasets and between groups was observed in the estimated value of this parameter . we thus conclude that this parameter should be adjusted separately for each protein level prediction task. we also compared the protein prediction power between the different datasets, and showed that the task of predicting protein levels where one is given expression data from a similar tissue, is easier than predicting using data from less similar tissues . this explains why the lowest mse is achieved in the ear dataset and the highest in mmt.

so far, our analysis showed the superiority of the rfcb method at the level of a dataset. this superiority still holds when moving to the level of a group, as in all groups the mse of the rfcb predction is the lowest among all methods. focusing on the nci <dig> dataset, the greatest improvement in predictions in terms of normalized mse is achieved for the leukemia and prostate, these cell lines having the lowest protein prediction power to begin with . next, we focused on the gene level, checking how well our prediction performs in predicting oncogene levels in cancer cell lines. out of the  <dig> oncogenes surveyed in  <cit> , we had full protein and mrna data for ctnnb <dig>  nras, and rb <dig>  using the six described methods, we predicted their protein levels in each nci <dig> group, and compared the results to the measured protein levels . for  <dig> out of  <dig> combinations of gene and group, all six predictions method performed well, with less than 2-fold difference between the expected and predicted levels. in the few cases where the difference was greater than 2-fold, the six methods were biased in their prediction in the same direction. an exception to this agreement was found in the prediction of nras expresion in breast and prostate cell lines, where the predictions of the ap and aptr methods suffered from ~ <dig> -fold prediction biases in opposite directions. in both cell lines the fcb and rfcb methods had a nearly perfect prediction.

differential expression indicates protein profiles are more similar than their rna counterparts
we compared the de genes between tissues in the ear dataset, both at the protein and the mrna domain. this type of comparison, as well as the comparison of the functional enrichment of the de genes on the mrna and protein levels, can suffer from several biases . there is detection bias against lowly expressed proteins, which tend to have more missing measurements, and so our power to detect de for a lowly expressed protein is lower. consequently, the power to detect up-regulated functions that are performed mainly by lowly expressed proteins is lower. the problem of missing data was evident in our data for the protein domain . to account for this effect, we reran de using different filters on the minimum number of measurements in the protein domain. we focus here on the results when analyzing only proteins for which all measurements were available.

plotting the rna and protein fold-changes of the de genes , we observed that  more de genes were found in the mrna domain ,  genes found to be de in protein were usually de also in mrna in the same direction , and  genes found to be de in both domains had more extreme mrna fold changes than those found to be de only in mrna . these observations imply that we expect the similarity between protein profiles to be higher than between their mrna counterparts. we note that these results remain valid when using other filters or other de detection procedures . we could not perform this type of analysis on the mmt dataset as statistically reliable de techniques require replicates.fig.  <dig> rna and protein expression fold changes between inner ear tissues. for mrna differential expression and fold-change estimation we used the edger package, with a detection threshold of q − value ≤  <dig> . for protein we used the samr package  with threshold q − value ≤  <dig> . only proteins with measurements in all samples were included. note that to emphasize the de status, significant  genes are drawn at the front and may occlude some non-significant ones




some tissue-functionalities coded in mrna are not manifested in protein
for mrna and protein, we looked for go enrichment in the set of genes up-regulated in the cochlea versus the vestibule and vice-versa . we observed that the terms found in the mrna domain represent a far broader list of functions than those found in the protein domain, when summarizing over the enrichments found using all filters. however, when comparing only the lists of enrichment terms found in the full data filter , the lists were similar in size, yet quite distinct in content. only three terms overlapped in the vestibule, representing  <dig> and 30% of the enrichments in the mrna and protein, respectively, and none overlapped in the cochlea. the similar size of the two lists was surprising, considering the much higher number of de genes in the mrna domain. it was also unexpected to see so little overlap between the lists, as 77% of the genes found to be de in protein were also de in the same direction in mrna in this analysis.

the analysis in the cochlea captured the functions of cell morphogenesis and nucleobase catabolic process in the mrna domain, and the function of sensory perception in the protein domain. importantly, the functions enriched in the protein domain were found in the mrna domain when using less stringent filters, but not vice versa.

the analysis of the vestibule identified functions related to cell development and morphogenesis, biological adhesion, and response to wounding in both domains. responses to general stimulus and chemicals, localization and cellular component movement, and renal system development, known to be related to ear development  <cit> , were functions observed only in mrna enrichments. terms relating to anatomical structure morphogenesis, and specifically to the process of endochondral bone morphogenesis, were enriched in the protein, as was the less expected term of phagocytosis. here also, all the functions enriched in the protein domain were either found, or similar terms to them were found, in the mrna domain with less stringent filters. in contrast, none of the functions unique to the mrna domain were found in the protein domain when using less stringent filters. these observations fit the hypothesis that some functionalities coded in mrna are not manifested in protein.

an exception to this behavior, that is, a function that is relatively more ‘active’ in the protein domain, was found using a different approach for detecting post-transcriptional regulated functionalities, in which we compared the functional profiles  <cit>  of the de genes between protein and mrna. using this approach, we concluded that the function of cell adhesion is post-transcriptionally controlled in the vestibule, with a relatively large number of genes that are not de in the mrna, but are so in the protein .

we performed enrichment analysis on the mmt dataset as well, by ranking the genes according to their fold-changes in protein and mrna, and using a cut-off independent approach  <cit>  to identify enrichments in both domains . inspired by  <cit> , we scored each pair of tissues according to how specific the terms that arise from the enrichment analysis are, to either the protein or the mrna domain . for most pairs of tissues, this analysis showed that there are more functions unique to the mrna than to the protein. this was very prominent in functions upregulated in the heart compared to the liver. in contrast, functions up-regulated in the cerebellum, compared to the liver and kidney, were more specific to the protein domain. next, we pooled the unique terms from all pairs, to determine which functions are uniquely enriched in one of the domains. after aggregating the results at the level of ‘go slim’  <cit> , we observed that protein modification and amino acid metabolism, as well as transport, including vesicle-mediated transport, tend to be unique in the protein domain . in contrast, lipid metabolism and catabolic processes, along with stress response, are more transcriptome-specific functions. terms related to cell death, cell adhesion, and immune system response, all appeared multiple times  and only in the mrna comparisons.

to complete the analysis we also analyzed genes that show relatively high expression in the mrna, but their measurements are completely missing from the protein. we performed this analysis on all datasets. for some of the cancerous cell lines, we found tumor related functionalities that are controlled through post-transcriptional repression , namely, functionalities that are coded in mrna but are less ‘active’ in protein.

discussion
in this study we compared mrna and protein expression across diverse datasets: mouse inner ear tissues, mouse organs, cancer cell lines and primate lymphoblastoids. we observed that the correlations in protein expression between groups are higher than the correlations in mrna expression, across all datasets. it was previously observed that across taxa protein levels are more conserved than mrna levels  <cit> . we showed this phenomenon across tissues as well, and explained it by changes in the transcript level that are attenuated at the protein levels. a direct outcome of this phenomenon is the compression of large differences in mrna expression to smaller ones in the protein domain. this is the first observation of this phenomenon for non-proliferating tissues, though it was previously seen in proliferative ones  <cit> . moreover, the aforementioned studies used ols regression, which is known to suffer from a strong dilution bias  <cit> . using the more robust ma regression instead, we provided evidence for such compression in ear, primate and in mmt . in nci <dig> and the brain-cerebellum pair  the regression results supported expansion, instead of compression.

when comparing tissues that are very similar in level of expression, small biases can render the regression invalid. in order to solve this issue, we tried a non-parametric approach, which can be less powerful but is not dependent on an underlying linear model. using this approach, we showed buffering for all datasets except nci <dig>  we therefore conclude that a partial buffering between translation and transcription exists in the mmt, ear, and primate datasets. for nci <dig>  the results were insignificant, and supported neither compression nor its opposite, signal amplification. perhaps a more powerful test  may provide the answer. for the primate dataset such an observation was made previously  <cit> . in this study, by addressing some of the limitations of that statistical analysis, we reaffirmed the correctness of the observation .

we did not necessarily expect to see the same phenomena in cancer cell lines as in healthy tissues, for obvious reasons: cell lines are programmed to proliferate, whereas cells in healthy tissues divide slowly, if at all; cell lines somewhat lose their resemblance to their tissue of origin, thus becoming more similar to a “global cancer pattern”; and cell lines of the same origin may diverge in their transcriptomic and proteomic profiles as they follow different paths of cancer evolution. in addition, the post-transcriptional regulation may be altered or even damaged in cancer. we showed one manifestation of these biological differences, namely the lesser ability to separate nci <dig> samples based on their origin, compared to the ear and mmt datasets. since the cell lines are more similar to each other in their expression profiles, the compression effect is expected to be less dominant in cancer.

a translational model has been proposed, where transcriptional signals are amplified by translational regulation  <cit> . the existence of an amplifying mechanism might appear to contradict the buffering suggested here. however, the authors studied budding yeast, a single cell type. in this model an increase in the mrna level of a transcript would translate into an exponential increase of the matching protein, while our analysis is based on multiple tissues. in each tissue the transcriptional, translational and post-translational regulations are fine-tuned to enable the correct function of the tissue. both mechanisms can coexist, i.e., the expression profiles that we observed result from a balance between compressing and amplifying mechanisms. the first is related to the tissue identity , and the second is connected to the way the translational apparatus of a cell functions. a very similar argument was made in  <cit> , in the context of different species. we speculate that the contradicting evidence we observe for buffering in groups that are more similar to one another might be the result of such balance; i.e., in such groups, the balance between the two mechanisms leans towards amplification.

what biological mechanism explains the buffering observation? decoupling is achieved by changing the translation rates, the protein degradation rates, or both. we cannot distinguish between these three options using our analysis, yet according to the literature, protein translation is assumed to be the major contributor to the variance of protein concentration  <cit> , and was shown to change through tissue differentiation  <cit> . hence we can speculate that the translation rate is the factor that is changing between the two tissues, although in a different context, of expression quantitative trait locis in lcls, the buffering observed between protein and mrna was attributed mainly to protein degradation  <cit> . in supplementary results  we discuss explanations from the literature  <cit>  as to how the coordination of translation and transcription is achieved, and demonstrate that alternative polyadenylation, one of the proposed mechanisms  <cit> , plays only a minor role, if any, in this balance in the ear dataset.

we acknowledge the possibility that mrna measurement error might cause an overestimation of the buffering effect. it is well known that distinct tissues may contain different amounts of rnaase that degrade mrna at dissimilar degrees and with different specificities  <cit> . given the impact mrna integrity has on transcript quantification  <cit> , these differences may result in measurement errors that are inconsistent between tissues. by using ribosome profiling data instead of rna-seq measurements, one can avoid this problem altogether, and obtain more rigorous results. another source of error is the number of amplification cycles and the precise pcr conditions used for each sample. we used the spearman’s correction to mitigate the between-replica error but we did not account for systemic errors between tissues. tighter experimental controls, together with more elaborate statistical normalization techniques, can address this potential error.

we demonstrated how the prediction of protein can be improved by taking the range compression into account. models that allow ptr to vary between tissues in a direction that buffers the change in protein levels , performed better than models that did not allow this variation or ignored rna levels altogether. the improvement in the prediction error was between  <dig> and 24%, depending on the dataset. the largest improvement was achieved in the ear, but in this dataset the prediction was very good to begin with. in the primate dataset the smaller improvement of 14% can make a large difference in the prediction quality. this enhanced ability to predict protein levels can be utilized, for example, to better predict disease status using machine learning. the higher accuracy exhibited by the rfcb method in the prediction of the nras protein level in breast cancer cell lines, supports its usage in disease status evaluation, as overexpression of nras is associated with poor prognosis in breast cancer  <cit> . in the future, as understanding of mrna-protein relationship improves, more sophisticated prediction tools can be developed that will be aware of this mechanism and explore different features of it .

if buffering worked in the linear fashion captured by the fcb model, and the noise level was similar in the measurements of protein and mrna, we would expect the correlations between tissue pairs in the protein and the mrna domains to be almost equal. we observed, however, that the correlations in the protein domain were higher. this is a surprising finding, especially in light of the higher noise level in protein, suggesting that a more powerful nonlinear buffering model could be described. another support for a stronger buffering comes from the number of de genes we found, which was much higher in the mrna domain. as mentioned, the protein measurements are slightly noisier, though probably not to the extent that justifies these high differences.

in the enrichment analysis we observed that the functionalities represented at the protein domain were, by and large, a subset of the functionalities represented at the mrna domain, which were far more numerous. the fact that we find less enrichment categories in protein is partially explained by the missingness pattern in the protein measurements: we have less chance to detect categories in which some or all of the genes are lowly expressed in the protein domain . focusing on the subset of genes with full measurements in protein allows a more fair comparison, but nearly ignores the possible differences between those ‘low expression’ categories. in that comparison we found a similar number of enrichment categories for protein and mrna. the lists differ greatly; however, we notice that the categories that were found in the protein and not in the mrna, were represented in the analysis of the full, non-filtered, mrna data. we can conclude that all the functionalities that are represented in the protein are also evident in the mrna data. for the opposite direction it is much harder to tell; to accurately answer this question we need to somehow predict the missing values in the protein, or develop an enrichment analysis tool that is aware of the ‘missing not at random’ nature of the data  <cit> .

why does one tissue maintain higher mrna levels but the same protein levels compared to another, where such practice requires more energy from the cell? we suggest that functionally distinct tissues possess different mrna profiles but similar protein profiles, in rest, as part of a preparation for a stimulus. under some stimulus a translational inhibition is removed from a gene  that is de between the tissues only at the mrna domain, so that the tissue that possesses higher levels of the gene’s transcript will synthesize the protein faster. indeed, one of the virtues attributed to translational control is the possibility of rapid response to external stimuli  <cit> . moreover, when exposing mammalian cells to stress induced by dithiothreitol, mrna- and protein-level regulation contribute equally to the change in protein expression  <cit> , demonstrating the importance of protein-level regulation under stress. if our suggestion is correct, it might be beneficial to measure both mrna and protein levels in order to deduce functionality of genes. if a gene is de at the protein domain, then the protein is important to the function of the resting tissue. if a gene is de only at the mrna domain, then it is required for the tissue functionality under some stimulus.

the fact that the vestibular up-regulated genes are enriched for response to stimulus and chemicals only in the mrna domain might be a manifestation of this hypothesis, as a role for these responses in the normal development of the ear is not known. also fitting this hypothesis are the multiple immune related terms found in the mrna domain, in the analysis of the non-filtered data. nevertheless, the lack of these terms from the protein analysis might be related to a relatively low expression of the genes in these categories. in the mmt analysis we see a similar pattern. response to stress terms are enriched in mrna data and not in protein, and those of immune system response are unique only to mrna. in the literature we can find examples where the translational regulation of genes changes in response to heat shock  <cit> , hypoxic stress  <cit> , changes in iron concentration  <cit> , and exposure to egf  <cit> . it is interesting to explore whether the genes activated in these responses are highly expressed in the mrna domain, compared to a tissue that is not normally subjected to these types of stress, even before the actual exposure.

CONCLUSIONS
our work demonstrates that protein levels are more conserved between tissues than mrna levels. we employed this observation to improve the prediction of protein levels in a non-proliferating tissue based on the mrna levels measured in that tissue, by using data from several other tissues. a biological explanation is proposed as to why tissues maintain different levels of mrna and similar levels of protein, by providing examples where this phenomenom serves as a preparation for a stimulus.

