BACKGROUND
the increasing number of completed genome sequencing projects has provided biologists with a wealth of sequences containing thousands of genes. many of these genes code for proteins of unknown function. this has led to the development of several large-scale methodologies that are grouped together under the term functional genomics/proteomics, with the aim of investigating the putative gene functions  <cit> . in the context of functional genomics, yeast saccharomyces cerevisiae has emerged as the model organism of choice for studying eukaryotic cells. s. cerevisiae has been the target of numerous large-scale experiments including genome sequencing  <cit> , expression profile  <cit> , interaction mapping  <cit> , etc. while much has been learnt in the recent years, more experiments are needed to uncover the details of the cell's behavior and responses to internal and external stimuli at the molecular level.

one way of defining protein functions is via the interactions that the proteins make with each other. it is generally accepted that the proteins that are functionally related, often interact with each other and form functional protein complexes  <cit> . consequently, protein-protein interaction  analysis has been used as a method to assign novel functions to proteins in model organisms such as s. cerevisiae and escherichia coli  <cit> .

genetic interaction analysis is another method which is used to study gene function. it is based on the assumption that many genes and pathways in yeast and other eukaryotic cells may be functionally redundant so that in the absence of a target gene, there will be other genes that compensate for its loss of activity with no phenotypic consequences  <cit> . however, the deletion of a second functionally related gene may result in sickness or lethality. therefore, the sickness of double mutants or "synthetic lethality" identifies genetic and hence functional relationships between the two genes  <cit> . the sickness or lethality in this case is determined by colony size reduction.

the availability of genome sequencing data has also greatly impacted studying the genetics of disease. chemical genetics, which is positioned at the borders of chemistry and genetics, has received considerable attention because it may hold a key to the discovery of drugs that affect the molecular mechanism of different diseases. using the set of non-essential yeast gene deletion  strains, very recently it was demonstrated that chemical-genetic analysis provided a fast and efficient way to determine the targets of inhibitory compounds  <cit> . this was done by analyzing the growth of the yeast gene deletion strain colonies in the presence of the sub-lethal concentration of a bioactive compound. analyses of the gene mutations that cause hypersensitivity to the compounds were then used to identify the cellular targets of the bioactive compounds.

both commercial and free image analysis tools have previously been developed for analyzing biological images. some of these tools are designed for specific functions such as cell or colony counting  <cit> , whereas others are more dynamic and permit some user interactive analysis of individual images  <cit> .

here, we report the development of a computerized system termed growth detector  that performs accurate yeast colony area measurement and calculates required statistical parameters which is suitable for comparative analysis of two yeast colony arrays. we use this automated tool to study the molecular mechanism by which berberine affects eukaryotic cells. in addition, gd analysis reveals a novel function for the mek <dig> gene in dna repair pathway, further indicating the use of gd in biological investigations.

RESULTS
the efficiency of gd to detect growth differences
we evaluated the ability of gd to detect growth differences in yeast colonies, by comparing colony growth for yeasts treated with various compounds to the untreated ones . for the description of how the gd analysis works please refer to the methods section. in our experiment with cobalt, we pinned approximately equal number of mutant yeast cells, for  <dig> strains, on media containing either a sub-lethal concentration of cobalt , or no additional cobalt. the gd analysis and the manual  inspection  method were used to evaluate the colony growth differences. the results were used to evaluate the efficiency of gd to identify colony size differences.

the mi method was performed by looking at the images of the two plates, by eye, and estimating the relative growth of a target colony over the average growth on the same plate and comparing it to that on the control plate. it should be noted that the treatment of the cells often results in an overall growth reduction for the entire array of yeast colonies, which to some extent may complicate manual comparisons. as indicated in table  <dig>  the mi approach resulted in the detection of  <dig> strains as positives . aside from the subjective nature of this approach which could complicate the intrepretation of the results, the mi analysis is also laborious. on average, it takes approximately  <dig> seconds for each yeast colony to be accurately analyzed.

cell sensitivity to cobalt  for  <dig> different yeast strains was analyzed using colony size reduction  or number of colonies formed . in addition to the  <dig> strains detected by mi, gd identifies another  <dig> sensitive strains. the data gathered by gd has more overlap  with the st data as compared to those gathered by mi . assuming that the st data represent ground truth, mi and gd have comparable % of novel/false positives which is calculated using  <dig> × /. a,b and c are calculated using  <dig> × /,  <dig> × /, and  <dig> × /, respectively. d and e assume that the st data represent ground truth. n/a is not applicable.

the performance time of the mi method is compared to approximately  <dig> seconds detection and statistical calculation time for all  <dig> yeast strains using the gd analysis. this is approximately a 64-fold increase in performance time. additionally, gd detected  <dig> sensitive strains . this is compared to the  <dig> strains identified by the mi analysis and suggests a 2-fold increase in detection of target strains for gd versus mi. consequently, for a complete experiment , more than  <dig> target sites might be identified with the gd analysis that could be missed otherwise. this is a very significant improvement for biological investigations especially given the accuracy of gd .

in addition to the improved speed and effectiveness of gd over mi, there are other advantages to using this automated method over the manual approach. gd can provide quantitative information about the observed growth differences. this quantitiative information can be used to prioritize the target candidates for follow-up experiments. multiple positive hits often present a challenge for deciding the priority of each hit. once the hits are quantified however, those with the best scores get automatic priority. in addition, gd analysis may have the advantage of reducing the amount of starting material needed for cell sensitivity screens. due to the constraints associated with manual scoring, each experiment may need to be repeated several times. since the pure amount of the experimental bioactive chemicals is often a limiting factor  <cit> , large-scale experiments with certain valuable samples for which only small quantities were readily available, were previously thought to lack merit. gd analysis can change this.

we also used spot test  analysis as an alternative method for detecting the sensitivity of yeast strains to cobalt . it should be noted however, that the determination of cell sensitivity to a bioactive compound is a subjective matter  <cit> . a cell in a specific experimental condition may show certain sensitivity to a compound. however, small variations in the experimental conditions  may reduce or enhance this sensitivity. therefore, while there is a positive correlation between sensitivities detected by spot test and colony size reduction analyses  <cit> , the results are not expected to fully overlap. for practical reasons however, here we used the st analysis as an alternative method for detecting sensitivity to which colony size reduction analysis may be compared.

to do the st analysis, wild type  yeast cells as well as the mutants were grown in liquid medium to saturation. the cells were diluted  <dig> times and allowed to grow to mid-saturation . the cells were then diluted using serial-dilution and decreasing numbers of cells were plated on the solid media with or without  the target bioactive compound. the relative reduced number of colonies formed is scored as sensitivity to the compound. an example of this is shown in figure  <dig>  the first circle on the top for each experiment contains  <dig> cells. the following spots contain approximately  <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> cells, respectively. this procedure is very time consuming and is done over a course of  <dig> days. in our experiments, we analyzed  <dig> strains per day. the analysis of the  <dig> strains by this technique took  <dig> full days . consequently, while the results obtained are reliable, this technique can hardly replace the colony size reduction approach for large-scale analysis.

as indicated in table  <dig>  the st analysis identified  <dig> sensitive strains . of these  <dig> strains,  <dig> and  <dig> strains were also identified as positives by the mi and gd analyses, respectively, indicating an overlap of 32% and 63% for the data gathered by mi and gd with that of st, respectively. this provides further evidence for the suitability of the gd analysis to identify sensitive strains and reaffirms its advantage over the mi analysis. further, mi and gd identified  <dig> and  <dig> strains as positives, respectively, which did not appear as sensitives using the st analysis. these may represent novel positives, and may stem from the differences in the cell sensitivities under different experimental conditions. alternatively, they may represent false-positives if the strains identified by st are assumed as the true sensitives.

we then examined if gd can potentially identify all positives detected by mi and st if a high rate of false positives was tolerated. it was observed that all the sensitives detected by mi can also be detected by gd if the selection threshold for defining sensitivity in gd analysis is lowered from 30% colony growth difference to 19%. this lowering of the threshold also resulted in the detection of  <dig> false/novel positives. the lowering of the stringency for the sensitivity selection in gd analysis from 30% growth reduction to 23% resulted in the detection of  <dig> additional sensitives that were originally detected by st alone, as well as  <dig> false/novel positives. further lowering of this threshold however, did not result in the detection of the remaining  <dig> sensitives  that were detected by st alone. the fact that gd cannot detect all the sensitives detected by st further highlights the difference between the data collected by the two approaches. also this difference might be partially explained by the experimental errors associated with the two methods.

altogether, results indicate that the automated system  offers significant improvement over the manual scoring  of yeast colonies. sensitive additional information can now be extracted in a timely fashion from the same experiment, which otherwise would have been missed. this additional information can help biologists to better interpret their results.

during the preparation of this manuscript a new image analyzer termed cellprofiler was developed which besides its use in analyzing various cell and colony images, it is also suitable for growth analysis of yeast colony arrays  <cit> . like gd, cellprofiler is also developed in matlab and measures the amount of growth in each patch of yeast, using intensity units and shape-related measures. the main advantage of gd over cellprofiler is that in addition to providing an accurate coordinate oriented map of colony areas, gd also performs post processing calculations and attains useful statistical information about the growth pattern of yeast colonies within each plate and relative to other plates . another advantage of gd over cellprofiler is its ability to compensate for plates lacking entire edge rows or columns. for the purpose of functional genomics and in light of the growing number of cell colony arrays  <cit> , the need for automated tools, such as gd, which are capable of performing comparative image analysis is apparent.

molecular mechanism of berberine
the alkaloid berberine is a component of a number of important medicinal plants that are used in traditional chinese and ayurvedic medicine  <cit> . berberine has demonstrated significant antimicrobial activity against different organisms including fungi  <cit>  and is relatively nontoxic to humans  <cit> . this makes berberine an ideal candidate for pharmaceutical drug development from medicinal plants. however, little information is available about the molecular mechanism by which this bioactive compound affects the cell. to investigate the mechanism of the bioactivity of berberine, we used gd analysis to examine the growth of the yeast non-essential gene deletion array  in the presence and the absence of the sub-inhibitory concentration  of berberine. the most sensitive yeast deletion strains  detected by gd were used for further analysis.

we then randomly selected  <dig> of these strains and examined their hypersensitivity to berberine by minimum inhibitory concentration  assay. this was carried out by placing approximately  <dig> yeast cells in each well of a 96-well microtiter plate in the presence of a gradient of berberine concentration varying from  <dig>  to  <dig> × 10- <dig> mg/ml and comparing their growth to that of the wild type strain for each of the  <dig> varying concentrations of berberine. as expected, all  <dig> examined deletion strains had significantly lower mic values as compared to the wild type strain, further reaffirming that gd analysis can correctly identify drug sensitive strains.

of the sensitive strains, only  <dig> had deletion of the genes with known functions.  <dig> of those genes were associated with stress response or multi-drug resistance. these genes are thought to be involved in general stress conditions and therefore may not be specific to the molecular activity of berberine. consequently, they were eliminated from further analysis to study the molecular target of berberine. analysis of the functions of the remaining  <dig> genes indicated that  <dig> of them had a role in the process of gene expression. this suggests that berberine is genetically linked to gene expression components, among other cellular processes. the smaller identified gene functional clusters had roles in the proccesses such as metabolism  and cell wall synthesis . it should be noted that these observations are considered preliminary and further investigations are needed to elucidate the exact mechanism of berberine activity.

identification of a novel role for mek <dig> in dna damage repair
to identify novel genes involved in dna damage repair  we examined the set of yeast non-essential gene deletion strains for their hypersensitivity to methyl methanesulfonate , a known dna damaging agent, by the pinning approach. gd analysis was then used as before to compare the colony growth for yeast strains in the presence and absence  of sub-minimum inhibitory concentration of mms . the top 10% of the strains  that was detected by gd as most sensitive to mms was selected for further analysis. as expected from the molecular activity of mms, this list contained a group of deletion strains for those genes that are functionally related to ddr such as; pol <dig>  which encodes for a subunit of dna polymerase delta required for error-prone dna synthesis in the presence of dna damage, ubc <dig>  which encodes for a ubiquitin-conjugating enzyme involved in the error-free dna postreplication repair pathway, rem <dig>  that we have recently shown to be involved in non-homologous end joining  pathway , etc. this further indicated that gd provides biologically meaningful data. another group of genes that were identified by gd as part of the most sensitive strains were those that had no previous known functional relationship to ddr. these genes may represent a secondary target for mms on the cell, or alternatively, they may represent novel genes that are involved in ddr. one such gene is mek <dig>  it is previously reported that mek <dig> encodes for a protein kinase required for meiotic recombination  <cit> . but the involvement of mek <dig> in ddr has not been documented before. to examine a possible role for this gene in ddr, we subjected the yeast gene deletion strain for mek <dig>  to a plasmid repair assay  <cit> . in this assay, yeast strains are transformed with equal amounts of intact and linearized  plasmids. the region around the site of linearization has no homology to the yeast chromosome. therefore, the strains that are deficient in nhej pathway, which is responsible for repair of double stranded dna breaks in the absence of a homologous dna template, show reduced ability to circularize the plasmid and form fewer colonies on the selective media. it was observed that in the absence of mek <dig>  yeast cells had approximately 80% relative reduction  in plasmid repair. this suggests that mek <dig> can affect the efficiency of nhej in yeast cells. we note however, that further analysis is needed to investigate the molecular function of mek <dig> in nhej.

yku <dig> is a major player in nhej pathway and its deletion strain is used as a control. each experiment is repeated four times and the results are combined. the efficiency of the wild type to repair double stranded breaks is set at  <dig> . the repair efficiencies for the other two strains are related to this value.

CONCLUSIONS
here we present a fast and efficient method termed gd analysis, to quantify yeast colony size. using this approach, we show that the berberine is genetically linked to gene expression components, among other cellular processes. in addition, we show that mek <dig> is a novel gene associated with dna damage in s. cerevisiae.

the work presented here offers significant improvement over the previously used method of manual inspection to estimate and compare yeast colony size under different experimental conditions. the speed and accuracy associated with this approach makes it an ideal choice for large-scale functional genomics investigations in which comparative colony size measurements are needed.

