BACKGROUND
the genomes of eukaryotic organisms are wrapped around histone proteins to form a condensed protein-dna complex known as chromatin 
 <cit> . the basic packaging unit, the nucleosome, consists of approximately  <dig> base pairs of dna wrapped around a histone octamer, containing two copies of each of the histone proteins h2a, h2b, h <dig>  and h <dig>  the positioning of these nucleosomes along the genome is important for control of gene expression by regulating access of dna to transcription factors and other dna binding proteins 
. nucleosomes are therefore not arranged randomly, but show a distinct distribution around genes. this nucleosome landscape was first observed in saccharomyces cerevisiae, and was later confirmed for higher eukaryotes, such as worms, flies, and humans . in summary, the core promoter is characterized by a nucleosome-depleted region followed by a strongly positioned + <dig> nucleosome that overlaps the transcription start site. the coding region is packaged by an array of nucleosomes with increasingly fuzzy positioning towards the 3′ end. finally, another nucleosome-depleted region is present at the 3′ end of the gene where rna polymerase ii terminates transcription.

nucleosome positioning is influenced by binding of other proteins and protein complexes to the dna that act as barriers, as well as by chromatin remodeling enzymes that actively shape the nucleosome landscape. however, one of the strongest determinants of nucleosome positioning is the dna sequence itself. in eukaryotes such as s. cerevisiae and humans, relatively rigid stretches of deoxyadenosines  decrease nucleosome binding affinity 
 <cit> . poly tracts are often found in the nucleosome-depleted regions that demarcate eukaryotic core promoters 
 <cit>  and their length and location relative to the transcription start site  have been shown to influence promoter activity 
 <cit> . in addition, nucleosome-bound dna shows a 10 bp periodicity of anti-phased a/t and g/c dinucleotides that corresponds to the helical turn of dna wrapped around the histone core 
.

the human malaria parasite, plasmodium falciparum, yearly responsible for an estimated  <dig>  deaths 
 <cit> , has the most highly at-rich genome sequenced to date. the at-content averages  <dig> % genome-wide, but reaches 90-95% in intergenic regions 
 <cit> . similar to other eukaryotic genomes, the p. falciparum genome is bound by nucleosomes, but the formation of tightly packed heterochromatin may be prevented by the absence of linker histone h <dig>  of which to date no homologue has been detected in p. falciparum. the p. falciparum genome is relatively depleted of transcription factors, but encodes a large amount of chromatin remodeling enzymes 
 <cit> . accordingly, the nucleosome landscape of p. falciparum has been proposed to be important for regulation of gene expression during the stage of its life cycle responsible for disease in humans 
. this asexual erythrocytic stage is characterized by parasite invasion of a red blood cell, followed by multiplication and the release of 16- <dig> daughter cells after a cell cycle of approximately 48 hours. differentiation of asexual parasites into male or female gametocytes allows transmission of p. falciparum to mosquitos. understanding the regulatory mechanisms for sexual differentiation is critical for the development of strategies aimed at preventing transmission of malaria.

in a previous study, we analyzed the nucleosome landscape of the p. falciparum genome during the asexual cycle by a combination of micrococcal nuclease  assisted isolation of nucleosome-bound dna  and formaldehyde-assisted isolation of protein-free dna , coupled to next-generation sequencing 
 <cit> . due to the relatively low coverage of these data sets , we were unable to perform an in-depth study of correlations between transcriptional activity and nucleosome positioning, in particular for promoter regions. here, we generated a new, high-coverage, nucleosome positioning data set and uncovered a strong dependency between sequence composition, nucleosome occupancy and transcriptional activity of both promoter and gene regions during the asexual and sexual stages of p. falciparum. this study confirms that one of the main determinants of nucleosome positioning in eukaryotes is encoded in the dna sequence itself and that changes in nucleosome occupancy greatly influence gene expression. however, given the strong dynamics in nucleosome positioning observed during the erythrocytic cycle and the relative paucity of transcription factors, these results suggest that the parasite may have developed its nucleosome landscape as a key mechanism to regulate gene expression.

RESULTS
generation of high-resolution nucleosome positioning maps
a detailed analysis of the relation between the nucleosome landscape and gene expression during the human malaria parasite’s asexual cycle has thus far been hampered by a lack of high-resolution nucleosome maps. in addition, nucleosome maps were not yet available for the sexually mature gametocyte stage. to extend and complement existing nucleosome occupancy data sets 
 <cit> , we performed two variants of chromatin immunoprecipitation coupled to next generation sequencing  for nucleosome mapping using either sonication  or mnase digestion  to fragment crosslinked chromatin into mononucleosomes . antibodies used for immunoprecipitations were either directed against h <dig>  which is universally present in all nucleosomes, or against an epitope shared between h <dig> and h <dig> , which enabled pull-down of all nucleosomes with the exception of centromeric nucleosomes that contain the variant histone cenh <dig>  nucleosome-bound dna fragments were subsequently analyzed by next-generation sequencing , generating  <dig> base pair  paired-end sequence reads. reads were first mapped to the human genome, followed by mapping of all remaining reads to the p. falciparum genome .

while digestion of chromatin by mnase has been reported to be biased by the preference of mnase for at-rich sequences 
 <cit> , others have found no evidence for such claim 
 <cit> . the use of a non-enzymatic fragmentation method and the specific enrichment for nucleosome-bound dna by immunoprecipitation should rule out that nucleosome-sized fragments were obtained merely as a potential sequence-based artifact of mnase digestion. mnase digestion resulted in a narrow distribution of mononucleosomal dna fragments  while sonication yielded larger fragments . sonication thus seems to leave relatively long tails of dna that are not part of the nucleosome itself, and may sometimes yield intact di- or trinucleosomes, indicating that mnase-based fragmentation of chromatin provides a higher resolution as compared to sonication.

extensive visual inspection of maine-seq 
 <cit>  and sonication/mnase chip-seq tracks in a genome browser confirmed very similar distribution patterns across the genome . accordingly, we observed high correlations between maine-seq 
 <cit> , mnase chip-seq, and sonication chip-seq , indicating that we obtained similar nucleosome maps despite differences in methodology. we therefore used mnase chip-seq data for all subsequent analyses of the asexual cycle. however, as chip-seq generally yields relatively low amounts of dna, we analyzed the nucleosome landscape of sexually mature parasites  using maine-seq.figure  <dig> 
validation of data sets. a. genome browser view  showing genome coverage for a section of chromosome  <dig>  with the gene model indicated in the top. genes located on the forward and the reverse strands are indicated in yellow and orange, respectively. sequencing of genomic dna resulted in an even distribution of reads across intergenic and coding regions. sequence read coverage for maine-seq 
 <cit> , sonication chip-seq and mnase chip-seq was similar and showed increased coverage of coding region as compared to intergenic regions, while opposite results were observed for faire-seq 
 <cit> . b. dna yields of immunoprecipitations using a non-specific antibody, an antibody directed against histone h <dig>  and an antibody directed against histone h <dig> . these data show a reduced amount of dna obtained from trophozoite samples, despite using the same amount of input material for each immunoprecipitation. since low amounts of dna were obtained using the anti-h <dig> antibody, we concluded that this antibody was not well suited for chip-seq experiments and was therefore not used for further analysis. c. total spectral counts for all histone proteins  and all annotated rna polymerase ii proteins  obtained by mass spectrometry analysis of nuclear fractions from ring, trophozoite and schizont stage parasites 
 <cit> . abundance levels of histones decreased during the trophozoite stage, while the amount of rna polymerase ii increased, consistent with high transcriptional activity in this stage, but not the ring or schizont stages. spectral count data were obtained from plasmodb .



transcriptionally active stages show global depletion in nucleosome levels
nucleosome dynamics were analyzed in synchronized p. falciparum cultures that were harvested directly after invasion of red blood cells at the ring stage, and at the trophozoite and schizont stages, as well as at the sexually mature gametocyte stage. the amount of chromatin used for immunoprecipitations was equivalent for all stages of the asexual cell cycle. however, dna yields obtained from chips consistently showed a reduced recovery at the trophozoite stage . these results are consistent with data from a wide variety of experimental approaches, including western blot analysis 
 <cit>  and mass spectrometry analysis 
 <cit>  , that showed reduced histone levels at the trophozoite stage, which is known to be the most transcriptionally active stage during the asexual cell cycle 
 <cit> . while detection of histone proteins decreased at the trophozoite stage as compared to the ring and schizont stages, mass spectrometry data showed an increased abundance of rna polymerase ii 
 <cit>  , further validating a potential link between histone levels and transcriptional activity.

next, we determined the number of nucleosomes and the average nucleosome level at each stage using the nucleosome positioning tool puffin 
 <cit> . puffin was designed in our group specifically for paired-end sequence reads. extensive experimental results showed that puffin outperforms other available nucleosome detection tools in terms of accuracy and number of nucleosomes reported along the genome. the number of reads mapped to each nucleosome was used to estimate nucleosome levels. to compare nucleosome levels between different stages, we normalized nucleosome scores using the total number of reads mapped to both human and p. falciparum genomes . in addition, we validated our nucleosome positioning data using a publicly available nucleosome positioning tool normal 
 <cit> .

the number of detected nucleosomes substantially increased in comparison with previous low-coverage maine-seq data 
 <cit>  . the number of locations where nucleosomes were present did not change dramatically during the cell cycle  and were not greatly affected by differences in sequencing library size between the different stages . however, nucleosome scores showed approximately a two-fold drop at the trophozoite stage, both inside genes and in intergenic regions , similar to reductions in chip dna yield  and histone abundance at this stage . in agreement with a previous data set 
 <cit> , these results suggest a binary structure of the chromatin, with strong nucleosome packaging early in the cell cycle, nucleosome depletion in trophozoite stage to allow massive transcription and dna replication, and tight re-compaction at the late stage in preparation for egress of daughter cells and re-invasion of new red blood cells. furthermore, nucleosome positioning obtained from sexually mature gametocytes also showed a relatively open chromatin structure, consistent with the level of transcriptional activity at this stage .figure  <dig> 
nucleosome positioning analysis across the erythrocytic cell cycle. a. the total number of nucleosomes in intergenic and coding regions as detected in our old maine-seq data set  
 <cit>  compared to the total number of nucleosomes reported by puffin using our new high-coverage mnase chip-seq data set . b. average scores of nucleosomes located in intergenic and coding regions at different time points during the asexual and sexual stages of the erythrocytic cell cycle. values are expressed as the percentage of the average score of nucleosomes located inside genes at the ring stage. c. average genome-wide sequence read coverage around the translation start site for a previously published nucleosome occupancy data set 
 <cit> ) and the mnase chip-seq data set from this study. both data sets show a well-positioned first nucleosome inside the coding region, as well as reduced coverage in intergenic regions as compared to coding regions. coverage is expressed as the fraction of the highest coverage value among all positions within the plot window. d. nucleosomal organization in and around coding regions. the location and scores of nucleosomes detected by puffin are shown for all  <dig>  p. falciparum genes that do not contain any introns. each line represents one gene, sorted from small  to large  and centered around its midpoint. more strongly positioned nucleosomes are represented by increasingly warmer colors. troph.: trophozoite; schiz.: schizont; gam.: gametocyte.



nucleosome occupancy inside genes was higher as compared to the relatively nucleosome-depleted intergenic regions . reduced sequence read coverage in intergenic regions as compared to coding regions was also observed for a previously published nucleosome occupancy data set 
 <cit> , albeit to a lower extent . the most strongly positioned nucleosomes were observed at the start and the end of coding regions . between these two strongly positioned nucleosomes, nucleosomal organization in p. falciparum genes appears to be relatively random , in contrast to the evenly spaced arrays of nucleosomes observed inside genes of other eukaryotes. to validate that the low coverage observed in intergenic regions was not mainly due to an artifact introduced by the low recovery of sequencing at-rich regions, we sequenced parasite genomic dna, which resulted in an even coverage distribution over intergenic and coding regions . in addition, sequencing results from non-protein-bound dna  
 <cit>  showed a high enrichment of intergenic regions, with more than 50% of all sequence reads mapped to intergenic regions . these data suggest that the reduced intergenic coverage in our nucleosome-bound dna sequencing data set is not simply the result of technical difficulties in sequencing the highly at-rich intergenic regions of the p. falciparum genome. similar nucleosome maps were obtained using sonication chip-seq, although the number of mapped nucleosomes was lower due to the lower resolution of this data set . collectively, these results confirm that dramatic changes in nucleosome landscape occur during the transcriptionally most active erythrocytic stages of p. falciparum.

nucleosome occupancy in promoter regions strongly correlates with transcription levels
in other eukaryotic organisms, decreased nucleosome occupancy in promoter regions is associated with higher transcriptional activity 
 <cit> . for p. falciparum, this connection has not been studied in detail. our most recent high coverage nucleosome and transcriptome 
 <cit>  data sets, both obtained at the exact same parasitic stages, allowed us to analyze the impact of nucleosome occupancy in promoter regions on gene expression in p. falciparum. we computed nucleosome occupancy levels for the  <dig> base pair region directly upstream of the translation start codon at the trophozoite stage. genes were grouped into ten transcription clusters of  <dig> genes each, based on steady-state mrna levels. we observed a strong correlation between nucleosome density in the promoter region  and transcriptional activity, with highly expressed gene clusters showing a more open nucleosome organization than clusters of genes with low expression values . in addition, for a smaller group of genes with annotated transcription start sites, promoter regions of highly expressed genes showed decreased nucleosome occupancy . inside coding regions of highly expressed genes, we observed an opposite correlation between nucleosome occupancy and transcriptional activity as compared to the promoter regions. highly transcribed genes were on average bound by more nucleosomes and at higher levels . a similar, albeit slightly weaker, association between nucleosome occupancy and transcript levels was observed when nucleosome maps were generated using the nucleosome positioning tool normal 
 <cit>  , indicating that this result is not an artifact of the puffin algorithm. in addition, the more open chromatin structure at promoters of highly expressed genes was replicated in sonication chip-seq data obtained using either anti-h <dig> or anti-h <dig> antibodies , suggesting that this observation is independent of chip-seq methodology.figure  <dig> 
association between nucleosome occupancy and transcription level at the trophozoite stage. a. the average number of nucleosomes per kilobase in the  <dig> base pair upstream of the translation start site  for each transcription cluster of  <dig> genes. b. the average score of nucleosomes located in the promoter region for each transcription cluster. c. sequence read coverage around the transcription start site for the subset of genes with annotated transcription start sites in each transcription cluster. d. the average number of nucleosomes per kilobase inside coding regions for each transcription cluster. e. the average score of all nucleosomes located inside coding regions for each transcription cluster. correlation coefficients reported were obtained using the spearman’s rank test. f-j: same as panels a-e for an independent trophozoite-stage nucleosome occupancy data set generated by bartfai et al. 
 <cit> .



to further validate our findings, we analyzed a previously published nucleosome occupancy data set generated using different experimental procedures for nucleosome isolation and library preparation 
 <cit> . we observed a similar correlation between gene expression level and nucleosome occupancy in both the promoter region and the coding region , indicating that these findings are not a result of biases of the methodologies used.

similar results were obtained using other publicly available rna-seq data sets 
 <cit>  . the correlation between nucleosome occupancy and transcription level was also observed when genes were divided into  <dig> clusters of  <dig> genes , but was absent for randomly generated gene clusters . to further investigate the dependency between nucleosome occupancy and transcript levels, we analyzed previously published transcriptome and nucleosome positioning data sets from yeast 
 <cit>  and human cells 
 <cit>  using our analysis pipeline. in yeast, we observed a comparable, but weaker association between expression levels and nucleosome occupancy in the promoter region . in human, the nucleosome landscape at the promoter region has a bimodal distribution, with a relatively open organization for expressed genes and a relatively closed organization for silent genes . transcriptional control in human cells is known to include more complex regulatory elements, such as enhancer regions that are located further away from the transcription start site. these results could therefore indicate that nucleosomal organization of promoter regions may be more important for regulation of transcriptional activity in organisms with compact genomes, such as p. falciparum, than in higher eukaryotes.

nucleosome occupancy patterns associated with stage-specific gene expression
similar associations between transcriptional activity and nucleosome characteristics of the promoter region and gene region were observed at the ring and schizont stages of the asexual cycle, and at the gametocyte stage . this may be the result of large overlaps between gene clusters with high transcription levels at different stages, as a large proportion of genes has high transcriptional activity throughout the erythrocytic cell cycle. a comparison of nucleosome occupancy for genes with stage-specific transcription profiles showed that changes in nucleosome occupancy occur at a genome-wide level . however, promoter regions of genes transcribed at the ring and trophozoite stage on average tend to be the most nucleosome-depleted, while promoter regions of genes expressed at the schizont and gametocyte stage have on average a slightly more compact nucleosome organization . stage-specific transcription factors may be critical for regulating expression of these particular genes. in addition, we found that var genes, associated with antigenic variation and pathogenesis, are strongly bound by nucleosomes, while their promoters are relatively nucleosome-depleted . transcription of the var gene family is known to be tightly regulated and involves mutually exclusive expression of one var gene out of a total of approximately  <dig> gene variants. transcriptional repression of the remaining variants is achieved by a combination of upstream and intronic regulatory elements, nuclear localization in repressive centers and repressive histone marks 
. the nucleosome landscape of this gene family is markedly different from non-var genes and could contribute to these alternative mechanisms of transcriptional regulation 
 <cit> .figure  <dig> 
nucleosome occupancy in genes and promoter regions of stage-specifically expressed genes. coverage plots  show average read coverage around the translation start site  for all genes with stage-specific expression profiles  at the four different stages. the number of genes in each group is indicated on the left. at all time points, genes specifically expressed at the schizont and gametocyte  stages show a slightly more closed chromatin organization in the promoter region. a relatively large proportion of ring stage-specific genes has a small first exon, resulting in a lower occupancy of the first nucleosome inside the coding region. heatmap presents normalized read coverage per nucleotide for all genes within each group. read coverage of the var genes is shown in the bottom row. read coverage values are expressed on a log  <dig> scale. troph: trophozoite stage.



at-repeats are the strongest inhibitory sequences for nucleosome binding in p. falciparum
in other eukaryotes, dna sequence has been shown to be an important determinant of nucleosome positioning. poly tracts, in particular, are frequently present in nucleosome-depleted promoter regions and inhibit nucleosome binding by decreasing the ability of the dna helix to wrap around the nucleosome core 
 <cit> .

to investigate whether sequence-dependent nucleosome binding preferences are present in the at-rich p. falciparum genome, we computed the average frequency of dinucleotides in all sequence reads that exactly matched the length of dna wrapped around a nucleosome . in contrast to the strong 10 bp periodicity observed in other eukaryotes, we observed a weak 10 bp periodic signal for aa and tt dinucleotides in p. falciparum nucleosomes located inside genes, and no periodic signal in intergenic regions . we also computed the enrichment of all 5-mers located in nucleosomes relative to the whole genome. in coding regions, nucleosome-bound dna showed an enrichment of 5-mers exclusively composed of g/c and a depletion of 5-mers exclusively composed of a/t , comparable to observations in yeast 
 <cit> . in contrast, a/t 5-mers were not as strongly depleted from nucleosomes located in intergenic regions, with the exception of 5-mers consisting of at-repeats . in addition, 5-mers containing a gg dinucleotide bordered by cytosines showed depletion from intergenic nucleosomes . similar results were obtained using 4-mer or 6-mer distribution patterns . interestingly, intergenic nucleosomes showed a small enrichment for 5 bp poly tracts, which were mainly found close to the nucleosome dyad , while this 5-mer is strongly unfavorable for nucleosome binding in other eukaryotes. for nucleosomes located in genes, the level of 5-mer enrichment was inversely correlated with their genome-wide frequency . this was not observed for intergenic nucleosomes, with the exception of 5-mers consisting of at-repeats .figure  <dig> 
sequence-based nucleosome-binding preferences in
p. falciparum
. a-b. frequency of aa + tt and gg + cc dinucleotides in nucleosome-bound dna fragments in coding regions  and intergenic regions . for nucleosomes located inside genes, a weak 10 bp periodicity was observed directly internal to the nucleosome boundaries, but disappearing closer to the nucleosome dyad. c-d. enrichment of 5-mers consisting exclusively of a/t or g/c nucleotides for nucleosomes in coding regions  and intergenic regions  at the ring stage. enrichment is expressed as the log  <dig> ratio of the frequency of a 5-mer inside nucleosomes and the genome-wide frequency of that 5-mer. e-f. genome-wide frequency of each 5-mer plotted against the enrichment of each 5-mer in nucleosomes, shown for nucleosomes in coding regions  and intergenic regions . nucleosomes inside coding regions show a strong binding preference for 5-mers with low genome-wide frequencies, while this association is absent for intergenic nucleosomes. at-repeat 5-mers are indicated by a red circle. pearson correlation coefficients are shown in the top right corner of each plot. g-h. enrichment of at-repeat 5-mers  in coding regions  and in the  <dig> nucleotides upstream of the translation start site   relative to their genome-wide frequency, for genes in each transcription cluster. correlation coefficients were obtained using the spearman’s rank test. i-j. sequence composition in coding regions  and promoter regions  among genes with different expression levels. 5-mers were divided into five groups based on their genome-wide frequency in intergenic regions. for each transcription cluster, the z-normalized average log  <dig> ratio of 5-mer frequency in the gene or promoter versus all genes or intergenic regions, respectively, is plotted for all 5-mer frequency groups. highly expressed genes show an increased prevalence of nucleosome-favorable 5-mers, while genes with low transcription levels show an increased prevalence of nucleosome-disfavorable 5-mers.



similar to poly tracts in other eukaryotes, at-repeats seem to be the most unfavorable sequences for nucleosomes in both gene and intergenic regions. since at-repeats are also the most abundant 5-mers in the p. falciparum genome, comprising  <dig> % and  <dig> % of gene and intergenic genome sequence, respectively, these sequences may have a profound effect on the nucleosome landscape of this parasite. indeed, at-repeat sequences were strongly depleted inside coding regions of highly expressed genes  and were enriched in promoters of highly expressed genes , corresponding to levels of nucleosome occupancy in these regions. highly expressed genes showed a strong enrichment of 5-mers with low genome-wide frequency , while promoter regions of high and low expression genes did not show a difference in 5-mer composition .

discussion
here, we studied nucleosome positioning in the human malaria parasite, and its association with transcription levels and dna sequence. our results suggest that nucleosome levels are partially dna-encoded and constitute an important control mechanism of gene expression levels in p. falciparum. the association between dna composition , nucleosome landscape, and transcription levels observed in this study is similar to the effect of poly tracts on nucleosome positioning and promoter activity in yeast 
 <cit> . however, to the best of our knowledge, this is the first report that details their relation in p. falciparum and provides a genome-wide, in vivo validation of the original observations in yeast. in addition, this study exposes several distinct differences in nucleosome organization and dynamics between p. falciparum and other eukaryotes that will be discussed in more detail below.

nucleosome binding preferences
high at-content, in particular in the form of poly tracts, are known to influence nucleosome binding affinities 
 <cit> . however, the nucleosome binding preferences that we observed in p. falciparum are distinct from eukaryotes with lower genomic at-contents. the typical 10 bp periodicity of a/t dinucleotides was absent, similar to observations in the at-rich  amoebe dictyostelium discoideum <cit> . in addition, at-repeat sequences, not poly tracts, seem to be a strong determinant of nucleosome positioning in p. falciparum. the p. falciparum histone h <dig> shows 92% homology to human h <dig> and 87% to s. cerevisiae h <dig>  which could account for differences in nucleosome binding preferences. furthermore, nucleosomes located in the intergenic regions of the p. falciparum genome have been found to contain histone variants h2a.z and h2b.z 
 <cit> . the presence of these histone variants may promote nucleosome deposition in highly at-rich regions, and could explain differences in binding preferences between genic and intergenic nucleosomes.

given the high prevalence of at-repeat sequences in the p. falciparum genome, it is tempting to speculate that the development of chromatin organization as a regulatory mechanism for gene expression levels has been the driving force for the evolution of the p. falciparum genome towards its high at-content. this in turn raises the question how nucleosome positioning and transcriptional activity are connected in plasmodium species with lower at-content, such as p. vivax . however, since presently p. vivax cannot be maintained in a continuous culture, this question might be difficult to answer.

nucleosome landscape in and around coding regions
nucleosomal organization around coding regions is relatively conserved across divergent eukaryotic species, with strongly positioned nucleosomes bordering nucleosome-depleted promoter regions 
 <cit> . downstream nucleosomes are arranged in tightly spaced arrays with increasing fuzziness towards the 3′ end of coding regions. in p. falciparum, we observed the most strongly positioned nucleosomes at the start and the end of coding regions, with less tightly organized nucleosomes in the gene body. the highly at-rich intergenic regions may act as barriers determining the positioning of the first and last nucleosome inside the coding region. in addition, the formation of evenly spaced nucleosomal arrays may also be affected by the high at-content of the p. falciparum genome. instead of being placed at a fixed distance from the neighboring nucleosome, nucleosomes may preferentially locate to regions with the least inhibitory sequences, resulting in seemingly more random spacing. despite these differences in nucleosome organization around coding regions, our results suggest that the general relation between nucleosome occupancy and promoter strength that has previously been uncovered in yeast also applies to p. falciparum.

global nucleosome dynamics associated with transcriptional activity
the dramatic genome-wide changes in chromatin organization during the trophozoite stage are in stark contrast with the modest rearrangements in nucleosome positioning that are generally observed during transcription in eukaryotes. our observations in p. falciparum are consistent with a model in which genome-wide nucleosome eviction at the trophozoite stage drives massive transcriptional activity. this global change in chromatin structure is confirmed by a recent study that determined the three-dimensional structure of the parasite genome throughout its erythrocytic cycle, demonstrating the opening of chromatin at the trophozoite stage 
 <cit> . in the absence of a large variety of transcription factors, nucleosome occupancy levels of individual promoters and gene regions may fine-tune the level of transcription for each gene by carefully regulating the accessibility of promoter regions to more general transcription factors and the rna polymerase ii machinery. interestingly, we observed that sexual genes have more densely nucleosome-packed promoters that may prevent activation of these genes during the asexual cell cycle. nucleosome repackaging during the schizont stage reduces the transcriptionally permissive state of the genome, and prepares the parasite for the process of egress and re-invasion. during stages with higher nucleosome occupancy, stage-specific gene expression may be tightly controlled by local chromatin remodeling complexes that provide access of highly selective transcription factors 
 <cit>  to promoter regions. thus, nucleosome remodeling and specific transcription factors are likely to act in concert to regulate both the levels and the timing of gene expression.

nucleosome depletion during the trophozoite stage could also be related to dna replication, which also occurs during this stage. however, dna replication is generally associated with an increased level of histones in eukaryotic cells . the mechanisms employed by p. falciparum to organize its genome-wide nucleosome eviction remain to be fully described. the p. falciparum genome is known to encode a relatively large amount of chromatin remodeling enzymes 
 <cit> , and many more may be present among its approximately  <dig>  conserved genes for which the function is currently unknown. considering the potential importance of nucleosome remodeling for cell cycle progression, parasite-specific enzymes that are involved in this process may be prime targets for novel antimalarial drugs.

histone modifications and variants
nucleosome occupancy is likely to act in concert with other mechanisms to form a regulatory network that controls gene expression at multiple levels. in other eukaryotes, both histone variants and histone post-translational modifications influence chromatin structure and are important contributors to gene regulation. in the malaria parasite, this correlation is less conserved. p. falciparum histones are predominantly acetylated and monomethylated resulting in a transcriptionally permissive state 
 <cit> , while heterochromatin marked by h3k9me <dig> and h3k36me <dig> is restricted to regions that contain tightly regulated gene families, such as var, rif, and stevor <cit> . similarly, h2a.z is mainly found in the + <dig> nucleosome of active promoters in other eukaryotes, while the universal localization of h2a.z to intergenic regions in p. falciparum <cit>  points towards a differential function of this histone variant. the correlation between nucleosome occupancy and transcript levels as described in this study is at least as strong as what has been observed for any histone modification or variant. we therefore speculate that nucleosome occupancy itself could be a major determinant of gene expression levels in p. falciparum. however, it will be necessary to define the role of all epigenetic mechanisms of gene regulation to completely understand transcriptional regulation in this parasite.

CONCLUSIONS
the results of this study suggest that nucleosome positioning in p. falciparum is strongly influenced by dna sequence composition and that chromatin organization is an important regulator of gene expression levels. a deeper understanding of chromatin structure and nucleosome dynamics involved in parasite-specific mechanisms of gene regulation could contribute to the discovery novel anti-malarial drug targets.

