BACKGROUND
chimpanzees and bonobos belong to the genus pan. bonobos  occupy the dense wet forests south of the congo river, whereas chimpanzees  occupy a much broader range of forested habitats located north of the congo river and across equatorial africa  <cit>  . chimpanzees are widely considered to be divided into four subspecies  <cit> : p. t. verus occurs in the upper guinea region of western africa; p. t. ellioti has a patchy distribution spanning from western nigeria to central cameroon; p. t. troglodytes occupies the congo basin with a range that spans from southern cameroon and eastward to the ubangi river; p. t. schweinfurthii occupies forests east of the ubangi river to the rift valley  <cit> .figure  <dig> 
chimpanzee subspecies ranges. distribution of the genus pan, including bonobos and the four subspecies of chimpanzee.



recently junker et al.  <cit>  created ecological niche models  for all african great apes. this study was comprehensive, and included two composite maps of taxon-specific enms for each ape subspecies at a continental scale. they compared enms from the 1990s and early 2000s in order to determine which ape taxa had experienced the most significant loss of suitable habitat in the recent past. for chimpanzees, they reported that p. t. verus and p. t. troglodytes had experienced the most significant decline in suitable habitat, but that p. t. ellioti and p. t. schweinfurthii have not experienced any significant changes in suitable habitat  <cit> . these conclusions were attributed to previous widespread habitat loss in p. t. ellioti and p. t. schweinfurthii. however, this study was carried out at a coarse resolution on a continental scale and did not account for two important factors, namely 1) the detailed population genetic structure of chimpanzees across africa, particularly cameroon, and 2) the potential role of future climate change on the distribution of suitable habitat for the two chimpanzee subspecies that occupy this region. accounting for both of these factors in enms is important for at least two reasons. first, it is unknown what role niche divergence plays in the genetic divergence of chimpanzees, or even if the various chimpanzee subspecies occupy significantly different types of habitats. data regarding the relationship between the distribution of genetic diversity and environmental variation remain sparse for the study region, but a growing body of evidence suggests that a strong relationship exists between the partitioning of adaptive genetic variation and environmental variation in cameroon for the few taxa studied to date  <cit> . second, this region of africa is expected to experience dramatic changes in forest cover and composition in response to climate change, and these changes are expected to accelerate over the next century  <cit> .

study area and taxa
the gulf of guinea region of africa is widely recognized as a biodiversity hotspot of global significance due to the region’s high number of endemic taxa  <cit> . the reasons why this region has so many endemic taxa remain unclear, but this pattern of high endemism has been attributed to the effects of geographic barriers, such as the niger river, sanaga river, and the cameroon highlands, as well as to the history of the forests in this area during the pleistocene  <cit> . this area also includes a conspicuous transition between three major biomes. specifically, the gulf of guinea rainforest and the congolian rainforest biomes converge with each other and with open savanna  <cit> . these three habitats meet in central cameroon, forming an ecotone comprised of a forest-woodland-savanna mosaic . ecotones across the world are increasingly recognized as being important in driving variation in a number of taxa  <cit> , and this ecotone in cameroon has been shown to be important in driving diversification in insects, reptiles, and birds  <cit> .figure  <dig> 
habitat types and chimpanzee population history in cameroon and nigeria. a. different habitat types and major rivers across cameroon and nigeria b. population history of chimpanzees in cameroon and adjacent parts of nigeria inferred from the analysis of  <dig> autosomal microsatellite loci in  <dig> unrelated chimpanzees  <cit> .



with respect to chimpanzees, cameroon is unique because it is home to two of the four subspecies: p. t. ellioti  and p. t. troglodytes . the ranges of these two subspecies meet along the sanaga river in central cameroon, which has been proposed to separate them  <cit> . the sanaga river is also notable because it has been proposed to influence the distributions of several other species that occupy different niches including, mandrillus leucophaeus/m. sphinx, cercopithecus erythrotis/c. cephus, c. nictitans martini/c. n. nictitans, and c. pogonias pogonias/c. p. grayi  <cit> . a clearer understanding of the role that environmental variation has played in delimiting the distribution of chimpanzee subspecies across this region may help to clarify why this region plays an important role in shaping the distribution of other forest-dwelling primates.

figure 2b shows the population structure of chimpanzees from this region inferred by fine scale population sampling and genetic analysis of wild chimpanzees  <cit>  suggesting that chimpanzees across this region are divided into as many as three distinct populations. a primary division of chimpanzee populations occurs at the sanaga river, which separates p. t. troglodytes in southern cameroon from p. t. ellioti in central and western cameroon north of the sanaga. in addition, p. t. ellioti may be further subdivided into two additional populations: one in the rainforests of western cameroon, which is separated from the second population located in the ecotone habitat  <cit>  east of the mbam river . for convenience, these three chimpanzee demes are called the p. t. ellioti  population , the p. t. ellioti  population  and the p. t. troglodytes population  throughout this document.

while this region of africa appears to be an engine of diversification in chimpanzees, the proximate mechanisms that make this region so important for this species remain unclear  <cit> . the sanaga river lies in the area where the gulf of guinea rainforest meets the congo basin rainforest, and its headwaters are in an ecotone in central cameroon. this complexity makes it difficult to attribute the separation of these taxa solely to their separation along the banks of the sanaga, particularly since habitat variation across this region appears to influence the distribution of other taxa that occupy vastly different niches  <cit> . these observations suggest that enms predicated upon the population genetic structure of chimpanzees across the region on a fine geographic scale may help resolve the role that habitat variation plays in delimiting the distributions of chimpanzees in the gulf of guinea and congo basin forests. in addition, enms made at a fine geographic scale may be more useful than continental-scale models  for more fully understanding future threats to these populations. specifically, this study was designed to address two key questions:  do the genetically defined populations of chimpanzees across this region occupy significantly different habitats and if so, which environmental factors appear to be the most important in describing suitable habitat for each population?  if a relationship exists between environmental variation and the partitioning of genetic variation, will ongoing and future climate change contribute to altering the remaining distribution of their suitable habitat?

RESULTS
maxent modeling under present conditions
aggregate enms were produced by averaging values from  <dig> replicate iterations of the data for both the two- and three-population models. these enms are shown in figure  <dig> and are displayed using a logarithmic scale ranging from  <dig>  corresponding to unsuitable habitat , to  <dig>  corresponding to most suitable habitat . figure 3a shows enms for the two-population model, which separates p. t. ellioti from p. t. troglodytes  <cit> . figure 3b shows enms assuming a three-population model, which subdivides p. t. ellioti into two populations  <cit> , one that inhabits the rainforests of western cameroon and a second population that inhabits the ecotone of central cameroon.figure  <dig> 
ecological niche models for chimpanzee populations in cameroon and nigeria. a. two-population model:  p. t. ellioti,  p. t. troglodytes, b. three-population model:  p. t. ellioti ,  p. t. ellioti ,  p. t. troglodytes.



testing model performance
table  <dig> shows the auc  values for enms of each population under present conditions. for evaluating the robustness of an enm, auc values greater than  <dig>  are considered to be ”very good” at describing a population’s niche, while auc values of  <dig> - <dig>  are considered to be “good”, and less than  <dig>  are classified as being “uninformative”  <cit> . all enms produced in this study performed better than enms produced by random associations between species presence and the environmental variables . all empirical auc values were greater than  <dig> , suggesting that the enm for each population was highly informative and described suitable habitats that corresponded very well with the environmental conditions found at presence localities recorded for each population considered in the study.table  <dig> 
average auc values for each ecological niche model 


2-population model
3-population model

p. t. ellioti
p. t. troglodytes
p. t. ellioti

p. t. ellioti

p. t. troglodytes

auc

standard deviation


additional file  <dig> shows the results of the maxent jackknife tests and the resulting percent contribution of each environmental predicting factor for both the two- and three-population models. in the two-population model,  <dig> % of the enm for p. t. troglodytes was defined by maximum temperature, and another 30% of the habitat was described by precipitation variables. the enm for p. t. troglodytes in the three-population model showed similar trends in suitable habitat. in both the two- and three-population model, optimal habitat for p. t. troglodytes is relatively uniform moist rainforest. in contrast, p. t. ellioti occupies a much broader range of suitable habitat, including moist rainforest, woodlands, and open savanna, with more than 80% of the enm for p. t. ellioti defined by trends in slope, temperature seasonality, tree cover, and precipitation.

subdividing the p. t. ellioti population into groups located in northwest cameroon and the ecotone revealed marked contrast in the habitats occupied by each population. over 30% of the enm for p. t. ellioti  is described by slope, and measures of precipitation and temperature seasonality described an additional 50% of their suitable habitat. the distribution of p. t. ellioti  is currently limited to the cameroon highlands and the bakossi mountains, where elevational gradients are prominent and the neighboring coastal region experiences high precipitation. the enm for p. t. ellioti  describes an entirely different habitat, with high auc values and the lowest standard deviation. many variables contribute to describing from 5-12% of the suitable habitat of the enms for this population. collectively these variables describe a suitable habitat for p. t. ellioti  that has greater variation in tree cover and that is drier, warmer, and more variable throughout the year compared to the optimal habitat of p. t. ellioti . although humans may be expected to strongly influence wildlife distributions, human population density contributed little compared to landscape variables in defining the habitat of any chimpanzee population considered in this study.

response curves for each of the environmental predicting factors were created for each enm using maxent. these graphs show the range of values for each factor that are most important for describing the suitable habitat of the population in question. many environmental predicting factors contributed to differences in the optimal habitat of each population. for example, slope was found to be one of the most important factors that differentiate the habitat of p. t. ellioti  versus p. t. ellioti  from the habitat of p. t. troglodytes in southern cameroon. specifically, at slopes greater than  <dig> degrees the probability of suitable habitat was greater than 90% for p. t. ellioti as a whole as well as when the subspecies was subdivided into p. t. ellioti  and p. t. ellioti . the enm of p. t. ellioti  also showed elevated gain in regions with sparse tree cover and less gain within areas of dense tree cover compared to p. t. ellioti . overall, individuals of p. t. ellioti  appear to occupy steep, densely forested areas. these habitats also experience high levels of precipitation throughout the year with a pronounced increase in precipitation from may – october. in contrast, p. t. ellioti  appears to occupy a wider breadth of habitats that include both forest and savanna, and they likely experience more seasonal variation in terms of temperature and precipitation throughout the year.

comparison of enms under present conditions
table  <dig> shows values for the schoener’s d test statistic  <cit>  and the i test statistic  <cit>  from the pairwise niche comparison tests for the two- and three-population models calculated using enmtools  <cit> . the two-population model revealed that the niches occupied by p. t. ellioti and p. t. troglodytes are highly divergent from each other . in addition, the three-population model that further subdivides p. t. ellioti into two subpopulations revealed that p. t. ellioti also occupies two significantly different niches that are located in the northwest of cameroon and in the central cameroon ecotone, respectively . both p. t. ellioti populations occupy niches that are significantly different from the niche occupied by p. t. troglodytes in southern cameroon . these observations align wellwith the inferred population genetic structure of chimpanzees currently occupying cameroon and eastern nigeria  <cit> .table  <dig> 
enmtools niche overlap test


schoener’s
d
i

model
comparison
observed
null mean
null sd
p
observed
null mean
null sd
p
pte* and ptt**
pte  and ptt

pte  and ptt

*pte 

**ptt 



enms under climate change scenarios
models of suitable habitat for chimpanzee populations under climate change scenarios were developed for the two populations of p. t. ellioti. p. t. troglodytes was excluded from these projections because the range of this subspecies extends far outside the study area, and the resulting predictions would likely be inaccurate because such models would not fully represent the environmental variation that this subspecies can occupy. figures  <dig> and  <dig> show enms for p. t. ellioti subdivided into the p. t. ellioti  and p. t. ellioti  populations, respectively. model performance for these enms under the various climate change scenarios was evaluated using auc values .figure  <dig> 
ecological niche models for
p. t. ellioti
 under scenarios of climate change. final ecological niche models produced by maxent for p. t. ellioti  under each of the three climate scenarios tested. warm colors show most suitable habitat, while cold colors show less suitable habitat.
ecological niche models for
p. t. ellioti
 under scenarios of climate change. final ecological niche models produced by maxent for p. t. ellioti  under each of the three climate scenarios tested. warm colors show most suitable habitat, while cold colors show less suitable habitat.



figure  <dig> and figure  <dig> show enms that are displayed on a logarithmic scale where  <dig> corresponds with unsuitable habitat  and  <dig> corresponds to suitable habitat . figure  <dig> shows enms for p. t. ellioti  for years  <dig>   <dig>  and  <dig> under the a1b, a2a, and b2a climate scenarios  <cit> , respectively. the a1b scenario describes an integrated world with balanced use of fossil fuels and non-fossil fuels, and human population growth followed by a gradual decline. the a2a scenario describes a heterogeneous or divided world where human population growth is continuous and countries are focused on preserving their local identities. the b2a scenario describes a heterogeneous or divided world where human population growth is continuous  and there is a local/regional focus on environmental protection  <cit> . compared to the enm for p. t. ellioti  under present conditions, the enms under these three climate scenarios suggests that p. t. ellioti  is unlikely to experience major shifts, contractions, or expansions of their suitable habitat through year  <dig>  figure  <dig> shows the projected enms for p. t. ellioti  for years  <dig>   <dig>  and  <dig> under the a1b, a2a, and b2a climate scenarios  <cit> , respectively. overall, each of the tested climate scenarios used in this study suggest that optimal habitat for p. t. ellioti currently living in the ecotone habitat will be reduced by year  <dig>  and that the remaining optimal habitat for this population will become less suitable over time.

CONCLUSIONS
comparison of enms under present conditions suggests that p. t. ellioti and p. t. troglodytes occupy significantly different habitats  . overall, the optimal habitat for p. t. troglodytes in southern cameroon is relatively uniform and mostly composed of moist rainforest. in contrast, the optimal habitat of p. t. ellioti is characterized by a higher degree of environmental variation and includes mountainous rainforest, lowland rainforest, woodlands, and savanna. further subdividing the range of p. t. ellioti into two subpopulations improved enm performance as evaluated by auc values . in addition, there appear to be two major niches occupied by p. t. ellioti: one subpopulation, p. t. ellioti , that occupies forested habitat in the mountains located in northwest cameroon and a second subpopulation, p. t. ellioti , that occupies the forest-woodland-savanna ecotone in central cameroon. these two areas were shown to be significantly different from each as well as from the optimal habitat occupied by p. t. troglodytes, as determined other by niche comparison tests  . major differences in the two p. t. ellioti habitats include a steep altitudinal gradient and higher annual precipitation in the northwest and reduced forest cover with more distinct fluctuations in temperature and precipitation throughout the year in the ecotone.

the extent of the optimal habitats for each of these three populations correspond with the distribution of the three genetically distinct populations of chimpanzees that have been inferred to exist across the study area  <cit> . these enms suggest that  a relationship exists between environmental variation and the population genetic structure of chimpanzees across the study area, and  that the sanaga river is unlikely to be the only factor that contributes to the separation of p. t. ellioti from p. t. troglodytes. these results provide an ecological basis for the assertion that environmental variation across the region may be driving local adaptation. this is particularly compelling when coupled with the findings of two related studies that found that simple allopatric speciation is unlikely to explain the observed patterns of chimpanzee genetic diversity  <cit> , and that a clear association exists between spatial patterns of genetic differentiation and habitat variation  <cit> . taken together, these studies propose that populations of chimpanzees in cameroon and nigeria may be following a pattern of isolation-by-environment  <cit> . furthermore, these findings suggest that environmental variation may also contribute to generating genetic variation within p. t. ellioti, as this subspecies occupies two fundamentally different niches in two different areas of cameroon. the distribution of these two habitats corresponds very precisely with the inferred distribution of the two p. t. ellioti demes  <cit> , which suggests that adaptation to different niches may play a role in the diversification of chimpanzee subspecies.

recognizing that a positive relationship might exist between environmental and genetic variation in the distribution of chimpanzees also has important implications for broadening understanding about the puzzling distributions of other primates proposed also to be influenced by the sanaga river, including mandrillus leucophaeus/m. sphinx, cercopithecus erythrotis/c. cephus, c. nictitans martini/c. n. nictitans, and c. pogonias pogonias/c. p. grayi  <cit> . these pairs of primates all occupy vastly different habitats and niches  <cit> , which suggests that other factors along with, or instead of, the sanaga river may be important in separating the distribution of these species, subspecies, and populations across the region. the role that environmental variation may have played in delimiting the distribution of these taxa remains uninvestigated. the existence of such a relationship would also be consistent with some insects  <cit> , reptiles  <cit> , and birds  <cit>  in which the pronounced ecological gradient across cameroon has been shown to be important in driving the population genetic structure of these species.

the african continent and central africa in particular are predicted to be one of the most severely affected regions of the world by climate change  <cit> . preliminary projections suggest that rainfall patterns will change dramatically in this region of africa, which will result in significant alterations of forest and savanna habitats  <cit> . models of global climate change also have been used to show that 30% of plant and animal species are at risk of extinction if the rise in mean global temperature exceeds  <dig> °c - an increase that is nearly certain to occur under future climate scenarios  <cit> . tropical forest taxa are widely believed to exist at a physiological optimum and their abilities to shift to new environmental conditions remains largely unknown  <cit> . most of this evidence comes from amphibians, which suggests that even conservative projections of global warming will likely lead to widespread decline in amphibian populations across tropical regions  <cit> . data regarding how climate change might affect mammals remain sparse, but climate induced range contractions have been linked to the loss of pockets of genetic distinctiveness in south african animals  <cit> . this suggests that it is reasonable to expect similar losses to occur in tropical forest mammals such as chimpanzees. thus, the final step of this study involved examining how climate change might affect the optimal habitats of p. t. ellioti in the future. specifically, the effects of climate change on the optimal habitats of p. t. ellioti were examined under the a1b, a2a, and b2a emission scenarios for years  <dig>   <dig>  and  <dig> 

the predictions presented in this study suggest that the two distinct habitats occupied by p. t. ellioti will be affected differently. little change is expected in mountainous, wet rainforests found in the northwest under any scenario across this time series. by contrast, optimal habitat in the ecotone is predicted to decline quickly under all scenarios by year  <dig> and will disappear almost entirely under the worst-case scenario by  <dig>  these findings have important implications for understanding the conservation outlook for this subspecies. p. t. ellioti is the most endangered of all the chimpanzee subspecies, with only about  <dig>  individuals estimated to persist across their entire range today and of which roughly half exist in this ecotone habitat  <cit> . junker et al.  <cit>  concluded that from the 1990s to the 2000s there had not been significant reductions in suitable environmental conditions for this subspecies, but the future predictions of our study indicate a drastic loss of suitable habitat by year  <dig> followed by progressive degradation of suitable habitat for half of the range of p. t. ellioti due to climate change. however, future models presented in this study do not address the effects of continued human population growth, urban sprawl, agricultural development, and hunting, which are all expected to continue and accelerate across the region in coming years  <cit> .

on a more positive note, there are several caveats to these sobering predictions. the models presented in this study do not take into account individual phenotypic plasticity or the potential for migration amongst these populations. in cases where loss of suitable habitat is likely to be significant, it is possible that these chimpanzees may be able to compensate and remain in their degrading habitat. they might also respond by migrating in order to track optimal environmental conditions, which is the simplest way that a population may respond to drastic changes in climate  <cit> . the effectiveness of migration to more optimal habitat relies on the availability of local suitable habitats for exploitation. both micro- and macrorefugia have been shown to act as important reservoirs of genetic diversity in past large climatic events  <cit> . from a conservation point of view, migration corridors between protected areas are important for securing the long-term survival of taxa in regions where climate change is predicted to heavily modify the landscape  <cit> . the result of migration to new habitats is unknown, and should be studied in greater detail with the use of rigorous dispersal/demographic simulations  <cit> . one likely outcome is that pockets of genetic distinctiveness in p. t. ellioti will be lost along with their optimal ecotone habitat. to the extent that genetic distinctiveness is an important conservation goal, it is important that planning efforts take into consideration the effects of climate change on the distribution of optimal habitat, especially for p. t. ellioti .

it is currently unknown whether chimpanzees will exhibit niche conservatism or if they will adapt to changes in their habitats that result from climate change. populations that exhibit strict niche conservatism over time may experience limited potential for range expansion and reduced dispersal opportunities since optimal habitat tracking may not be possible due to their divergent neighboring niches  <cit> . this possibility is especially plausible for p. t. ellioti  since this population exploits a niche that is completely divergent from the rainforest habitats of the neighboring p. t. ellioti  and p. t. troglodytes in southern cameroon. this region of west central africa is likely to experience drastic alterations that could lead to the loss of nearly all optimal chimpanzee habitat found in central cameroon by  <dig>  although the threats of hunting and habitat fragmentation by logging and agricultural plantations are immediate and are expected to have a large overall effect on chimpanzees in this region  <cit> , the results of this study suggest that habitat loss due to climate change is a serious concern within our lifetimes and should not be ignored in conservation planning.

