BACKGROUND
mycoplasmas are the smallest and simplest prokaryotes capable of self-replication, being provided only with the minimal machinery required for survival. during evolution, they have regressively evolved from gram-positive bacteria by reduction of their genome to an essential minimum, economizing their structural elements, metabolic pathways, and genetic resources  <cit> .

among other consequences, this cost-cutting strategy led to loss of the cell-wall component, and therefore to lack of a peptidoglycan "shell". instead, sterols are incorporated into the lipid bilayer, providing resistance to rupture, but still allowing a certain flexibility of cell shape. integral and associated membrane proteins are therefore directly exposed and act as the immediate bacterial interface, playing a major role in survival and pathogenesis  <cit> . gathering information on membrane proteins of such a pathogen might provide novel and interesting insights on its biology, and generate useful information for improving diagnosis, vaccination, and therapy. recently, a large-scale study was carried out on the proteome of the human pathogen mycoplasma penetrans, based on the tap-ms approach  <cit> . however, membrane proteins were not included in this study, since they require dedicated protocols for purification and analysis and present numerous challenges.

many members of the genus mycoplasma are pathogenic for humans, animals, plants, and insects. m. agalactiae is the etiological agent of contagious agalactia , a serious disease of sheep and goats characterized by mastitis, polyarthritis, keratoconjunctivitis, and abortion  <cit> . ca has a worldwide distribution and is endemic in mediterranean countries  <cit> , causing severe economic losses in areas where economy is largely based on small ruminant milk production  <cit> .

in europe, the disease has been tentatively controlled either by vaccination or with serological tools based on recombinant surface proteins  <cit> . at present, the two above mentioned strategies are not actually compatible until proper diva  vaccines will allow discrimination of vaccinated animals from naturally infected ones. the highly immunogenic, surface-associated membrane proteins represent key antigens for diagnosis and vaccine development. however, the finding of constantly expressed surface proteins in mycoplasmas is complicated by the existence of mechanisms aimed to evade the host immune response  <cit> . surface-associated proteins are also pivotal for pathogenesis by acting as cytoadhesins  <cit> . to date, a limited number of constantly expressed surface proteins have been described in m. agalactiae. among them, p <dig>  p <dig>  and p <dig> were described as antigens  <cit> ; other proteins belong to the variable surface membrane proteins family   <cit> , and p <dig> was suggested to play an important role in attachment to the host cell  <cit> .

genetic approaches traditionally used for large scale investigation of protein sets have been poorly applied to mycoplasmas. the expression of immunogenic mycoplasma proteins in escherichia coli expression libraries is hampered by the very high a+t content  and by the mycoplasma-specific codon usage, resulting in abnormal internal transcription/translation and in premature termination, respectively  <cit> . in  <dig>  the full genome sequence of the m. agalactiae type strain pg <dig>  was published  <cit>  and paved the way for systematic proteomic studies in mycoplasmas.

the combination of 2-d page and mass spectrometry  is a well-established method for the systematic and comparative study of proteomes, since it allows the simultaneous visualization and identification of the protein complement of a cell. however, it is commonly reported that standard 2-d page lacks in resolution of very hydrophobic and basic proteins, which are particularly abundant in the mycoplasma membrane  <cit> . indeed, membrane proteins are poorly detected in 2-d page maps of mycoplasma total protein extracts  <cit> . triton x- <dig> fractionation may assist in solving this problem, since it was demonstrated to enable a selective enrichment in hydrophobic proteins  <cit> . triton x- <dig> fractionation followed by 2-d page remains the method of choice for proteomic characterization of the membrane protein subset  <cit> , and for differential analysis of membrane protein expression among bacterial strains  <cit> . more specifically, the recently developed differential in gel electrophoresis   <cit> , based on labeling of protein samples with fluorescent dyes before 2-d electrophoresis, enables the accurate analysis of differences in protein abundance between samples. however, considering the above mentioned intrinsic limitations of 2-d page, other gel-based proteomic approaches, such as one-dimensional page and liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry   <cit> , can be combined with the 2-d page/ms in order to mine deeper into a liposoluble proteome.

in this study, the membrane proteome of m. agalactiae was characterized by means of triton x- <dig> fractionation, 2-d page-ms, gelc-ms/ms, and gene ontology classification. differential expression of membrane proteins among m. agalactiae strains was also evaluated by 2d dige.

RESULTS
extraction of bacterial proteins and isolation of liposoluble proteins
this study was aimed to the systematic characterization of m. agalactiae pg2t membrane proteins by means of a gel-based proteomic approach. in order to increase coverage for liposoluble proteins, a commercial fractionation method and the classical triton x- <dig> fractionation protocol were applied to m. agalactiae pg2t cell lysates. the best results were obtained by means of triton x- <dig> fractionation. figure 1a illustrates the hydrosoluble and liposoluble fractions obtained from m. agalactiae pg2t, flanked by the total protein pattern for comparison. the efficiency of the procedure in separating liposoluble proteins was evaluated by western immunoblotting using a rabbit hyperimmune serum raised against m. agalactiae p <dig>  a previously characterized surface lipoprotein  <cit> . as expected, presence of p <dig> was observed only in the total extract and in the triton x- <dig> phase , confirming that the fractionation method enabled separation and enrichment of hydrophobic proteins.

2-d page/ms of m. agalactiae pg2t liposoluble proteins
total proteins and the triton x- <dig> soluble fraction of m. agalactiae pg2t were subjected to 2-d page separation in order to evaluate the extent of enrichment in basic and liposoluble proteins. as illustrated in figure  <dig>  left panel, a very high number of spots were present in the total protein map of m. agalactiae pg2t but, as expected, basic proteins were poorly represented. upon comparison, the 2-d page map generated with the triton x- <dig> soluble fraction showed a significant enrichment in basic proteins, with an excellent resolution also in high-abundance spots .

in order to attain a systematic characterization of the liposoluble proteome, the triton x- <dig> phase fraction of m. agalactiae pg2t was subjected to 2-d page under three different pi intervals: 3-10nl, 7- <dig>  and 4- <dig> . from these 2d maps, about  <dig> spots were excised and identified by maldi-tof and nanohplc-nanoesi-q-tof ms. this approach led to the successful identification of  <dig> unique proteins, corresponding to  <dig> % of all m. agalactiae pg2t genes. figure  <dig> reports a representative liposoluble protein map summarizing the main protein identifications accomplished on 2-d spots. a detailed description of all protein identifications is given in additional file  <dig>  experimentally deduced molecular weight and pi of protein spots were compared with the theoretical parameters obtained from mascot, and most experimental data were in accordance with theoretical data. few proteins, such as vpma, were detected in multiple spots at different pis and molecular weights, as expected for this class of lipoproteins which undergo size variation. the well-known immunogenic proteins  <cit>  were all detected by 2-d page at the expected pi and mw. all six variable surface lipoproteins encoded in the m. agalactiae pg2t genome were also detected, some of which  with high expression levels, as could be expected considering their relevance in providing variability to the mycoplasmal antigenic mosaic.

2d dige of liposoluble proteins among the type strain and two field isolates of m. agalactiae
in order to assess the suitability of 2-d page for comparison of the membrane protein composition, the liposoluble protein profiles of m. agalactiae pg2t and two field isolates were compared by 2d dige .

the images generated upon acquisition of the single color channels enable to evaluate the liposoluble protein profiles separately , while comparison of two protein profiles can be performed upon superimposition of two color signals . in the overlay image, the three proteome 2d maps can be compared. although many spots are shared among the three profiles , a number of differences in expression can be appreciated. in fact, several spots are present only in one  or two profiles . many already known antigens  appear in white, indicating superimposition of the three signals and therefore presence in all three bacterial proteomes. several differences among the three profiles can be easily observed; for example, the series of spots at  <dig> kda corresponding to vpmay  is present only in two cases  while the series of spots at  <dig> kda  is present only in one case . the application of this method to an adequate number of isolates might enable to easily detect constantly expressed proteins that might serve as candidate antigens for development of vaccines and diagnostic tools.

gelc-ms/ms of m. agalactiae pg <dig> liposoluble proteins
although well suited for lipoprotein analysis, the 2-d page/ms strategy presents drawbacks in analysis of transmembrane proteins, such as permeases or other highly hydrophobic proteins. moreover, these protein classes may undergo selective loss during precipitation/resolubilization steps. in order to increase the membrane protein coverage and minimize selective protein loss, sds-page and gelc-ms/ms analysis were performed on the non-precipitated triton x- <dig> liposoluble protein fraction. a total of  <dig> slices were cut from the sds-page gel lane containing the separated liposoluble proteins  and subjected to nanohplc-nanoesi-q-tof-ms/ms identification. upon application of this method,  <dig> mycoplasma proteins were identified in total, corresponding to 26% of all m. agalactiae pg2t genes,  <dig> of which were also identified by 2-d page/ms .

data analysis and classification
a gene ontology  classification was carried out on proteins identified by 2-d page/ms and gelc-ms/ms. for the first method, proteins  were mostly classified by the go software as hypothetical lipoproteins , cytoplasmic proteins , ribosomal proteins , and other membrane-located proteins . when identifications obtained by gelc-ms/ms were also included in the go analysis , 43% of all identifications were assigned to proteins located on the membrane, either lipoproteins  or other membrane proteins , whereas 36% were classified as cytoplasmic, 17% as ribosomal, and 4% of unknown localization .

all protein identifications were then classified according to function . as expected, a high proportion of the identified proteins perform membrane transport functions , and belong mostly to abc transporters . transmembrane proteins, such as permeases, were detected only by means of gelc-ms/ms. another highly represented functional process was translation , due to the elevated number of ribosomal proteins identified. hydrolytic enzymes were also significantly represented , highlighting their crucial role for survival of mycoplasmas. several other functional classes, such as enzymes involved in amino acid, carbohydrate, lipid, and nucleic acid metabolism, were significantly represented in the m. agalactiae pg2t liposoluble protein fraction. secretion/export systems accounted for 4% of all identified proteins; these components are in fact crucial for maturation and release of secreted proteins, but also for positioning/exposing lipoproteins on the outer side of the bacterial cell. about 19% of proteins could not be assigned a specific function by manual searches or go classification.

proteomic data were analyzed in order to investigate presence of liposoluble proteins resulting from expression of horizontally-transferred genes  <cit> . among  <dig> identified proteins,  <dig>  were acquired by hgt from the mycoplasma mycoides cluster , while  <dig>  were acquired by hgt from other bacteria , for a total of  <dig> proteins, making up to  <dig> % of all expressed membrane proteins being derived from putative hgt events.

discussion
gathering proteomic information on prokaryotic membranes is a challenging task, due to difficulties in cell fractionation and to the intrinsic chemical properties of membrane proteins in general. therefore, both systematic and differential proteomic information on prokaryotic membranes is generally lacking. in this work, we approached the systematic characterization of what is believed to be one of the simplest bacterial pathogen membranes, in an attempt to move a step forward in our understanding of its composition, complexity, and function. in addition to its lower complexity, investigating membrane composition and plasticity in mycoplasmas is of particular interest since surface proteins are subjected to size and phase variation, and information on the extent and level of such variation is crucial in studies targeting identification of common immunogens, evaluation of immunological escape mechanisms, and adaptation of the bacterium to its host. all six variable surface lipoproteins encoded in the pg2t genome  <cit>  were detected by 2-d page, although one of these  was not expressed in a field isolate examined by 2d dige. triplicate experiments showed that the two-dimensional expression pattern of each field isolate is relatively stable under laboratory conditions, and that there is a reproducible differential expression of several protein spots in the field isolates compared to the type strain pg <dig>  interestingly, these differences are being detected in bacteria which were grown in culture media, where all protein variants should theoretically be expressed  <cit> . it was already demonstrated that the switching mechanism is so fast that it can be pointed out in a single colony on solid culture  <cit> . this might suggest that the lack of vpmay in the isolate nurri could result from a local genetic mutation. a large-scale study performed on a higher number of field isolates might enable the detection of constantly expressed proteins, which might be useful as targets for the development of vaccines and diagnostic tools for ca.

mycoplasmas have evolved a parasitic lifestyle, and membrane transporters are consequently very important for uptake of nutrients and growth factors. the genome of m. agalactiae pg2t encodes  <dig> abc transporters, but proteins from only  <dig> of these were identified in this study. we also failed to identify all the components of a complete membrane transporter complex; however, it is possible that expression of all sequences encoded by the transporter gene operon may not necessarily take place at the same time. abc transporters components encoded by different operons may likely interact to form functional transporters, producing the further advantage of creating many different combinations that can help evasion of host defense mechanisms. for instance, the genome of m. agalactiae pg2t encodes for two oligopeptide  abc transporters, one typical of the hominis group and one probably transferred by means of horizontal gene transfer mechanisms from m. mycoides subsp. mycoides and m. capricolum subsp. capricolum. we identified the substrate binding protein  from one operon, and the permease  and the atp-binding protein  from another operon; notably, these proteins create a functional transporter. moreover, oppa could be more than a simple substrate binding protein, since it was demonstrated to play an important role in pathogenicity in m. hominis by inducing atp release and cell death of hela cells in vitro and by mediating adhesion to host cells  <cit> . other authors reported a different pattern of expression of these operons: in the study by nouvel and co-workers  <cit> , only oppa, oppf, and oppd were detected. these apparently controversial results could be due to technical issues, or be dependent on variations in expression of opps within the pg2t strain. this will need to be elucidated in future studies.

upon analysis of all ms data, the proteins putatively assigned by the go software as cytoplasmic accounted to 36%. among these, many hydrolases were present. however, lipases, peptidases, and nucleases might be associated to the membrane compartment and assist in reducing macromolecules to simple components, enabling their uptake. in fact, mycoplasmas lack many biosynthetic pathways and rely on internalization of nucleotides, amino acids, sugars and lipids from their external environment. recently, it was reported that hydrolytic enzymes are surface-located in mycoplasmas, and that they can be associated with abc transporters in order to digest macromolecules before uptake of simpler components, or play major roles in pathogenicity  <cit> . interestingly, in the m. agalactiae genome, the genes coding for many of these hydrolases are also located close to abc transporter operons.

several other proteins have a predicted cytoplasmic localization, but could be membrane-associated in mycoplasmas, such as the elongation factor tu  and the e <dig> beta subunit of the pyruvate dehydrogenase complex. traditionally, these are considered to be cytoplasmic proteins involved in protein synthesis and energy production, respectively, but it was demonstrated that in m. pneumoniae they are surface exposed and interact with host fibronectin, mediating adhesion  <cit> . it was also demonstrated that many "cytoplasmic" proteins such as the ef-tu are strong antigens in many mycoplasma species  <cit> .

ribosomal proteins represent a significant proportion of the mycoplasma liposoluble proteome. this might appear inconsistent, but in spite of their traditionally cytoplasmic localization, it was already demonstrated that ribosomes interact with the bacterial protein export complex  <cit> . moreover, it is well known that in eukaryotes ribosomes are associated with endoplasmic reticulum, where they participate in the protein secretion pathway  <cit> . several proteins that take part in other metabolic pathways were also identified in the liposoluble fraction of m. agalactiae pg2t. we could speculate that many proteins involved in nutrient metabolism might associate with proteins devoted to internalization of precursors in metabolizing complexes, and be co-purified with these. nonetheless, a pre-fractionation of membranes was not performed because of inherent technical difficulties, and we cannot rule out that enzymes with high hydrophobicity might be present as cytoplasmic contaminants.

the recent work by sirand-pugnet and coworkers revealed the occurrence of horizontal gene transfer  events in m. agalactiae. the expression of proteins acquired by hgt highlights the importance of horizontal gene flow for the evolutionary plasticity of mycoplasmas; for instance, by allowing changes in host and/or tissue tropism through acquisition of traits enabling colonization and survival in new niches  <cit> . in total, an impressing  <dig> % of proteins expressed on the m. agalactiae membrane are coming from other bacteria, reinforcing the view that an important part in the evolution of mycoplasmas might be driven by genetic exchange with bacteria sharing the same host districts, probably in order to compensate the concurrent process of gene loss  <cit> . another interesting observation was the detection of mag_ <dig>  a hypothetical lipoprotein which is apparently the result of an horizontal gene transfer event with mycoplasmas of the mycoides cluster , which was not detected by nouvel et al. in the pg2t liposoluble proteome  <cit> .

hypothetical proteins were of particular interest; since these did not have an assigned function, similarity searches were conducted with blast tools in order to infer their possible role in the biology of mycoplasmas. among these, the hypothetical lipoprotein mag_ <dig> belongs to the mycoides cluster lppa/p <dig> family, and it is an antigen recognized early and persistently in infection  <cit> . the hypothetical protein mag_ <dig> has an indigoidine synthase a -like domain similar to clostridium spp. idga is involved in the biosynthesis of indigoidine, a blue pigment synthesized by erwinia chrysanthemi and implicated in pathogenicity and protection from oxidative stress by scavenging oxygen radicals  <cit> . indigoidine production increases tolerance to oxidative stress and contributes to aggressiveness, and might therefore act as a virulence factor.

CONCLUSIONS
2-d page studies might be extremely powerful for comparison of protein expression in different mycoplasma isolates, especially when considering that lipoproteins can be selectively detected with this method, and that size and phase variations can be easily spotted through the application of powerful differential comparison approaches as the 2d dige. however, these need to be integrated with traditional western immunoblotting and gelc-ms/ms for a deeper coverage and characterization of other mycoplasmal surface immunogens to be used as tools for vaccination, diagnosis, and therapy. this combined approach allowed the identification and characterization of  <dig> m. agalactiae proteins putatively localized on the membrane or associated to it, providing useful insights on its composition. in the future, alternative approaches such as blue native electrophoresis and chemical crosslinking of surface proteins will also enable to elucidate functional and structural aspects of membrane proteins that cannot be accounted for by the traditional gel-based proteomic approaches.

