BACKGROUND
human lipid and lipoprotein metabolism is altered during acute phase response. a striking example is sepsis , which is correlated with severe hypertriglyceridemia. in cells such as hepatocytes, smooth muscle cells, and adipocytes several effects of endotoxins on intracellular lipid metabolism are identical to, or mediated by, effects of pro-inflammatory cytokines such as interleukin-1β  and tumour necrosis factor-α   <cit> . these two cytokines are also present in atherosclerotic plaques, where it has been suggested that the cytokines mediate a constant low-grade inflammatory state. if they affect lipid metabolism in cells in the vascular wall in a similar manner as they affect peripheral tissues during acute phase response, such effects may contribute to atherosclerotic plaque development.

macrophage foam cells are a characteristic feature of atherosclerotic plaques. during foam cell formation modified lipoproteins enters cells by receptor mediated uptake and excess neutral lipids are stored as lipid droplets, creating a typical foamy appearance. oxidized forms of low density lipoproteins  are the modified lipoprotein usually considered causative during foam cell formation in vivo, but excessive uptake of other lipoproteins can also result in intracellular lipid accumulation and give macrophages a foamy appearance. we have previously described an in vitro model system for foam cell formation, where cells are lipid loaded by incubation with aggregated ldl  or very low density lipoproteins . in this in vitro model system all cells incubated with agldl or vldl have large numbers of intracellular lipid droplets, illustrating a model for macrophage foam cell formation with predominantly cholesterol ester or triglyceride rich lipid droplets, respectively  <cit> .

we hypothesised that il-1β and tnf-α affect lipid turnover in macrophage foam cells, a mechanism not previously described for this cell type. after lipid loading, foam cells were treated with either cytokine, mimicking the in vivo situation where atherosclerosis development is propagated by both hyperlipidemia and inflammation.

RESULTS
intracellular lipid content of macrophage foam cells
isolated primary human monocytes were differentiated to macrophages and lipid loaded by incubation with vldl or agldl. control cells were incubated for the same period of time in lipoprotein-free cell culture media. after incubation in presence or absence of lipoproteins all cells were rinsed with heparin in order to remove lipoproteins attached to the cell surface. fresh cell culture media supplemented with 0– <dig> pg cytokine/ml was added to cells and the macrophages were incubated in this media for an additional  <dig> h. cell viability was not affected by this treatment, as judged by two different assays performed both directly after lipoprotein lipid loading and after subsequent cytokine treatment.

incubation of control macrophages and macrophage foam cells with il-1β resulted in higher levels of intracellular lipids in cytokine treated cells, in a cytokine dose-dependent manner. effects were most pronounced in cells lipid loaded by incubation with vldl before cytokine treatment . the same pattern was apparent in control cells and cells incubated with agldl before cytokine treatment . experiments were repeated with tnf-α replacing il-1β. tnf-α induced a dose-dependent increase in intracellular triglyceride levels of control and agldl treated cells, whereas there was a limited effect of tnf-α on vldl treated cells . tnf-α had no strong effect on intracellular cholesterol levels neither in lipid loaded nor in control cells .

the experiments were repeated using the human leukaemia cell line thp- <dig>  in this cell type tnf-α displayed a strong and significant effect on intracellular lipid levels in lipid loaded cells as well as in control cells. exposure to the cytokine resulted in high levels of intracellular triglyceride and total cholesterol regardless of lipid loading before cytokine treatment . the same was apparent after incubation of thp- <dig> cells with il-1β . included in fig.  <dig> are intracellular lipid levels directly after lipoprotein lipid loading, i.e. before exposure to cytokine. incubation of lipid loaded cells with  <dig> pg il-1β/ml, i.e. the highest concentration used in our experiments, resulted in intracellular lipid values close to levels before cytokine treatment . this suggests that the cytokines suppress macrophage lipid turnover. we therefore proceeded to analyze whether il-1β and tnf-α affected mechanisms for lipid efflux and lipid metabolism in macrophage foam cells.

fatty acid efflux and triglyceride turn-over
thp- <dig> cells were incubated in presence or absence of lipoproteins and thereafter incubated with 0– <dig> pg cytokine/ml. conditioned media after cytokine treatment were analyzed for free fatty acid  content by colorimetric analysis. after cytokine treatment, ffa levels were 3– <dig> times higher in conditioned media from triglyceride-rich  cells than in media from cholesterol-rich  cells or in conditioned media from cells incubated in absence of lipoproteins, however there was no significant correlation between cytokine concentration and ffa levels in conditioned media from any cell type . in an additional series of experiment thp- <dig> cells were labelled with -oleate during lipoprotein uptake. cells were then treated with either of the two cytokines in lipoprotein and label free media. exposure of labelled and lipid loaded cells to tnf-α significantly decreased the amount of fatty acid label recovered in conditioned media . cytokine treatment of cells also resulted in increased retention of labelled fatty acid in the intracellular triglyceride  fraction .

acyl-coenzyme a synthetase activity
differentiated thp- <dig> cells were lipid loaded by incubation with vldl, and then treated with il-1β in lipoprotein free media as described above. cells were homogenized and separated in sub-cellular fractions. acyl-coa synthetase activity was assessed for five minutes in aliquots containing mitochondria or endoplasmic reticulum. enzymatic activity was affected by cytokine treatment in a dose-dependent manner, where il-1β stimulated acyl-coa synthetase activity of the endoplasmic reticulum and suppressed enzyme activity in mitochondria, indicating enhanced fatty acid esterification and decreased β-oxidation in cytokine-stimulated cells .

expression and secretion of apolipoprotein e
primary human macrophages or thp- <dig> cells were incubated in absence of lipoproteins, or with vldl or agldl, and then treated with il-1β or tnf-α as in previous experiments. incubation with either cytokine did not result in any consistent effects on apolipoprotein e  secretion from cells . real-time pcr analysis did not demonstrated any significant effects of either cytokine on apoe mrna levels in lipid loaded or control cells .

discussion
atherosclerosis is a disease accelerated by inflammation and by plasma dyslipidemia, where the latter typically include high levels of ldl and vldl. in virtually all eukaryotic cells intracellular lipid will accumulate in lipid droplets when lipoprotein lipid uptake exceeds lipid degradation and efflux. in atherosclerotic plaques, macrophage foam cell lipid droplets mainly accumulate cholesterol ester  <cit> . pro-inflammatory cytokines have earlier been reported to increase intracellular cholesterol levels in some cell types; il-1β increases cholesterol accumulation in mesengial cells by up-regulation of scavenger receptors, by dysregulation of the ldl receptor, and by inhibition of cholesterol efflux mediated by the atp binding cassette transporter protein a <dig>   <cit> . cytokines have also been reported to affect macrophage lipid efflux in mouse j <dig> cells, where il-1β or tnf-α both decrease mrna and protein levels of abc-a <dig>  <cit> .

it is clear from our experiments that when thp- <dig> cells were lipid loaded by incubation with lipoproteins and then incubated in cytokine free media, the cells utilized stored lipids . cytokine treatment after lipoprotein lipid loading resulted in dose-dependent retention of intracellular lipid. the results suggest that increased cellular lipid content after incubation with the pro-inflammatory cytokine is the result of decreased intracellular lipid catabolism and/or efflux. however, we cannot exclude that lipid content of cells after cytokine treatment in part also may reflect affected lipid synthesis. such directs effects on lipid synthesis have been reported for adipocytes, where tnf-α decreases de novo fatty acid synthesis, whereas il-1β increases it  <cit> .

macrophage foam cells lack pathways for cholesterol degradation; excess lipid can only be removed from cells via reverse cholesterol transport pathways. excess cholesterol is removed from macrophage foam cells as oxysterols, via efflux to extra-cellular acceptor particles, or via endogenous production of apoe leading to formation of lpe particles that mediate cholesterol removal from human monocyte-derived macrophages in absence of serum or exogenous acceptor particles  <cit> . cytokine treatment may directly affect apoe production; long-term  treatment with tnf-α stimulates human monocyte  apoe mrna expression and protein levels in vitro  <cit> . this effect may be species-specific, as  <dig> days of incubation with tnf-α or il-1β decreased de novo synthesis of apoe secretion in mouse peritoneal macrophages to approximately half of the level in control cells  <cit> . neither cytokine exerted any consistent effect on apoe secretion from control or lipid-filled cells. our experiments were performed in absence of extra-cellular acceptor particles, as we aimed to analyze cytokine effects on endogenous macrophage lipid efflux pathways only. additional experiments using the same model systems as above in presence of exogenous apoa-i or hdl particles will shed further light on whether cytokine treatment also affect lipid efflux pathways involving abc transporters.

treatment of macrophage foam cells with il-1β or tnf-α may decrease overall foam cell lipid efflux capacity, although our data on efflux of labelled fatty acids did not demonstrate cytokine effects strong enough to account for the entire effect on intracellular lipid retention. tnf-α  decreased efflux of labelled fatty acid from cells, and both cytokines showed trends towards increasing the amount of fatty acid label retained in the intracellular triglyceride fraction after lipid loading and cytokine treatment. these data indicate that cytokine treatment may impede foam cell lipid droplet turnover.

an interesting observation is that regardless of method of lipid loading cytokine effects on neutral lipid turnover appeared to be stronger or more pronounced for triglycerides than for cholesterol ester. foam cell lipid droplet turnover of triglycerides has been reported to be three to four times faster than that of cholesterol esters  <cit> . it is likely that the effects of il-1β and tnf-α are partially mediated by cytokine effects on enzymatic activity of acyl-coa synthetase, a key point for fatty acid oxidation but also for fatty acid esterification and storage in triglycerides, cholesterol ester, and phospholipids. enzymatic activity depends not only on protein levels or substrate availability but also on intracellular location, as the same enzyme activates fatty acids for catabolic β-oxidation in mitochondria as for anabolic esterification on the endoplasmic reticulum. for that reason, we chose to analyze acyl-coa synthetase activity in different subcellular fractions rather than in whole cell homogenates.

it has to be pointed out that figure  <dig> illustrates acs enzyme activity during five minutes of incubation only. the short incubation time of the acs assay is necessary for a linear dose response ratio between enzyme activity and production of labelled product. the effects of il-1β and tnf-α on total intracellular triglyceride and cholesterol content illustrated in figures  <dig>   <dig>   <dig>   <dig> are the result of incubations with respective cytokine for  <dig> h. therefore, although the cytokine effect on acs activity during short term incubation is minor, it is likely that the combined decrease in activation of fatty acids for subsequent β-oxidation and increase in activation of fatty acids for esterification will result in major accumulation of intracellular lipids over time.

it can be argued that cytokine concentrations used in our experiments are high compared to what is found in vivo. serum concentrations of il-1β and tnf-α are typically in the low pg/ml range, with increases in serum concentrations found in post-infarction and diabetic patient . it is well documented that il-1β and tnf-α expression is strongly increased in atherosclerotic plaques compared with surrounding tissues, but this is typically analyzed with immunohistochemical methods or with pcr analysis of mrna expression  <cit> . attempts have been made to analyze plaque cytokine production directly, such as analyses of tnf-α secretion in endotoxin-stimulated culture of explanted human atherosclerotic plaque tissue  <cit> , with final cytokine concentration in conditioned media reaching  <dig> pg/ml. it is likely that concentrations of cytokines in the vicinity of cells in atherosclerotic plaques are several degrees of magnitude higher than serum concentrations or concentrations in tissue culture, making the higher concentrations used in the current experiment possible in vivo.

CONCLUSIONS
our data suggests that il-1β and tnf-α may share a previously unknown effect on macrophage foam cells, resulting in retention of neutral lipids by a combination of decreased lipid efflux, decreased β-oxidation substrate availability, and stimulated fatty acid esterification. if such mechanisms are active in vivo, the high neutral lipid content of cytokine-treated cells may contribute to atherosclerotic development and even accelerate development of unstable lipid-rich atherosclerotic plaques.

