BACKGROUND
protein kinases play essential roles in signal transduction and regulation by phosphorylating other proteins to alter their enzymatic activity, cellular location, or association with other proteins. phosphorylation of the target protein is a necessary and key step in the occurrence and development of some cancers and inflammatory diseases. therefore, protein kinase inhibitors which specifically block the action of one or more protein kinases have been used as drugs for molecular targeted treatment of cancer and inflammatory diseases. however, poor bioavailability and limited in vivo half-life are rather common features of many kinase inhibitors that usually are highly hydrophobic compounds. for example, rapamycin  isolated from streptomyces hygroscopicus is such kind of hydrophobic kinase inhibitor which has already been approved by us food and drug administration  as an immunosuppressive drug to prevent the rejection of solid organ transplants  <cit> . rap is a natural inhibitor of the mammalian target of rapamycin  which is a critical regulator of cell growth, proliferation and survival. dysregulation of mtor activities often occurs in a variety of human malignant diseases, making it a crucial and validated target for the cancer intervention  <cit> . the anti-proliferation activity of rap was evaluated and it was found that rap could also inhibit the proliferation of a number of tumor cell lines  <cit> . however, since it is a strongly hydrophobic compound and only slightly soluble in several acceptable excipients such as ethanol, propylene glycol and polyethylene glycol  <dig>  <cit> , rap is only available in oral but with a relative low bioavailability of around 17%  <cit> . therefore, conventional dosage formulations of rap could not fulfill the demand for anti-proliferation therapy.

biodegradable polymeric nanoparticles are more and more frequently used in drug delivery systems and represent one of the most rapidly developing areas, which have now attracted growing interest of chemists, pharmacists and biologists. nanosized polymeric nanoparticles provide a comprehensive platform for achieving the enhanced drug solubility/stability, improving the effectiveness of drug therapy and reducing the side effects of the loaded drug to healthy tissues. many different natural and synthetic polymers have been developed as drug delivery carriers. polyhydroxyalkanoates  are a family of biodegradable aliphatic polyesters which are synthesized by a wide range of bacteria. phas have been extensively studied as implantable tissue repair/regeneration devices and other biomedical devices such as sutures and suture fasteners, because of their good biocompatibility and biodegradability  <cit> . recently, phas have also been explored for controlled drug-release applications  <cit> . based on their polyester aliphatic properties, phas are more efficient in encapsulating the hydrophobic compounds and thus would be especially beneficial for hydrophobic drugs. several commercialized phas, for example, polyhydroxybutyrate  and poly , have been successfully developed into nanoparticles and investigated for the entrapment and release profiles of hydrophobic compounds. the drug-loaded pha nanoparticles demonstrated sustained release of hydrophobic drugs and enhanced bioavailability in cell-based assays  <cit> .

in our previous studies, a novel naturally synthesized hybrid polyester, polyethylene glycol  <dig>  end-capped poly  was directly produced by aeromonas hydrophila fermentation  <cit> . in this study, the novel phbhhxpeg nps were prepared and investigated to serve as the nanocarrier for sustained release of a hydrophobic kinase inhibitor like rap. rap cellular uptake of phbhhxpeg nps, in vitro release of rap from the nps, cellular proliferation inhibition and kinase inhibition of rap-loaded nps were investigated. the results obtained in this study indicated that the microbial synthesized phbhhxpeg hybrid copolymer represents a promising material to serve as an intracellular drug delivery carrier for sustained release of hydrophobic kinase inhibitors.

RESULTS
preparation and characterization of phbhhx and phbhhxpeg nps
two kinds of free nanoparticles , two kinds of rhodamine-loaded nanoparticles  and three kinds of rapamycin-loaded nanoparticles  were prepared by an emulsification–solvent evaporation technique. the sizes and polydispersities of the nanoparticles were listed in table  <dig>  figure  <dig> showed the tem photographs and the size distribution of phbhhx and phbhhxpeg nps, respectively. the sizes of nanoparticles ranged from  <dig> to 300 nm after 6 h stirring with relative low polydispersity index . at the drug/material feeding ratio of 1: <dig>  entrapment efficiency  of rapamycin in both phbhhx and phbhhxpeg nps were higher than 90%. the drug loading content  of rap-loaded phbhhx and phbhhxpeg nps were  <dig> % and  <dig> %, respectively. pla nps demonstrated lower entrapment ability compared with phbhhx and phbhhxpeg nps, which was consisted with our previous report.

mean
abbreviations:nps nanoparticles, d
mean
, mean diameter, sd standard deviation, pdi polydispersity index, ee entrapment efficiency.

in vitro release of rapamycin
three kinds of rap-loaded nps were prepared based on pla, phbhhx and phbhhxpeg, respectively. figure  <dig> shows the in vitro release profiles of rap-loaded nps in water at 37°c. pla and phbhhxpeg nps showed similar profiles of an initial burst release followed by a sustained discharge stage, which was a little bit faster than that from phbhhx nps. about 40% of the drug could be released within the first 24 hrs from pla nps and phbhhx-peg nps and only about 30% of rap was released from phbhhx nps during the same period. at  <dig> hours, the percentage of retained drug in phbhhx and phbhhxpeg nps were 42% and 25%, respectively, which demonstrated that the release of rap from phbhhxpeg nps was faster than that from phbhhx nps.

interestingly, the release of rap from pha-based nps was more efficient than that from pla nps. indeed, more than 95% of the drug could be released from the phbhhx and phbhhxpeg nps after  <dig> days. on the contrary, more than 30% rap still remained in the pla nps even after  <dig> days, which indicated that this 30% of drug was strongly encapsulated in the pla nps and could not be released. such behavior might be explained by the relativly poor crystalline nature of phbhhx and phbhhxpeg materials, thus allowing rap to diffuse from the loose particle core. these results thus indicated that the phbhhx and phbhhxpeg nanoparticles could efficiently and effectively extend the release profile of rap and could be eventually used as controlled delivery carriers for hydrophobic drugs.

cellular uptake of phbhhx and phbhhxpeg nps
human prostate cancer cell line pc <dig> and a murine macrophage cell line raw <dig>  were used to investigate the in vitro endocytosis of pha-based nps. cells were treated with the rhodamine b solution, rhodamine b-loaded phbhhx nps and phbhhxpeg nps in the same fluorescence intensity, respectively. after 3 hrs treatment, the intracellular fluorescence of the rhodamine b solution treated group was weak in both pc <dig> and raw <dig>  cells, which suggested that rhodamine b could not be easily absorbed by both these two cell lines . however, significant intracellular fluorescence signal could be detected either by the fluorescence microscopy observation  or by fluorescence intensity analysis  in both pc <dig> and raw <dig>  cells 3 hrs after the addition of rhodamine b–loaded nps. the internalized nps were mainly accumulated in the cytoplasm and didn’t reach the cell nucleus area, indicated by the weak fluorescence intensity area inside the cells. moreover, the rhodamine b–loaded phbhhxpeg nps treating group showed much stronger intracellular fluorescence intensity compared to the rhodamine b–loaded phbhhx nps treating group, indicating that phbhhxpeg nps showed higher cell affinity and easier cellular uptake.

in vitro cytotoxicity evaluation of phbhhx and phbhhxpeg nps
the cytotoxic effect of phbhhx and phbhhxpeg nps on pc <dig> was evaluated in vitro by mtt assay. figure  <dig> shows relative proliferation percentage of pc <dig> incubated with different nps at doses of  <dig>   <dig> and 1000 μg ml- <dig> for 24 h, respectively. phbhhx and phbhhxpeg nps could be well tolerated at the concentration of 100 μg ml- <dig>  however, decreased cell viability was observed in the groups treated with 1000 μg ml- <dig> and 500 μg ml- <dig> nps, which resulted in 40% and 20% decrease of cell viability, respectively. phbhhx nps and phbhhxpeg nps-treated groups did not show significant difference in cell viability.

effects of rapamycin-loaded nps on proliferation of pc <dig> cells
the anti-proliferation effect of rap-loaded nps on pc <dig> cells was evaluated by the mtt assay. cells were treated with 10 μm free rap, rap-loaded phbhhx  and phbhhxpeg nps  which contained equal amounts of drug, respectively, for 48 h. pc <dig> cells showed a dramatic inhibition of cellular proliferation when treated with rap-loaded nps compared to cells treated with free rap at the same concentration . the anti-proliferative effects persisted after  <dig> hours without further addition of nps, potentially because of the sustained intracellular release of rap from the nps. in line with the efficient cellular uptake and the fast voiding rate of phbhhxpeg nps, rap-loaded phbhhxpeg nps inhibited pc <dig> cell proliferation more efficiently than rap-loaded phbhhx nps.

effects of rap-loaded nps on mtor activity
p70s6k  is a main downstream mediator of mtor and phosphorylation level of p70s6k at thr <dig> could be used as a probe for mtor activity. different from the anti-proliferation effect on pc <dig>  phospho-p70s6k signaling could be significant inhibited by rap at a very low concentration , as previosly reported  <cit> . the inhibition on mtor activity in pc <dig> could also be achieved by adjusting drug-loaded nps dosage  to reach a final rap concentration of either  <dig> or  <dig> nm . treatment with free rap, rap-loaded phbhhxpeg nps and rap-loaded phbhhxpeg nps equally resulted in decreased p70s6k phosphorylation , without affecting total p70s6k and total mtor levels. this indicated that the decreased phosphorylation level of p70s6k was only due to the inhibition of mtor activity but not because of the downregulation of mtor or p70s6k. in keeping with their anti-proliferative effects, drug-loaded phbhhx and phbhhxpeg nps demonstrated to better inhibit mtor than free rap. rap-loaded phbhhxpeg nps showed even stronger inhibition effects than rap-loaded phbhhx nps.

discussion
because poor bioavailability and limited in vivo half-life are rather common features of many kinase inhibitors that usually are highly hydrophobic compounds, the development of polymer-based nanocarrier for kinase inhibitors provided a promising strategy to improve their therapeutic activity by releasing drugs in a sustained manner, and consequently enhancing their bioavailability, improving their solubility, and reducing the toxic side effects  <cit> . in addition, drug-carrying nanoparticles could be passively accumulated in tumor or inflammatory tissues through the enhanced permeability and retention  effect and thus could further increase the effectual concentration of hydrophobic drugs  <cit> . polymeric nanoparticles have been extensively studied as drug carriers  <cit>  and several polymer-based, nanoparticulated formulations have been approved by the fda for clinical applications  <cit> . phas are linear biopolyesters produced as energy- and carbon-storage materials by many bacteria. the medical applications of pha have been extensively explored in recent years for implant biomedical applications  <cit> . several members of phas, such as phb and phbhhx, have also been developed into nanoparticles and investigated for controlled drug-release applications  <cit> . our previous data indicated that they were efficient in encapsulating hydrophobic compounds such as the phosphoinositide-3-kinases  inhibitor tgx <dig> . in this study, rapamycin, a mtor inhibitor with relative high molecular mass of  <dig> , was used to investigate the entrapment and release abilities of pha nps for high molecular weight kinase inhibitors. both phbhhx and phbhhxpeg nps showed higher rapamycin entrapment efficiency  and more complete drug release than that of pla nps, which was consisted with the study of tgx221-loaded pha nps. this indicated the advantage of pha-based nps in the entrapment and sustained release of hydrophobic kinase inhibitors. the results of this study also showed that release of rapamycin from phbhhxpeg nps was faster than that from phbhhx nps, which might be due to the incorporation of peg fragments and the relativly low molecular weight of phbhhxpeg.

the incorporation of peg could also confer more hydrophilicity to phbhhxpeg nps. this might explain the enhanced cellular uptake of phbhhxpeg nps, since a hydrophobic surface is known to disturb cell interaction. yang et al. reported that the surface of pha film demonstrated higher hydrophilicity and better cell compatibility after naoh treatment  <cit> . this can be explained by the ability of naoh treatment to break down the ester bond of pha backbone, leaving more hydroxyl group and carboxyl group on the surface of pha film. our previous study also indicated that the naoh treatment increased the surface hydrophilicity of phbhhx film and the neural stem cell-phbhhx film interaction . the hydrophilic peg represents a biocompatible material commonly used to enhance the biocompatibility of an object with good cell compatibility. therefore, the emulsification/solvent evaporation method was used to expose peg at the surface of phbhhxpeg nps and hence to increase the hydrophilicity of nps surface as well as the cell-nps interaction. in agreement, our results showed that cell contact was maximal in phbhhxpeg nps.

pegylation of nanocomposites was reported to be able to resist nonspecific protein adsorption and have prolonged circulating half-life in vivo <cit> . however, in this study, the phbhhxpeg nps could not prevent the endocytosis by raw <dig>  murine macrophage-like cells. this might be explained by an insufficient peg density on the colloidal surface of phbhhxpeg nps. peg-modification of plga nps is known to improve circulation time, depending on the molecular weight  and molar ratio  of peg incorporation  <cit> . after 5 min from administration, the remaining plga particles in circulation are about 5%, 25% and 50% for unmodified, peg <dig> modified and peg <dig> modified plga particles, respectively. this shows that the long peg chain is necessary for increased anti-clearance properties. in our study, the phbhhxpeg copolymer was synthesized by a. hydrophila by adding peg <dig> in the culture medium. peg <dig> attacks the carbonyl carbon of the phbhhx chain directly and forms the end-capped phbhhxpeg copolymer  <cit> . thus, in our experiments the incorporated peg fragment was no longer than 3– <dig> units in each chain. while this was insufficient to promote the formation of a dense, hydrophilic cloud on the surface of nps, potentially preventing macrophage-dependent opsonization, the use of peg <dig> was sufficient to optimize nps hydrophilicity and bioavailability.

CONCLUSIONS
overall, this study represented the potential of phbhhxpeg nps as a promising kinase inhibitor delivery carrier in anti-cancer study. our results indicated that the entrapment of rapamycin into phbhhxpeg nps could sufficiently enhance its bioavailability and anti-proliferation effect. nonetheless, in vivo evaluation of circulating time and anti-proliferation ability of the rapamycin-loaded pha nps in animal models is still needed. conversely, the proven effectiveness in cell based assays of this novel intracellular delivery nanocarrier opens the way to similar formulation of other kinase inhibitors. since the phbhhxpeg nps based drug delivery carrier could also be internalized by other cell types such as macrophage, rapamycin-loaded phbhhxpeg nps might also have alternative applications, for example, in the field of immunosuppressant therapeutic tregimens.

