BACKGROUND
human genome sequencing has led to the emergence of chemogenomics which is an inter-disciplinary approach to drug discovery  <cit> . in chemogenomics, compound libraries are combined with gene and protein information and the ultimate goal is to understand molecular recognition between all possible ligands and all proteins in the proteome. however, the size of the protein-ligand space makes any systematic experimental characterization impossible. the number of reasonably sized molecules, up to about  <dig> da in molecular weight, that contain atoms commonly found in drugs is very large. a commonly quoted mid-range estimate is  <dig>  <cit> . the human genome project has identified and characterized more than  <dig> genes in the human dna  <cit> . due to phenomena such as alternative splicing and post-translational modifications, each gene may result in several proteins, and the human proteome is estimated to contain more than  <dig> million different proteins  <cit> . the chemogenomic grid is thus sparse since experimental data, e.g. in the form of binding affinity values such as inhibition constants  and inhibitory concentrations , is available only for a very limited number of protein-ligand complexes. chemogenomics approaches are therefore focused either on generalized models that attempt to fill this sparse grid by prediction of protein-ligand interactions, or on thorough investigation of more limited well-characterized systems. examples of the latter are studies by martin et al.  <cit>  and guba et al.  <cit> , in which selective ligands against somatostatin g-protein-coupled receptor  subtype  <dig> were designed by carrying out a focused screen of drug candidates that target gpcrs in which amino acids of the drug-binding site share notable similarity to that of the subtype  <dig> gpcr receptor. examples of generalized models, that attempt to span larger parts of the protein-ligand space, are those of lindström et al.  <cit>  who induced a model from a set of structurally diverse proteins, bock et al.  <cit>  who induced a model on a large set of sequentially diverse gpcrs, and strömbergsson et al.  <cit>  who recently reported on a model that spans the entire structural enzyme-ligand space. all models were able to predict binding affinities fairly well with a cross-validated coefficient of determination r <dig> of  <dig> – <dig> . however, a proteome-wide model that spans protein and ligand representatives from the entire known protein-ligand space has not been reported yet.

protein and ligand space have traditionally been studied as separate entities. since conventional drug discovery is focused on ligand optimization, the chemical space has been studied extensively  <cit> . oprea and gottfries  <cit>  introduced chemgps, which is an efficient method to navigate the chemical space through a subset of ligands that act as core and satellite compounds. protein space has mostly been studied with the aim to classify proteins into protein families, and in the study of evolutionary relationships. classifications of proteins have been made both at the sequence and structural level. for instance, pfam  <cit>  is a large collection of protein families each represented by a multiple sequence alignment, and the databases scop   <cit> , and cath   <cit>  describe the structural and evolutionary relationships between all proteins whose structure is known.

chemogenomics has fuelled the creation of publicly available protein-ligand databases such as chembank  <cit> , which stores raw data from screening assays, and drugbank  <cit> , which contains information on drugs and their known targets. protein-ligand space has mainly been explored through structure-based methods such as high-throughput docking, where chemical libraries are systematically docked against an array of protein targets  <cit> , and molecular dynamics simulations, where the free energy of ligand binding is predicted  <cit> . lately, the chemogenomics space has also been explored through networks and knowledge-based methods. for instance, park & kim  <cit>  compared structural features of proteins and ligands which resulted in a protein-ligand binding similarity network, and campillos et al.  <cit>  explored known side-effects information of marketed drugs to induce a drug-drug target relation network, which resulted in the prediction and successful experimental validation of a number of novel drug-drug target interactions.

due to the paucity of protein-ligand interaction data, any chemogenomics study deals with large datasets that cover only a small part of the protein-ligand space. in this study, we present a new approach to visualize and compare chemogenomics protein-ligand subspaces. the method can be used on any protein-ligand interaction dataset and is applied here to the well-defined structural protein-ligand subspace of the protein data bank   <cit>  and the subspace of all approved drugs and their known targets in the drugbank  <cit>  database. we show that this approach can be used to compare chemogenomics subspaces, and to identify close neighbours in protein-ligand space, which may be used in focused screening applications to predict and further investigate unwanted cross-interactions of candidate drugs with other proteins.

RESULTS
a protein-ligand interaction dataset encompassing the structural protein-ligand space
the pdb is the single world-wide archive of structural data of biological macromolecules and contains more than  <dig> structures. all ligands  in the pdb were downloaded from msdchem   <cit> . each ligand was found in complex with one or more biomolecules in the pdb. ligands that had fewer than  <dig> non-hydrogen atoms, or that were known to be additives from crystallographic experiments, were removed from the dataset. this resulted in the removal of  <dig> ligands . a non-redundant set of proteins co-crystallized with each ligand was obtained through the culling server pisces  <cit>  . this resulted in  <dig> non-redundant protein-ligand interactions that cover the entire pdb protein-ligand space .

it is not trivial to determine which ligands in the pdb bind non-specifically. for instance, many commonly occurring carbohydrates can bind specifically to some proteins but may also be additives from experiments. ligands suspected to be additives, and ligands associated with more than  <dig> pdb entries were scrutinized using literature searches and discussed with an expert . figure  <dig> shows that the large majority of ligands are associated with fewer than  <dig> non-redundant pdb chains. however, since only a small fraction of the ligands  were investigated manually, it is likely that there are some non-specific ligands in the final pdb interaction dataset . in addition, the set of  <dig> removed ligands may well contain a few "true" ligands that bind specifically to their protein target. however, considering the large size of the final pdb interaction dataset , we assume that the possible inclusion of a few non-specific ligands will not seriously affect the projection of the protein-ligand space.

a dataset representative for the protein-ligand space of approved drugs
the drugbank  <cit>  database is one of the most comprehensive resources for information on drugs and drug targets. the 2d structures of all  <dig> approved drugs listed by drugbank were obtained together with information on their targets. the large majority of the drugs , had one or several known targets. to obtain a non-redundant set of protein targets associated with each drug, each protein set was subjected to pair-wise global alignment by the needleman-wunsch algorithm and the sequences were culled at 95% sequence identity. this resulted in a dataset of  <dig> interactions , containing of  <dig> unique drugs and  <dig> unique targets. more than half  of the drugs are listed to interact with more than one protein target. this clearly indicates that cross-interaction of drugs with other possibly unwanted proteins in the proteome is very common.

selection of protein and ligand descriptors
protein descriptors have been designed mainly for the purpose of protein classification and prediction and can be based on protein 3d structure, the entire primary structure, or amino-acid properties where each residue is treated as a separate entity within a sequence or structure. examples of descriptors based on 3d structure information are local protein substructure descriptors  <cit>  that have been applied to protein family classification and function prediction of protein-ligand binding affinity values  <cit> , and structural motif descriptors  <cit>  that have been applied to prediction of binding sites in proteins. protein descriptors based on the entire sequence typically use properties such as amino acid composition, amino acid sequence order or physiochemical features of amino acids. for instance, the profeat server  <cit>  computes more than  <dig> protein descriptors from their sequence. single residues within a sequence or structure can be described by so-called z-scales  <cit>  which are principal components of a large number of physicochemical amino acid properties. such z-scale descriptors have been applied successfully in proteochemometrics  <cit> , but they require a sequence alignment in order to compare and describe variable positions in related sequences. the protein-ligand datasets used in this study contain proteins that vary greatly in structure, sequence and function. moreover, since a large part of the known drug targets are membrane-bound receptors, the drugbank dataset contains many proteins for which no 3d structure is available. descriptors were therefore computed from the entire sequence. in this study, a set of easily interpretable protein descriptors, developed by dubchak et al.  <cit>  were used. the descriptors are based on composition, transition and distribution of structural and physicochemical properties, such as hydrophobicity, polarity, charge and solvent accessibility .

a large number of ligand descriptors has been developed for use in drug discovery and development. ligand descriptors are typically classified by the dimensionality of the representation of the compound  <cit> . so-called zero-dimensional  descriptors are derived from the chemical formula, and include simple atom counts and molecular weight. one-dimensional  descriptors are computed from a ligand represented as a substructure list, and include count descriptors of functional groups, rings and bonds. 2d descriptors are derived from the graphical representation of a chemical structure, and include 2d binary fingerprints and connectivity indices. finally, three-dimensional  descriptors are generated from 3d conformations and include dipole moments and hydrophobicity potentials. in this study, a set of 0d descriptors commonly used in quantitative structure activity relationship  studies were used . these descriptors are easy to interpret and describe various physiochemical properties important for drug development. moreover, the same descriptors have previously been used successfully by larsson et al. to visualize chemical space  <cit> .

pdb vs. drugbank – a comparison of protein-ligand subspaces
to visualize and compare the protein-ligand interaction subspace of the pdb to the subspace of all approved drugs, a principal component analysis   <cit>  was performed on the concatenated pdb and drugbank dataset. pca is an unsupervised machine learning approach that is used to describe associations and patterns among a set of input variables. the idea behind pca is to find principal components which are linear combinations of the original variables that describe each object in the dataset. pca is used for data compression and outlier analysis, provided that the extracted components account for a sufficiently large part of the variation in the original dataset.

to identify any outliers, pca was performed separately on the ligand and protein descriptors of the merged dataset. this resulted in the detection and removal of  <dig> ligand outliers and six protein outliers . since all descriptors are interpretable, a descriptor contribution study of an outlier provides some information on how the outlier differs from the average of the entire dataset. for instance, the descriptor nsk  was the highest contributing descriptor of the ligand outlier bivariludin® . the number of non-hydrogen atoms in the  <dig> residue peptide was  <dig> as compared to average of  <dig>  for the entire dataset. a corresponding example of a protein outlier is the pdb entry 1l3r, chain i, which is a camp dependent protein kinase inhibitor. the highest contributing protein descriptor was a transition descriptor that is the percentage low polarizability residues followed by high polarazability residues or vice versa. the value of this descriptor was 42%, for 1l3ri, compared to an average of  <dig> % for the entire dataset.

after removal of outliers, three separate pca models were induced on the merged pdb and drugbank dataset. the first pca model was induced only on protein descriptors, the second one only on ligand descriptors, and the third one included both protein and ligand descriptors. table  <dig> shows the results of the pca modelling. two measures of model quality are reported: r2x which is the goodness of fit, and q <dig>  which is a measure of the predictive power of the model . all three models explain more than half of the variation  in the data. moreover, the q <dig> values are on a par with the r2x values, which shows that the model is able to predict data removed during cross-validation. this shows that both protein and ligand descriptors alone can be used for pca model induction and, more importantly, that it is possible to induce valid pca models on the combination of protein and ligand descriptors.

                              r
                           2
                              x
                              q
                              #components
this table contains the results obtained from a principal component analysis on the dataset, described by protein or ligand descriptors in isolation, and by the combination of protein and ligand descriptors. the number of descriptors  is displayed along with the fraction of explained  and predicted  variation captured by the components .

the pca models based on protein, ligand and protein-ligand descriptors are displayed in figure 2a, b, and 2c respectively, where the datasets are projected onto the three first components. to obtain an estimate of the overlap between the pdb and drugbank datasets, a nearest-neighbour  approach was used. all computed components, i.e. not only the tree components shown in figure  <dig>  were used to compute the distances. a comparison of r2x of the first three components  and of all components  shows that the first three components contain the bulk of the captured variation in the pca models. however, since the other components contain on average 20% of the captured variation in the data, it is reasonable to compute the distances using all available components.

the nn analysis results are listed in table  <dig>  the nn analysis of the pca model based on protein descriptors alone reveals that 20% of the drugbank proteins have a nn in the pdb dataset, and that 6% of the pdb proteins have their nn in the drugbank dataset. this indicates that the pdb and drugbank protein subspaces have limited overlap, which is expected since a large number of drugs bind to membrane receptors for which no crystal structure is available. although figure 2b may give the impression that the drugbank ligand subspace is a subset of the pdb ligand subspace, the nn analysis resulted in similar overlap percentages as the protein descriptor pca model. this indicates that a large fraction of the known drugs are yet to be co-crystallized with any protein targets.

this table contains the percentage nearest-neighbor  in the tree pca models based on protein descriptors, ligand descriptors and protein-ligand descriptors. the nn overlap is reported for drugbank vs. pdb and vice versa.

a drugbank cross interaction study
more than half of the drugs in drugbank  interact with more than one drug target. to investigate whether our modelling approach is able to detect known drug target cross interactions, the nearest neighbours  of each drugbank complex were analysed. for each complex in drugbank, whose ligand has at least one known cross interaction, the  <dig> nns were computed from all ten extracted components in the protein-ligand pca model. figure  <dig> plots the percentage complexes for which at least one known drug target was found among the nns, against the number of checked nns. the figure shows that the protein-ligand pca model is much better at capturing known protein cross interactions than the pca model based only on protein descriptors. this shows that our pca modelling approach is able to capture a large fraction of the known cross interactions, which suggests that the model will also be able to capture as yet unknown cross interactions with any protein-ligand interaction dataset.

case study – acamprosate in complex with metabotropic glutamate receptor 5
acamprosate  is used to treat alcohol dependence  <cit> . its chemical structure is similar to that of gamma-aminobutyric acid, and it is thought to act through several mechanisms affecting multiple neurotransmitter systems. serious side effects include allergic reactions, irregular heartbeat, and low or high blood pressure, while less serious side effects include headaches, insomnia, and impotence. drugbank lists five protein targets that interact with acamprosate . the targets are all in the human glutamate receptor family, and protein 3d structures are not available for any of the targets. the five nearest neighbours of glutamate receptor  <dig>  were computed from all extracted components of the protein-ligand pca model. figure  <dig> shows a modbase  <cit>  homology model of glutamate receptor  <dig>  and the acamprosate ligand structure, together with information on the five nearest neighbours, in the merged pdb and drugbank datasets. the first neighbour is an acetyltransferase component of a pyruvate dehydrogenase complex in complex with its co-factor lipoic acid . the second neighbour is a porin protein from the outer membrane  in complex with a colicin inhibitor . the third neighbouring complex is human carbonic anhydrase i  and the drug levetiracetam  that is used to treat epilepsy. the fourth neighbour is hepatitis a virus proteinase c  in complex with a peptide-based ketone inhibitor . the last neighbour is a glutamate receptor that is a known cross interaction target, and its putative structure is shown as a homology model obtained from modbase  <cit> . interestingly, in terms of protein sequence similarity and tanimoto score, the last neighbour is the most similar to the p41594-acamprosate complex. this is probably due the fact that both protein and ligand descriptors capture general features, such a molecular weight or percentage charged amino acid residues. the major advantages with the protein descriptors are that they are easy to interpret, fast to implement, and allow for generalized comparisons of a large set of heterogeneous proteins. however, the descriptors do not reflect sequence length or any structural properties, and like many qsar descriptors, describe each protein as single large molecule. therefore, a protein and its nearest neighbours will not necessarily display a high degree of sequence similarity. similarly, the ligand descriptors selected for this study are very easy to interpret and describe properties important for drug development. they do not, however, describe any structural properties which explain the low tanimoto scores between acamprosate and the five neighbouring ligands. despite the above mentioned limitations, this example demonstrates that it is still possible to identify one of the known acamprosate cross interactions. considering that this method captures a large part of the known drugbank cross interactions , it is reasonable to assume that the subset of nearest neighbours may be used in, for instance, focused screening approaches that aim to design selective drugs, or as inspiration in the search of novel drug scaffolds.

CONCLUSIONS
traditional drug discovery has long been a multidisciplinary effort to optimize ligand properties  towards a single molecular target. the drugbank data on drugs and drug targets shows that the majority  of the approved drugs interact with more than one protein drug target. it is thus likely that any given drug candidate will interact with several proteins in the proteome, and that such cross-interactions may lead to detrimental side-effects. the chemogenomics approach has already been applied successfully in the design of selective drugs by studying protein targets in the same family  <cit> . instead of treating the protein and ligand spaces as separate entities, this study attempts to look at protein-ligand subspaces from a chemogenomics perspective. to this end, interaction data was collected from the pdb and drugbank databases, protein and ligand descriptors were computed, and a pca model was finally induced to compare the two datasets. the selected descriptors are computed from the primary structure of a protein and a 2d representation of a ligand. both protein and ligand descriptors describe general physicochemical features and are easy to interpret. since the protein descriptors are computed from the amino acid sequence, any protein whose sequence is known can be included in the model. however, the descriptors treat each protein as a single molecule with only a rough estimate of sequence order. this means that features such as 3d structure or active site location are not described. similarly, the ligand descriptors provide no real information on ligand structure which explains the low tanimoto similarity of the five nearest neighbours to acamprosate in the case study. the non-supervised nature of this approach means that any other descriptors would result in a new model. it would be of interest to induce a more specific model based on, for instance, protein active site descriptors such as the screen  <cit>  descriptors, or ligand 3d structure descriptors such as the grind  <cit>  descriptors. such a model would of course exclude any protein-ligand complex whose 3d structure is unknown. despite the generality of the descriptors used in this study, our results show that it is possible to induce a pca model on the combined set protein and ligand descriptors, and that the model captures a large part of the known drugbank cross interactions. this indicate that this method could be applied to find chemogenomically similar protein-ligand complexes in the proteome, in order to define a subset of putative drug targets to study for possible cross-interactions. these could be used in more focused studies in vitro, in vivo or in silico, using methods such as radio-ligand binding experiments  <cit> , docking studies  <cit> , molecular dynamics simulations  <cit> .

