BACKGROUND
natural ophiocordyceps sinensis , known as dongchong xiacao  in chinese and as the chinese caterpillar fungus in western countries, is traditionally considered a parasitic complex of a fungus  and caterpillars that belong to thitarodes, hepialidae and lepidoptera  <cit> . it is endemic to alpine habitats on the tibetan plateau, located predominantly in tibet and tibetan autonomous prefectures of neighboring provinces and the high himalayas  <cit> . being described as an organism complex rather than a simple o. sinensis organism, the terms caterpillar fungus and natural dcxc are an entomophagous flask fungus in the new family ophiocrdycipitaceae   <cit> . isolated o. sinensis strain and dcxc have been used for academic research and processing products, however their names in concrete practices were often confused. experimental methods in biochemistry have proved that dcxc consists of active constituents such as cordycepin, cordycepic acid, polysaccharides, nucleosides, ergosterol, peptides, aminophenol and trace elements  <cit> . the modern medical researches prove that natural dcxc and its active components possess a wide range of pharmacological actions, such as anti-inflammatory  <cit> , antioxidant, antitumor, antihyperglycemic, antiapoptosis, immunomodulatory, nephroprotective and hepatoprotective  <cit> . its immunoregulatory function plays an important role in anti-tumor effects, organ transplantation and the prevention of kidney, liver and heart disease  <cit> . therefore, these myco-medicinal products, coupled with their associated mycelial cultures, are popular items in the traditional medicine market  <cit> . high commercial value and habitat degradation of natural dcxc has led to overexploitation, which has endangered the species in recent years. the number of natural dcxc populations is extremely limited, and its residential ecological environments are also potentially threatened  <cit> . to protect dcxc resources and its habitats, an effective approach is to study and develop substitutes represented by endogenetic microorganisms isolated from natural dcxc, based on consideration of its specific bioactive components. on the other hand, artificial cultivation of dcxc or artificial assistance of its growth may provide an alternative to protect this valuable resource  <cit> . in the past 30 years, scientists have been devoted to determine the anamorph of dcxc, and the investigation and isolation of the endogenetic fungi from natural dcxc . meanwhile, genetic diversity of natural dcxc has been estimated from a limited number of individuals or populations using various molecular methods . currently, the microorganism community composition, structure and functional activity of natural dcxc remain unclear.

with conserved and hypervariable sequence characteristics, the 16s rrna genes and the internal transcribed spacer  regions were commonly used as the ideal marker sequence in the analysis of microorganism community diversity  <cit> . the 16s rrna gene and its regions sequences permit the identification and prediction of phylogenetic relationships of prokaryotes and eukaryota  <cit> . high-throughput sequencing, in particular pyrosequencing  <cit> , has been applied widely to studies of microorganism community composition, structure and its ecology  <cit> . using this method, some trace microbes have been detected, and there have been new discoveries in the field of microbial population diversity in traditional chinese medicinal materials   <cit> , agriculture  <cit> , marine ecology  <cit>  and soil ecology  <cit> . according to traditional chinese medicine theory, the geoherbalism formation of tcmm is based on many factors, among which the microenvironment of rhizosphere soil plays an important role in the formation of secondary metabolism in medicinal plants. therefore, based on the diversity of microbial communities by the clone library approach  <cit> , the natural dcxc couple with its microhabitat soil was divided into four parts: stroma, larva, external mycelial cortices and soil, to in each sample using high throughput pyrosequencing platform  and quantitative real-time pcr  techniques. the aim of the study was to detect the microbial diversity and community structure of natural dcxc and its microhabitats. in subsequent, we analyzed the relationship between the microorganism community composition and structure in various specimens with regard to the medicinal components, fungal parasitisation of the larva, and growth and development. it lays a foundation for exploring the genetic diversity and functioning of dcxc microbiota as a model for further biotechnological developments.

RESULTS
community diversity
high quality sequences of  <dig>  16s rrna genes and  <dig>  its reads were obtained with at least  <dig> bacterial 16s rrna gene and  <dig> fungal its reads in each sample. the results indicated that a large number of bacterial and fungal microorganisms inhabiting the natural dcxc   and its microhabitat  . although we got nearly ten thousandsequences per sample for bacteria and fungus community, the slope of the rarefaction curve was still not flat at different similarity cutoff values, indicating that there were still microorganisms that was not detected . the diversity and richness of bacterial and the fungal community of different natural dcxc samples and its microhabitat were represented by the indices . the otu  numbers and shannon’s index of the soil sample were higher than the other samples, both in the bacterial and fungal communities , which indicated a higher diversity of the bacterial and fungal community in the soil adhering to natural dcxc. this was also demonstrated by the curve of otu rank abundance  and simpson’s index . interestingly, the otu number and the shannon’s index showed that the bacterial community diversity was highest in the soil, followed by external mycelial cortices and stromata, and fewest in sclerotia at each similarity level. for the fungal community, the otu number revealed the same trend as the bacteria; however, this trend in shannon’s index was disturbed for external mycelial cortices and stromata.fig.  <dig> collection and isolation of dcxc and its microhabitat samples. a the sample was collected from ya-an ethnic township, baqing country of nagqu prefecture; b the samples for this study were collected in three different populations at least 50–100 m apart at  <dig> m above sea level; the stars indicated the governments of biru, nierong, sog and baqing county; the triangles indicated the sampling locations in the ya-an ethnic township, baqing county; c habitat of natural dcxc; d-i after collection of growing dcxc . the collected samples were divided into dcxc and its growth microhabitats. microhabitat samples included soil adhering to the surface of the membrane , and external mycelial cortices  . the dcxc was divided into sclerotia  and stroma 


a to calculate all the indices, the sequences number in each samples were normalized to the same, with  <dig> bacterial 16s rrna gene sequences and  <dig> fungal its sequences


b abbreviation of the samples name: stroma , membrane covered around larva , larva  and the soil adhering to the surface of the membrane covered dcxc. the detailed image is shown in fig. 1




similarly, richness was highest in the soil sample, followed by external mycelial cortices and stromata. the least rich bacterial and fungal communities were in the sclerotia sample, which was in accordance with the chao <dig> index . the richness of microorganism community indicated that the soil and the external mycelial cortices in contact with the soil promoted microorganism growth.

community composition
according to the taxonomy results of 16s rrna gene and its sequences obtained by a localblast search against the silva and unite databases, the microbial compositions in the different samples were analyzed . the bacterial community composition was varied in different samples of natural dcxc and the microhabitat samples. proteobacteria was the main group in different samples and presented  <dig> ,  <dig> ,  <dig>  and  <dig>  % of the total bacteria detected in sclerotia, stromata, external mycelial cortices and soil, respectively . the proportion of acidobacteria in the sclerotia was rather small, representing only  <dig>  %. in contrast, acidobacteria in the other three samples were higher:  <dig>  % in stromata,  <dig>  % in external mycelial cortices and  <dig>  % in the soil. bacteroidetes was another notably abundant bacterial group, with the lowest proportion,  <dig>  %, in sclerotia and the highest,  <dig>  %, in stromata. in addition, actinobacteria, planctomycetes and verrucomicrobia bacteria, as well as firmicutes, were also detected in the samples, although at small fractions. finally, we also detected notable numbers of unclassified bacteria, especially in the external mycelial cortices and soil samples, representing  <dig>  and  <dig>  % of the total sequences in these samples, respectively, indicating a higher diversity of unknown microorganisms in these two samples.fig.  <dig> bacterial and fungal community patterns of different samples. a bacterial community at the phylum level; b fungal community at the phylum level. the percentages on the vertical axis of the graph represent the proportion of each microbe group in the total obtained sequences for each sample



for the fungal community, we detected three main phyla in the samples from dcxc: ascomycota, basidiomycota and zygomycota . ascomycota was the most dominant group in the samples, representing  <dig>  % in sclerotia,  <dig>  % in stromata,  <dig>  % in external mycelial cortices and  <dig>  % in the soil. basidiomycota, as the second most abundant fungal community group, was present at its lowest level,  <dig>  %, in the sclerotia and was highest in the soil at  <dig>  %. while in the stromata and external mycelial cortices, the portions of basidiomycota fungi were  <dig>  and  <dig>  %, respectively. zygomycota was present in low numbers in the sclerotia, external mycelial cortices and soil samples, but was rather higher, accounting for  <dig>  % of the total detected fungi, in the stromata. the limitation of the resolution of the its sequence meant that there was a notable fraction of the its sequences in each sample that could not be classified exactly, especially in the sclerotia and external mycelial cortices, with  <dig>  and  <dig>  % of undefined sequences in these two samples, respectively. these results suggested an undiscovered abundant fungal community resource in the samples from natural dcxc.

the compositions of bacterial and fungal community were further analyzed at the genus level. the huge undiscovered microorganism resource in the natural dcxc and the resolution limit of the rrna gene and the its region sequence, resulted in a large proportion of unclassified sequences at the genus level. for the bacterial community, undefined sequences accounted for  <dig>  in the sclerotia,  <dig>  in the stromata,  <dig>  in the external mycelial cortices and  <dig>  in the soil. these unclassified sequences suggested a huge bio-resource that may be related to the producing of medical materials in natural dcxc. meanwhile, the most abundant genera detected in the sclerotia included pseudomonas and rhodoferax, with  <dig>  and  <dig>  % of the total sequences, respectively. while other genera, such as pedobacter , sphingomonas , collimonas  were also detected. the main genera detected in the stromata were pedobacter , rhodoferax , variovorax  and mucilaginibacter . for the external mycelial cortices sample, the thermomonas  and gemmatimonas  were the main genera detected. in addition, ferruginibacter , gemmatimonas  and terrimonas  were the main genera in the soil sample. detailed information on the bacterial genera and their proportions detected in each sample is shown in additional file 3: table s <dig> 

the undefined fungal its sequences also accounted for a significant percentage of the total sequences in the sclerotia , stromata , external mycelial cortices  and soil . the entoloma were the main genus detected in the sclerotia  and external mycelial cortices  samples. it was also distributed in the soil sample, but the percentage was only  <dig>  %. exophiala , cladophialophora  and phaeomollisia , were the main genera detected in the sample stromata. tetracladium , were the main genus in the external mycelial cortices sample. finally, for the soil sample, cladophialophora , verrucaria , sebacina  and gyoerffyella  were the main genera detected. for more information of the fungal community genera and their proportions detected in each sample are shown in additional file 4: table s <dig> 

community similarities in different samples
the microorganism community similarity in different samples of natural dcxc was determined by weighted principal coordinates analysis . the bacterial community in the soil sample appeared more similar to the bacterial community in the external mycelial cortices. these two samples clustered separately from the other two samples, sclerotia and stromata . this was also demonstrated by the unweighted pair group method with arithmetic averages  trees constructed from thetayc distances, in which the bacterial communities of soil and external mycelial cortices were in the same group, while the samples stromata and sclerotia were in another group . in addition, a venn diagram showed the shared otus with 97 % similarity of the bacterial community in each samples from dcxc . soil and external mycelial cortices samples shared  <dig> otus; meanwhile, that soil and stromata samples shared  <dig> otus, and there were only  <dig> otus shared by soil and sclerotia. this suggested that the bacterial communities in soil and external mycelial cortices were more similar, which was constant to the results of pcoa and the upgma clustering analysis. the defined bacteria at the genus level in the soil sample mainly were ferruginibacter and gemmatimonas, while the thermomonas and pseudomonas were the main genera in the sample external mycelial cortices and stromata, which was constant with the composition of the bacterial community at the genus level .fig.  <dig> principal coordinates analysis of bacterial and fungal communities in different samples of natural dcxc. percentages on the axes of the graph represent the explained variance of total variance. the otu data matrix used in the analyses was clustered at the  <dig> % similarity and the principal coordinates analysis was based on the jclass model. otus shown in the profiles were relatively more abundant ones. the circle in color indicated the four samples distributed in the ordination. the circle in gray indicated the otus that areas symbolize the abundant, and the different circles indicated the number of sequences contained in each otu



fungal communities in the sclerotia and external mycelial cortices samples were more similar, with entoloma being abundant in these two samples. meanwhile, fungal communities in samples of soil and stromata were only distantly related to those in the sclerotia and external mycelial cortices . upgma trees constructed from a thetayc distances matrix showed that the fungal community structure in external mycelial cortices and sclerotia was more similar to each other than they were to those of the sample stromata and soil . in addition, a venn diagram  showed that the shared otus with 97 % similarity of the fungal community in each samples from dcxc and its microhabitats, which indicated that external mycelial cortices and sclerotia shared  <dig> otus. meanwhile,  <dig> otus were shared by external mycelial cortices and stromata, and  <dig> otus were shared by external mycelial cortices and soil. this demonstrated that a similar fungal community structure in the external mycelial cortices and sclerotia samples. soil and stromata samples contained rather different fungal communities compared to the external mycelial cortices and sclerotia samples, suggesting a high diversity of fungi in the different samples of dcxc and its microhabitats. for the defined fungal genera in the samples, the levels of entoloma provided a partial explanation for the distribution of sclerotia and external mycelial cortices, while other genera did not show a tendency to be present in a particular sample internal microenvironment, indicating that these fungi were disparate in the different part of dcxc.

abundance of total bacteria and fungi
the abundance of total bacterial and fungal communities was detected qpcr  based on the sybr green method. the qpcr results indicated that the soil sample contained the most abundant bacterial and fungal community compared with the other samples from natural dcxc. the abundance of bacterial community were higher than the fungal community in natural dcxc samples . bacterial community abundance was  <dig>  ±  <dig>  ×  <dig> copies per gram dry materials in the soil sample, which was significant higher than in in the sclerotia, stromata and external mycelial cortices samples . with the fungal abundance was  <dig>  ±  <dig>  ×  <dig> copies per gram dry material, abundance in the soil sample was significant higher than in in the other samples . the results of a t-test indicated that the abundances of total bacterial and fungal communities were significantly higher in the soil sample than in the other samples , and the abundance of the total fungal community was significant higher than the total bacterial community abundance in each sample .fig.  <dig> abundance of the total bacterial and fungal community in different samples isolated from natural dcxc. the error bars indicate sds , with some error bars smaller than the symbol. samples containing a different letter indicate that there were significant differences . the unit of abundance was the log value of the gene copies per gram of dry materials. the moisture content of each sample was measured by gravimetric analysis after oven-drying  of triplicate samples



discussion
natural dcxc is an expensive, endangered, traditional medicinal drug, which comprises many fungi and a larva. since the 1980s, the separation and identification of the anamorph of dcxc have been the main focus in this field. more than  <dig> fungal strains belonging to  <dig> genera, which are involved in anamorphic types of the dcxc, have been reported in china. in recent years, the relationship between dcxc and its microhabitats has received more attention. zhang et al.  <cit>  investigated the mycobiota of natural dcxc using a traditional culture-dependent method. in total,  <dig> fungal cultures were isolated from different parts  of natural dcxc. for the growth microhabitat of dcxc, li et al.  <cit>  analyzed soil fungal community structures in propagated dcxc by dgge, and found that the its <dig> sequences of fungi in soil samples were highly similar to those of inocybe  fr., tricholoma  staude, entorrhiza c.a. weber, unconfirmed ascomycota, and soil fungi in genbank; the similarity of the soil fungal population structure was only  <dig>  % ~  <dig>  %. based on the above-mentioned analysis, at the technical level, the traditional culture-dependent method was used for primary separation of fungi from the dcxc. modern bio-techniques were used for the identification of the dcxc anamorph in the isolates, rather than to investigate the microorganism community . many years of research have proved that h. sinensis is the anamorph of natural dcxc collected from different geographical regions  <cit> . however, h. sinensis and o. sinensis belong to different stages of the life cycle of the same organism  <cit> . o. sinensis pathogenicity has clearly been shown, but only by a few researchers. the aims of the previous studies were to determine the anamorph of dcxc that could produce similar metabolites to dcxc. currently, h. sinensis mycelia have been applied successfully for in large-scale fermentation to produce various drugs and health products  <cit> , which has led to limited protection of natural dcxc resources. although o. sinensis is defined to be only one species, natural dcxc and its microhabitats contain a variety of microorganism  <cit> , and form a complex host-microbiota-environment microecosystem. in this study, the pyrosequencing analysis reveals an unexpectedly high diversity of the microorganism community in the complex microecosystem. analysis of composition and structure of microorganism communities benefits to unsolved problems in dcxc study, for example, how fungus infected the larvae, what was the relationship  of endophytic fungus and its host organism interaction. however, in this microecosystem, the relationships among microorganisms inhabiting in dcxc need to be further explored. the influence of these microorganisms to the reproductive and individual development of dcxc will also need further investigation. in addition, numerous of unidentified sequences were detected in the natural dcxc samples and its micro-environments. there are two possible reasons for explanation of this result. firstly, the research targeting the micro-ecology in tibetan plateau was few all over the world. secondly, scientists for the study of dcxc mainly came from china, and focused their interesting on isolation and identification of the fungus of the asexual generations , and fermented these fungi by using artificial methods, etc. so there was a little piece of information on endogenetic microorganism from natural dcx in the database. the bacterial population of dcxc was only one report available  <cit> , and the effects of bacteria on the growth process and medicinal composition of natural dcxc are unclear. based on the results analysis of this study, the main groups of bacteria in the different samples were proteobacteria, acidobacteria, bacteroidetes, actinobacteria and firmicutes. among the bacterial communities, the proteobacteria is a major group  of bacteria, which include a wide variety of pathogens. the results suggest that bacteria may be relative to pathopoiesis of the larva. acidobacteria is widely distributed in nature and plays important roles in various ecosystems  <cit> . seven genera of acidobacteria were isolated and reported, and confirmed by bergey’s manual of systematic bacteriology, including acidobacterium, geothrix, holophaga and the recently published edaphobacter aggregans, edaphobacter modestus, chloracidobacterium thermophilum and terriglobus roseus  <cit> . after the confirmation of the symbiotic microbes in the larva guts, genomic analysis will be possible to reveal the molecular foundations of the relationships between the insect and its microbiome  <cit> . furtherly, the roles of the bacterial communities in growth and development, and in the formation of bioactive ingredients of dcxc need further exploration. it is need further for study that endogenetic bacteria play roles in larva pathopoiesis, secondary metabolite formation and fruit body development. although, pooling the samples from different sampling sites together only was a preliminary approach in study design in the early high-throughput sequencing, which might resulted in the extreme limitations of data, the results of current study also have certain values for the further study. study design will be improved in the following research of comparing the endogenetic microorganism community in natural dcxc from different areas.

pharmaceutical substances from natural dcxc are a complex product, just as the dcxc itself is a natural complex of larva and fungal, as well as bacterial communities. hence, we have good reason to believe that the complicated communities of endogenetic microorganisms in dcxc are related to the secretion of the pharmaceutical substances, and are involved in the growth, development and metabolic process of dcxc. in other words, bioactive ingredients and the infection process of fungus to larva should be related to the endogenetic microorganism community structure of dcxc. in studies of the fungal community structure  <cit> , it was demonstrated that the culture-dependent method only identified limited amounts of microbes  <cit> . the limitation of the approach resulted few kinds of fungi being found in dcxc. many studies have indicated a diverse microorganism community in natural dcxc using culture-dependent and independent methods  <cit> . obviously, the culture - dependent methods are not sufficient to discover the endogenetic complete community resource, especially the bacterial community. surprisingly, the dcxc microbiota has so far been poorly explored and exploited for screening bioactive component proposes. in this study, the large proportion of unidentified sequences was found, and the function of these sequences was still unclear. however, illustration of the endogenetic microorganism community structure in dcxc using metagenome data would be beneficial to clarify the relationship between the dcxc and its endogenetic microorganisms, metagenome analysis provides new avenues for the study of the dcxc microorganism community and will reveal the molecular foundations of the relationships between the larva and its microbiome. the unidentified sequences, as a new potential microbial resource, will lay a foundation in the discovery of new drugs and drug leads, and the potential biotechnological application of dcxc microbiota.

CONCLUSIONS
this study revealed an abundant endogenetic fungal and bacterial resources and a variety of genetic information in natural dcxc by high-throughput  <dig> sequencing technology. in the natural dcxc and its microhabitat, the main bacterial groups were proteobacteria, acidobacteria, bacteroidetes, actinobacteria and firmicutes, while the ascomycota, basidiomycota and zygomycota were the main fungal phyla. proteobacteria presented  <dig> ,  <dig> ,  <dig> and  <dig>  % of all bacteria in the sclerotia, stromata, external mycelial cortices and soil, respectively. and as the main fungi phyla, ascomycota presented  <dig> ,  <dig> ,  <dig> and  <dig>  % in the sclerotia, stromata, external mycelial cortices and soil, respectively. the bacterial and fungal communities were obviously distinct in each sample and the microorganism communities were more diverse in the environmental sample than in the natural dcxc sample. microorganisms that had been discovered in natural dcxc will provide sources for screening the new bioactive metabolites and its biotechnological application.

