BACKGROUND
in the years following the completion of the human genome sequencing projects, a variety of genome-wide screening procedures for functional analysis were developed. for instance, plasmid vectors were applied to transfer cdna for over-expression, or, alternatively, shrna knock-down cassettes for gene silencing  <cit> . to this end, different plasmid vectors complexed with transfection reagents were immobilized in microspots delivered to planar glass slides, which were subsequently covered with a monolayer of cells. the cells took up the genetic information  and phenotypic alterations were functionally assayed  <cit> . however, many primary cells are not amenable to classical transfection protocols. in these cases viral vectors are the only means to genetically manipulate the target cells. this instigated us to test the suitability of viral vectors for arraying, for which purpose we have chosen adenovirus as a model. in the meantime, similar arraying experiments were carried out using lentivirus  <cit>  and retrovirus  <cit> .

we have generated a microarray of infectious adenovirus to convey genetic information into the target cells . by choosing an adequate blocking procedure, we managed to strictly confine the cells to the viral spots, preventing adherence to areas without genetic information. by co-expressing fluorescent markers, we could differentiate infected cells from non-infected cells, thus facilitating phenotypic analysis.

we have employed the adenoviral array technology to analyze the contribution of seven protein kinases to cell signalling in huvec after viral transfer of validated shrna expression cassettes. this group of enzymes was selected to exemplify the application of miniaturized adenoviral arrays.

RESULTS
reverse transduction by arrayed adenovirus
the use of adenoviruses has been demonstrated for miniaturized high-throughput virus production as well as transduction in microwell plates  <cit> . a novel printing technique was developed to print arrayed adenovirus on glass slides for the subsequent infection of cells seeded on top . the viruses were immobilized in defined spots , and the surface outside the spots was blocked in a way that only the area of the viral spots was permissive to eukaryotic cell adhesion. hence, the pattern of immobilized adenovirus was reflected by the formation of a corresponding cell array . this approach facilitates phenotypic analysis, as the cells to be investigated are spatially confined . adenoviral vectors applied in figure  <dig> were constructed to express enhanced green fluorescent protein  or red fluorescent protein  as markers for the identification of infected cells. in addition, they contain gateway™ recombination sites for high-throughput introduction of shrna expression cassettes after in vitro recombination. successful infection was assayed by egfp or rfp fluorescence analysis. the appearance of egfp/rfp-positive cells indicated that the immobilized viruses maintained their infectivity, and no significant intermixture occurred between neighboring viral spots . this finding was further supported by quantification of egfp fluorescence in spots with rfp-expressing adenoviruses, and vice versa . likewise, release of adenoviruses from spots was not observed when the washing buffer was tested for infectious particles . hence, the viruses were sufficiently immobilized to prevent cross-contamination between the spots, yet immobilized cells were still able to take up viral particles for infection.

the infectivity rate of reverse transduction was measured by comparing the number of egfp-positive cells with the number of dapi-stained nuclei. in the case of the osteosarcoma cell line u- <dig> os, infection of approximately 70% of all cells was achieved . we found the chips with immobilized adenoviruses to remain infective for more than two weeks when stored at 4°c, without significant loss in overall infectivity .

in conclusion, arrayed adenoviruses are able to transduce cells efficiently, and the adenoviral arrays generated can be readily stored for prolonged time-periods without loosing infectivity, meaning this technology to be applicable for the large-scale applications.

shrna-mediated knock-down on a chip
an imaging procedure with the help of imagej  was used to calculate knock-down of target genes by quantitative analysis of immunstainings. the principles of the analysis are explained in figure 2a. u- <dig> os cells were seeded onto the adenoviral array, and infected cells were identified by rfp fluorescence . lamin a/c expression was visualized by indirect cy <dig> immunofluorescence microscopy . for quantitative analysis, the fluorescence intensity of infected cells was determined by computer-assisted image analysis. in order to electronically evaluate the cells, the roi  were defined using rfp fluorescence, indicative of adenoviral infection: to this end, the images were subjected to image segmentation. during the segmentation process, images were binarized by setting a defined threshold value for pixel intensity, and subsequently assigning the value of "black" to all pixels with an intensity above the threshold, and a value of "white" to all pixels with an intensity below the threshold. hence, "black" pixels correspond to areas where infected cells are located, allowing to discriminate image regions containing infected cells from regions without infected cells, and the former regions gave rise to the "regions of interest" analysed further. those rois  were superimposed on the corresponding cy <dig> images, and the intensity of lamin a/c immunostaining was determined for each roi .

adenoviral vectors were arrayed on a chip encoding shrna directed against lamin a/c   <cit>  in addition to an rfp expression cassette. as a control, adenovirus encoding an irrelevant shrna  was introduced. this shctr contains an shrna sequence with no homology to human genes, as confirmed by blast search. fluorescence intensities of the cells infected by the control adenovirus were compared to the one of the cells infected by the shlamin expressing virus as depicted in a bar chart . compared to the control, lamin a/c expression was decreased in the case of the cells transduced with an adenoviral vector expressing lamin-specific shrna, indicative of an overall reduction in lamin a/c expression.

hence, our results show that shrna-mediated knock-down is feasible in cells exposed to adenoviral arrays.

validating the adenoviral arrays in functional assays – comparison to conventional infection
a panel of seven adenoviral vectors expressing shrnas directed against human protein kinases was applied to analyze the phenotypic response of tumor cells after gene silencing. the protein kinases selected are known to be involved in the regulation of apoptosis   <cit> , p38alpha   <cit> ), in cell cycle progression  or in mitotic regulation   <cit>  and pbk   <cit> ). furthermore, one protein kinase was included for which no effect on apoptosis had been described . the shrna sequences were validated and reduced protein kinase mrna levels to ≤ 40% compared to the control shrna  in a reporter psicheck™- <dig> assay . luciferase activity was normalized to cells co-transfected with psicheck and shctr. three independent experiments have been carried out and the standard deviations are given. these kinase-specific shrna adenoviral vectors were printed in arrays, and u- <dig> os cells were immobilized as described above.

the induction of apoptosis was determined either by terminal-deoxynucleotidyl-transferase-mediated dutp-biotin nick end labelling , or by immunodetection of cleaved caspase  <dig>  a representative set of micrographs is given in figure 3b, in which infected cells were identified using egfp fluorescence , whereas red fluorescence indicated incorporation of rhodamine-labelled dutp or the presence of activated caspase- <dig> . a merger of both micrographs is likewise given , in which yellow indicates a strong tunel- or caspase 3-signal. as a result, a strong induction of cell death upon knock-down of p38alpha in u- <dig> os cells was detected.

fluorescence intensities of both activated  caspase  <dig> and tunel in comparison to cells infected with the control adenovirus  were quantified as outlined above. the induction factor observed using activated caspase  <dig> or tunel staining as a determinant was up to 4-fold . the knock-down of the four kinases p38alpha, pkn <dig>  nek <dig> and pbk evoked apoptosis as determined via caspase  <dig> activation compared to the control infection . the same four kinases were identified as targets using the tunel assay . hence, using two independent assays for apoptosis detection, we could demonstrate the feasibility of functional assays on the adenoviral chips.

in figure 3d, the functional assay performed on the adenoviral array was compared with the conventional assay using transfection of u- <dig> os cells in a  <dig> well format: the induction of apoptosis on the array was determined by the detection of activated caspase  <dig> as described above, whereas the induction of apoptosis in the 96-well plate was determined by measuring the enzymatic activity of caspase  <dig> using a proluminescent caspase  <dig> substrate , which is adapted to high-throughput cellular assay systems. in this kind of assay, the generated luminescence is proportional to the amount of caspase activity present. for comparison, shrna sequences against two anti-apoptotic kinases, p38alpha and pkn <dig>  as well as an shrna sequence against cdk <dig>  the knock-down of which did not induce apoptosis, were chosen, and the induction of caspase  <dig> activity was depicted. induction of apoptosis after shrna-mediated knock-down of p38alpha and pkn <dig> exceeded the signals of the well-based assay which indicated that the adenoviral chip is a suitable alternative to the well-based assays. no induction of apoptosis was observed with either assay after expression of the vector specific for the knock-down of cdk <dig> 

the signal-to-noise ratios  in fig. 3d were calculated as a ratio of the difference between mean signal and mean background values to the background standard deviation  <cit>  in order to compare the sensitivity of the on-chip assay with the in-well assays. for the experiment performed on the chip, they amount to:  <dig>  ;  <dig>  ;  <dig>  . for the in-well trials, they amount to:  <dig>  ;  <dig>  ;  <dig>  . similar experiments using tunel assay were not performed.

functional assays using primary huvec
the advantage of adenoviral infection lies in the fact that adenoviruses allow the genetic manipulation of cells not amenable to classical transfection protocols, such as many primary cells. to make use of this advantage, we investigated both the efficiency of the knock-down and the employability of a functional assay using primary human umbilical vein endothelial cells . the knock-down efficiency was analyzed by seeding huvec onto a microspot array of immobilized adenovirus encoding rfp as well as shrna directed against lamin a/c . as a control, adenoviruses encoding rfp as well as a control shrna  were likewise printed. a comparative quantitative analysis was conducted as described above, the result of which is presented in a percentile diagram  as well as in a bar chart . compared to the control situation, a significant reduction of fluorescence intensities was observed in cells infected with adenovirus expressing shrna specific for lamin a/c. hence, the overall reduction in lamin a/c expression indicated that adenoviral arrays are also applicable to human primary cells. adenoviral arrays yielded levels of lamin a/c knock-down of 30–40% in huvec cells, which were quantitatively similar to the levels observed in u- <dig> os cells.

next, we asked whether an array of kinase-specific shrna expressing adenoviruses would result in detectable induction of apoptosis in huvec. as shown above for u- <dig> os cells, huvec were exposed to arrayed adenoviral shrna vectors and activated caspase  <dig> was detected by immunofluorescence analysis. figure 4c demonstrates induction of apoptosis in huvec after infection with shrna directed against pbk. here, similar to figure 3b, infected cells were identified using egfp fluorescence , whereas red fluorescence indicated incorporation of cy3-labelled antibodies against cleaved caspase  <dig> . a merger of both micrographs is likewise given , in which yellow indicates a strong activation of programmed cell death. as can be inferred from figure 4d, the maximal induction of apoptosis was approx. 3-fold in comparison to the control vector . the induction factors observed were significantly different when compared to the control situation  and within a similar range as those found after transduction of u- <dig> os cells.

whereas the knock-down of nek <dig> and pbk induced apoptosis in both huvec and u- <dig> os cells, the cells differed in their response to the knock-down viruses against btk, cdk <dig>  p38alpha <dig>  and pkn1: the knock-down of the former resulted in apoptosis in huvec, and the knock-down of the latter evoked apoptosis in u- <dig> os.

in conclusion, we show that adenoviral arrays are suitable to perform functional assays even in primary cells. hence, the adenoviral microarray allows a comparative analysis of kinase functions in different cell types under miniaturized and parallelized conditions.

discussion
multiple rnai platforms are now available for performing large-scale loss of function screens on mammalian cells. viral-based screens have been introduced for their promise in expanding rnai screens to models incompatible with conventional sirna-based approaches.

we present here a microarray suitable for miniaturized and parallelized genetic manipulation and screening of primary human cells. as a vector for gene transfer we have employed adenoviruses. the viral vector system applied needs to include stable viral particles to enable long-term storage and transport. additionally, high-throughput applications for genome-wide screenings require the possibility to produce virus in a small scale, miniaturized format, properties which are adequately met by adenoviral vectors.

in addition to the adenoviral microarray presented here, a similar system was also reported for lentiviral  <cit>  and retroviral  <cit>  shrna expression vectors. adenoviral and lentiviral screening platforms may be advantageous when assays are to be performed in primary, nondividing/differentiated cells or in established cell lines refractory to transfection. the technology of viral immobilization is comparable in all the cases: they rely on the principle of "reverse transduction/infection". the viral stocks are printed manually or automatically on glass slides coated with γ-amino propyl silane in the case of lentiviral microarrays, with a nanostructured titanium dioxide film in the case of retroviral microarrays, or with nitrocellulose for adenoviral microarrays. these printed chips can be stored or used directly. the production of high-titer viral particles in miniaturized 96-well format had earlier been demonstrated for lentiviruses  <cit> , retroviruses  <cit>  and for adenoviruses  <cit> .

the decision as to which technology of viral delivery to employ will be situational as each of these three approaches comes along with distinct advantages and drawbacks. the advantage of the adenoviral microarray system presented in this study is an application of an appropriate blocking solution after printing the adenovirus. this implementation serves to confine cell adherence to the distinct spots containing the genetic information. such confinement resulted in an array of cells, significantly simplifying identification in subsequent analysis. additionally, it results in a reduced number of cells required for screening, which is especially relevant for the screening of primary cells, as the amount of cells available is frequently restricted. whether the blocking step is applicable to the lentiviral microarray or any other viral system remains to be shown. as the viral vector system applied is characterised by highly stable viral particles, storage and transport of ready-to-use arrays is also feasible.

genetic manipulations carried out in a microwell format allow for the well-by-well analysis using biochemical assays, the sensitivity of which needed to be achieved in a microarray configuration by fluorescence imaging. we have hence compared a sensitive well-based assay measuring the induction of apoptosis via enzymatic activity of caspase  <dig> in the lysate with immunodetection of activated caspase  <dig> on the microarray. as judged by the signal-to-noise ratios, the microarray-based assay provided signals at least in the range of the in-well assay. for optimal sensitivity, it should be noted that any assay carried out on a microarray requires discrimination between cells which have taken up shrna constructs and untransduced cells. here we introduced adenoviral vectors which enable the required discriminatory power, provided by a suitable marker incorporated in the vector backbone.

in order to test the feasibility of the adenovirus array technology for unravelling signalling pathways in a model primary cell, we studied the influence of shrna-mediated knock-down of a set of seven protein kinases on the apoptotic process. the applicability of the device for functional assays on primary cells was exemplified using huvec. the comparison of signals obtained infecting huvec or u- <dig> os cells revealed cell-type-specific responses to the knock-down constructs directed against individual kinases. the technology of the adenoviral sirna microarray allowed to quantitatively measure phenotypical differences between these two distinct cell lines and therefore was qualified as a convenient and suitable tool for the cell-based analysis. nevertheless, for more fundamental conclusions of the biological impact of these kinases, a more detailed investigation is needed, e.g. by testing several independent shrna sequences directed against the targets identified to rule out off-target effects.

the kinases analyzed have been chosen from two categories: on one hand, we have selected rather general interplayers, such as pbk and nek <dig>  which have been shown to be important for cell cycle progression, dna damage, and mitotic regulation  <cit> . on the other hand, we have selected more specific interplayers: p38alpha, btk, pkn <dig> and cdk <dig>  <cit> . the knock-down constructs against pbk and nek <dig> drove both huvec and u- <dig> os cells into apoptosis, consistent with their overall importance for cell cycle progression.

a more specific response was observed for p38alpha and pkn <dig> in u- <dig> os cells. these experiments suggest that osteosarcoma cells exhibit a higher sensitivity towards inhibition of kinases involved in the mapk pathway than huvec. on the contrary, the knock-down of the kinases btk and cdk <dig> elicited apoptosis in huvec but not in u- <dig> os cells. as it was reported by cai et al., solely depleting cdk <dig> was not sufficient to induce apoptosis in the osteosarcoma cell line u- <dig> os  <cit> .

the depletion of trka  showed no effect on the induction of apoptosis in either cell type. this kinase depends on a particular surface membrane receptor for signal transmission, which might be absent or inactive in the cells examined  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
in general, the results on apoptosis induction upon knock-down of particular targets using the adenoviral chip correlated with published data  <cit> . additionally, the functional assays performed using this practical microarray technique allowed the preliminary identification of several genes involved in the activation of apoptosis, both in tumor and in primary cells. the easy handling of the adenoviral microarrays, their suitability for immunochemical studies and for other diverse applications, as well as the possibility to acquire reliable results within a short period of time – these are the advantages of the present system. in addition, the suitability of adenoviral microarrays for miniaturized and parallelized screening makes them an attractive tool for a variety of scientific purposes.

