BACKGROUND
leishmania, a protozoan parasite is responsible for causing the infectious disease leishmaniasis. around  <dig> million people are affected by this disease worldwide. the sphingolipid metabolism of vertebrates, fungi and plants has been well documented. sphingolipid metabolism in parasites like leishmania plays an important role in maintaining the infectivity of the parasite. sphingolipids form an integral component of the parasitic membranes  <cit> . they are localized in the membrane micro domains and are involved in a wide array of signal transduction pathways  <cit>  parasites like leishmania scavenge host sphingolipids and remodel them into parasite specific sphingolipids. the key enzymes involved in the sphingolipid metabolism are a) spt  b) spl  and c) ipcs   <cit> .

spt, the first key enzyme in the sphingolipid metabolism localizes into the endoplasmic reticulum and belongs to the class-ii pyridoxal-phosphate-dependent aminotransferase family  <cit> . it comprises of two subunits sptlc <dig> and sptlc <dig> and catalyses the first step of the de novo synthesis of sphingolipids i.e. condensation reaction of serine and palmitoyl-coa to form 3-dehydro d-sphinganine. the second key enzyme, spl belongs to the group ii pyridoxal- dependent decarboxylase family of enzymes  <cit> . it acts on the phosphorylated sphingoid bases  such as sphingosine-1-phosphate and cleaves them into aldehydes and phosphoethanolamine  <cit> . ipcs represents another key enzyme in the sphingolipid metabolism. ipcs is unique to certain fungi, plants and protozoan parasites like leishmania. there is no mammalian equivalent of this enzyme and thereby ipcs has been considered as an attractive drug target in the sphingolipid metabolism of leishmania <cit> . ipcs localizes in the golgi complex and catalyses the reaction involving the conversion of ceramide to inositol phosphoryl ceramide   <cit> . the importance and role of these three target proteins in the sphingolipid metabolism has been shown in figure  <dig> 
leishmania
.

the sphingolipid metabolism of leishmania and many other pathogens is highly conserved and offers a series of attractive drug targets for further inhibitor design. ipcs, spt and spl in leishmania have been identified as important target proteins by biochemical network modeling.  <cit>  we present the phylogenetic relationship among these key enzymes in leishmania to obtain a comparative history of the related proteins. role of selection pressure, assessment of the strength of purifying versus diversifying selection for all the three target proteins has provided an idea of the molecular evolution of target proteins.

methods
acquisition of sequences
amino acid and coding sequences of the three enzymes  in the sphingolipid metabolism were retrieved from ncbi, ensemble and uniprot databases. a total of  <dig> sequences for ipcs and sms,  <dig> sequences of spl and  <dig> sequences for spt were used in this study .

sequence alignment, selective constraints and phylogenetic analysis
the sequences were aligned using clustalw v <dig> . <dig> using the default parameters. larkin et al.  <cit>  phylogenetic tree reconstruction for the sphingolipid metabolism was done using mega  <dig> program by the neighbour-joining method with  <dig> bootstrap resampling’s. saitou and nei  <cit> . the evolutionary distances  were computed using the poisson correction method.

functional divergence
to evaluate the potential functional divergence and to predict the amino acid residues accounting for the functional differences among the three enzymes, type i functional divergence was estimated using diverge  <dig> . gaucher et al.  <cit>  sequences were classified into three different groups  using the p-distance method . for each pairwise comparison, the coefficient of evolutionary functional divergence  and standard error were determined. utilizing the coefficient of evolutionary functional divergence  the sequences were subjected to significant functional divergence and likelihood ratio test . based on the site-specific posterior probabilities, sites experiencing functional divergence in the subgroups were identified  <cit> , <cit> .

sdp  analysis
sdp’s determine the differences in functional specificity within the protein family  <cit> . the input set of sequences was divided into  <dig> groups  containing  <dig>   <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> sequences respectively. sdp’s were predicted by sdpfox and sdppred and the z scores were calculated for each alignment column.

selection pressure assessment of the protein families
the selected clades from functional divergence were submitted as nucleotide alignment in fasta format to the selecton server for analysis of the non-synonymous  versus synonymous substitution  ratio  <cit> . to study the effect of selection pressure on the conservedness of the three proteins, the protein msa was submitted to the consurf server, which classifies the residues based on their conservation in the msa  <cit> .

selection pressure assessment at the codon level
selection pressure on the codon was estimated for the targeted organism leishmania. protozoan coding sequences were obtained from genbank . in order to normalize codon usage within datasets of differing amino acid compositions, relative synonymous codon usage  values were calculated. the reference set consisted of highly expressed genes pertaining to the lipid metabolism as reported by  <cit>  codon adaptation index  was calculated using cai calculator  <dig>  <cit> . other species non-specific indices like enc  and fop  were calculated using dambe software  <cit> ) and codonw respectively  <cit> . gc3s values were calculated using codono webserver  <cit> . coding sequences of elongation factors were retrieved from genedb. a comparison of the cai values of the elongation factors with the cai values of ipcs, spt and spl was made to determine the codon usage bias in each of the three genes.

RESULTS
phylogenetic tree construction for the sphingolipid metabolism
phylogenetic analysis provides a basis for understanding the diversity within the conserved protein families. phylogenetic tree for the sphingolipid metabolism included a total of  <dig> protein sequences belonging to the four protein families. the optimal tree was obtained and the sum of branch length was  <dig>  . the rate of amino acid substitutions per site was  <dig> . from the phylogenetic tree, it was observed that ipcs and spl protein families were phylogenetically distant from spt protein family. ipcs in leishmania showed resemblance to the ipcs protein in plants as compared to other fungal groups.

functional divergence
phylogenetic analysis doesn’t provide much information for genes that have diverged by accumulating only few mutations. for such genes, analysis of the type i functional divergence provides patterns of sequence variations across the gene family. site specific functional divergence of a gene across a set of homologous gene sequences can be analyzed using type-i functional divergence. functional divergence correlates with the kind of selection pressure operating over the protein , defining the extent of amino acid conservation. evolutionary pressures operating over the parasitic proteins vary from one amino acid to another. amino acids that are of functional importance, are evolutionary conserved, on the other hand amino acids experiencing high rates of sequence divergence alter the basic function of a protein. the coefficient of functional divergence for the pap2c  and spl  protein families was much higher than that of spt  protein family . site specific posterior probability analysis indicated that pap2c and spl protein families diverge from the spt family.

specificity determining positions 
gene duplication, deletion events along with the evolutionary selection pressures alter the basic biochemical properties of a protein like ligand binding, protein-protein interactions and the specificity towards the substrate. the amino acid positions which vary only in certain subgroups and alter the specificity of a protein are called the specificity determining positions . alignment positions, accounting for such functional specificity of the three enzymes in l. major were mapped and analyzed for their conservation. a total of  <dig> positions were identified as sdp’s in all the four groups .

selection pressure over the protein families
selection pressure operating over protein families can be estimated using the ratio of non-synonymous substitutions and the synonymous substitutions. the extent of positive selection pressure, determines the relative rate of mutability of any amino acid . purifying selection on the other hand, promotes conservation of the amino acids . sphingolipid metabolism of parasites remains highly conserved among several parasites. as evident from the consurf analysis, most of the amino acids of all the three protein families fall under the effect of purifying selection and are functionally conserved across closely related species . amino acids in the ipcs protein family were less conserved as compared to spl and spt protein families. two sites  in the ipcs protein were under the influence of positive selection . relative mutability of such sites is much higher and hence inhibitor designing against the binding pockets containing these residues should be avoided in order to cut down the probability of developing drug resistance.

studies of synonymous codon usage also reveal information about the molecular evolution of individual genes. a gene can be characterized not only by its amino acid sequence but also by its codon usage shaped up by the balance between mutational bias and natural selection. differences in the codon bias between species arise as a consequence of the selection pressure, which results in the non-uniform usage of synonymous codons within a gene. bias can be either codon specific or gene specific. optimal codons can also be defined by their nucleotide chemistry  and the codon usage bias. genes display a non-random usage of synonymous codons and a measure of this non-randomness is rscu . codons with an rscu value higher than  <dig> are used more frequently than expected, while codons with an rscu value less than  <dig> indicate a lesser preference of the particular codon  <cit> . to understand the codon usage pattern for ipcs, spl and spt protein families, rscu values were calculated and the codon adaptability index  was obtained  <cit> . cai values of ipcs gene were slightly lesser than that of spt or spl. at least one of the codons for each of the three genes had a rscu value greater than  <dig>  we compared the enc values of genes in leishmania with that of other homologues, enc values of leishmania species were lesser than other organisms. this indicates the possibility of selection pressure, guiding the translational selection of optimal codons in leishmania <cit> . a plot of enc vs gc3s indicated that the enc values generally showed negative correlation with the gc content. all the genes tested in leishmania had a higher predominance of g and c ending codons. moreover gc content at the third synonymous position in leishmania species was higher than that of other species. codon usage pattern of all the genes therefore appears to be determined by the gc3s value . higher gc content, lower fop values along with lower enc values suggest that there exists a moderate bias in the usage of synonymous codons in different leishmania species. codon usage bias was much more predominant in the spt and spl genes as compared to ipcs .

rscu  cai – codon adaptability index b) enc – effective number of codons c) gc3s – gc content at third synonymous position d) fop – frequency of optimized codons. a comparison of these indices between leishmania and other homologous species is made. range of indices between homologous species is given in the brackets. ipcs, spt and spl genes of leishmania experience higher codon usage bias as compared to their homologues.

elongation factors show higher expression and stronger codon usage bias. a comparison of the cai values of the various elongation factors of leishmania with the genes coding for our target proteins was done. the cai value of spt gene was comparable with that of cai values of elongation factors. spt gene therefore showed stronger codon usage bias than spl or ipcs . in due consideration of the role of selection pressure deciding the evolvability of target proteins, it can be concluded that the three target proteins were moderately conserved and given their importance in the sphingolipid metabolism, these proteins could serve as good drug targets.

spt gene showed a higher cai value as compared to ipcs and spl genes.

CONCLUSIONS
the key enzymes  of the sphingolipid metabolism of l.major were studied in relation to other members of the same protein family. the present study supports the classification of sphingolipid metabolism with a high bootstrap value on the internal branches. to derive sufficient information about the kind of evolutionary pressure the three enzymes are being subjected to, functional divergence and conservation at the level of both amino acids and codons was studied. functional divergence analysis indicated that pap2c family diverged from spl and spt. amino acids accounting for functional specificity  of the three enzymes in l.major were mapped. along with the functional divergence, the selection pressures over the protein families were assessed. the effect of selection pressure was more predominant at the codon level as indicated by the cub indices. ipcs gene showed a lower codon usage bias as compared to spl and spt genes. at the protein level, the effect of purifying selection was largely predominant and this accounted for the functional conservation of the three drug targets.

abbreviations
er: endoplasmic reticulum; ipcs: inositol phosphoryl ceramide synthase; spl: sphingosine 1-p-lyase; spt1: serine palmitoyl transferase 1; spt2: serine palmitoyl transferase 2; sms: sphingomyelin synthase; nj: neighbour-joining; me: minimum evolution; sdp: specificity determining positions; rscu: relative synonymous codon usage; enc: effective number of codon; fop: frequency of optimized codons; cai: codon adaptation index; cds: coding sequence; msa: multiple sequence alignment; cub: codon usage bias.

competing interests
the authors declare that they have no competing interests.

authors’ contribution
conceived and designed the experiments: shs, sos, vm. sos and vm participated in the acquisition of sequences. sos, vm participated in the phylogenetic tree construction and functional divergence analysis. vm sos contributed in the selection pressure assessment of the protein families. shs vm sos contributed to the data analysis. shs, vm, sos wrote the manuscript. all the authors read and approve the final manuscript.

supplementary material
additional file 1
supplementary file.

click here for file

 acknowledgement
vineetha mandlik acknowledges the financial support as senior research fellow of department of biotechnology, government of india. the work was supported by department of biotechnology, government of india . the authors would also like to thank dr. shekhar c. mande for supporting the bioinformatics and high performance computing facility at national centre for cell science, pune, india.
