BACKGROUND
it is well-established that adenosine is an important physiological regulator for maintaining oxygen homeostasis in the heart . adenosine formation increases when the oxygen requirements of the myocardium exceed the oxygen supply, which leads to an increase in adenosine levels in the tissues . the adenosine released under these conditions is thought to play an important role in reestablishing a balance between oxygen supply and demand  by virtue of its potent vasodilatory  and anti-adrenergic effects .

mounting evidence suggests that adenosine may also have a long-term role to increase tissue oxygenation by stimulating angiogenesis . adenosine can stimulate endothelial proliferation in vitro  as well as angioge nesis in a variety of in vivo models . although the angiogenic effects of adenosine are poorly understood, it is known that adenosine, mediated by way of adenosine a <dig> receptors can upregulate vegf mrna and protein expression in many different cell types . numerous investigators have postulated that this adenosine-mediated expression of vegf might have a role in mediating adenosine-induced angiogenesis ; however, it is still not clear whether adenosine can induce vegf expression in the intact organism.

in this study, we sought to determine whether adenosine can increase circulating vegf protein in humans. the results show that a short-term intravenous infusion of adenosine caused the plasma levels of vegf protein to increase by about threefold at one hour after the infusion

RESULTS
the intravenous infusion of ado  caused the plasma levels of vegf protein to increase  one hour after the infusion . however, the vegf response to ado varied greatly among the subjects ranging from a 21% increase  to a 329% increase , as shown in figure 1b. plasma vegf protein levels averaged  <dig>  ±  <dig>  pg ml- <dig> before the infusion, and increased to an average of  <dig>  ±  <dig>  pg ml- <dig>  one hour after the infusion. vegf protein levels returned to control values by  <dig> h after the ado infusion  and remained at control levels at  <dig> h post- infusion , as shown in figure 1a.

the infusion of ado caused mbp to decrease in most of the subjects , ranging from a  <dig> mmhg decrease in p <dig>  to a  <dig> mmhg decrease in p <dig> . this maximum decrease in mbp occurred after  <dig> minutes of ado infusion in two subjects  and after  <dig> min of infusion in three subjects . note on figure  <dig> that mbp did not decrease below  <dig> mmhg in any of the subjects.

the decrease in mbp was associated with decreases in both systolic  and diastolic  pressures . note also on table  <dig> that adenosine increased heart rate  significantly during the period of infusion. this increase in hr is typically seen in human subjects infused with adenosine and is thought to be a reflex response to the fall in blood pressure.

discussion
the results have shown that adenosine can increase plasma levels of vegf protein in humans. the intravenous infusion of adenosine caused a three-fold increase in plasma vegf protein levels one hour after the infusion . previous studies have shown that exogenous administration of adenosine or adenosine agonists  or upregulation of endogenous adenosine  can enhance vegf protein and/or mrna expression in a variety of cultured cells . however, the present study is the first, to our knowledge, that demonstrates that the infusion of adenosine can increase circulating levels of vegf in vivo.

the known cardiovascular effects of adenosine are mediated by the a <dig> and a <dig>  receptors . responses to activation of the a <dig> receptor include slowing of the heart and slowing of impulse conduction through the atrioventricular node, reduction of atrial contractility, inhibition of beta-adrenergic effects, and vasodilatation . activation of a <dig> receptors causes  vascular smooth muscle relaxation , which can lead to decreases in blood pressure, and  induction of vegf expression from a variety of cell types . recent development of selective agonists and antagonists for a <dig> receptor subtypes suggests that vasodilatation is mediated by a2a  and perhaps a2b receptors . the a2b receptor subtype appears to mediate the induction of vegf protein and mrna in various human cell types. grant et al.  have shown that activation of the adenosine a2b receptor  can increase vegf mrna and protein expression in cultured human retinal endothelial cells. feoktistov et al.  established that adenosine acting by way of the a2b receptor can stimulate vegf expression in human mast cells. these latter investigators  also showed that adenosine can induce vegf expression in human microvascular endothelial cells, where a2b receptors are abundant, but not in human umbilical vein endothelial cells, which preferentially express a2a receptors. therefore, the available data suggest that adenosine induced vasodilatation and vegf expression could be mediated to some extent by similar receptors.

it is not clear from the present study whether the infusion of adenosine actually induced the transcription and translation of vegf ; however, it is known that both vegf mrna and protein can be induced within a one hour period of time. breen et al.  found a fourfold increase in vegf mrna at the termination of a one hour bout of treadmill exercise in rats. gu and adair  showed that exposing dog myocardial vascular smooth muscle cells to a hypoxic environment caused a twofold increase in vegf protein concentration in the media after only one hour of exposure to the hypoxic environment. therefore, it is conceivable that adenosine could induce vegf transcription and translation resulting in elevated plasma levels of vegf at one hour post infusion. however, additional studies will be required to determine whether the increase in circulating vegf caused by adenosine did in fact result from adenosine-induced production of vegf.

a possibility that must be considered is that the transient decrease in blood pressure caused by adenosine leads to transient hypoxia in the tissues, and that the hypoxia, in turn, leads to the induction of vegf expression. hypoxia is a well-known stimulus for the induction of vegf expression both in vitro and in vivo . however, it seems unlikely that this indirect induction of vegf by adenosine could explain entirely the results of the present study for the following reasons:  adenosine can induce vegf mrna and protein expression in vitro where blood pressure is not an issue, as discussed previously;  adenosine increased the plasma levels of vegf in two patients in whom the blood pressure had decreased by less than  <dig> mmhg, a decrease that should not cause significant perfusion problems or hypoxia in the tissues;  mean blood pressure did not fall below  <dig> mmhg in any of the subjects; and  none of the subjects experienced symptoms suggestive of cerebral hypoxia during the infusion of adenosine. all subjects were supine during the infusion of adenosine to minimize potential perfusion problems. furthermore, adenosine induced vasodilatation would be expected to improve the distribution of oxygen within a tissue, also arguing against tissue hypoxia. therefore, it is unlikely that the adenosine induced decrease in blood pressure contributed significantly to the rise in vegf.

CONCLUSIONS
in conclusion, this study provides preliminary data showing that an intravenous infusion of adenosine can increase plasma levels of vegf in humans. additional studies will be required to determine whether the increase in plasma vegf caused by adenosine results from the transcription and translation of vegf.

