BACKGROUND
around  <dig> million years ago, a tanning response evolved in our hominid ancestors in which the accumulation of melanin granules in skin cells provided physical protection against the dna-damaging effects of sunlight  <cit> . today the tanning response is exploited by millions of people each year for cosmetic reasons. because of the increased risks for melanoma and squamous cell carcinoma following overexposure to sunlight  <cit> , the molecular biology of the tanning response has been given substantial biomedical attention over the last decades from dermatologists and oncologists , as well as from those seeking ways to achieve tanning independent of sunlight  <cit> .

the biomedical importance of the tanning response, and the potential benefits associated with being able to induce the response in safe ways, call for the establishment of deep knowledge of the underlying regulatory anatomy. however, despite some promising progress in recent years our understanding of the tanning response as a complex process in a system dynamics context is still rather moderate.

it is a common experience that the regulatory anatomy of complex biological systems involving several actors and intricate feedback relationships can be very hard to understand in qualitative as well as quantitative terms without guidance from a mathematical conceptualization of the dynamics. many conceive that mathematical models are of no use until enough data are available so that they can be made very detailed. however, the heuristic importance of simple models should not be underestimated, as they serve as very efficient interfaces between various disciplines and help us to assess whether our current conceptions of mechanisms, processes and interactions do really lead to the dynamic behaviours we observe.

here we provide a simple first-generation mathematical model describing the dynamics of melanin content in epidermal layers when the skin is exposed to uv radiation. the main rationale for this effort is to provide a theoretical foundation of appropriate resolution to guide the establishment of a theoretical-experimental research programme aimed at resolving key issues concerning the regulatory anatomy of the tanning response. a conceptual model outlining the major premises underlying the mathematical model is given in figure  <dig>  and in the remaining part of this section we provide a biological backdrop and the basic premises underlying our current mathematical conceptualization of the tanning phenomenon.

the tanning response
the tanning response is the additional production and distribution of melanin, exceeding the constitutive level, following uv stimulation. the uv signal is transduced from the primary recipient to the melanocyte, where the photoprotective pigment melanin is produced and distributed. in addition to the optical shielding effects, melanin and its precursors and intermediates act as free-radical scavengers as well as signalling molecules  <cit> . the tanning response thus encompasses uv sensing, signal transduction, melanogenesis, melanosome mobilization and transfer to keratinocytes as well as the further distribution through the epidermis via keratinocyte migration.

photobiology of the uv radiation
uv radiation is electromagnetic radiation with wavelengths just below visual light . the biologically most relevant wavelength segments are uva  and uvb . uvb represents the most bio-reactive part of the spectrum both as inducer of erythema and tanning. our current conception is that uv radiation causes basal cell skin cancers, such as basal cell carcinoma and malignant melanoma, through its mutagenic effect on basal layer cells. melanin has a remarkable capacity to absorb uv radiation and to reflect it at the shortest wavelengths   <cit> .

signal transduction
uv radiation is the major inducer of the tanning response. even though the identities of the primary uv-responsive agents are unknown, both keratinocytes and melanocytes produce various substances that enhance melanogenesis upon uv stimulation  <cit> . these comprise the elements controlling the activity of the hypothalamus-pituitary-adrenal axis which are expressed in the skin, including corticotropin releasing hormone , urocortin, and pomc, with its products acth, β- and γ-lph, clip, α- and β-msh, and β-endorphin  <cit> . the skin is therefore conceived to possess a complete stress handling system of which the tanning response is an important part  <cit> . the hormone αmsh and its receptor mc1r are important mediators of uv induced tanning  <cit> . it has recently been proposed that the increased pomc transcription in keratinocytes following uv exposure is p <dig> dependent  <cit> . even though the pomc derivatives do not seem to be crucial in constitutive melanin production in mouse  <cit> , genetic variants of their receptor, mc1r, are deemed to be the main determinant of constitutive melanin levels, and also of the tanning ability in humans  <cit> . this enigmatic situation substantiates the challenges involved in understanding the intercellular signalling network of the skin.

melanogenesis
melanogenesis, which occurs within discrete cytoplasmic organelles of the melanocyte called melanosomes, is a process where the amino acid tyrosine is converted into melanin pigment. tyrosinase is regarded as the rate-limiting enzyme in this process. the transcriptional regulation and the posttranslational activation of tyrosinase are the key regulation points for the melanogenesis. microphthalmia-associated transcription factor  is a central protein in the transcriptional regulation of tyrosinase and thereby melanogenesis, as demonstrated by its role in waardenburg syndrome type  <dig> and tietz syndrome  <cit> . the architecture of the mitf promoter region suggests that several transcription factors  are involved in melanogenesis and the tanning response  <cit> . lef1/tcf and creb are responsible for the immensity of mitf promoter responsiveness to uv radiation via mc1r/camp/pka and the wnt/β-catenin pathways  <cit> . mitf is therefore proposed to act as a self-regulating switchboard for diverse pathways originating in the cell membrane or the intracellular environment and regulating the activity of the melanogenic apparatus  <cit> . other transcription factors can also activate melanin production, like the ubiquitous basic helix-loop-helix-leucine zipper transcription factor usf <dig>  which is reported to be essential for the tanning response, and indeed mitf and usf <dig> share binding site specificity  <cit> .

both p <dig>  erk1/ <dig> and other map kinases are involved in mitf signalling and regulation  <cit> . the map kinase pathway is in turn activated by several ligands such as kitlg, fgf <dig> and egf. the mapk pathway may also activate creb via rsk <dig>  illustrating the complexity of the structure in these networks. the key second messenger camp appears to be another point of cross talk between the αmsh-mc1r pathway and the map kinase pathway  <cit> . see  <cit>  for comprehensive reviews of the molecular biology of melanogenesis.

the melanin is delivered to nearby keratinocytes through dendrites
an additional effect of uv irradiation and the subsequent release of crh, the pomc derivatives and even endothelins and nitric oxide is stimulation of melanocyte dendrite growth and melanosome delivery to keratinocytes  <cit> . each melanocyte attached to the epidermal basement membrane exports mature melanosomes to nearby keratinocytes through its dendrites. the uptake of melanosomes by the keratinocytes is an active process involving regulatory processes in the dendrites as well as in the keratinocytes  <cit> .

further distribution through keratinocyte movement
95% of the cells in the epidermis are keratinocytes and a fraction of the keratinocytes in the basal layer is "stem" keratinocytes which produce new keratinocytes continuously through cell division. from being attached to the epidermal basement membrane initially, these "non-stem" keratinocytes move progressively toward the skin surface. in a cross section of the epidermis the keratinocytes form four distinguishable layers named stratum basale, stratum spinosum, stratum granulosum and stratum corneum  <cit> . the thicknesses of the viable parts of the epidermis  and of stratum corneum vary between individuals and are correlated with a number of factors like age, body site, gender, uv-exposure, smoking habit, and physical tire  <cit> .

mathematical modelling of pigment distribution and production
the model aims to translate the available empirical knowledge into a dynamic model of pigment production and distribution in order to establish a theoretical foundation enabling a deeper and more quantitative understanding of the highly interesting and important tanning phenomenon. the model is described in detail in the methods section, but here we state its most important premises. the model is designed to describe the dynamics associated with what is called a melanin unit, which consists of one melanocyte and the keratinocytes with which it maintains functional contact. in one melanin unit there are around  <dig> keratinocytes distributed between the three viable layers  <cit> .

the model describes the melanin content mj in layer j, j ∈ {c, g, s, b} , the signal substance concentration s and the dendrite length relative to the length from mid-melanocyte to stratum corneum, x. in the constitutive condition, i.e. in the absence of uv radiation, the melanin produced in the melanocyte is assumed delivered only to the basal layer. the melanin is then distributed outwards by the continuous movement of keratinocytes towards the skin surface. the constitutive level of melanin production and delivery is in equilibrium with the melanin degradation and the loss of melanin through keratinocytes shed from the skin surface. exposure to uv radiation triggers signal substance production, which, in turn, leads to enhanced melanogenic activity. due to the resolution level of our model, the complex signal processing is condensed into one signal concentration value s, which alters the ratio of the number of ligand bound receptors to the total number of receptors on the melanocyte membrane. while this is a severe simplification of a complex phenomenon, we are still able to capture the systemic behaviour on the current level of resolution. dendrite growth and melanin production are both assumed to depend on this ratio. consistent with how biological compounds are normally degraded and in accordance with common modelling practice, degradation of melanin and signal substance are assumed to be linear.

the dendritic growth following uv exposure may show a quite complex geometry, and in the model this growth process has been very much simplified. to derive the functions which describe how melanin is distributed into the epidermal layers, we assume a uniform growth process and that all keratinocytes that can be reached from one melanocyte with a dendrite of a given length will receive the same amount of melanin.

the available data
even though a considerable amount of empirical data has been used as a basis for model construction, the amount of available relevant validation data is very modest. to the best of our knowledge, there is currently only one experimental study reported where human skin exposed to uv-exposure is subsequently biopsied to analyse the melanin content in the different epidermal layers  <cit> . in this work, tadokoro et al. exposed nine individuals to a single  <dig> minimal erythema dose  of uva/uvb radiation. biopsies were taken before and seven days after the exposure. using the fontana-masson method, they established the melanin content in the basal, spinosum and granulosum layers of epidermis on these two time points. these data points are reported as single measurements, i.e. no standard error or standard deviation are given. the amount of melanin is given in a not scaled unit and with no measurement of volume. the thicknesses of the different epidermal layers are varying a great deal and it is therefore difficult to establish good concentration measures from these data.

RESULTS
reproduction of empirical data
the model was parameterized to fit available data on the distribution of melanin in the different epidermal layers and how different skin types respond to uv radiation. consistent with tadokoro et al.'s  <cit>  experiments, the model was exposed to a uv pulse. the eight free parameters of the model were optimized to fit nine different data sets representing nine different individuals . for six of the individuals , the model successfully describes the observed melanin distributions and can be calibrated to mimic individual differences . the model is not able to describe data corresponding to the three remaining individuals . results for these individuals are therefore not shown in the table or the figure.

the goodness-of-fit /mdata) <dig>  where mdata and mmodel are the measured data and model prediction, respectively, for each individual whose data can be successfully described by the model in the three epidermal layers at times t =  <dig> d and t =  <dig> d.

dendricity
after the uv pulse, the dendrites first grow and then retract . the dendrite extension into the layers of epidermis differs substantially between individuals both in length and duration. individuals s <dig>  s <dig> and s <dig> are described by the model with intermediate dendrite lengths lasting longer than the one week simulation time, while s <dig>  s <dig> and s <dig> exhibit longer dendrites over a shorter period of time.

identifiability
the primary object of the model fitting process is to demonstrate that the model is capable of describing the melanin dynamics in the individuals that constitute our dataset. however, in this context it is important to consider to which degree the actual parameters can be uniquely determined. such determination may be prevented by the structure of the model equations as such  or, more generally, because the model structure and/or the scarcity or poor quality of the data make it impossible to obtain reliable parameter estimates   <cit> . we examined the practical identifiability of the model by assessing parameter determinability in the six individuals which the model could explain. using the criterion that a parameter is determinable if the absolute value of its cross-correlation with all other parameters is below  <dig> , none of the individuals showed determinability in all parameters and no parameter was determinable in all individuals . in fact, in individual s <dig>  not a single parameter was deemed to be determinable .

the checked parameters are determinable for the given individuals using the requirement for determinability given in inequality .

sensitivity analysis
a sensitivity analysis of the model was performed in order to identify the robustness to variation in each parameter. the sensitivity was assayed by perturbing one parameter value at a time and then computing the goodness of fit for the resulting parameter set relative to the goodness-of-fit of the optimized parameter set as a function of degree of perturbation . generally, we observe that the model fit is substantially more sensitive to variation in the parameters fmin, γs, ωg, ωb than in the parameters find, α, γs, a . in addition, for each of the six individual cases we tested to what degree a modest simultaneous random perturbation of all parameters worsened the fit to the empirical data . this exercise reveals that in some individuals  the fit is substantially worsened with a relatively slight perturbation of the parameter values. these are the same individuals that have a very sharply defined optimum . in comparison, for individuals that have a widely defined optimum , the goodness-of-fit is almost not affected by the small random perturbation .

discussion
due to the paucity of relevant experimental data the model is intentionally very simple. despite this it is capable of making quite strong predictions concerning the relationship between observed temporal development of melanin production and distribution following uv-exposure and the thicknesses of the epidermal layers as well as the degree of dendricity.

the resolution level of the model is a trade-off between the benefits and disadvantages of simple models compared to complex models containing a large amount of molecular detail. in this work we do not explicitly model different signal substances, different receptors , different second messengers and all the actors in the different pathways leading to melanogenesis and dendrification as well as the biochemical regulatory effects of melanin. this does not mean that the model is in conflict with the available information concerning these processes. given more spatiotemporal experimental data on the tanning response as suggested by the current work, we think the stage will be set for the making of more high-resolution models.

in the six individuals which the model successfully describes, the model fails to achieve parameter determinability due to the wide range of parameter values that are able to provide a fit to data that is almost as good as the best . to overcome the poor parameter determinability more data points are needed, given that the model is structurally identifiable. ideally, future experiments should be designed through collaboration between theoreticians and experimentalists, e.g. by following the rules of identifiability analysis  <cit>  to ensure that modellers have maximal use of the data by optimizing the reliability of parameter estimates.

tadokoro et al.  <cit>  provide measurements of three additional individuals for which the model is not capable of achieving consistency with the empirical data. the reason for this is that the melanin levels in the granulosum or spinosum layers in these three individuals are lower  <dig> days after than before uv-exposure, and the model does not include mechanisms that can produce such behaviour. a possible explanation can be that the uv-exposure causes alteration of the thicknesses of the epidermal layers. a thinner spinosum or granulosum  <dig> days after uv radiation can, even with a higher relative melanin density, result in a decrease in measured melanin levels with the methods applied by tadokoro et al.  <cit> . it should be stressed that such a mechanism can easily be implemented so that the model can account for all  <dig> individuals, but no insight is gained by this exercise before more empirical data become available. in fact, the above discrepancy between model results and empirical data clearly documents the need for including specific measurements of the thickness of epidermal layers in experimental set ups like that of tadokoro et al.  <cit> .

the model does not take into account the possibility that dna damage due to uv-exposure causes the production of signals stimulating melanogenesis long after the cessation of uv-exposure . neither does it take into account that the thickness of stratum corneum may change with uv-exposure  <cit>  and that this may influence the uv absorbance  <cit> . since, so far, the data on how dna damage might enhance and prolong signal substance production is so scarce, we find it premature to include this effect in our model. moreover, the time window of uv radiation in the experiments used to validate our model is probably not long enough for the thickening of stratum corneum to take place and give an effect. thus, we do not have data to assess whether or not the uv-induced thickening of stratum corneum plays an important role in the tanning process. this does not mean that the above phenomena are not interesting, but that, in the lack of quantitative data, not much would be gained by including them in the model.

CONCLUSIONS
we have translated the available knowledge of the constitutive melanin production and distribution as well as the tanning process in human skin into a differential equations model. the model provides a first generation theoretical framework for a quantitative understanding of the factors underlying observed phenotypic variation in skin colour and tanning ability. in six out of nine individuals for which empirical data exist, the model describes the tanning dynamics and identifies the thickness of the epidermal layers and the degree of dendrification as potentially important sources of variation. the model fails to describe the tanning dynamics in the last three individuals, but by doing so it identifies which data are needed for making an empirically validated improvement of the model to also handle these cases.

