BACKGROUND
the aps is a multi-system autoimmune disease characterised by vascular thrombosis and/or recurrent pregnancy loss in patients who test positive for either apl or lupus anticoagulant  <cit> . aps carries a significant burden of morbidity and mortality  <cit>  with long-term anticoagulation being the only treatment with any proven benefit in reducing recurrent thrombosis  <cit> . since anticoagulation carries an inherent risk of bleeding it is desirable to develop alternative treatments that target apl directly. patients with aps generally have high levels of serum igg apl. monoclonal and polyclonal igg apl have been shown to be pathogenic and promote thrombosis in vivo  <cit> . apl from patients with thrombosis only bind phospholipids  in the presence of protein co-factors, of which β2gpi has been studied the most extensively. understanding how these pathogenic apl interact with β2gpi at the molecular level could ultimately facilitate the development of targeted therapies.

β2gpi contains five homologous domains  <cit>  and anchors to pl via domain v  <cit> . using domain deletion studies, in which β2gpi was produced with one or more domains deleted, it was shown that the amino terminal domain  is particularly important for apl binding, suggesting that crucial apl binding epitopes are contained within this domain  <cit> . a compound based on di is currently being studied for possible use as a toleragen to treat aps patients by inducing anergy in b lymphocytes that produce apl  <cit> . clearly an efficient method of di production could enhance the scope for investigating the antigenic role of di and facilitate epitope mapping studies. an expression system in e. coli could offer such a tool. furthermore if di is ultimately used therapeutically, prokaryotic expression lends itself to large-scale cost-efficient production.

e. coli is the most frequently used prokaryotic expression system for production of heterologous proteins due to its efficiency, cost-effectiveness and potential for high-level production  <cit> . however, various properties of different genes, their transcribed mrnas and protein products may preclude efficient eukaryotic protein expression in bacteria. current expression methods for di use baculovirus containing a cloned cdna sequence of the di gene to infect spodoptera frigiperda insect cells  <cit> . this method of expression is relatively expensive, laborious and less amenable to being scaled-up in comparison to prokaryotic expression systems. other than the formation of two disulphide bonds, no other post-translational modifications such as glycosylation are necessary for biologically active di expression. hence an established e. coli expression system could hold several significant advantages over the currently available system of production.

there are no published reports of di expression in e. coli. previous attempts to achieve this may have been unsuccessful for a number of reasons. we hypothesise that these reasons are related to e. coli codon bias against eukaryotic codons, potential toxicity of di to e. coli and the relative difficulty of disulphide bond formation in the reducing environment of bacterial cytoplasm. in this paper we have addressed these problems and now report the first system for expressing di in e. coli. we have demonstrated the binding properties of the expressed protein to murine monoclonal anti-antibodies that recognise conformational epitopes on the surface of di, to pathogenic human monoclonal igg apl and to polyclonal igg derived from aps patients.

RESULTS
pan gene codon optimisation and tight regulation of expression are critical in ensuring efficient production of di by e. coli
a synthetic gene encoding for di was designed by the juniper programme. six  <dig> mer overlapping oligonucleotide primers covering the length of di were specifically designed by juniper to minimise non-specific annealing. these primers were used in one-step recursive pcr  <cit>  to create a di gene . importantly, juniper incorporates codons used preferentially by e. coli, as the native cdna sequence of di contains an abundance of codons used rarely by e. coli  <cit> . of the  <dig> codons present in the native di gene,  <dig>  are used by e. coli at a frequency of less than 1%. these rare codons are present in clusters of between two to five codons in length. hence one may expect translational problems in e. coli with an abundant mrna species containing an excess of rare low trna codons  <cit> . even a single rare codon can have a deleterious effect on heterologous protein expression  <cit> . the establishment of other eukaryotic protein expression systems in e. coli, utilising the same codon optimisation principles, has been described elsewhere  <cit> , but few, to our knowledge, have targeted all codons amenable to e. coli optimisation as we have done. it is planned for this software  to be freely available over the internet in the near future and enquiries about this should be addressed to the authors of this paper. the proposed website is cited in the reference list.

the eukaryotic protein di is toxic to e. coli. even small amounts of di basal production resulted in cell death necessitating tight regulation of expression using the t7lac promoter  <cit>  and the addition of 1% glucose to the expression cultures  <cit> . when the cell cultures were induced with  <dig> mm or  <dig>  mm isopropylβ-d-thiogalactoside , marked inhibition of cell growth occurred. however, inducing with  <dig>  mm iptg resulted in approximately 80% increase in od <dig> values, suggesting that e. coli can only sustain a certain level of di production, above which marked toxicity and cell death occurs. the incorporated pelb leader sequence directed the expressed target protein into the bacterial periplasmic compartment facilitating the formation of disulphide bond formation and hence correct folding of di. western blot analysis of periplasmic fractions from cell cultures induced with no iptg,  <dig>  mm iptg,  <dig>  mm iptg and  <dig> mm iptg indicate that most expression of target protein is seen with cell cultures induced with  <dig>  mm iptg, with some leakage of di into the culture supernatant . furthermore, no target protein is seen in the uninduced control confirming the tight regulation of basal expression that this system provides. we suggest that e. coli may be able to sustain a critical level of di production with gentle induction at low iptg concentrations, above which intolerable amounts of rapid di production result in marked e. coli toxicity, leading to overall reduced yield of target protein.

in order to assess the contribution of using optimal codons preferred by e. coli, we compared expression of the synthetic bacterial gene with expression of human cdna encoding di. this human di cdna, cloned into a bacpak plasmid, bd biosciences  was donated as kind gift from m iverson and m linnik . the human di sequence was amplified using pcr with primers designed to incorporate flanking ncoi and xhoi restriction sites, which were used for ligation into pet-26b. parallel expression cultures of both constructs  were performed. equal amounts of periplasmic protein extracts from both cultures were transferred onto a membrane. western blot analyses by probing with an anti-his <dig> antibody confirmed significantly greater target protein production using the synthetic gene .

recombinant periplasmic his-tagged di is conformationally correct and may be purified using nickel chromatography
the presence of hexahistidine -tagged di within periplasmic samples was confirmed by performing western blot experiments probing the membrane with mab- <dig> and 6c4c <dig> murine anti-di antibodies  and an anti-his <dig> antibody . the murine anti-di antibodies, produced by immunizing mice with recombinant di, recognize conformational epitopes of di  <cit> . these antibodies have been shown previously to bind non-reduced di on a western blot but not to di where the cysteine residues have been blocked to prevent disulphide bond formation. the fact that these antibodies bind expressed non-reduced di on both western blot  and direct immunoassay  suggests strongly that our periplasmic product is folded correctly.

di was purified using nickel chromatography utilising the incorporated c-terminal his6-tag and eluted with  <dig> mm imidazole. purity of the eluted di protein was assessed using 15% sds-page after extensive dialysis against phosphate buffered saline -10% glycerol, in order to remove the imidazole . yields of expressed soluble di approximated to  <dig> μg/l expression culture, as assessed using the bca protein assay.

human igg apl binds to expressed di
is <dig> is a monoclonal apl with proven in vivo thrombogenic pathogenicity derived from a patient with aps  <cit> . our group have made two variants of this monoclonal apl, swapping the light chain  with that of an anti-dna antibody b <dig> and another monoclonal apl uk- <dig>  we have previously shown that the three expressed heavy/light chain combinations is4vh/is4vl, is4vh/b3vl and is4vh/uk-4vl possess different abilities to bind cardiolipin and β2gpi  <cit> . we have established that replacing the vl of is <dig> with that of b <dig>  increases binding to cardiolipin and β2gpi whereas is4vh/uk-4vl binds very poorly to either antigen  <cit> . these three heavy/light combinations show similar order of binding to di in direct enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay  as was previously seen in anti-cardiolipin and anti-β2gpi elisa   <cit> . however, it was noted that though is4vh/uk-4vl bound di to a lesser degree than the other antibodies studied , the degree of binding to di of this antibody was much greater than that observed to β2gpi  or cardiolipin  <cit> . these results suggest the presence of crucial antibody binding epitopes that become exposed on the surface of di when it is not attached to the rest of the β2gpi molecule. this notion is underlined by the inhibition assay , which demonstrates that expressed di inhibits binding of affinity purified native is <dig> to di more strongly than equivalent μmol concentrations of whole β2gpi. this data confirms the antigenicity of recombinant di expressed by e. coli in both solid and fluid phase assays.

antigenicity studies of recombinant di produced by e. coli were expanded to test binding to a series of affinity purified polyclonal igg samples derived from patients with aps.  <dig> serum samples known to bind cardiolipin and β2gpi from patients with aps were identified. the igg fraction was affinity purified using protein g coated beads and tested for binding to recombinant di coated on a nickel plate. we also tested purified igg derived from two sets of control subjects. there were nine healthy controls and  <dig> subjects with systemic lupus erythematosus  who did not have aps. sle was chosen as a disease control because it is a closely related autoimmune disease and sle and aps can co-exist in the same patient. figure  <dig> shows that binding of polyclonal igg from patients with aps was significantly greater than binding to polyclonal igg from either control group.

clearly recombinant di expressed by e. coli binds igg from patients with aps. the fact that di binds is <dig> better than whole β2gpi in the fluid phase implies that recombinant di may be used as a competitive inhibitor of the pathogenic apl/β2gpi interaction and thus act as a potential therapeutic agent. the ability to produce such an agent by expression in e. coli would be advantageous. given that di is produced in bacteria however sufficient measures should be undertaken to ensure expressed samples are free from lipopolysaccharide.

CONCLUSIONS
we have shown that, by using a stepwise strategy to address specific problems relating to codon optimisation, periplasmic protein translocation and tight regulation of expression, efficient bacterial expression of di of human β2gpi is possible. recombinant di was conformationally correct and bound human monoclonal apl in both solid and fluid phase assays. di also bound a series of igg samples derived from patients with aps. this is the first description of di production using an e. coli expression system. ease and efficiency of expression will be utilised to study different epitopes on di and investigate the binding of variants of di to polyclonal igg affinity purified apl derived from patients with aps. furthermore if di or a peptide derived from di is eventually used in the therapeutic setting  <cit>  an e. coli system of production would be likely to facilitate production and cost.

finally, we submit that the simple design and production of a synthetic gene globally optimised for expression in e. coli using juniper and one-step recursive pcr, as illustrated in this paper, is an important technique that can be applied to other eukaryotic proteins, particularly if the cdna sequences of these genes have clusters of codons used infrequently by e. coli.

