BACKGROUND
deoxyribonucleotides, the building blocks of dna, are synthesised from their rna counterparts, ribonucleotides, by reduction of the 2' hydroxyl group in a radical-based reaction catalysed by ribonucleotide reductases . the reaction is the sole de novo pathway for synthesis of deoxyribonucleotides, and was likely pivotal to the transition from rna- to dna-based genomes  <cit> . rnr is thus essential for cellular life, as evident from the observation that all studied organisms code for at least one rnr   <cit> . all extant rnrs are evolutionarily related, as evidenced by structural conservation of the catalytic core  <cit> .

rnrs have been grouped into three broad classes based on the mechanism of radical generation, which is essential for the reaction. class i rnrs generate a tyrosyl radical in a separate subunit , from where it is transferred to the catalytic subunit  with each catalytic turnover. in the radical-generating subunit, the radical originates at an iron-oxygen centre, meaning class i rnrs are operational only under aerobic conditions. class iii rnrs also carry a stable radical, generated by an activase , using s-adenosylmethionine  as cofactor. radical generation requires cofactor cleavage whereupon the radical is transferred to the catalytic subunit , and stored as a stable glycyl radical. exposure to oxygen cleaves the enzyme at the glycyl radical; class iii rnrs are hence operational under strictly anaerobic conditions  <cit> . class ii rnrs can be either monomers or dimers of nrdj. radical generation is via cleavage of deoxyadenosylcobalamin . no stable protein-based radical is formed, so radical generation and transfer to the active site occurs with each turnover. class ii rnrs operate independent of oxygen presence or absence, but the requirement for adocbl means they are cobalt-dependent. see table  <dig> for a comparison of rnr classes and  <cit>  for reviews of rnr biochemistry, genetics and protein structure.

*class i is traditionally subdivided into ia  and ib  respectively. class ib lacks activity regulation, and ib operons contain two ib-specific genes, a flavodoxin  and a reductant .

genome analyses indicate that all three rnr classes are found across all three domains of life, but only a small minority of genomes carry genes for all three classes  <cit> . while all three rnr classes are widespread among bacteria, available genome data from archaea and eukaryotes reveal a patchy distribution. class i rnrs are rare among archaea, but are present in all sequenced eukaryotic genomes . classes ii and iii on the other hand, are common across archaeal genomes, with only a handful identified in eukaryote genomes. furthermore, organisms encoding more than one class as well as more than one set of genes for a single class, are common  <cit> . while some cases of within-class rnr specialisation in dna repair have been well studied  <cit> , and a class i rnr subunit in mammals is under dna damage control  <cit> , the reaction biochemistries also dictate the existence of clear operational constraints between the classes.

given the clear antiquity of ribonucleotide reduction, and the broad distribution of the three classes of ribonucleotide reductase, we sought to address whether this distribution is the result of ancient paralogy - possibly predating the last universal common ancestor  - followed by differential loss among lineages, or whether the current distribution is instead the result of horizontal gene transfer . under the latter model, receipt of additional rnr classes may extend the environmental conditions under which the recipient organism can sustain dna replication .

to test these two hypotheses, we constructed phylogenetic trees using protein sequences from  <dig> archaea,  <dig> bacteria,  <dig> eukaryotes and  <dig> viruses from all three classes of rnr. the resulting phylogenies are not exempt from the many problems that complicate phylogenetic estimation from ancient sequences , but, when combined with additional genetic evidence, nevertheless recover sufficient information to distinguish between the two hypotheses.

RESULTS
assessing rnr phylogenies for vertical versus horizontal transmission
to examine whether the evolutionary history of rnr genes reflects ancient paralogy with vertical descent or hgt, we performed phylogenetic analyses class by class . figure  <dig> shows preliminary bionj trees for the class i catalytic  and radical-generating  subunits , the class ii  and class iii catalytic subunits  respectively. the evolutionary distances spanned by known rnr distribution patterns are great, and we therefore expected to see poor resolution for the large number of sequences included in each tree. for ancient paralogy to apply, the three domains  should be phylogenetically distinct - failure to see this pattern might either indicate insufficient phylogenetic signal across a given dataset, or that the data are better accounted for by horizontal transmission.

bionj trees of rnr subunits  do not appear consistent with ancient paralogy under any plausible evolutionary model of the relationships between the three domains. a general pattern likely to be consistent with hgt is that major bacterial groups are divided across several disparate parts of the trees. for the pattern we observe to be the result of ancient paralogy followed by differential losses, a high number of rnrs would have had to have been present in the common ancestor of the various bacterial phyla. further circumstantial evidence for the mobility of rnr genes is that rnrs are frequently encoded by hgt vectors such as plasmids, viruses, phage, and prophage .

*there are several other examples of plasmid encoded class i rnr operons in yersinia spp.

in order to investigate whether the distribution of rnrs across the three domains can be explained by hgt, we performed detailed investigations of a number of potential cases of interdomain hgt apparent from these preliminary analyses.

evidence for hgt of class i rnr from bacteria to archaea
from our preliminary analysis of class i catalytic and radical-generating subunits  it was evident that the archaeal class i sequences form two well-separated groups  interspersed within bacterial homologues . this is surprising given that all eight archaeal class i rnrs in rnrdb are from the halobacteriaceae . this pattern may therefore be indicative of one or more hgt events. to investigate this further, we generated maximum likelihood trees from the two clusters encompassing these archaeal sequences . the resultant trees from both subunits , pseudorooted using the global topologies in figure  <dig> , confirm this initial result, suggesting that at least one set of class i rnr genes were horizontally transferred after the diversification of the halobacteriaceae. additional evidence supporting transfer comes from an examination of the order of nrda and nrdb genes in class i rnr operons: gene order is opposite in the two groups of archaeal sequences. the specific gene order is in both cases shared with bacterial nearest neighbours as identified from the trees in figure  <dig> . we also note that the small, radical-generating subunit  in the group including halobacterium sp. carries a substitution of the radical-bearing tyrosine to a phenylalanine . this variant is functional, as recently demonstrated for the class i rnr from chlamydia trachomatis  <cit> .

*rows 1-3: archaeal class i rnrs transferred from halophilic bacteria, together with class i rnrs from the salt-tolerant bacterium salinibacter ruber and a halophage . rows 6-10: archaeal class i rnrs that are similar to the sequences from the bacterium chlamydia trachomatis .

several additional lines of evidence support two independent hgt events from bacteria to halobacteriales. the group containing sequences from halomicrobium mukohataei, halorubrum lacusprofundi and natronomonas pharaonis clusters with halophage aaj- <dig> and the halophilic bacterium salinibacter ruber  <dig>  <cit> , with strong support in trees from both subunits . in addition to s. ruber, the nearest neighbours include other halophilic bacteria  but also the vertebrate pathogen dichelobacter nodosus vcs1703a  <cit> , the thermophilic thermus aquaticus and t. thermophilus  and the marine bacterium polaribacter irgensii  <cit> . phylogenetic proximity to halophilic bacteria adds credibility to transfer from bacteria to archaea since these species can plausibly come into contact in a hypersaline environment.

closer examination of the data indicates several sequences are associated with vectors that could have facilitated transfer. in addition to halophage aaj- <dig> , the class i rnr genes in n. pharaonis and in t. thermophilus are both encoded on plasmids  <cit>  , likewise providing a possible vector for hgt. interestingly, the class i genes in halorubrum lacusprofundi are encoded on the second, smaller chromosome, whereas the class ii rnr genes are encoded on the large chromosome . we can thus overall conclude that the group of archaeal class i rnr sequences from halorubrum lacusprofundi, n. pharaonis and halomicrobium mukohataei are likely the result of hgt from bacteria, most probably in a shared hypersaline environment.

the other group of halophilic archaeal class i rnrs  - containing sequences from halobacterium sp., halogeometricum borinquense, halorhabdus utahensis and natrialba magadi - shows weaker positional support, but the combination of phylogenetic position, operon architecture  and a variant phenylalanine in the small subunit   nevertheless indicates clear support for this group being distinct. while no vectors can be implicated as agents of transfer, and no sequences deriving from halophilic bacteria are immediate phylogenetic neighbours, to attribute the pattern we observe to vertical inheritance would require massive loss of class i rnr genes across archaea. this, and the fact that the nrdb genes carry an atypical substitution of the radical harbouring tyrosine to a non-radical harbouring phenylalanine, shared with chlamydiae spp. and other bacteria that are relatively close to this group of archaeal sequences in our trees , suggests a second independent transfer of class i rnr genes from bacteria to archaea. these results are also consistent with other observations indicating extensive gene transfer events from bacteria into halophilic archaea  <cit> . in conclusion, the ancestor of extant archaea did not possess a class i rnr, and this class cannot be traced back to luca. instead, it seems most likely that class i rnr evolved in bacteria.

the leca possessed a class i rnr of bacterial origin
given the relatively recent bacterial origins established for archaeal class i rnrs, class i presence in eukaryotes cannot be explained by vertical inheritance from the common ancestor of eukaryotes and archaea. we have found class i rnrs in all completely sequenced eukaryote genomes we have knowledge of   <cit> , which currently span five eukaryote supergroups. this suggests that the last eukaryotic common ancestor  may have possessed a class i rnr. in support of this, in trees derived from both class i subunits eukaryotic sequences form a clan, consistent with a single origin  subunit trees). furthermore, phylogenies from both subunits  are broadly consistent across eukaryotes, and trees are likewise broadly congruent with expectations from single gene trees spanning eukaryotes. while there are unexpected positions for some groups, especially in the small subunit nrdb tree , these largely relate to the relationships between eukaryotic supergroups; lack of resolution of the deepest branches of eukaryotes in our trees is hardly surprising given current difficulties in establishing a definitive eukaryote phylogeny from much larger datasets  <cit> . however, we do not observe any topologies that would strongly indicate horizontal gene transfer among eukaryotes, and we therefore tentatively conclude that leca encoded a class i rnr.

it has previously been suggested that eukaryotic class i rnrs may have been transferred from mitochondria  <cit> , and class i trees  are consistent with a bacterial origin for eukaryotic class i rnr genes. a plausible sister group to eukaryotes, consisting mainly of actinobacterial sequences, can be identified in trees from both subunits . however, our trees do not provide sufficient resolution to establish a specific bacterial donor group. moreover, there is no evidence that eukaryote class i rnrs are of alphaproteobacterial origin, which would be expected if the genes were a result of hgt from the protomitochondrial genome  <cit> . it thus seems likely that class i rnr entered the eukaryote lineage via hgt from a bacterium other than the protomitochondrion. however, with ongoing transfer of ribonucleotide reductases clearly occurring among bacteria, it is equally possible that any signal relating to the ultimate bacterial source has been erased by subsequent transfers; reliable detection of the originating lineage supposes that descendants of the donor have not themselves been subject to homologous gene displacement events.

hgt of class i rnr from eukaryotes back into bacteria
both nrda and nrdb trees  also provide clear evidence for hgt of class i rnr in the opposite direction, from eukaryotes to bacteria. in both cases, there is strong phylogenetic support for the genes of the recipient bacterial group, predominantly composed of marine bacteroidetes spp., being derived from within eukaryotes . while it is not possible to identify the exact partners associated with transfer, the known biology of members of the recipient group and their nearest eukaryote neighbours indicate a mechanistically and ecologically plausible scenario for association and transfer. several species in the recipient group have a documented association with eukaryotes. for instance, algoriphagus sp. is known to form colonies with the choanoflagellate proterospongia sp. , psychroflexus torquis was isolated from a sea-ice algal assemblage  <cit>  and tenacibaculum med <dig> is a nitrogen-fixing bacterium associated with diatoms  <cit> . flavobacterium johnsoniae uw <dig> is of particular interest since it encodes two class i operons; as seen in the nrda trees, one is placed near the archaeal sequences in the tree , while the other groups with eukaryotes . the nearest eukaryote neighbours in both nrda and nrdb trees  include oomycetes  and naegleria gruberi . based on these characteristics, phagotrophy could plausibly have facilitated transfer, but would require prey bacteria to be resistant to digestion. while our analysis is unable to identify the specific eukaryote host-bacterium interaction responsible for the pattern we observe in the data, the observation that flavobacterium spp. and amoebophilus asiactus  are digestion-resistant following engulfment by acanthamoeba  <cit>  is consistent with transfer by this route. it will therefore be interesting to establish whether gene transfer from host to resident bacteria - the opposite of the 'you are what you eat' ratchet  <cit>  - is a significant pathway for gene acquisition.

eukaryotic class iii rnrs and their activases are probably fused and have been transferred from bacteria
class iii rnrs are common among both bacteria and archaea  <cit> . our overview tree in figure 1d , shows that archaeal and bacterial sequences are not intermixed, possibly indicating presence of class iii rnr in the luca.

to date, only eight class iii rnrs have been identified in eukaryote genomes  <cit> , spanning fungi , and stramenopiles . this might be due to limited sequencing of eukaryote genomes, or an indicator of hgt from either bacteria or archaea. phylogenetic trees generated from nrdd sequences reveal that the eukaryote sequences form a well-supported clan , falling well within the bacteria, suggesting a single transfer into eukaryotes from a bacterial source . for class iii rnr to have been present in the luca would require, under the three domains scenario, that class iii was present in the ancestor of archaea and eukaryotes and subsequently replaced in the lineage leading to leca by hgt from a bacterial source. further supporting a bacterial origin for eukaryotic class iii rnrs, we note that the handful of archaeal sequences in the subtree shown in figure  <dig> are best accounted for by independent hgt events from bacteria, not vertical descent from the archaeal-eukaryote common ancestor.

remarkably, closer inspection of the eukaryote class iii operons reveals that, at the sequence level, nrdd and nrdg subunits are coded by a single open reading frame in all cases except in s. japonicus where there are two nrdd genes, one fused as per all other eukaryotes, and one singleton nrdd. hgt of fused proteins has been reported previously  <cit> , and the putative nrddg fusion raises the possibility that subunit fusion facilitates successful fixation of transferred prokaryotic operons in eukaryotes by permitting expression of distal genes in operons for which eukaryotic promoter sequences and translation initiation sites will be unavailable.

the existence of a eukaryotic nrddg clan also suggests a single bacterial to eukaryote transfer with subsequent spread among eukaryotes. this is supported by the distribution of eukaryote nrddg in two ways. first, this gene fusion is only sporadically present among fungi, being restricted to two genera. notably, within the schizosaccharomyces genus, only s. japonicus carries an nrddg homologue - neither s. pombe nor s. octosporus genomes carry detectable homologues. second, the only identifiable homologues outside fungi are in oomycetes . this is of particular interest in that oomycetes have a fungal-like lifestyle, but are constituents of the supergroup chromalveolata, so are evolutionarily distant from fungi . phylogenomic evidence suggests that the fungal-like lifestyle may in part be the result of extensive transfer of genes to oomycetes from fungi  <cit> . taken together, these observations suggest that class iii rnrs have been transferred from a bacterial donor to eukaryotes, with subsequent transfer between fungi and oomycetes.

hgt of class ii rnr from bacteria to eukaryotes, and intradomain hgt among eukaryotes
the archaeal class ii rnr sequences are all in the same part of our phylogenies  although with several interspersed bacterial sequences. the topology is thus consistent with presence of a class ii rnr in luca followed by a few hgt events between archaea and bacteria. however, certain bacterial groups - firmicutes  and alphaproteobacteria  in particular - are dispersed across the tree in a way that is hard to reconcile with a solely vertical pattern of descent.

similar to class iii, class ii rnrs are only sparsely distributed across sequenced eukaryotic genomes, though this distribution spans four eukaryote supergroups: amoebozoa , excavata , opisthokonta  and chromalveolata . such a broad distribution could indicate a deep eukaryotic ancestry for class ii rnr. notably, the class ii rnr in euglena gracilis has previously been suggested as a possible ancestral eukaryotic rnr  <cit> . if correct, this would suggest that a class ii rnr was present in the leca. if this was inherited vertically from the ancestor of archaea and eukaryotes, then the archaeal class ii proteins should be closely related to the eukaryotic class ii proteins. alternatively, the sparse presence of class ii rnrs among eukaryotes sequenced to date may be the result of hgt from bacteria. to test between these two possibilities, we generated phylogenies from nrdj sequences . figure 1c shows, with strong support, that the eukaryotic class ii rnrs can be divided into two phylogenetically distinct groups, consistent with at least one hgt event. one group  is clearly derived from bacteria via hgt - all sequences in this group, except m. brevicollis, form a clan  - together with the epsilonproteobacterium nitratiruptor sp.  - this clan is sister to a group containing the class ii rnr from lactobacillus leichmannii . the structure of l. leichmannii class ii rnr reveals it is a monomer  <cit> , in contrast to the catalytic components of all other characterised rnrs, where the catalytic component forms a dimer  <cit> . at the dimer interface, effectors controlling the substrate specificity of the enzyme bind  <cit> , but the monomeric l. leichmannii class ii rnr instead contains a domain that mimics the dimer interface  <cit> . our phylogeny is in broad agreement with previous studies where monomeric and dimeric sequences form separate groups  <cit> . an alignment of eukaryotic nrdj sequences together with the sequences for the two structurally solved nrdjs , and a handful of other putatively monomeric and dimeric nrdj sequences, indicates that all eukaryotic nrdj sequences, bar that from t. vaginalis, have the insert particular to monomeric nrdjs .

the class ii rnr from m. brevicollis also appears monomeric , but does not belong to the same clan as the other monomeric eukaryotic sequences, suggesting this sequence may be the result of a second independent transfer. branch lengths in the monomeric part of the tree are long however and the m. brevicollis sequence is extensively diverged from its nearest neighbours . this can lead to artefacts in phylogenetic reconstruction, especially long-branch attraction  <cit> . we performed successive removal of groups of sequences to analyse effects on topology, but failed to detect any artefact . we therefore conclude that the presence of monomeric class ii rnrs in eukaryotes is due to hgt from bacteria on at least one occasion. establishing whether monomeric class ii rnrs in eukaryotes originate from two independent transfer events must await the identification of additional eukaryote class ii sequences.

while the monomeric class ii rnrs in eukaryotes have entered this domain via hgt, what can be said of the evolutionary history of the t. vaginalis class ii rnr? as all archaeal proteins are dimeric and group within a distinct clade , one possibility is that the t. vaginalis sequence has been inherited vertically from the archaeal/eukaryal ancestor. the tree indicates t. vaginalis is close to archaeal sequences , but two complicating factors are evident. first, the branch leading to t. vaginalis is extremely long, and, second, the clan to which t. vaginalis is basal consists of archaea interspersed with bacteria , so there is no direct relationship with archaea as predicted under vertical inheritance. the extensive sequence divergence between t. vaginalis and archaeal class ii sequences, plus the fact that no other dimeric class ii sequences are known from eukaryotes, makes it difficult to conclude on current data whether the t. vaginalis class ii sequence in our tree  has a horizontal or vertical evolutionary history.

evaluating phylogenetic evidence for rnr gene mobility
a phylogenetic approach to identification of hgt can effectively identify transfer events between distantly related organisms since species incongruence is readily recognisable. we have identified a number of interdomain transfers on this basis, but establishing a direct donor-recipient relationship is often difficult because of limited sequence sampling, and conclusions can only be drawn from the resulting phylogenies. following an interdomain transfer, spread of a gene via subsequent intradomain transfer is most readily identified when the later transfers are between distantly related species. however, phylogenetic signal may not in itself be sufficient to establish a transfer event since artefacts may also give a misleading signal . it has also been pointed out that the identification of putative transfer events is greatly strengthened by ecological plausibility  <cit> , which in simple terms means that the candidate organisms should at least have overlapping environmental ranges, thus enabling interaction. in the preceding sections, we attempted to address ecological plausibility despite uncertainty regarding identification of donor and recipient. to address rnr mobility in more general terms, we therefore sought independent evidence for ongoing rnr gene mobility.

rnrdb contains a large number of rnr genes encoded in viral genomes  <cit> , and, using the database, we identified several cases of plasmid and prophage encoded rnrs among bacteria . these constitute evidence for association of rnr genes with mobile vectors, and integrated plasmid and phage provide direct evidence for transfer, thus contributing to the view that rnr genes are horizontally mobile. this type of genetic signature readily identifies recipients, and demonstrates transfer events, but in most cases it is not possible to identify donors. one interesting case where a probable donor-recipient relationship emerges is for the class i rnr genes among a group of aquatic vertebrate viruses . these are not closely related to eukaryote class i rnr sequences. in both nrda and b subunit trees  these viral sequences are nearest neighbours to francisella tularensis, a bacterial species that includes both mammalian and fish pathogens  <cit> . further evidence consistent with a direct relationship is that both the francisella and the viral sequences share unusual features: in all these sequences, the predicted nrda lacks the n-terminal atp-cone and the nrdb appears to be a translational fusion with glutaredoxin as it carries a glutaredoxin-like cxxc sequence in its n-terminal region. however, while the nrdab genes form an operon in francisella, they are separated in the viral genomes. the latter pattern suggests either independent transfers of each gene, or subsequent viral genome rearrangement. our interpretation of these data is that these aquatic vertebrate viruses likely picked up class i rnr genes from francisella, possibly during a double viral/bacterial infection in an aquatic vertebrate.

discussion
ribonucleotide reductases and the nature of luca and of leca
ribonucleotide reduction is the sole pathway for de novo deoxyribonucleotide synthesis, and evolution of this reaction is thought to have played a crucial role in the transition from rna to dna as genetic material  <cit> . given such antiquity, it is perhaps unexpected that there are three major classes of rnr, each with distinct mechanisms for radical generation  <cit> . it is now clear that the catalytic core of the three classes shares a common ancestry  <cit> , illustrating that ribonucleotide reduction evolved only once. the work we present here illustrates that phylogenies cannot be reliably used to settle the debate concerning the relationship of these three contemporary classes to the ancestral rnr  <cit> , because the emerging pattern is one of extensive interdomain transfer. it is significant that there are numerous bacterial lineages which carry all three classes, and this is likewise true for two eukaryotes and one archaeon. the results presented here demonstrate that this pattern cannot be attributed to vertical descent from some totipotent luca, and instead illustrate that the patterns we see can be attributed to the disconnect between the evolutionary history of reproduction and gene mobility. current data do not obviously favour a class i rnr encoded by luca. this interpretation is consistent with speculation that this class evolved from class ii , following the rise of atmospheric oxygen  <cit> . while we favour this interpretation, we note that cryptic ancient losses can never be ruled out , and an early origin of class i is in fact plausible under the 'respiration early' hypothesis  <cit> , and given plausibility of abiotic oxygen generation in the early oceans  <cit> . having said that, both class ii and class iii phylogenies are arguably more readily reconciled with presence in luca, though the general pattern of frequent intradomain and occasional interdomain horizontal transfers is such that, on these data, it is not possible to definitively establish whether luca was dna-based  <cit> .

while caution is warranted in speculating on the deep antiquity of ribonucleotide reductases, there is perhaps cause for cautious optimism with regards to establishing the ancestral state for ribonucleotide reduction in leca however. our results suggest that leca probably possessed a class i rnr, but, having said that, there is also evidence that this is ultimately bacterial in origin, deriving from an ancient hgt event pre-dating leca. current data precludes the presence of class i rnrs in the common ancestor of eukaryotes and archaea on account of there being good evidence that those instances of class i rnrs in archaea are independent transfers from bacteria. extrapolating from the operational constraints of class i enzymes, the implication is that leca was at minimum aerotolerant and could divide in the presence of intracellular oxygen, consistent with the placement of sterol biosynthesis  in leca  <cit> . that known eukaryote class iii genes have clearly entered this domain via hgt from bacteria rules out a strictly anaerobic rnr in the eukaryote ancestor. having said that, our analysis of class ii enzymes cannot formally exclude the possibility that leca possessed a class ii enzyme. however, the data in support of this possibility are restricted to the dimeric class ii rnr from trichomonas vaginalis. no eukaryotes are known to synthesise adocbl, and b12-utilisation across eukaryotes appears limited  <cit> . on the basis of these observations, support for a class ii rnr ancestral to leca is currently weak. this creates an interesting dilemma: all cellular lineages require at least one rnr ; the class i rnrs may be traceable to leca, but are ultimately bacterial in origin, and the dimeric class ii rnr in t. vaginalis may yet turn out to be the result of a transfer event. if true, this would indicate that any evidence for the nature of ribonucleotide reduction in the eukaryote stem lineage  has been erased by hgt.

more generally, our results are compatible with a bacterial origin of eukaryotic aerobic respiration, but the class i phylogeny does not enable us to establish that the source is mitochondrial, as previously suggested  <cit> . while it is tempting to try and establish the specific donor, the mobility of rnr genes may well have long since erased any trace of a mitochondrial origin since detection of such a signal is reliant on there being no hgt of alphaproteobacterial class i rnrs subsequent to this event. two processes are expected to contribute to erasure of a signal for the direct donor for ancient transfer events. the first is transfer of the gene of a closest bacterial relative to the ancestor into another lineage. the second is displacement of the original sequence via loss or gene displacement in the direct ancestor. while it is still formally possible that the class i rnr entered eukaryotes via the mitochondrion, the fact that we see numerous transfer events into eukaryotes suggests a more complex picture, such as that proposed by lester et al.  <cit> , where genes of bacterial origin in the eukaryote lineage have been transferred from multiple bacterial sources.

an ecological view of rnr gene transfer
with evidence for a vertical trace being limited in the case of rnrs, it seems highly likely that transfer of this essential function is facilitated by the varying operational constraints of each class. one might rather trivially account for ongoing transfer by alluding to the distinct operational constraints, and it likewise seems possible that cases where all three classes are present in the same genome may be indicative of lineages capable of undergoing reproduction in diverse environmental conditions. however, in contrast to some cases of one-off ancient gene transfer , the data we present hints at an ongoing process of transfer and loss. in particular, rnrdb reveals numerous instances of paralogy as well as cases where only a single subunit is apparently present in a genome. this makes sense in that, under conditions wherein one rnr gene set is expressed, another may not contribute to deoxyribonucleotide synthesis. for instance, under environmental conditions where class i rnr is required, expression of class iii may well be superfluous . consequently, under environmental conditions where one is essential the other may be lost through mutation, leading to a corresponding reduction in environmental range. our prediction is therefore that horizontally transferred rnrs have a facultative symbiotic relationship with the vertically-inherited genetic cohort; at least one rnr is essential, but individual sets of rnr genes risk being lost. rather than viewing gene transfer solely in terms of receipt of beneficial genes by the recipient, it would therefore seem reasonable to consider the ecology of rnr genes also. there is no benefit to gene loss for the individual gene, and as a consequence, those rnrs carried by vectors have the greatest chance of persisting and spreading under the threat of continual loss. such a view may also help explain apparent redundancy across genomes . under ongoing transfer, such redundancy may simply indicate the lag between integration and loss of one set of homologues. an examination of rnrdb reveals that this is relatively common. in some cases there may well be a functional rationale for such redundancy , but in the absence of direct evidence for subfunctionalisation and selection on subclass paralogues, the null hypothesis should be that this represents functional redundancy.

the best indication that all three classes may be under selection in some lineages comes from pseudomonas aeruginosa, which encodes all three rnr classes  <cit> . all three classes are expressed in p. aeruginosa, though at very different levels, and there are indications for different roles of class i and class ii during different cell cycle phases. during aerobic exponential growth, the level of class i transcripts greatly exceeds that of class ii rnr. when entering stationary phase this pattern is reversed as class i transcription decreases and class ii transcription increases  <cit> . a possible explanation for this is that the oxygen independence of class ii could be an advantage during fluctuating or diminishing oxygen levels, a circumstance that is arguably more likely during stationary phase than during the rapid growth experienced when available nutrients allow exponential growth. the high expression levels of class i rnr during exponential growth suggest that class i rnr is more effective than class ii in the presence of oxygen. such an interpretation is in line with expectations of lower requirements for deoxyribonucleotides for repair purposes during stationary phase. another possibility, suggested by torrents et al.  <cit> , is that p. aeruginosa experiences a reduced oxygen transfer rate during stationary phase, and this could reduce cellular oxygen concentrations to a level suboptimal for class i rnr function. in summary, although the precise biology is not yet known, the presence of all three rnr classes in p. aeruginosa, phytophthora , the archaeon halorhabdus utahensis, and diverse bacteria  <cit>  hints at a possible selective advantage for organisms that encode a range of rnrs. equally, these observations could be an artefact of genome sequences as snapshots - we note that, in contrast to other phytophthora genomes, the recently published genome of phytophthora infestans  <cit>  does not carry genes for class iii rnrs. we therefore caution against extrapolating lifestyle effects or possible selective explanations from rnr gene repertoire alone.

gene duplication, followed by specialisation via subfunctionalisation is considered an important evolutionary route to genetic novelty  <cit> . however hgt also creates a situation similar to paralogy by the presence of multiple copies. while a paralogous pair of genes created by gene duplication are initially identical, this is not necessarily so for xenologues created by hgt. hgt may therefore play an important role in organismal or lineage survival since it is a means by which 'ecoparalogues'  <cit>  may be acquired by an organism.

CONCLUSIONS
while ribonucleotide reduction is clearly an ancient process, pivotal to the origin of dna, we find no definitive phylogenetic support for class ii and class iii rnrs being present in luca. our data indicate class i originated in the bacteria, having spread to eukaryotes and archaea via horizontal gene transfer. the timing of the origin of ribonucleotide reduction therefore remains uncertain. we have however found evidence of both intra- and interdomain transfer of rnr genes and conclude that ribonucleotide reduction, the essential function encoded by these genes, is a mobile trait owing to the differing operational constraints that enzymes from the three classes display. we predict that organismal range will to some extent be dependent upon which classes are present in the genome of the organism, and that these are maintained through ongoing gene transfer.

