BACKGROUND
the rhodophyta, or red algae of hawaii represent one of the best studied red algal floras worldwide from a morphological perspective  <cit> , making it an ideal flora for molecular characterization. endemism estimates for the marine  and freshwater  algal floras of the islands are based on species lists from compiled traditional taxonomic surveys, and the potential for unrecognized genetic diversity is high  <cit> . it is almost certain that these estimates will change as molecular techniques are applied on a more routine basis to the hawaiian flora and in other areas of the tropical pacific. until this survey, only a small proportion of the published studies of hawaiian rhodophyta employed molecular approaches, although those few resulted in substantial taxonomic revision to the hawaiian representatives of the genera akalaphycus, galaxaura, ganonema and liagora  <cit> . additionally, a new red algal order  was described from hawaiian material as a result of molecular phylogenetic analyses  <cit> .

there has also been a bias toward the study of large, conspicuous members of the hawaiian seaweed flora  <cit> . the red algae, however, display a vast array of morphologies and reproductive strategies  <cit> , and the breadth of this diversity is often overlooked in general survey efforts. it is certain that more concentrated study of the less conspicuous turf and crustose morphologies, as well as the epiphytic and parasitic representatives, will yield unrecognized diversity  <cit> . indeed, examination of a number of red algal taxa using molecular techniques has revealed cryptic diversity that was previously unrecognized based on morphology and anatomy, e.g.  <cit> .

red algal systematics and taxonomy are fraught with a number of issues, often making identification difficult. since the end of the 19th century, the classification of red algae has been largely based on female reproductive anatomy and post-fertilization events  <cit> . later additions to the suite of taxonomic characters included the ultrastructure of pit connections between cells  <cit>  and the use of dna sequence data  <cit> . current red algal systematics usually employs a blend of biological, morphological and evolutionary species concepts, depending on the subgroup under study. for example, although the ability to interbreed and produce fertile offspring is not usually explicitly tested in phycological studies, some researchers have shown the biological species concept to be applicable  <cit> . morphology continues to play a key role in red algal systematics, although these data are now typically viewed in an evolutionary context, and the inclusion of molecular data has become commonplace in the last two decades.

the traditional system of relying exclusively on reproductive characters for taxonomic purposes has several disadvantages. these characters can be evaluated only for those taxa that undergo sexual reproduction, which may be encountered rarely in some taxa. furthermore, a number of red algae from hawaii are believed to be strictly asexual, including the genera stylonema, chroodactylon, erythrocladia, erythrotrichia, compsopogon and hildenbrandia  <cit> . for others, only asexual stages have been found in hawaii, even though they are known to be sexually reproductive in other geographical regions . some taxa are also highly seasonal in their timing of reproduction, meaning that collections must be made in a narrow window of the year to observe the necessary characters . still other taxa rarely undergo sexual reproduction, with no apparent seasonal pattern .

heteromorphic taxa  present another challenge for red algal systematics and, in hawaii, include members of the bangiales, batrachospermales, bonnemaisoniales, gigartinales and some members of the nemaliales  <cit> . until recently, researchers have relied on culturing methods to link heteromorphic counterparts of the same taxon, and this approach has had profound impacts on the taxonomy of red algae  <cit> . a number of taxa in the hawaiian islands are known for which these two phases are spatially separated and morphologically distinguishable, and collecting often results in the recovery of only one of these phases. often the gametophyte is the more conspicuous of the two generations, as an upright phase, while the tetrasporophyte is an overlooked filamentous or crustose stage  <cit> . in cases like these, dna sequences associated with each morphological specimen can reveal molecular identity of morphologically distinct life history stages.

biodiversity research is based on the ability to apply taxonomic names to collections. this is often not simple for the red algae, for reasons described above. dna barcoding is a more recent development in biodiversity studies that has the potential to allow greater discrimination among cryptic species than traditional taxonomic methods. dna barcodes are short, species-specific dna sequences from one or more genetic loci, allowing for differentiation of individuals at the species level  <cit> . the purpose of a dna barcode is to assign unknown individuals to species and to enhance the discovery of new species  <cit> , both of which are fundamental aims of this project. one of the major components of the present study is the acquisition and analysis of short dna marker sequences from the nuclear , plastidial  and mitochondrial  genomes of hawaiian red algae to assess intraspecific variation and to provide a dna sequence framework for the hawaiian rhodophyta.

the hawaiian rhodophyta biodiversity survey  was undertaken to document and archive the marine, freshwater and terrestrial red algae of the hawaiian islands with an unprecedented depth of analysis and coverage by vouchering morphological samples and total genomic dna extracts and undertaking an assessment of dna sequence diversity for as many samples as possible. compilations of freely available taxonomic data sets such as this fulfil the mandate of the "biodiversity commons"  <cit> . resulting archived collections are invaluable for studies into the phylogenetic relationships among taxa, species-level descriptions of the flora, preliminary population genetic analyses, and biogeographic studies within the hawaiian islands and among other tropical pacific island systems.

the hawaiian archipelago extends in a northwesterly direction for almost  <dig>  km, includes a series of small islands, atolls and seamounts  <cit> , and is well known as a center of endemism and biological uniqueness  <cit> . in  <dig> the northwestern hawaiian islands were declared the papahanaumokuakea national marine monument, and this large portion of the archipelago is understudied for most algae. an imminent need exists to document the biodiversity of this unique island chain in the face of threats from ongoing alien and/or invasive species, algal blooms, climate change and corresponding sea-level rise  <cit> . characterizing native biodiversity provides essential baseline data for future detection of algal introductions, and for monitoring changes in assemblages at particular sites. to this end, we undertook a series of collecting expeditions and analyses to document the hawaiian red algal diversity, and here present a summary of our findings.

RESULTS
diversity of sampling locations
a total of  <dig> sites were sampled in the hawaiian rhodophyta biodiversity project;  <dig> from the main hawaiian islands  and  <dig> from the northwestern hawaiian islands  . the vast majority of the collecting sites were marine or brackish , while a much smaller number of freshwater  and terrestrial  locations were also included. marine and brackish water sites were typically located in the intertidal and shallow subtidal areas, although some collections from scuba depth  were also included. hawaii undersea research laboratory  submersible collections  were labelled according to dive and container data and provided representation from hawaiian deep water habitats, but are not included in the above site totals since they are not accompanied by gps data.

seventeen sites yielded large numbers  of accessions , including two from the island of hawaii, three from kauai, three from maui, one from molokai and eight from oahu . although the high number of accessions from these sites is partly based on accessibility , they are still highly diverse locations that, in most cases, were surveyed multiple times because of their impressive numbers of taxa.

summary of rhodophyta collections
the vast majority of accessions analyzed were from marine and brackish locations , while  <dig> were from freshwater habitats and two were from terrestrial locations. a total of  <dig> orders,  <dig> families,  <dig> genera and  <dig> species/subspecific taxa of red algae are represented in the collections . additional file  <dig> presents a checklist of taxa collected, identified and analyzed as part of the biodiversity survey, including new island and state records.

new records reported here do not include most of the coralline red algae , which are being studied in detail by other researchers. in our new records, we included specimens from the bernice p. bishop museum  that were not reported in abbott's  <dig>  <cit>  assessment of distributional records, and also compared our distributional data to publications since this treatise and to those not covered therein. included are those for freshwater red algae  <cit> , descriptions of more recently recognized species of marine algae  and reports of previously unrecognized taxa .

one new order of red algae  was recorded from our survey collections, although a number of additional new ordinal names are applied compared to those listed in abbott  <cit>  due to nomenclatural revision and inclusion of previously unreported taxa . the family rhodachlyaceae is reported for the first time, as are the genera chroothece, madagascaria, pseudobangia and rhodachlya. species designations for most of these newly reported genera are still being assessed, but it is likely that many of them represent undescribed species. many new island distributional records  were determined from the survey collections .

abbott  <cit>  listed  <dig> species of marine red algae in the hawaiian islands, of which  <dig> were also identified from our biodiversity survey collections. the remaining  <dig> taxa, which included large numbers of species in the genera colaconema, ceramium/gayliella, herposiphonia and polysiphonia/neosiphonia, were not identified during our survey; however, these are primarily diminutive taxa that require a great deal of specialized morphological expertise for identification, and were not surveyed as readily as the more conspicuous macrophyte taxa. it is also possible that some of these taxa are not permanent members of the hawaiian red algal flora since attempts to collect from reported localities have not yielded examples of these taxa.

summary of dna sequence data
a total of  <dig>  sequences were generated for hawaiian red algae through this study -  <dig> for the nuclear lsu marker ,  <dig> for the plastidial upa marker , and  <dig> for the mitochondrial coi marker  . the lsu and upa markers amplified and sequenced across the red algae with the greatest ease, as illustrated by the total number of sequences obtained. however, the resolution of the three markers was quite different, with the coi marker being the least conserved , the lsu marker being relatively divergent at higher taxonomic levels but conserved for closely related species, and the upa marker being approximately twice as conserved as coi, but with a similar topological pattern .

dna sequence diversity of hawaiian rhodophyta
sequence data for each of the three markers sequenced  were employed to investigate the molecular diversity of hawaiian red algae. sequence diversity for each sampled taxon for the three markers is presented as a series of neighbor-joining  trees in figures  <dig>   <dig>   <dig>   <dig>   <dig>   <dig>   <dig>   <dig>   <dig>   <dig>   <dig>   <dig>   <dig>   <dig>   <dig>   <dig>   <dig>   <dig>   <dig>   <dig>   <dig>   <dig>   <dig>   <dig>   <dig>   <dig>   <dig>   <dig>   <dig>   <dig>   <dig>   <dig>   <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> . taxa are grouped by order , or by family  in the case of the ceramiales . since only short molecular markers were used , we did not attempt to reconstruct phylogenetic relationships among our collections for the individual marker data sets, nor assess branch support, but instead focused on patterns of diversity for species and groups of closely related species . thus, higher order relationships in the nj sequence diversity trees should not be evaluated.

some trends of marker utility are evident. overall, a pattern of #lsu sequences > #upa sequences > #coi sequences was observed in a number of instances, including for the acrosymphytales, gigartinales, nemastomatales, peyssonneliales, plocamiales and pihiellales , the gelidiales, gracilariales and halymeniales , and many of the ceramiales . in contrast to this, the large number of coi sequences for the bonnemaisoniales  relative to lsu  and upa  is due to targeting of the coi region for a mtdna-based phylogeographic study  <cit> . overall, amplification and sequencing success was much higher for the lsu and upa markers than for the coi marker, based on the laboratory protocols employed in this study.

a number of taxa were represented by multiple clusters of sequences according to one or more of the markers, including hydrolithon reinboldii  , grateloupia filicina  , dichotomaria marginata  , champia parvula  , spyridia filamentosa  , martensia flabelliformis and m. fragilis  , laurencia crustiformans and l. mcdermidiae  , and amansia glomerata  . these clusters may be due to cryptic or incipient speciation, or phylogeographic structure, and these taxa should be investigated through detailed anatomical and morphological comparison of specimens  as well as increased sampling for molecular analyses, in order to clarify which of these processes accounts for the diversity observed in the nj trees.

other taxa were identified that will require taxonomic attention to reconcile patterns of molecular diversity with currently applied taxonomic names. for example, the genera ahnfeltiopsis  , peyssonnelia   and gelidium   all have clusters of sequences for at least one marker with multiple species names applied. along these same lines, some pairs of taxa were shown to possibly be conspecific according to all three molecular markers employed here .

phylogenetic analysis of concatenated upa, lsu and coi sequences
although sequences for each of the three markers are short in length, when concatenated they yield  <dig>  bp of data  that can be used for phylogenetic analyses. a raxml maximum likelihood analysis of sequence data for all accessions for which sequences of all three markers were available  yielded a phylogenetic tree  that generally resembled current understanding of florideophyte red algal evolutionary relationships; however, bootstrap support was generally present only at and below the level of family. of the  <dig> red algal orders included in the analysis, nine were supported as monophyletic, five were represented by only a single accession and thus did not have an associated bootstrap value, and three were not supported as monophyletic  . a total of  <dig> families were represented in the analysis, with  <dig> supported as monophyletic, nine represented by only a single accession, and four not supported as monophyletic , phyllophoraceae, and dumontiaceae) .

phylogeographic analyses of widespread taxa
although our collecting strategy was to analyze approximately three specimens per taxon, several common taxa  were represented in the survey collections by numerous sequences for the mitochondrial coi marker , asparagopsis taxiformis , dasya iridescens  and dichotomaria marginata ). preliminary sequence analyses suggested that intraspecific variation was present for each of these, and thus they were employed as phylogeographic examples to explore whether general patterns are discernable for members of the hawaiian red algal flora .

amansia glomerata
a. glomerata is widely distributed throughout the hawaiian archipelago  <cit> . statistical parsimony analysis yielded three distinct networks; one containing nwhi samples , and two containing mhi samples .

asparagopsis taxiformis
this species is sought after as a food source in the hawaiian culture  <cit> . statistical parsimony analysis of coi sequences for this taxon yielded two networks formed at the 95% connection limit; one that contains three samples from the south shore of the island of oahu , belonging to lineage  <dig> , and the remainder forming a large network that is broadly divided into lineage  <dig>  and lineage  <dig>  .

dasya iridescens
a single network was formed by statistical parsimony analysis containing both mhi and nwhi samples . the nwhi samples were closely related to one another and separated from mhi samples. additionally, greater nucleotide diversity was present for mhi samples, especially those from the island of oahu.

dichotomaria marginata
two networks were formed by statistical parsimony analysis, both of which contained only mhi samples . samples from the island of molokai formed two distinct haplotypes in the most populated network, while samples from the other islands  were represented in the most geographically diverse haplotypes .

in contrast to these findings, a number of taxa were analyzed for which multiple sequences were obtained , but with little or no sequence diversity across the sampled range  . these species - acanthophora pacifica, coelothrix irregularis, haliptilon subulatum, laurencia majuscula, lithophyllum insipidum, polysiphonia howei and tolypiocladia glomerulata - are all presumed to be native to the hawaiian islands  <cit>  and represent three different orders of red algae . these examples demonstrate that not all widespread hawaiian red algal taxa have high intraspecific divergence, and hence lend further support to asparagopsis taxiformis, amansia glomerata and dichotomaria marginata consisting of species complexes in the hawaiian islands.

*divergences reported as sequence identity 

discussion
the hawaiian rhodophyta biodiversity survey yielded only a few new taxonomic records for the hawaiian islands, but many new distributional records. the flora has been remarkably well-studied from a morphological and anatomical perspective, most notably by abbott  <cit> , and many of her designations are supported by our molecular investigations. however, many taxa have also been revealed to be in need of in-depth taxonomic study based on our molecular survey data due to instances of suspected cryptic or incipient speciation , or conspecificity . as such, our survey data provide a unique opportunity to flag hawaiian red algal taxa for further study. although identification of these taxonomic issues, rather than full resolution, was the goal of the hawaiian rhodophyta biodiversity survey, several of these flagged taxa have been investigated in detail under the auspices of the project , and we hope that other researchers will be able to make use of the data for similar purposes, for it is detailed taxonomic studies that will ultimately lead to a floristic revision of the hawaiian red algae. also, additional taxonomic expertise for some of the lineages of red algae investigated during the project , will be needed for taxonomic resolution. however, despite adding relatively few new taxa to the species list, we have substantially updated the reported range of many taxa, with  <dig> new island-level distributional records included from our sampling records.

the vast majority of accessions analyzed were from marine and brackish locations , while  <dig> were from freshwater habitats and two were from terrestrial locations. this breakdown is close to the accepted consensus that, worldwide, approximately 97% of red algal species are marine  <cit> .

the three molecular markers chosen for diversity assessment of our red algal collections  differ markedly in both their degree of conservation and ease of amplification/sequencing, based on the protocols that were applied to our survey samples. since the hawaiian rhodophyta biodiversity survey encompassed an evolutionarily diverse set of samples, and we aimed to generate a large number of sequences , we were constrained by the need for minimal variations of protocol for each marker . the lsu and upa markers were sequenced without modification , and these first two markers yielded the highest and second highest overall number of sequences, respectively. in contrast, the coi marker required the design of an additional reverse primer, and yielded the lowest number of sequences. ease of data acquisition and performance characteristics of each of the three markers are further examined and discussed in  <cit> , as well as below.

all clean sequences  were retained in hadb, regardless of whether or not they corresponded to the taxon under study; contaminant sequences  were re-labelled as such and given new accession numbers. all three markers yielded some contaminant sequences, but the upa marker yielded the highest number , followed by lsu  and coi .

the lsu marker was the simplest for which to reliably obtain clean sequence data; only a single pair of primers was needed, and most samples were successfully sequenced on the first attempt. the disadvantage of the lsu marker, however, was a lack of reliable species-level resolution . a recent investigation of the characteristics and phylogenetic "performance" of the lsu, upa and coi markers based on this same data set confirmed that the lsu marker is the most conserved of the three, that it was the easiest for which to obtain sequence data, and illustrated that florideophyte red algal sequence data for the marker became saturated at f <dig> distances of approximately  <dig>    <cit> . the lsu marker was included in the survey to provide representation from the nuclear genome . however, given that the level of resolution for the lsu marker differs so strongly from the other two markers , it would be difficult to recommend its inclusion in future biodiversity surveys.

the upa marker, which was first described in  <dig>  <cit>  and tested for a selection of algal lineages in  <dig>  <cit> , can be amplified and sequenced for most cyanobacterial and plastid-containing algal lineages, with only a few genus-level exceptions noted to date . this universality is exceptional among algal primers, and lends great potential for the use of this marker in assessment of environmental samples that contain multiple algal lineages  <cit> . for this reason, we believe it is important to continue to generate framework data for this marker for as many algal representatives as possible. recent work has shown that the upa marker falls between in the coi and lsu markers in terms of ease of data acquisition, that it is quite conserved , and that saturation is not an issue for any group of the florideophyte red algae based on upa sequences  <cit> .

the coi marker was somewhat more difficult to amplify and sequence across red algal lineages, and two combinations of primers were used to obtain the  <dig> sequences reported here . others have reported requiring up to seven primer combinations to obtain coi sequences for samples within a single family of red algae  <cit> . however, the coi marker is widely recognized as the dna barcode for red algae  <cit> , and as such, provides a useful sequence data set due to the immediate comparative power of coi sequences against the  <dig>  red algal dna barcode sequences in the barcode of life data systems  v. <dig>  database . this trade-off between universal amplification and resolution has been noted in the past  <cit> . we recently reported that these coi florideophyte red algal sequence data were the most difficult of the three markers to obtain , but that the coi marker is the least conserved , and that saturation of the entire data set occurs at f <dig> distances of approximately  <dig>    <cit> .

maximum likelihood analysis of the concatenated lsu+upa+coi sequences yielded a phylogenetic tree that included support for most of the florideophyte red algal orders and families included in the data set . a number of explanations may be responsible for the lack of full resolution in the phylogeny, including insufficient sequence data  <cit> , insufficient taxonomic representation, or unresolved identifications of some specimens. verbruggen et al.  <cit> , in their recent research on the data requirements for resolving the red algal tree of life, indicated that up to  <dig>  ×  <dig> nucleotides of sequence data may be required to resolve some regions of the phylogeny, which is orders of magnitude more data than that provided by our concatenated three-marker data set. we  <cit>  preliminarily evaluated the phylogenetic performance of the three markers with the same data set by assessing changes in neighbour-joining bootstrap support with the addition of marker data , and also concluded that the fully concatenated phylogeny was supported largely at the family and ordinal level, with higher level relationships not resolved. nonetheless, the sequences of the three markers will make a valuable addition to the red algal species assignment framework of data, and in concatenated form are useful for examining phylogenetic relationships at lower taxonomic levels.

considering the taxa studied using statistical parsimony analysis , the debate arises as to whether observed breaks in networks represent strong phylogeographic signal or species boundaries. it has been suggested that the 95% connection limit under statistical parsimony, which is commonly used in phylogeographic studies, is a useful criterion for indicating biological species boundaries  <cit> . applying this criterion to our analyses suggests that cryptic species may be common in the hawaiian red algal flora. only one of the four taxa investigated formed a single haplotype network at the 95% connection limit , while the remaining taxa formed two  or three networks . if this pattern holds true for a number of other hawaiian red algal taxa , then there may be many more species than currently recognized in the flora. sorting out phylogeographic signal from species boundaries requires an understanding of the limits of phenotypic plasticity for each case. most of our identifications were made, at least preliminarily, based on morphology and anatomy. we largely relied on the detailed descriptions of abbott  <cit>  but supplemented these with more recent or taxon-specific studies that were relevant to each taxon . nonetheless, lately there have been a number of cases in the phycological literature where cryptic species complexes have been revealed through molecular data, and in a number of these instances other characters  have later been identified that allowed recognition of the species on grounds other than molecular data, e.g.  <cit> . more detailed phylogeographic, morphological/anatomical and life history analyses of suspected species complexes will be necessary for confirmation, but the dna sequences from the present survey provide a valuable starting point for identification of these phenomena, and pave the way for taxonomic revision of the floristic checklist.

interestingly, not all common hawaiian rhodophyta species have notable intraspecific sequence variation. eight taxa representing three different orders  were reported to have little to no sequence divergence for the three markers sequenced. although these taxa require stronger sampling for confirmation and resolution of these trends, one important finding from the survey is that phylogeographic patterns are likely to vary, even for taxa considered to be native to the hawaiian islands, and that histories of individual taxa need to be studied  to obtain a fuller understanding of intraspecific molecular patterns. it does not seem to be the case that increased within-taxon sampling will always reveal obvious phylogeographic patterns. this difference could be due to many factors, including the length of time since colonization of the species , ease of dispersal, dispersal vectors and type of life history , habitat and physicochemical parameter tolerances.

ekrem et al.  <cit>  emphasized that dna barcode data will only ever be as useful as the reference library of sequences against which comparisons are made. this is a compelling argument for support of biodiversity surveys of entire floras, such as this one, that attempt to account for the diversity of a region with both morphological and molecular sequence characterizations, and that make these data available to others in easily-accessible formats for comparisons. zhang et al.  <cit> , however, rightly point out that sample sizes for most dna barcode studies are insufficient to assess genetic diversity of a species, and the level of intraspecific sampling for our project is no exception. given the limited time and funds for the survey, we aimed to strike a balance between representation of as many taxa as possible and sufficient coverage of common taxa to assess intraspecific diversity. we emphasize that the patterns discussed here are largely preliminary, and that a more thorough examination is warranted to reveal the full story.

the value of the hawaiian rhodophyta biodiversity survey is multifaceted: through this project we have generated baseline molecular diversity data for much of the flora, revealed taxa requiring further systematic investigation , begun to elucidate phylogeographic patterns for hawaiian red algae, revised the species checklist for hawaiian rhodophyta, and reported a number of new records . all of these data , as well as photographs and micrographs, specimen details and collecting site information, are available via the publicly accessible hawaiian algal database  <cit> , and the data have also been shared with the global biodiversity information facility  <cit>  and genbank  <cit> . voucher specimens and the dna extract library are available to other researchers, enhancing the long-term value of the survey collections. the value of the survey will also increase as other studies make use of the data and our initial observations are developed into additional projects.

CONCLUSIONS
here we describe the principal findings of the hawaiian rhodophyta biodiversity survey, a four-year effort to inventory and assess the species of red algae from the hawaiian islands. numerous new taxonomic and distributional records resulted from the collections, which allowed for an updated taxonomic checklist of hawaiian red algae. three molecular markers  were sequenced for numerous collections, and the data from each marker compared to establish baseline molecular diversity profiles for the flora. a number of cases were highlighted where the molecular data helped to identify taxa or groups of taxa in need of systematic revision, illustrating the value of constructing this baseline molecular diversity data set. in the case of widespread and common species, the sequence data were also helpful in beginning to elucidate phylogeographic patterns, which differed substantially depending on the taxon. a maximum likelihood analysis based on concatenated sequence data for  <dig> red algal orders yielded a tree topology that is largely consistent with current understanding of red algal phylogeny, but with lower support at deeper nodes, indicating that the dna barcode-like markers have phylogenetic utility at and below the ordinal level. the value of each of the markers for biodiversity surveys was also assessed, and recommendations made for inclusion or exclusion in future surveys of algal floras.

