BACKGROUND
in adult mammals, red blood cells are ultimately derived from hematopoietic stem cells that commit to the erythroid lineage. erythroid progenitors in the bone marrow give rise to a wave of morphologically identifiable precursors that undergo a limited number of cell divisions in association with macrophage cells. these maturing erythroblasts accumulate hemoglobin, reduce cell size, condense their nucleus and ultimately enucleate to form reticulocytes that are released into the bloodstream. prior to birth, a similar process of “definitive” red cell production occurs in the fetal liver.

however, the embryo requires red blood cells prior to the formation of the liver. this need is satisfied by the emergence of a transient population of “primitive” erythroid cells from the yolk sac. in the mouse, primitive erythroid progenitors  first emerge in the yolk sac beginning at embryonic day  <dig>  , and generate a wave of maturing primitive erythroblasts that exclusively constitute red cells in the embryo until e <dig>  when the fetal liver begins to release definitive erythrocytes  <cit> . primitive erythroblasts progressively undergo nuclear condensation and accumulate increasing amounts of hemoglobin until replication ceases, ultimately reaching steady-state hemoglobin content and a final cell size more than six times that found in adult murine erythrocytes  <cit> . in the mouse, primitive erythroid precursors primarily express embryonic globins , while definitive erythroid cells in the fetal liver and bone marrow express adult globins   <cit> . despite maturing in the bloodstream, primitive erythroblasts, like their definitive counterparts, ultimately enucleate to form reticulocytes  <cit> .

definitive erythropoiesis has been extensively studied and several key transcriptional regulators of erythroid cell maturation have been identified, particularly in the adult erythroid lineage produced in the bone marrow. however, relatively little is known about the regulation of primitive erythropoiesis. some key transcription factors  have been identified that regulate the production of both primitive and definitive erythroid cells, including tal <dig>  lmo <dig>  gata <dig>  gata <dig>  and klf <dig> <cit> . other key tfs play lineage-specific roles; c-myb and gfi1b, for example, preferentially regulate definitive erythropoiesis  <cit> . likewise, the targeted disruption of the cytokine erythropoietin  and its receptor  have revealed an essential role for this pathway in the synthesis of definitive erythrocytes. this is not the case for primitive erythropoiesis, where a reduced population of primitive erythroblasts continues to mature in the bloodstream of epo- and epor-deficient embryos  <cit> .

our goal is to utilize knowledge of definitive erythropoiesis to gain further insight into the mechanisms that regulate primitive erythroid maturation and to identify factors that may distinguish the maturation of these two distinct, but closely related erythroid lineages. we employ a network-based systems approach to infer lineage-specific transcriptional regulatory networks from annotated microarray expression data. these data were obtained from primitive erythroid, fetal definitive erythroid and adult definitive erythroid cells isolated from mouse embryos, fetuses, and adult bone marrow, respectively  <cit> . five independent samples of primary erythroid precursors at three progressive stages of maturation , as well as reticulocytes, were purified by flow cytometry and used for the analysis of global gene expression on an affymetrix platform.

gene-interaction networks inferred from patterns of co-expression have become increasingly popular tools for exploring gene function in biological systems. such analyses have largely focused on identifying functionally enriched integrated sub-networks of co-expressed genes representing coherent functional units or biological pathways  <cit> . however, the architecture of an interaction network also provides insight into specific gene essentiality in the modeled system. in particular, the topological prominence of a gene or protein in an interaction network may reflect its biological role  <cit> , although the association between specific measures of topology  and essentiality likely varies  <cit> .

here, we applied a three-stage semi-supervised machine learning algorithm to estimate gene essentiality during erythroid precursor maturation. we employed the well-characterized transcriptional control of definitive erythropoiesis to identify topological features of inferred transcriptional regulatory networks and patterns of gene expression during erythroid precursor maturation that characterize known key regulators of red cell differentiation. using these features, we predicted potential regulators of primitive versus definitive erythropoiesis and these predictions were then validated experimentally. taken together, our data indicate that differential stat signaling plays an important role in the regulation of primitive compared to definitive erythropoiesis.

RESULTS
we identified  <dig>  potential transcriptional regulators expressed in the microarray expression dataset of erythroid cells using gene ontology  annotations . of this set of potential key factors,  <dig> were known to play either essential or non-essential roles in the regulation of adult definitive erythropoiesis and were used as a reference dataset for training the machine learning algorithm.

lineage-specific regulatory networks were assembled by integrating factor co-expression and computational predictions of tf binding based on sequence similarity. although less than 15% of the potential interactions were realized, the networks did not exhibit scale-free topologies. networks were overall highly connected, with degree distributions left-skewed and most genes having > <dig> neighbors . the full list of inferred interactions comprising these networks can be accessed through interactive search strategies on the erythrondb website . no single pattern of expression or standard measure of topological prominence in the estimated regulatory networks characterized the reference gene set, although most were preferentially expressed in the more immature proerythroblast and basophilic erythroblast stages of maturation .

we hypothesized that factor essentiality in highly-connected small-world networks might be better inferred by considering both expression data and multiple aspects of network architecture. to this end, we identified  <dig> properties that capture aspects of expression, differential expression and network topology . using a genetic algorithm , we evolved a weighted sum of these properties that defined an essentiality score capable of segregating key tfs from no-impact or non-essential tfs.

* ratio of the number of edges that exist between the k neighbors of gene i  and the number of potential edges between the neighbors, or ki.

† reciprocal of the mean shortest path length between a gene i and all other genes that can be reached from it, where v is the set of all possible genes and dg is the shortest path length between genes i and j. path lengths were estimated using the dijkstra distance  <cit>  as implemented in the boost graph library  <cit> .

‡ average expression profiles mapped to  <dig> templates using vector projection. the best-fit profile  was used as an indicator of the trend in expression during erythropoiesis.

during most runs, the ga successfully converged on optimal solutions in less than  <dig> generations and performed well for both the training  and testing  erythroid datasets. various runs were differentiated by the ga parameters . evolved weights comprising the best solutions found by the ga in each run were ranked by the product of their fitness in both the training and testing datasets and the top  <dig> solutions are listed in additional file 2: table s <dig>  these results are representative of all solutions, which were highly consistent in highlighting measures of global centrality, clustering coefficient, out-degree, and average absolute expression in the basophilic and poly-orthochromatic erythroblast stages as important properties for discriminating key regulators.

using the weighted linear equation generated by the best solution  a lineage-specific essentiality score  was calculated for each tf. in training runs, the ga was unable to find a solution that grouped all known regulators, but instead consistently produced a solution in which there is a bi-modal split between two sets of tfs. all known essential regulators, including klf <dig>  gata <dig> and tal <dig>  cluster in the right tail of the strongly skewed score distribution; non-essential tfs fell closer to the modal value . in the fetal definitive erythroid lineage, essential and non-essential factors were discriminated, but not as well differentiated as in the adult definite erythroid lineage . estimated essentiality scores for genes present in both adult definitive and primitive erythroid lineages are significantly correlated . the distribution of scores for all lineages were strongly right skewed and essential or key tfs known to play a role in all three erythroid lineages  consistently fell in the right tail . thus, we hypothesized that right-tail genes  possess topological and expression properties most similar to those of the known essential regulators of adult definitive erythropoiesis and segregated them for further analysis. erythroid lineage-specific essentiality scores are available in additional file  <dig> .

there are  <dig> transcription factors in the right-tail of the primitive erythroid score distribution, of which  <dig> were found to be differentially expressed, based on ranked cosine similarity, between the adult definitive and primitive erythroid expression datasets. differentially expressed genes fall into six main groups, distinguished by the pattern of expression in early  versus late  stages of erythroid maturation . a complete listing of these genes is available as an interactive search strategy from erythrondb . of the known key definitive erythroid regulators used to train the genetic algorithm, only gata <dig>  stat5a, and stat5b are differentially expressed between the two lineages.

using the database for annotation, visualization and integrated discovery  v <dig>   <cit> , we annotated and surveyed functional term enrichment in the differentially expressed result set. the  <dig>  tfs used to build the interaction networks were employed as the background set for this analysis. functional enrichment clustering using the david resource resulted in a few significant groups, the most relevant of which included hemopoeisis and erythrocyte homeostasis, embryonic morphogenesis, regulation of cell cycle and cell differentiation, regulation of apoptosis, intracellular signaling, and a variety of signaling pathways . closer examination of the david results revealed a large degree of overlap in enrichment cluster membership and many of the tfs found in multiple enrichment clusters were known to be involved in or downstream effectors of mapk signaling. further scrutiny of the differentially expressed result-set revealed a total of  <dig> genes  related to mapk signaling .

because epo-induced mapk signaling plays an important role in erythroid maturation, we looked for overlap between the mapk-enriched gene set identified via the david analysis and canonical epo pathway genes using the ingenuity knowledge base . this list included both core pathway genes and those involved in downstream epo-induced signaling pathways . we identified eleven tfs differentially expressed between primitive and adult definitive erythropoiesis that are potential downstream targets of epo-signaling . interestingly, this list includes all but one of the stat-family genes  expressed in our erythroid lineage datasets. stat5a and stat5b were expressed during both primitive and definitive erythropoiesis, but exhibited increasing expression during the maturation of primitive erythroid cells and the opposite pattern during the maturation of adult definitive erythroid cells . stat <dig> was preferentially expressed in primitive erythroid cells and stat <dig> highly expressed only in the adult definitive erythroid lineage, with expression levels increasing as maturation proceeded . the remaining stat-family gene expressed in our dataset, stat <dig>  was also identified by the ga as a potential regulator of primitive erythropoiesis and differentially expressed in the primitive compared to adult definitive erythroid lineage, but was not distinguished by the functional enrichment analysis.

erythroblast maturation can be recapitulated in vitro using either liquid cultures or semisolid media that supports the generation of clonal erythroid colonies derived from erythroid progenitors. we took advantage of both liquid cultures and colony assay systems to test the function of stat <dig> in the primitive and definitive erythroid lineages using s3i- <dig>  a small molecule inhibitor of stat <dig> dimerization  <cit> . culture of primary yolk sac cells in the presence of the stat <dig> inhibitor s3i- <dig> reduced the number of eryp-cfc colonies by 70% . in contrast, the formation of colonies from bone marrow-derived definitive erythroid progenitors, d <dig> bfu-e and cfu-e, was unaffected by stat <dig> inhibition . addition of the stat <dig> inhibitor also reduced the number of maturing primitive erythroblasts in liquid culture; definitive erythroblast production was not affected . these data suggest a functional role for stat <dig> in primitive, but not definitive, erythropoiesis.

we examined our erythroid lineage-specific datasets for upstream activators known to utilize stat <dig> as a mediator of signaling. a significant molecular signature of interferon signaling was found exclusively in the adult definitive erythroid lineage . because ifnγ is known to inhibit colony formation of bone marrow-derived erythroid progenitors  <cit> , we treated definitive and primitive erythroid colony-forming cultures with ifn as expected, ifnγ inhibited bone marrow-derived cfu-e colony formation by 20%. consistent with the preferential expression of interferon genes in definitive erythroblasts, the addition of ifnγ to cultures of primary yolk sac cells did not affect the numbers of eryp-cfc-derived colonies . these expression and functional data indicate that interferon signaling regulates definitive, but not primitive, erythropoiesis.

discussion
the primitive, fetal definitive, and adult definitive erythroid-specific gene-interaction networks inferred from microarray expression datasets are highly connected and do not exhibit scale-free topologies. the connectivity of the inferred networks is, in part, a reflection of the underlying dataset, which is high quality and exhibits very high fidelity among replicates in the primitive and adult definitive erythroid lineages  <cit> , effectively yielding stepped expression profiles with four stage-specific plateaus. the connectivity also reflects the underlying biology. by restricting our gene set to transcription factors, we segregated a single cohesive functional sub-network of the genome-wide expression during the terminal maturation of each lineage; i.e., the transcriptional regulation of erythropoiesis.

annotating network edges with predicted tf binding potentials reduced the connectivity of the co-expression network by introducing directionality. however, the utility of this annotation was limited by the availability of partial weight matrices and binding consensus sequences, which only allowed predictions of targets for a third of the tfs considered in this analysis. these out-directed edges were important for discriminating essential from non-essential regulators , suggesting that integrating further directionality would highlight additional differences among these lineages. the predicted binding may have introduced a bias to the analysis; genes for which binding targets were predicted were more likely to be identified as potential regulators, but only if many of their potential targets were present in the networks. for example, targets were predicted for foxo <dig>  but <1% of those targets  were found in the adult definitive erythropoiesis network . the gene still had a relatively high essentiality score within the adult-definitive lineage , determined by the other properties contributing to the score estimate.

another limiting factor to this analysis was the use of the gene ontology to identify potential regulators. due to the incompleteness of the annotation, some known, and likely several unknown, factors that play a key role regulating erythropoiesis were removed from consideration. for example, lmo <dig>  a known transcription factor and essential regulator of erythropoiesis, was filtered from the analysis due to the incompleteness of its go annotation at the time the analysis was performed.

despite these limitations, this system provided a rare opportunity to compare a set of closely related regulatory networks underlying the development of phenotypically distinct but functionally equivalent cells within a single organism. the essential regulatory mechanism underlying the fetal and adult definitive erythroid lineages has been well characterized, but comparatively little is known about the regulation of primitive erythropoiesis. the regulatory networks underlying these three erythroid lineages are different. however, they must also possess some commonalities as each results in the synthesis of a cell containing a complex cytoskeletal network, filled with hemoglobin, and devoid of a nucleus and internal organelles. while the timing and identity of essential regulators may vary, it is likely that they regulate the same or a similar suite of down-stream targets. thus, we hypothesized that the topological and expression properties that characterize the known regulators of definitive erythropoiesis also should characterize equivalent regulators of primitive erythropoiesis; i.e., prior-knowledge about the definitive erythroid lineages could be used to test and validate computational predictions and then to moderate novel inferences about the regulation of the primitive erythroid lineage. with this in mind, the problem of predicting essential regulators of primitive erythropoiesis was considered a good fit for machine learning approaches and a task-specific algorithm was developed.

our results revealed that key transcription factors in the definitive erythroid lineages could be discriminated by a combination of traits encompassing both the raw expression pattern and the architecture of the computationally inferred gene-interaction network. as expected, given the lack of the scale-free topology in our networks, local degree  provided little predictive power for identifying key regulators ; however considering specific subsets of these connections  did assist in discriminating the reference gene set. measures of cohesion  and shortest-path centrality  were also informative for the highly inter-connected networks .

overall, the estimated essentiality score for a gene in the adult definitive erythroid lineage was not a good predictor of its score in the primitive erythroid lineage. additionally, known essential and non-essential definitive erythroid regulators were not as well-differentiated in the fetal dataset as in the adult, emphasizing that the majority of genes were not consistently ranked between the lineages. this is not surprising as a subset of these reference regulators  are known to play different roles in the primitive versus definitive erythroid lineages; thus the scores of individual genes are expected to vary across the lineages and likely reflect the underlying biology. this observation was supported by our analysis; ~57% of the predicted potential key transcriptional regulators of primitive erythropoiesis are differentially expressed in primitive compared to adult definitive erythropoiesis.

the list of putative key transcriptional regulators of primitive erythropoiesis predicted by the ga and found to be differentially expressed between primitive and adult definitive erythropoiesis was enriched in genes activated downstream of mapk-signaling. this included a striking signature of genes in the epo signaling pathway, including the stat-family genes. it has been shown in cell culture that epo activates stat <dig>  stat <dig>  and stat5a/b <cit> . jak2-mediated phosphorylation of stat5a/b is a core pathway mediating the epo effect in erythroid cells; jak2-deficiency in mice recapitulates the epo- and epor-null phenotype with an absolute block in definitive erythroblast production and fetal death by e <dig>   <cit> . stat5-deficient fetuses ultimately develop severe anemia and die in the perinatal period  <cit> , but show no absolute block in definitive erythropoiesis or any known primitive erythroid defect, suggesting that other transcriptional regulators are also involved in mediating this critical signal and supporting our computational prediction of a differential role for stat-signaling in primitive compared to definitive erythropoiesis.

stat <dig> exhibits a pattern of increasing expression during erythroblast maturation specifically in the adult definitive erythroid lineage. consistent with our computational finding, adult stat1-null mice exhibit reduced numbers of cfu-e and elevated erythroblast apoptosis  <cit> . there is no known effect of stat <dig> deletion on primitive erythroblasts. furthermore, stat <dig> has been implicated as a necessary downstream mediator of ifnγ in the negative regulation of bone marrow erythropoiesis  <cit>  and ifns α, β, and γ have all been shown to negatively regulate definitive erythropoiesis  <cit> . we find that genes involved in interferon-signaling are preferentially expressed in the adult definitive erythroid lineage , including ifng, downstream apoptotic  and anti-apoptotic  genes, and genes involved in the negative regulation of cell proliferation . this differential expression signature finds functional validation in our in vitro studies, which revealed that ifnγ inhibits definitive, but not primitive, erythroblast maturation.

the presence of stat <dig> in our list of putative regulators was especially interesting as it is expressed at extremely low levels in the microarray dataset  and was, in fact, filtered out of prior analyses due to its low expression level  <cit> . this gene was likely identified by the genetic algorithm as a putative regulator based on its topological prominence in the inferred regulatory network, emphasizing the information gained from considering multiple aspects of network topology. stat <dig> is preferentially expressed in primitive erythropoiesis, with expression levels increasing gradually during later maturation stages . although it has been shown that epo induces tyrosine phosphorylation of stat <dig> <cit>  and a potential role for this gene has been inferred in fetal definitive erythropoiesis through pathway analysis  <cit> , activation of stat <dig> is uncommon in hematopoietic cell lines  <cit> . here, the computationally predicted functional role for stat <dig> in primitive, but not definitive, erythroid cell maturation is validated in vitro. small molecule inhibition of stat <dig> dimerization resulted in reduced numbers of erythroblasts late in the primitive erythroid culture, consistent with the increased expression of stat <dig> during late stages of primitive erythroblast maturation.

CONCLUSIONS
although primitive and definitive erythropoiesis share fundamental transcriptional regulators and result in the synthesis of terminally mature enucleated erythrocytes  <cit> , they are fundamentally different processes. definitive erythropoiesis in the adult is in steady state, continuously undergoing fine-tuned positive and negative regulation to maintain normal oxygen-carrying capacity. in contrast, primitive erythropoiesis emerges from the yolk sac and must transiently produce exponentially increasing numbers of erythroblasts to fill the newly-formed embryonic vasculature. we have identified the differential usage of stat <dig> and stat <dig>  as well as interferon signaling, as defining characteristics of these lineages that may reflect opposing roles in the regulation of erythroid cell proliferation and survival.

