BACKGROUND
the family characidae is the largest family of freshwater fishes in the neotropics, comprising around  <dig> species in approximately  <dig> genera  <cit> . because of its considerable species richness and diversity, the relationships and limits of the main lineages in the family have been controversial: two-thirds of all species were considered incertae sedis in the family just a decade ago due to lack of consistent information on their relationships  <cit> . besides species richness, a primary challenge to establishing relationships based on morphological phylogenies has been associated with their conservative morphology though their long period of evolution, since characid fossils with essentially modern morphologies are known from eocene-oligocene deposits  <cit> . taken together, these factors may explain the high level of morphological homoplasy inferred across lineages within the family . in recent years, an increasing understanding of the relationships among major lineages within characidae is emerging on the basis of evidence provided by molecules, osteology, and primary and secondary sexual characters .

two large and subordinated clades of interest in our investigation have been successively recognized as monophyletic in characidae. the first more inclusive clade embraces all characid species that lack a supraorbital bone  . this clade was recently raised to family rank and named characidae in a more restricted sense by previous authors  <cit> , who also reassigned all characid species bearing a supraorbital bone to new or previously recognized characiform families. the second, less inclusive clade and the main subject of this study, was informally named “clade a” and diagnosed based on two synapomorphies: the dorsal fin with two unbranched and eight branched rays, and the premaxilla with four teeth in the inner series  <cit> . “clade a”, sensu malabarba and weitzman  <cit> , included the subfamily glandulocaudinae eigenmann,  <dig> sensu weitzman and menezes  <cit>  , the newly described genus cyanocharax, and  <dig> genera of uncertain relationships previously listed within cheirodontinae or tetragonopterinae  <cit>  and classified as incertae sedis genera in characidae  <cit> : attonitus, boehlkea, bryconacidnus, bryconamericus, caiapobrycon, ceratobranchia, creagrutus, hemibrycon, hypobrycon, knodus, microgenys, monotocheirodon, odontostoechus, othonocheirodus, piabarchus, piabina, rhinobrycon, and rhinopetitia . prior to this proposition  <cit> , nothing was known about phylogenetic relationships among these  <dig> incertae sedis genera, except for two studies involving caiapobrycon, creagrutus and piabina  <cit>  . conversely, phylogenies were available at the tribe and genus levels for all taxa previously included in the glandulocaudinae, mostly based on sexually dimorphic characters of males  <cit> .fig.  <dig> relationships of stevardiinae based on morphological studies. phylogenetic relationships among major groups of characid and stevardiin taxa according to morphological analyses by  malabarba and weitzman  <cit> ,  mirande  <cit> , and  ferreira et al.  <cit> . black branches and names indicate stevardiinae taxa. the black circle on the internal branches indicates the synapomorphic loss of the supraorbital bone in  and , a diagnostic character for characidae sensu oliveira et al.  <cit>  . asterisks  indicate taxa with inseminating strategy

fig.  <dig> relationships of stevardiinae based on previous molecular studies. phylogenetic relationships among major groups of characid and stevardiin fishes according to molecular analyses by  calcagnotto et al.  <cit> ,  javonillo et al.  <cit>  and  oliveira et al.  <cit> . black branches and names indicate stevardiinae taxa. the black circle on the internal branches indicates the synapomorphic loss of the supraorbital bone in  and , a diagnostic character for characidae sensu oliveira et al.  <cit> . asterisks  indicate taxa with inseminating strategy


diapomini

glandulocaudini

hysteronotini

landonini

stevardiini

phenacobryconini

xenurobryconini

incertae sedis
tribes and genera currently recognized in stevardiinae . composition of the tribes diapomini, glandulocaudini, hysteronotini, landonini, phenacobryconini, stevardiini, and xenurobryconini follows  <cit> . genera originally included in stevardiinae  <cit>  or subsequently by other authors indicated by superscripts matching the reference number ; genera in bold were included in this study



the presence of modified scales in the caudal fin of males has been the main character defining the glandulocaudinae since the group was described  <cit> . the complex morphologies of these caudal organs were explored in detail in phylogenetic studies to test the monophyly and internal relationships of the glandulocaudin tribe xenurobryconini  <cit>  and to diagnose and propose internal relationships within glandulocaudinae. on this basis, glandulocaudinae was divided into seven tribes  <cit> : corynopomini eigenmann,  <dig> , diapomini eigenmann,  <dig>  glandulocaudini eigenmann,  <dig>  hysteronotini eigenmann,  <dig>  landonini weitzman and menezes,  <dig>  phenacobryconini weitzman and menezes,  <dig> and xenurobryconini myers and böhlke,  <dig> . this classification was further modified in light of new histological evidence from the caudal organs of males  <cit> . as a consequence, the subfamily glandulocaudinae was restricted to the tribe glandulocaudini sensu weitzman and menezes  <cit>  and the six remaining tribes were placed in the resurrected subfamily stevardiinae  <cit> . the family group name corynopomini is a junior synonym, being this tribe consequently also renamed as stevardiini .

monophyly of “clade a”, including the glandulocaudinae and stevardiinae sensu weitzman, menezes, evers and burns  <cit>  and the  <dig> incertae sedis genera listed previously  <cit> , has been supported more recently on the basis of both morphological  <cit>   and molecular data  <cit>  . furthermore, later studies have added ten genera to “clade a” after the original definition  <cit> , such that it currently includes  <dig> genera . in a morphological phylogeny of  <dig> characiform species, including  <dig> species and  <dig> genera of “clade a”, the stevardiinae sensu weitzman and collaborators  <cit>  was reported to be paraphyletic given that it also included glandulocaudinae  <cit>  . based on this inference, a more comprehensive concept of the name stevardiinae was advanced embracing all members of “clade a”, with glandulocaudinae being lowered in rank to a monophyletic tribe  within stevardiinae  <cit>  . the newly defined stevardiinae sensu mirande  <cit>  was diagnosed on the basis of three synapomorphies:  the previously mentioned possession of eight branched dorsal-fin rays  <cit> ,  the absence of the epiphyseal branch of the supraorbital canal, and  the presence of nine dorsal-fin pterygiophores. for clarity, “clade a” was then named stevardiinae and, as presently recognized, is widely distributed in the neotropics on both sides of the andes, from costa rica in central america to central argentina.

several species in stevardiinae have been shown to be inseminating  <cit>  , a term used to describe the capacity of males to transfer sperm directly into the female reproductive tract. possible selective advantages of insemination include increase of the probability of fertilization, protection of the gametes from a potentially harmful environment, the temporal and spatial separation of mating and oviposition, and sperm competition  <cit> . also, this strategy in characids is correlated with small-sized species that produce fewer numbers of eggs   <cit> . in stevardiinae, inseminating species tend to have lower relative fecundity values than other characids and some species are able to reproduce during major part of the year , which may demonstrate the advantages of the insemination strategy  <cit> .table  <dig> insemination strategy and sperm morphology

tribes

diapomini

acrobrycon
a. ipanquianus  <cit> ,

diapoma

planaltina
p. britiskii  <cit> , p. glandipedis  <cit> ,

glandulocaudini

glandulocauda
g. melanogenys  <cit> ,

lophiobrycon

mimagoniates
m. barberi  <cit> , m. inequalis  <cit> ,
m. lateralis  <cit> , m. microlepis  <cit> ,
m. barberi  <cit> ,

hysteronotini

hysteronotus

pseudocorynopoma
p. doriae  <cit> ,

landonini

landonia

phenacobryconini

phenacobrycon

stevardiini

corynopoma

gephyrocharax
g. atracaudatus  <cit> , g. chocoensis  <cit> , g. intermedius  <cit> , g. melanocheir  <cit> , g. valencia  <cit> , g. venezuelae  <cit> ,
g. atracaudata  <cit> ,

pterobrycon

xenurobryconini

argopleura
a. chocoensis  <cit> ,

chrysobrycon

iotabrycon

ptychocharax

scopaeocharax
s. rhinodus  <cit> ,

tyttocharax
t. tambopatensis  <cit> ,

xenurobrycon
x. macropus  <cit> ,
x. heterodon  <cit> ,

incertae sedis

attonitus
attonitus bounites  <cit> ,

boehlkea
b. fredcochui

bryconadenos

bryconacidnus

bryconamericus
b. alpha,
b. deuterodonoides,
b. exodon, b. iheringii,
b. pachacuti, bryconamericus sp.

caiapobrycon
c. tucurui

ceratobranchia
c. binghami

creagrutus
c. lepidus  <cit> ,
c. affinis, c. britskii,
c. changae, c. cochui, c. figueiredoi, c. holmi, c. menezesi,
c. paralacus,
c. taphorni

cyanocharax
c. alburnus,
c. alegretensis,
c. dicropotamicus,
c. itaimbe,
c. lepiclastus,
c. macropinna

hemibrycon
h. dariensis, h. metae

hypobrycon
hypobrycon sp.

knodus
k. beta, k. breviceps,
k. meridae,
k. septentrionalis,
k. turiuba, knodus sp.

markiana
m. nigripinnis

monotocheirodon
m. pearsoni  <cit> ,

odontostoechus

piabarchus
p. analis

piabina
p. argentea
p. anhembi  <cit> ,

rhinobrycon
r. negrensis
stevardiinae species with known insemination strategy and sperm morphology, based on several studies indicated by superscripts matching the reference number . taxa not listed in this table indicate lack of information


aindicates personal communication by john burns



except for two species of monotocheirodon that bear intromittent organs, all remaining species of stevardiinae lack copulatory organs  <cit> . among these, insemination strategy has been documented by the presence of sperm in females through histological examination of the ovaries for all species of the tribes diapomini, glandulocaudini, hysteronotini, landonini, phenacobryconini, stevardiini and xenurobryconini, all the species of attonitus, bryconadenos and monotocheirodon and some species of bryconamericus , creagrutus  and knodus   <cit>  . inseminating species, however, also have been described in other lineages of characidae, such as the tribe compsurini within the subfamily cheirodontinae  <cit>  and in a clade formed by hollandichthys plus rachoviscus  <cit> . taking this pattern at face value, insemination seems to have at least three independent origins within characidae  <cit> .

the presence of insemination correlates with differences in sperm morphology. while in most externally fertilizing teleosts the spermatozoa are characterized by a spherical to ovoid nucleus and short midpiece, in inseminating fishes an elongated nucleus is the most frequently observed  <cit> . this elongation may be advantageous for insemination over ovoid nucleus since it facilitates sperm movement through the female gonopore and within the female reproductive tract, increasing directional movement toward female gonopore, and facilitating the formation of sperm packets to be moved by the male urogenital papilla to the female urogenital pore  <cit> .

three unique morphotypes of sperm have been described among species of stevardiinae , based on arrangement of centrioles, flagellum, nucleus, and the midpiece  <cit>  . based on the phylogenetic evidence available  <cit> , it has been proposed that insemination is likely to have evolved only once within stevardiinae and may constitute a synapomorphy shared by the most derived species of this subfamily  <cit> . however, recent morphological phylogenies  <cit>   still have limited taxonomic representation to effectively test this hypothesis which is, likewise, not supported by molecular evidence given the absence of a monophyletic group with all inseminating stevardiines  <cit>  . in terms of sperm morphology, it has been proposed that sperm type m <dig> is synapomorphic to stevardiinae, m <dig> synapomorphic to all the inseminating species of the stevardiinae, and m <dig> synapomorphic to the xenurobryconini  <cit> . information about these traits related to reproduction, however, are just known for less than 1/ <dig> of all stevardiines species, which hamper a better understading of the evolution of the reproductive strategy in this subfamily.

most of the species-level diversity in stevardiinae is contained in only four genera  that include  <dig> out of  <dig> nominal species described for the subfamily . among these four genera, creagrutus  is the only one supported as a monophyletic group based on apomorphic features associated to jaws and teeth  <cit> . the remaining three genera bryconamericus , hemibrycon  and knodus  have been traditionally and arbitrarily diagnosed using pre-cladistic criteria based on the number of teeth on the maxilla and on the extension of scales over the caudal-fin rays  <cit> . not surprisingly, recently published morphological- and molecular-based characid phylogenies found that bryconamericus and knodus are polyphyletic groups , thus demonstrating the need of further study to diagnose monophyletic genera based on consistent phylogenetic evidence.

this study presents phylogenetic relationships for a large number of taxa of stevardiinae based on analysis of a multi-locus data set to address two main goals:  test the monophyly of the stevardiinae and the included putative tribes and genera, with emphasis on the species-rich genera bryconamericus, hemibrycon, and knodus; and  shed light on the evolution of insemination and secondary sexual dimorphism among stevardiines, specifically whether insemination had a single origin among members of this subfamily.

RESULTS
sequences from three mitochondrial  and four nuclear loci  were obtained from a total of  <dig> individuals. the concatenated alignment contains  <dig>  sites, of which  <dig>  are variable. some markers could not be successfully amplified and sequenced for a number of taxa due to technical issues or low quality of the genomic dna. mitochondrial and nuclear dna sequences could be obtained for 85 % and 69 % of the taxa, respectively. efficiency for nuclear genes was lower, most likely due to non-conserved priming regions and a higher risk of cross-contamination in the nested pcr procedure . overall, the data set is 76 % complete. more detailed information for each molecular marker can be found in table  <dig> and for sequences obtained for each specimen in additional file  <dig>  the best-fit partitioning scheme selected under the aic criterion contained  <dig> data blocks .table  <dig> summary information of molecular data analyzed in this study

dna sequence information and composition of molecular markers used in this study. overall mean genetic distance is an indication of the rate of evolution of each marker



the maximum likelihood tree obtained with raxml is shown in fig.  <dig> in a summarized view, rendered by collapsing major clades to single terminals. the three large clades previously reported for characidae  are well-supported by the data, with “clade a”  resolved as the sister group of “clade b”. seven clades with high bootstrap support were obtained within stevardiinae, some in agreement with previous classifications but most clades are new. fig.  <dig> presents a phylogenetic classification for the subfamily stevardiinae and a proposed definition of monophyletic tribes and genera based on the taxonomic sampling analyzed in this study. the complete tree is available in detail in figs. 4– <dig> and in additional file  <dig>  the molecular markers used in this study provided good phylogenetic resolution with high bootstrap support throughout the tree, with an average value of 78 % across branches and with more than half of the values equal to, or higher than, 90 %. landonia latidens was excluded from the analysis since most genes for this taxon could not be amplified and sequenced, resulting in an unstable phylogenetic position for this species. clades defining genera and other monophyletic groups within tribes received higher bootstrap support than branches leading to larger clades, especially clades containing the particularly species-rich genera such as bryconamericus and knodus. when comparing the stability among all trees accessed in this study, the newly circumscribed groups  proposed herein are largely obtained by all methods with high support values , except for the highly species-rich genera  that received low support. the trees obtained with garli, tnt and star are not shown, but some results from these analyses are reported in table  <dig>  all trees and data matrix obtained in this study are available at dryad repository .fig.  <dig> abbreviated tree of stevardiinae obtained in this study. abbreviated maximum likelihood tree of stevardiinae obtained with raxml summarizing relationships among stevardiinae genera and limits of tribes. branches leading to monophyletic genera as proposed in this study, or to outgroup clades  are collapsed to a single terminal. taxa currently assigned to other genera that are included in the proposed genera are indicated in parentheses. red sperm symbols highlight clades with inseminating strategy present and blue sperm symbols highlight clades with external fertilization confirmed: large symbols for all taxa within xenurobryconini, glandulocaudini, and stevardiini and smaller symbols for some species next to corresponding genera. bootstrap values are shown for internal branches, with values inside gray circles highlighting nodes for proposed tribes and green circles showing support for monophyletic genera proposed in this study. full topology is displayed in figs. 4– <dig> and additional file 4


fig.  <dig> section of the stevardiinae phylogeny showing the relationships among clades “b” and “c” and stevardiinae, and, within stevardiinae, in the tribes eretmobryconini and xenurobryconini. ml tree obtained with raxml. single name labels several terminals when they lead to same nominal species. type species of each genus are highlighted in green when sampled in this study. red sperm symbols highlight taxa with insemination strategy, while blue sperm symbols highlight taxa known to have external fertilization. sperm types are indicated by m <dig> – m <dig>  absence of any symbols next to taxon names indicates lack of knowledge about reproductive characters. bootstrap values indicated with dots placed on internal branches according to inset caption. section of the full topology shown on the left  is expanded on the right. node  <dig> subtends eretmobrycon  that includes all species of bryconamericus scleroparius group 

fig.  <dig> section of the stevardiinae phylogeny showing the relationships between argopleura and the tribes glandulocaudini and stevardiini. ml tree obtained with raxml. single name labels several terminals when they lead to same nominal species. type species of each genus are highlighted in green when sampled in this study. red sperm symbols highlight taxa with insemination strategy, while blue sperm symbols highlight taxa known to have external fertilization. sperm types are indicated by m <dig> – m <dig>  absence of any symbols next to taxon names indicates lack of knowledge about reproductive characters. bootstrap values indicated with dots placed on internal branches according to inset caption. section of the full topology shown on the left  is expanded on the right. node  <dig> subtends chrysobrycon from southwestern amazon 

fig.  <dig> section of the stevardiinae phylogeny showing the relationships in hemibryconini. ml tree obtained with raxml. single name labels several terminals when they lead to same nominal species. type species of each genus are highlighted in green when sampled in this study. red sperm symbols highlight taxa with insemination strategy, while blue sperm symbols highlight taxa known to have external fertilization. sperm types are indicated by m <dig> – m <dig>  absence of any symbols next to taxon names indicates lack of knowledge about reproductive characters. bootstrap values indicated with dots placed on internal branches according to inset caption. section of the full topology shown on the left  is expanded on the right. node  <dig> subtends hemibrycon from western amazon, magdalena and orinoco basins, and central america 

fig.  <dig> section of the stevardiinae phylogeny showing the relationships in creagrutini. ml tree obtained with raxml. single name labels several terminals when they lead to same nominal species. type species of each genus are highlighted in green when sampled in this study. red sperm symbols highlight taxa with insemination strategy, while blue sperm symbols highlight taxa known to have external fertilization. sperm types are indicated by m <dig> – m <dig>  absence of any symbols next to taxon names indicates lack of knowledge about reproductive characters. bootstrap values indicated with dots placed on internal branches according to inset caption. section of the full topology shown on the left  is expanded on the right. node  <dig> subtends creagrutini, with carlastyanax  and creagrutus , the latter widely distributed from paraguay basin to central america

fig.  <dig> section of the stevardiinae phylogeny showing relationships in diapomini . ml tree obtained with raxml. single name labels several terminals when they lead to same nominal species. type species of each genus are highlighted in green when sampled in this study. red sperm symbols highlight taxa with insemination strategy, while blue sperm symbols highlight taxa known to have external fertilization. sperm types are indicated by m <dig> – m <dig>  absence of any symbols next to taxon names indicates lack of knowledge about reproductive characters. bootstrap values indicated with dots placed on internal branches according to inset caption. section of the full topology shown on the left  is expanded on the right. node  <dig> subtends knodus sensu stricto, widely distributed in amazon and orinoco basins 

fig.  <dig> section of the stevardiinae phylogeny showing the relationships in diapomini . ml tree obtained with raxml. single name labels several terminals when they lead to same nominal species. type species of each genus are highlighted in green when sampled in this study. red sperm symbols highlight taxa with insemination strategy, while blue sperm symbols highlight taxa known to have external fertilization. sperm types are indicated by m <dig> – m <dig>  absence of any symbols next to taxon names indicates lack of knowledge about reproductive characters. bootstrap values indicated with dots placed on internal branches according to inset caption. section of the full topology shown on the left  is expanded on the right. node  <dig> subtends bryconacidnus from western amazon . node  <dig>  subtends a clade from the southern range of the geographic distribution  that contains bryconamericus sensu stricto, piabarchus, piabina and diapoma. node  <dig> subtends bryconamericus sensu stricto restricted to rio paraná and uruguay basins and coastal rivers in southeastern brazil 

fig.  <dig> section of the stevardiinae phylogeny showing the relationships in diapomini . ml tree obtained with raxml. single name labels several terminals when they lead to same nominal species. type species of each genus are highlighted in green when sampled in this study. red sperm symbols highlight taxa with insemination strategy, while blue sperm symbols highlight taxa known to have external fertilization. sperm types are indicated by m <dig> – m <dig>  absence of any symbols next to taxon names indicates lack of knowledge about reproductive characters. bootstrap values indicated with dots placed on internal branches according to inset caption. section of the full topology shown on the left  is expanded on the right. node  <dig> subtends piabarchus distributed in rio são francisco basin and upper paraguay . node  <dig> subtends piabina from the rio são francisco, upper paraná and paraguay basins . node  <dig> subtends diapoma from the paraná, uruguay and coastal systems in southern brazil 

diapomini + lepidocharax



creagrutus






support for clades representing tribes and genera proposed in this study  obtained on the basis of maximum likelihood , parsimony , and species-tree  analyses. bootstrap values  are shown when the clade was obtained with maximum likelihood and parsimony, or indicated otherwise when it was not obtained . for the star analysis presence  or absence  of the clade is indicated


asome gene trees did not support the monophyly of stevardiinae



the monophyly of genera bryconamericus, cyanocharax, hemibrycon, and knodus is strongly rejected by topology tests based on the molecular data . this is also true for the tribes diapomini and xenurobryconini sensu weitzman and menezes  <cit>  . based on the distribution of the species with known reproductive strategy and sperm morphology , the hypothesis that inseminating stevardiines are monophyletic is rejected. only sperm morphology m <dig>  is inferred to have a single origin given that it is present within a monophyletic unit in our tree topology. conversely, m <dig> appears in several clades  and may have multiple origins , and m <dig> is observed in species distributed in several distantly related clades: near the root of the tree  and also in ceratobranchia, cyanocharax, knodus meridae, piabina and rhinobrycon .table  <dig> topology tests for currently accepted taxonomic groups


bryconamericus

cyanocharax

hemibrycon

knodus
results of topology tests for the monophyly of currently accepted taxonomic groups  and for groups based on reproductive strategy . tribe composition tested prior hypotheses as shown in table  <dig>  <cit> , genera composition as listed by  <cit>  and for insemination strategy as in table  <dig>  for each group, difference in maximum likelihood score  between a tree with this clade enforced with respect to the maximum likelihood tree  is followed by p-values for three testing procedures


au approximately unbiased test; sh shimodaira-hasegawa test; kh kishino-hasegawa test


ns
p >  <dig> ; *p <  <dig> ; **p <  <dig> 



based on the results presented here, we proposed a new classification of stevardiinae, , subdividing the subfamily into seven tribes, redefining some generic circumscriptions, and leaving only  <dig> of the  <dig> genera as incertae sedis, as discussed below.

discussion
in agreement with previous molecular  <cit>  and morphological studies  <cit> , the monophyly of stevardiinae or “clade a”  <cit>  was resolved with confidence in our results . the most comprehensive morphological analysis was based on  <dig> species in  <dig> genera  <cit>  and a large-scale molecular phylogenetic analysis of the characidae included  <dig> stevardiine species in  <dig> genera and along with a broad taxonomic representation of other subfamilies  <cit> . none of these previous studies, however, resolved internal relationships within stevardiinae due to limited taxonomic sampling. here we present analyses of a large and comprehensive sampling of stevardiinae, with  <dig> genera and around  <dig> species/morphotypes, which identification was based on morphology and geographic location , and propose a new classification  based on monophyletic units  supported by our results. the following sections address morphological, reproductive and geographic distributional data in relation to the major clades supported by this study, as well as limitations imposed by missing data and ambiguous phylogenetic resolution in subsections of the phylogeny.

monophyly of the stevardiinae
our results are consistent with the definition of “clade a” based on the presence of four teeth in the inner row of the premaxilla  <cit>  , but not with the placement of bryconamericus scleroparius clade and markiana  outside the stevardiinae  <cit>  . this alternative hypothesis requires the separate origin of this trait in markiana and in a clade containing the subfamilies aphyocharacinae, aphyoditeinae, cheirodontinae, gymnocharacinae, and stevardiinae plus the bryconamericus scleroparius clade, with a reversal to five or more teeth  in a less inclusive clade containing aphyocharacinae, aphyoditeinae, and cheirodontinae. the inclusion of the bryconamericus scleroparius clade and markiana in the stevardiinae herein contradicts this hypothesis and resolves the presence of four teeth in the inner series of the premaxilla as a diagnostic character for the stevardiinae .

a dorsal fin with ii+ <dig> fin rays  <cit>  is another diagnostic character proposed for “clade a”; although some authors split this trait into two characters  <cit> : eight or fewer branched dorsal-fin rays and nine or fewer dorsal-fin pterygiophores. according to our results , the ii+ <dig> dorsal-fin rays would not be a diagnostic character for stevardiinae, but for a less inclusive clade including all stevardiinae except markiana plus bryconamericus scleroparius group . the inferred order of appearance of these diagnostic characters along the tree is informative as to the placement of two fossil species of paleotetra from the eocene-oligocene  to support the hypothesis that these fossils constitute a stem lineage of stevardiinae  <cit>  or potentially within the tribe eretmobryconini, since these fossils have four teeth in the inner series of the premaxilla but ii+ <dig> dorsal-fin rays. secondary increases in the number of dorsal-fin rays are recorded in pseudocorynopoma doriae , mimagoniates rheocharis , chrysobrycon myersi , differing from the other species of these genera with ii+ <dig> dorsal-fin rays  <cit> .

seven strongly supported monophyletic groups observed in the phylogeny , herein designated tribe-level taxa are discussed in the following sections. argopleura is the only genus that could not be included in any tribe with confidence but it is closely related to glandulocaudini and stevardiini .

eretmobryconini, new tribe
the east andean genus markiana and the west andean and central american species of bryconamericus  form a strongly supported clade  that is the sister group of the remaining stevardiinae. they share with stevardiinae the apomorphic presence of four teeth in the inner series of the premaxilla, but have ii+ <dig> dorsal fin rays, which is considered a plesiomorphic state in characidae.

markiana is a monophyletic genus with two geographically disjunct species distributed in the rio orinoco and the paraná, paraguay and mamoré river basins. its relationships with other taxa were not clearly resolved and hence the genus was treated as incertae sedis in characidae  <cit> . markiana was first proposed as belonging to stevardiinae  <cit>  based on spermiogenesis, sperm morphology, the possession of four teeth in the inner series of the premaxilla, and short triangular ectopterygoid. consistent with our results, this genus has been found related with the central american characid species bryconamericus emperador  <cit> , currently assigned to the bryconamericus scleroparius group  <cit>  and this clade formed the sister group to the remaining stevardiinae. although mirande and collaborators  <cit>  favored a grouping of markiana with astyanax, separately from the bryconamericus scleroparius group and from the stevardiinae, they found this relationship variable and with low stability in their analyses, and noted that markiana and the bryconamericus scleroparius group “share the absence of an ossified rhinosphenoid, an overlap of the horizontal arm of the preopercle by the third infraorbital, the possession of only four teeth on the inner premaxillary row, and the presence of two uroneurals”  <cit> . under self-weighted parsimony optimization  <cit>  and in other analyses  <cit> , these characters support the monophyly of a group formed by these two taxa. taken together, all the evidence strongly supports the recognition of markiana plus the bryconamericus scleroparius group as a monophyletic unit, and contradicts alternative hypotheses grouping markiana and astyanax.

the species of the bryconamericus scleroparius group form a clade both in our hypothesis based on molecular data  and on analysis based on morphological data  <cit>  . these species are not closely related to bryconamericus exodon, the type species of the genus, which is placed in a distant position in the phylogeny , and must be recognized as a group separate from bryconamericus. in addition, the monophyly of bryconamericus is strongly rejected by our molecular data . among the species of bryconamericus scleroparius group, b. bayano is the type species of the genus eretmobrycon fink,  <dig>  which was synonymized with bryconamericus  <cit> . based on our results and in previous results from morphology and sperm data  <cit> , we propose the revalidation of the genus eretmobrycon and the inclusion of all bryconamericus species present in node  <dig>  within this genus . also, bryconamericus guaytarae and b. simus, not examined here, were tentatively resolved within the b. scleoparius group  <cit>  and, because of it, are also tentatively included in eretmobrycon. even though the number of ii+ <dig> dorsal-fin rays is plesiomorphic, it can be used as a further character to distinguish the species of eretmobrycon from bryconamericus.

xenurobryconini myers and böhlke,  <dig>  new usage 
the tribe xenurobryconini, as currently defined, contains seven genera: argopleura, chrysobrycon, iotabrycon, ptychocharax, scopaeochrax, tyttocharax and xenurobrycon . this group was first proposed for xenurobrycon and tyttocharax  <cit>  based on morphological similarities of their caudal fins. tyttocharax was later split in two genera: tyttocharax and scopaeocharax  <cit> , and in this same study argopleura and iotabrycon were added as members of the xenurobryconini. ptychocharax and chrysobrycon were described later  <cit>  and also added to the tribe.

the monophyly of this tribe is strongly rejected by our molecular data . instead, our results  resolved a highly supported clade ) congruent with “subgroup b xenurobryconins” sensu weitzman and fink  <cit> , diagnosed by  <dig> morphological synapomorphies. monophyly of this group is further supported by the apomorphic sperm morphotype m <dig> shared by these three genera  <cit>  . iotabrycon and ptychocharax  were found as successive sister groups to )  <cit> , but further investigation is necessary to test their membership within xenurobryconini since molecular or sperm ultrastructure information are currently unavailable for these two genera. we provisionally list them within xenurobryconini .

the other two genera, argopleura and chrysobrycon, are more closely related to the tribes glandulocaudini and stevardiini . in most of our phylogenetic results, argopleura is resolved as the sister group of glandulocaudini, however in the ml tree reconstructed in raxml it is placed as sister group of glandulocaudini and stevardiini . since affinities of argopleura with glandulocaudini and stevardiini are not clearly resolved and argopleura could be potentially included in gladulocaudini , this genus is temporarily placed as incertae sedis in stevardiinae. the new circumscription of the tribe xenurobryconini is restricted to the genera scopaeocharax, tyttocharax, and xenurobrycon, and possibly iotabrycon and ptychocharax.

glandulocaudini eigenmann,  <dig> sensu menezes and weitzman, 2009
the monophyly of the tribe glandulocaudini including the genera mimagoniates as sister group of lophiobrycon and glandulocauda is supported by our results . the monophyly of glandulocaudini was hypothesized  <cit>  based on the presence of modified caudal peduncle squamation extending onto the caudal fin from the ventral region of the dorsal caudal-fin lobe and by the presence of modified club cells on the caudal organ, which probably secretes a pheromone during courtship. all the species in this group are inseminating. relationships within glandulocaudini, grouping lophiobrycon as sister group to glandulocauda receive high bootstrap support , rejecting previous hypothesis that placed lophiobrycon as the sister group of the other two genera in this clade  <cit> .

stevardiini gill,  <dig>  new usage
monophyly of a clade composed by the tribes hysteronotini, phenacobryconini , stevardiini and xenurobryconini has been proposed  <cit>  based mostly on the morphology and histology of the caudal organ. the molecular data resolved a monophyletic group including chrysobrycon  with other taxa previously assigned to stevardiini and hysteronotini . the stevardiini  is resolved as a strongly supported monophyletic group that includes corynopoma riisei and the four species of gephyrocharax . this clade is the sister group of a clade that includes pseudocorynopoma , chrysobrycon myersi, and a characid from the southwestern amazon  tentatively assigned to gephyrocharax. strong support of node  <dig>  suggests that this form could be assigned to chrysobrycon, with whom it also shares a distribution in western amazonia, while other species assigned to gephyrocharax are distributed in the orinoco, atrato, and central american rivers, but further study may be necessary to fully resolve this issue.

in conclusion, we recognize an extended tribe stevardiini that includes chrysobrycon and pseudocorynopoma, and possibly hysteronotus, in addition to the three genera currently recognized in this tribe . further analysis of pterobrycon and hysteronorus is necessary to resolve of the final composition of this tribe.

hemibryconini géry,  <dig>  new usage
the hemibryconini was first introduced  <cit>  to refer to a large group of characids consisting of boehlkea, bryconacidnus, bryconamericus, ceratobranchia, coptobrycon, hemibrycon, knodus, microgenys, nematobrycon, piabarchus, rhinobrycon, and rhinopetitia. we adopt the name but modify the circumscription to recognize a well-supported clade that includes solely acrobrycon, boehlkea and hemibrycon. these genera are characterized by the presence of teeth along more than one-half the length of the dentigerous margin of the maxilla  <cit> , which may constitute a diagnostic morphological character for the tribe. although we did not examine boehlkea in this study, it is provisionally included in hemibryconini, based on this morphological evidence.

previous studies that addressed relationships within stevardiinae using sexually dimorphic characters inferred a sister-group relationship between acrobrycon and diapoma plus planaltina  <cit> . other studies based on osteological and external morphological characters failed to support this relationship, suggesting instead that acrobrycon is most closely related to mimagoniates, pseudocorynopoma, and diapoma  <cit> . similarly, other morphological studies have suggested a close relationship between either boehlkea and hemibrycon  <cit>  or bryconamericus and hemibrycon  <cit> . the sister-group relationship between hemibrycon and bryconamericus lacks morphological or molecular support, which is not surprising since the monophyly of bryconamericus has been strongly rejected by several independent studies  <cit> . in contrast to previous studies, we find strong support for the sister group relationship between acrobrycon and hemibrycon .

under the phylogenetic hypothesis presented in fig.  <dig> , hemibrycon is paraphyletic, including five species originally described in bryconamericus . these species are not closely related to bryconamericus exodon, the type species of the genus, which is placed in a distant position in the phylogeny , and, therefore, should be recognized as a group separate from bryconamericus. we reassign these five species to hemibrycon . hemibrycon is found in both sides of the andes, with at least two separations, showing a peripheral distribution pattern within the amazon basin  <cit> .

our results also highlight issues with delimitation of species in hemibrycon. for instance, the clade from the upper río cauca basin includes three nominal species with negligible genetic differentiation: h. boquiae, h. brevispini, and h. quindos . based on these results and taking into account the lack of strong morphological evidence diagnosing these nominal species  <cit> , it is likely that h. brevispini, and h. quindos are junior synonyms of h. boquiae. the specimen from the upper cauca labeled bryconamericus caucanus is likely misidentified and should be included in h. boquiae. other specimens assigned to bryconamericus caucanus form a differentiated and well-supported clade with h. jabonero. further study of this group is warranted.

creagrutini miles,  <dig>  new usage
the affinities between carlastyanax and creagrutus were recently explored  <cit> , and seven morphological synapomorphies were identified uniting these genera, with one of these being unique among characids . this clade is well supported in our analysis  that also confirms the re-validation of carlastyanax at the rank of genus and as sister group to creagrutus  <cit> . however, according to our results piabina is not the sister group of creagrutus or creagrutus plus carlastyanax, rejecting previous proposals  <cit> . as in hemibrycon, creagrutus has a distribution to the two sides of the andes. nested among the amazonian species of creagrutus, the molecular data include an enigmatic taxon collected from the río marañón , identified at this time as characidae sp. n. that differs from creagrutus in having flattened multicuspids teeth on the premaxilla, as opposed to the massive teeth typical of creagrutus. this taxon is closely related to c. muelleri , another species from the western amazon basins, strongly suggesting that it should be assigned to creagrutus.

diapomini eigenmann,  <dig>  new usage
a large clade including the remaining taxa in stevardiinae is supported by the molecular data  and herein named diapomini, differing radically from the current usage  <cit>  . diapomini herein includes taxa assigned to attonitus, bryconacidnus, ceratobranchia, cyanocharax, diapoma, hypobrycon, knodus, nantis, odontostechus, piabina, piabarchus and rhinobrycon, in addition to a large number of species of bryconamericus plus hyphessobrycon guarani. within this tribe there are three large clades of which two clades with an amazon-orinoco basin distribution are weakly supported and one clade with a southern south america distribution is highly supported . in addition, lepidocharax was found  <cit>  as sister group of all former stevardiinae  <cit> , except landonia and glandulocauda. in our results, lepidocharax is instead placed as sister group of diapomini in all our phylogenetic results , although with low support . however, because of the consistency found among trees where lepidocharax is sister group of the diapomini, we tentatively assign lepidocharax as member of this tribe, but we highlight the necessity of further investigation.

the species with amazon-orinoco distribution are split into two weakly supported clades , both of which contain specimens assigned to knodus interspersed with other taxa. the monophyly of this genus is strongly rejected by the molecular data . the paraphyly of knodus with some species of bryconamericus was already pointed in a morphological study  <cit> . consistent with this hypothesis, our results support the separation of this genus in two clades. in the first amazonian clade, a number of bryconamericus species from the amazon and orinoco basins  are grouped in a clade with nearly all of the species of knodus analyzed here , including its type species k. meridae, and the inseminating bryconadenos tanaothoros from the rio xingu. although the node subtending this group  received low bootstrap support , it is supported in all our results , suggesting that knodus sensu stricto could be circumscribed to this clade . bryconadenos was hypothesized as closely related to attonitus  <cit> , but our results support the inclusion of bryconadenos in the genus knodus as defined above. some species definitions within this clade, most notably k. smithi from the río purus should be revised, since it does not group with other taxa from the urubamba and yuruá rivers assigned to the same species. knodus sensu stricto is the sister group of rhinobrycon negrensis .

in the second amazonian clade, a well-supported group  includes the inseminating bryconamericus pectinatus along with knodus hypopterus, knodus sp. from madre de dios and urubamba  and two unidentified species of bryconacidnus. this clade  does not include the type species of either knodus  or bryconamericus , and the strong support for this group suggests that all these species could be assigned to bryconacidnus, pending further study that includes the type species of this genus .

relationships of bryconamericus pachacuti from the upper amazon in peru remain somewhat uncertain but our results place it as the sister group to attonitus  with low bootstrap support , and separated from b. exodon by five nodes. generic assignment of b. pachacuti cannot be resolved with confidence, but it is tentatively retained in “bryconamericus” pending further study. ceratobranchia and attonitus are resolved as monophyletic with confidence and placed with low support as closely related to the “bryconacidnus” clade .

the remaining members of the diapomini form a strongly supported clade  that occupies the southern portion of the range of the stervardiinae and includes the species of bryconamericus analyzed in our study and not discussed so far, including the type species of the genus, b. exodon, and the species of the remaining genera listed for the diapomini.

the type species of bryconamericus is grouped with node  <dig> . although this node receives relatively low bootstrap support , it is present in all results obtained in this study . the sister group to bryconamericus exodon is a clade  formed by several species of bryconamericus , and other taxa assigned to three small genera hypobrycon, nantis, and odontostoechus. while describing the genus hypobrycon, it has been hypothesized that some of the species described in bryconamericus  would be possibly more closely related to this new genus than to b. exodon, and that the definition of hypobrycon could be expanded to include these species  <cit> . our finding corroborates the grouping of hypobrycon with bryconamericus iheringii and some other congeners but the recognition of hypobrycon or of the monotypic genera nantis and odontostoechus as valid genera would demand the recognition of several small genera in node  <dig>  odontostoechus has been described originally in cheirodontinae based on the presence of a single series of teeth in the premaxilla, but this seems to be an autapomorphy of the type species, o. lethostigmus. similarly, the diagnostic characters of nantis seem to constitute autapomorphies of the type species. given that bryconamericus has priority over all other nominal genera in this clade, our results provide the basis for defining a monophyletic genus bryconamericus sensu stricto that includes all the species subtended by node  <dig> . further study of this group is warranted given the morphological diversity of the studied species. other species of bryconamericus not subtended by node  <dig> and not discussed in this study, would be retained in “bryconamericus” until further study may justify shifting then to other genera .

piabarchus analis plus bryconamericus stramineus  and bryconamericus thomasi plus piabina  form two well-supported groups. these results suggest that the two species assigned to bryconamericus should be reassigned to piabarchus and piabina, respectively , since they are only distantly related to the type species bryconamericus exodon. a specimen from the amazon basin in peru assigned to piabarchus analis  was misidentified and corresponds to gephyrocharax . therefore the distribution of piabarchus is restricted to the paraguay-paraná and são francisco basins.

among the remaining genera included in this tribe , there is a very well supported clade embracing cyanocharax, diapoma and “hyphessobrycon” guarani. this clade is also supported by the apomorphic number of i+ <dig> pelvic-fin rays, a count also shared with the species of planaltina not analyzed herein, and differing from the other genera in stevardiinae that have i+ <dig> rays . the genus diapoma  has been hypothesized as closely related to other inseminating species of stevardiinae that also bear a caudal organ  <cit> . all these studies, however, did not include a comprehensive sampling of other species without caudal organs to test this relationship. it is of note that the caudal organs of the diapomini  <cit>  differ from those of taxa in other tribes in being present and identical in both males and females, while it is sexually dimorphic  in other inseminating tribes , suggesting the non-homology of the caudal organ of the diapomini relative to other tribes. our results place diapoma as a clade inserted in cyanocharax, making this genus as defined  <cit>  paraphyletic. similarities between cyanocharax and diapoma, such as tooth arrangement, general body shape, color pattern and number of pelvic-fin rays have been previously discussed  <cit> , in a comparison of the morphology of diapoma speculiferum and diapoma terofali with cyanocharax alburnus . based on the strong molecular support for this clade , species of cyanocharax and hyphessobrycon guarani should be reassigned to the genus diapoma  in order to define monophyletic genera and to be consistent with a phylogenetic classification. diapoma as herein defined includes five highly supported internal clades . further study of this group is warranted given the morphological diversity of the included species and the presence of four well-defined internal lineages.

monotypic tribes 
two monotypic tribes in stevardiinae were not analyzed here: landonini weitzman and menezes,  <dig> and phenacobryconini weitzman and menezes,  <dig>  landonia latidens was sampled in our study, but excluded from our analyses because of few genes amplified that produced instability in the phylogeny; phenobrycon henni was not available. as already pointed in the literature  <cit> , the large amount of monotypic genera being proposed in characidae to accommodate autapomorphies is somehow arbitrary and, in many instances, lacking phylogenetic inference. in the case of landonini and phenacobryconini, monotypic tribes were proposed to accommodate the large amount of autapomorphies presented by these monotypic genera; however these propositions do not reflect phylogenetic relationships. since the relationships for these two monotypic genera are unknown in stevardiinae, we placed them as incertae sedis  to emphasize the necessity of further investigation of their relationships.

insemination
external fertilization is the most common reproductive strategy across the ostariophysi, including characiformes. insemination as a reproductive strategy is found only in some representatives of the characidae, including several members of the stevardiinae . historically, the study of insemination was prompted by the presence of modified glandular organs in the caudal or anal fins of some species and documented histologically by the presence of sperm in the ovaries of stevardiine species that bear this caudal organ. insemination, however, has also been documented for a few species lacking modified caudal or anal fins , but information on insemination, or the lack of it, is absent for most of the remaining members of this subfamily, being available only for  <dig> of the  <dig> species of stevardiinae , and only for  <dig> species analyzed here . apparently due to the fact that external fertilization is ancestral and widespread in characidae, characid species whose reproductive strategy is unknown have been treated informally in the literature as externally fertilized, but absence of evidence should not be used as evidence for absence. a topology test constraining all known inseminating taxa into one clade, however, rejects a single origin for insemination . all members of xenurobryconini, glandulocaudini, stevardiini and scattered species in hemibryconini, creagrutini and diapomini are inseminating. this phylogenetic distribution suggests multiple origins and/or multiple losses of the inseminating reproductive strategy in stevardiinae. that is in agreement with the general phylogenies of the characidae  <cit> . further analyses should produce more conclusive results once the reproductive strategy of most species of stevardiines is known.

in term of sperm morphology, m <dig> spermatozoid from the xenurobryconins is the only sperm morphology recovered as monophyletic, while m <dig> and m <dig> are found scattered along the tree. since m <dig> appears close to the root in markiana and in several other terminal nodes, it could constitute a diagnostic character for the stevardiinae. for m <dig>  the sporadic position for the few taxa that present this sperm type along the tree may indicate that this trait has multiple origins in stevardiinae. however, the proposition of these sperm morphotypes was based on grouping multiple characters  into a single sperm morphotype  <cit> . a reductionist analysis that creates artificial sperm types could lump independent characteristics, with distinguished evolutionary histories, into a single sperm group , not necessarily recovering phylogenetic relationships among taxa that share them.

unfortunately, it is important to highlight that the lack of information about sperm morphology and reproductive strategy in several taxa precludes the use of probabilistic approaches for ancestral state reconstruction to test the hypotheses presented here.

CONCLUSIONS
the molecular phylogeny presented in this study provides a significant advance in our knowledge of the relationships among of characid fishes in the subfamily stevardiinae. on the basis of well-supported monophyletic groups, we defined seven tribes  and propose new circumscriptions for historically problematic  genera such as bryconamericus and knodus, splitting part of the species of bryconamericus into different and not closely related genera . some key taxa not included in our study or with poor resolution in our phylogeny remain with uncertain classification, and point to necessary future studies. reproductive traits among stevardiine species that include inseminating strategy and variable sperm morphology are interpreted under the new phylogenetic hypotheses to show that some are evolutionary labile characters while others are phylogenetically informative requiring additional documentation and further analyses to understand their origins and phylogenetic distributions.

