BACKGROUND
the advent of sequence-based assays of transcriptomes  has allowed better quantification of mrna, with less bias and greater dynamic range than microarrays  <cit> . however rna-seq is undergoing a rapid evolution, and the impact of basic experimental design on data quality is still under investigation.

the majority of published transcriptome data have used rna extracted from the whole cell , assuming a negligible contribution of nuclear rna to the total rna population. this assumption has been challenged by trask et al. <cit> , who demonstrated that the nuclear contribution does impact the gene expression profile when examining steady-state messenger rna  by microarray analysis. rna extracted from the cytoplasmic fraction, which does not contain a nuclear rna contribution, could also be used for rna-seq experiments. however, none of the available studies on rna-seq quantification have compared the use of total rna with the use of cytoplasmic rna.

during rna synthesis, mrnas are transcribed, spliced, capped, and polyadenylated in the nucleus and the resulting steady-state rna is transported from nucleus to cytoplasm via nuclear pore complexes for translation. messenger ribonucleoproteins are co-transcriptionally recruited to mrna, and direct the export of mrnas via their interaction with mrna export factors and nuclear pore complexes  <cit> . this process is regulated at many levels, yielding a dynamic steady-state mrna population that is maintained by synthesis and turnover, at varying rates for each individual transcript  <cit> . the rate of transportation from nucleus to cytoplasm can affect the amount of transcript detected in both the total and the cytoplasmic fractions, and hence might bias measurements of transcript levels. it has previously been shown that mrna molecules that are not of immediate need to produce proteins are retained in the nucleus  <cit> . in addition to nuclear retention, the gene level is also regulated by other mechanisms and one of them is the degradation of mrna by the exosome complex  <cit> .

it is known that the levels of mrna and protein abundance in cells are modestly correlated  <cit> . one can argue that cytoplasmic rna is a better proxy for protein levels since the cytoplasmic fraction contains only mature rna; unlike total rna, which also contains nuclear rna. validation of this argument will require studies that assess how well the levels of total rna and cytoplasmic rna are correlated with protein abundance.

to investigate the impact of nuclear transcripts present in total rna, we compared the expression levels of genes obtained from the total fraction with those obtained from the cytoplasmic fraction. we performed poly+ rna-seq experiments on three human cancer cell lines  on cytoplasmic and total rna fractions in quadruplicates. we investigated the effect of the length and structure of untranslated regions and the length of the coding sequences on the transcript levels in total and cytoplasmic rna. mirna-mediated degradation of transcripts and its role in transcript regulation was also investigated, as well as the effect on the correlation with protein levels. we present here an extensive study of rna-seq that compares gene expression levels from poly  isolated total and cytoplasmic rna as well as their relation to protein levels.

RESULTS
rna from three different human cell lines  was extracted from whole cells  and from the cytoplasm , which does not include nuclear transcripts. each extraction was replicated four times. to ensure that the cytoplasmic fraction was pure from nuclear contamination, all extractions were analyzed using capillary electrophoresis . the nuclear and cytoplasmic preparations had, in addition to the ribosomal peaks, discriminatory signature profiles in which the nuclear fractions contained an additional peak, which were present only in the total rna preparation  <cit> . the strongest signal, at roughly  <dig> nucleotides , was used to determine nuclear rna presence. all of the total rna samples displayed the signature peak, whereas the cytoplasmic fractions did not . the samples were then sequenced using massively parallel sequencing, and rpkm  values were calculated  <cit> . expression values were in excellent agreement between total and cytoplasmic preparations for every cell line  and the distribution of the rpkm values between the total and cytoplasmic fractions did not differ significantly . in all cell lines, the gene coverage was slightly higher in cytoplasmic rna than in total rna.

the deseq algorithm was used to find sets of genes detected at different levels in cytoplasmic and in total rna  <cit> , hereafter referred to as differentially detected  genes. a number of dd genes were identified between the total and cytoplasmic fractions within each cell line . in a- <dig> and u-251mg, 18% and 15% of the genes were detected in different amounts between total and cytoplasmic rna of the approximately  <dig> detected genes; whereas in u- <dig> os, only 6% of the genes were differentially detected . there were approximately as many genes detected at higher levels in total rna  and in cytoplasmic rna .

length and structure of untranslated regions influence nucleus-to-cytoplasm transportation rate of transcripts
messenger rnas vary in sequence and length and this can affect their rate of transportation to the cytoplasm. to investigate this, genes that were detected differentially—in one, two, or all three cell lines—were selected and classified into two groups: genes that had a higher number of copies in the total rna fraction and genes that had a lower number of copies in the total rna fraction and plotted separately . differential detection of genes in total or cytoplasmic rna fractions relies on that total rna fraction would contain all mature polyadenylated transcripts whether they were in the cytoplasm or in the nucleus of the cell, whereas the cytoplasmic fractions only contain transcripts already transported to the cytoplasm.

to study whether the lengths of untranslated regions  could affect the transportation rate of transcripts, we compared the utr and coding sequence lengths of differentially detected genes with those of genes exhibiting no differential detection. we found that genes detected in higher amounts in total rna  tended to have longer utrs  and that a significant proportion of longer transcripts were detected at lower levels in the cytoplasmic rna . this trend was consistent for genes that were differentially detected in one or more cell line . we obtained utr fold energies of  <dig>  genes from the ucsc genome browser . a more negative fold energy corresponds to a more structured sequence. figure 3d–e and additional file 4: figure s <dig> show that genes that were detected at higher levels in total rna had lower utr fold energies  than those with no differential detection. the data also show that the secondary structure of the 3’ utrs had a stronger effect compared to 5’ utrs.

genes with higher numbers of mirna target sites were detected in lower levels in the cytoplasmic rna fraction compare to total rna fraction
transcripts that are degraded in the cytoplasm in high rates will also contribute to the differential detection since those degraded in cytoplasm will be detected at lower levels in the cytoplasmic rna fraction compared to total rna fraction. to investigate whether these genes have a higher number of micro-rna  targets, hence resulting in a higher probability for degradation when exported into the cytoplasm, an analysis comparing the number of mirna targets per gene was performed. the same method to classify differentially detected genes  was used for the analysis. the mirna data for the three cell lines  has been described elsewhere  <cit> . the list of experimentally verified mirnas per target gene was downloaded from mirtarbase  <cit>  and compared with the list of expressed mirna in each cell line. as described by akan et al., the three cell lines have very similar mirna profiles but u- <dig> os have more uniquely expressed mirnas. there was a significant difference  between the three groups of differentially detected genes for each cell line . the genes that had a higher number of transcripts in the total rna fraction  showed for all three cell lines a slightly higher number of mirna targets than the genes that had a lower number of copies in the total rna fraction  and genes that where not differentially detected . interestingly, the cell line with a more pronounces difference between the groups, u- <dig> os, is also the cell line that has more uniquely expressed mirnas, and this could be the explanation for the slightly higher number of mirna targets per gene seen in u- <dig> os. overall, the data suggests that the mirna may be one of the contributing factors for differential detection of genes.

correlation between mrna and protein expression
a ratio-based correlation analysis  was performed between protein abundance levels  <cit>  and the corresponding total and cytoplasmic mrna levels, for each cell line. for u- <dig> os, the correlation coefficient between protein abundance and total rna was  <dig>  and between protein abundance and cytoplasmic rna was  <dig> . the correlation coefficients for the other two cell lines  were very similar. there were no significant differences  between total and cytoplasmic rna levels in terms of correlation with protein abundance. the correlations were similar whether differentially detected genes were included or excluded, see additional file 5: table s <dig> for correlation coefficients between protein abundance and total and cytoplasmic rna, respectively, for genes detected differentially in all three cell lines.

discussion
when designing a gene expression experiment with the goal of measuring steady-state levels of mrna, care should be taken to isolate rna from the correct cellular compartment. currently, the majority of rna-seq experiments sequence mature transcripts  in the total rna fraction, which also contain mature mrna species to some degree  <cit> . removing the ~5– <dig> times more complex nuclear rna  <cit>  could reduce the overall complexity and enable deeper sampling of the remaining mrna population and thus increase sensitivity. however, isolating the cytoplasmic rna instead of total rna is feasible when working with cell cultures, but for many other biological models are total rna the only choice.

despite the proposed advantage of sequencing only cytoplasmic rna for cells in suspension, it is still not clear whether the cytoplasmic fraction represents the full complexity of the steady-state rna of whole cells. one argument against using cytoplasmic rna could be that the translation levels of certain transcripts might be regulated by their transportation rate from nucleus to cytoplasm  <cit> . moreover, the transportation rate of transcripts from nucleus to cytoplasm could depend on particular properties of the transcript such as length or sequence.

here, we investigated how the representations of transcripts differ between the cytoplasmic and total rna fractions. there were  <dig>   <dig>  and  <dig> transcripts in u- <dig> os, u-251mg, and a- <dig> that were detected at higher levels in total rna than in cytoplasmic rna. this indicates that a significant proportion of the mature transcripts were retained in the nucleus, which then contributed to higher detection levels in the total rna fraction since the cytoplasmic rna lacked the mature transcripts from the nucleus. utr fold energies can influence post-transcriptional regulation and it has been shown that utr fold energies of mrna transcripts are lower than those of random sequences of the same length with the same mononucleotide frequency  <cit> . interestingly, most of the genes detected at higher level in total rna had long and structured 5’ and 3’ utr sequences as well as longer coding sequences, in all cell lines. furthermore, it may cause an improper estimation of the rna levels of these transcripts in the cytoplasmic fraction. similarly, shorter genes or genes with shorter utrs were overestimated in the cytoplasmic fraction. this mis-estimation could introduce biases and should be considered in the analysis of transcriptome.

hence, our data indicates that the transportation rate of transcripts from nucleus to cytoplasm depends on the sequence features of transcripts. selective degradation of transcripts by for example the exosome complex and the half-life of transcripts cannot be ruled out as contributing factors. the results from the comparison of microrna targets per gene for all three cell lines show that there is a higher number of microrna targets per gene for genes detected differentially higher in the total rna fraction compared to the cytoplasmic rna fraction. this could indicate that these genes are subject to degradation to a higher degree when entering the cytoplasm. however this does not explain the higher number of genes with structured 5’ utr sequences as well as longer coding sequences in the total rna fraction. therefore, we propose that both nuclear retention and cytoplasmic rna degradation via mirnas are the main contributors to the differential detection of genes.

there were  <dig>   <dig>  and  <dig> genes for u- <dig> os, u-251mg, and a- <dig>  respectively, that were detected at higher levels in cytoplasmic rna than in total rna. there is no obvious biological reason for this. however, a technical explanation can be suggested: owing to the lower representation of longer transcripts in the cytoplasmic fraction, there was relatively more sequencing space. this could have allowed for better coverage of shorter transcripts in cytoplasmic rna than in total rna. indeed, most of the genes detected at higher levels in the cytoplasmic fraction had shorter coding lengths. however, not all the differentially detected genes were the same for all cell lines. this supports the fact that there are also cell-specific factors that affect the nuclear retention of transcripts, apart from transcript sequence and structure  <cit> .

our results have shown that the total and cytoplasmic fractions yield different representations of steady-state rna levels. it can be argued that cytoplasmic polyadenylated rna might correlate better with protein abundance levels if one assumes that the contribution of polyadenylated nuclear rna to the steady-state mrna levels in cytoplasm were not negligible. however, a previous study of mouse fibroblasts investigated mrna and protein levels in relation to half-lives, transcription rates, and translational control and found that mrna only explained around 40% of the variability in protein levels  <cit> . our data show that cytoplasmic and total rna correlated very similarly to protein abundance levels in all cell lines, and the correlation level is similar to what have previously been published  <cit> . this indicates that the neither nucleus-to-cytoplasm transportation rate nor the mirna mediated degradation of transcripts affect protein abundance at a global level. however, future studies with synchronized cells and different time points would shed some more light upon the correlation between the rna and protein population in a cell. furthermore, including all transcripts and not only polyadenylated rna would give amore complete overview of the rna population in a given cell type.

CONCLUSIONS
overall, our findings show that there are significant differences between total mrna and cytoplasmic mrna, which should be considered when comparing gene and protein expression patterns, and in general when using mrna levels in different cellular compartments as a proxy for protein levels. such efforts include whole genome/proteome comparisons, such as the human protein atlas initiative  as well as other global efforts that correlate disease with genomic, transcriptomic, and proteomic information. furthermore, our findings show that expression levels derived from the total rna fraction be regarded as an appropriate estimate of the amount of mrnas present in a given cell population, independent of the coding sequence length or utrs.

