BACKGROUND
since the introduction of the phage display peptide libraries in  <dig>  <cit> , when a vector could directly display a small foreign peptide in one of the coating proteins of the filamentous m <dig> phage particle, the greatest task has been to find suitable ligands. because of the need for repeated panning rounds to isolate high-affinity ligands, the whole panning procedure is rather laborious and time consuming. therefore, a shorter, more efficient procedure, with fewer steps and fewer panning cycles would be desirable.

phage display is suitable not only for peptides, but also for small proteins and protein fragments , which can be expressed on the phage surface proteins  <cit> . several linear  <cit>  and constrained cyclic  <cit>  phage peptide libraries have been sucessfully used to screen for affinity ligands against a variety of targets, all of which were based on use of the laborious, repetitive biopanning procedure. the technique of phage display and its applications is more extensively discussed in some recent review papers. c. adda et al.  <cit>  and j. kehoe et al. <cit>  review the technique of phage display in all its aspects. m. paschke  <cit> ; m. szardenings  <cit> ; m. arap  <cit> ; c. mersich et al.  <cit>  and v. petrenko  <cit>  present extensive reviews on the present state and applications of the phage display technology.

to separate phages binding to the ligand from non-binders, the ligand is immobilized on a solid carrier allowing for easy separation of the liquid phase, which contains predominantly non-binding phages, from the solid phase, which contains mainly binding phages . many variations of the technique have been described, however, rigid plastic materials, such as polystyrene, have traditionally been used as carriers to provide a nonporous interface for ligand immobilization. as the diffusivity of phages is negligible due to their size, the ligands immobilized in diffusional pores will be essentially unavailable to the phages. to provide a larger interface area, the size of the carrier beads can be decreased or the surface can be decorated with tentacles. however, this does not circumvent the main shortcoming of the traditional biopanning process, namely that washing is carried out in batch mode which is a "one-plate" operation and hence rather inefficient from a bioseparation point of view. not surprisingly, several repetitive rounds  are needed to isolate strong binders. the separation of a liquid phase from a solid phase in chromatographic mode  could be assumed to be much more efficient, giving efficient separation of binders from non-binders in a single operation. to determine whether this is in fact the case, an affinity chromatographic material that combines several non-trivial characteristics is needed. such a material should:

 be macroporous, with a pore size no less than  <dig> μm, as the phages themselves are about  <dig> μm long ;

 have highly interconnected pores, allowing convectional rather than diffusional mass transport of phages and presumably cells inside the pores;

 be hydrophilic with minimal non-specific binding of phages or cells and hence no need for post-coating;

 contain active groups for the immobilization of the ligand.

we have recently presented a material with the required combination of properties for chromatographic separation of microbial and mammalian cells  <cit> . macroporous hydrogels, or cryogels, are produced using polymerization in semi-frozen conditions, where ice crystals perform the role of the porogen, and polymerization proceeds in the non-frozen liquid phase  <cit> . the properties of cryogels and the architecture of interconnected macropores are presented in detail in recent publications by plieva et al.  <cit> . in this communication we present a new chromato-panning procedure based on using a cryogel as a matrix for ligand immobilization.

RESULTS
on-column panning
the efficiency of the column panning procedure  was studied by comparing the performance of the chromato-panning procedure with that of the tube panning procedure. different phage libraries were used, and three panning rounds were performed. human lactoferrin  was used as the ligand, and this was coupled to the column as described in materials and methods. the most frequently used elution media in biopanning procedures are glycine and hydrochloric acid at a ph of ~ <dig> . frequent use of these acidic buffers may denature the bound ligand, leading to a loss in binding capacity. in earlier work  <cit>   <dig> m nacl was used as elution medium to elute protein from a cryogel-phage column with good results. to evaluate the elution strength both elution media were investigated in a column panning procedure, showing similar elution efficiencies . based on these findings both elution solvents were used in further experiments:  for the tube panning procedure,  <dig>  m glycine, ph  <dig> , was used as the elution medium and  for the column panning procedure  <dig> m nacl was used as elution medium. after elution, phages from each panning round were amplified and recovered, their binding efficiencies were tested using a phage elisa as described in materials and methods. different phage libraries, a cyclic hexamer , linear hexamer  and a linear pentadecamer  library, were used for biopanning. after one round in the column panning procedure, the selected phages show comparable  or somewhat higher  binding strength towards hulf as compared to the phages obtained after the third panning round in the tube panning experiment . the l <dig> library showed similar results to the c <dig> library . in the tube panning experiment an increase in binding strength was observed in consecutive panning rounds . in the column panning procedure, no further increase was observed after the first round . table  <dig>  shows that a statistical significant difference  between top-values  is observed for all three used between the first round of the tube panning and the chromato-panning procedure, which disappeared after the third tube panning round. furthermore, also a paired comparison over the three libraries between the first round of the tube panning and the chromato-panning procedure resulted in a statistically significant difference . these results show the superiority of the chromato-panning procedure for fast screening for high affinity ligands.

for the three phage libraries c <dig>  l <dig> and l <dig>  top-values, 95% ci and r <dig>  was calculated and compared for the tube panning round  <dig>   <dig>  and chromato-panning procedure round  <dig> . superscripts denote statistical significant difference  between top-values .

on-column infection
to further optimize the column panning procedure, on-column infection of e. coli cells was investigated. the macropores in the cryogel are large enough to allow e. coli cells to pass freely through the plain cryogel without blocking the pores  <cit> . however, on the hulf cryogel we observed binding of cells that could be eluted from the cryogel with nacl, in accordance with previous observations that e. coli cells bound to an anion-exchange cryogel column were eluted by nacl  <cit> . as hulf is positively charged at ph ~ <dig> , the hulf-cryogel may act as an "anion-exchanger", which could explain our observation. nacl  eluted all cells from the column. by immediately diluting the  <dig> m nacl eluate in luria broth  medium, the final nacl concentration of the eluted cell suspension was reduced to approx.  <dig>  m nacl. this nacl concentration had no negative effect on the viability of the cells. under these conditions we observed a similar growth rate on agar plates to that of cells that had not come into contact with high salt concentrations.

the on-column infection procedure was first tested with a single-clone phage  as described in materials and methods. the amount of amplified phages after on-column infection was comparable to the amount obtained in a tube panning procedure or a column panning procedure with a separate infection step. the binding strength of the phages obtained was similar to that for phages obtained from a normal panning procedure . a similar result was obtained with phage clones hu <dig> and hu <dig>  although the three phage clones expressed a different peptide sequence on the piii protein  <cit> . the same procedure was consequently performed with the l <dig> and l <dig> phage libraries. two column panning rounds and on-column infection were performed with each phage library. the amount of phages and the binding strength were determined after each panning round. again, the amount of phages was comparable to the amount of phages obtained in the other panning procedures. the binding strength was also similar as that obtained in the column panning procedure with a separate infection step. again, the results show that only one panning round is necessary to obtain specific phages for the l <dig> library. statistical analysis shows no significant difference between the top-values of round  <dig> and  <dig> of the chromato-panning . for the l <dig> library still some increase is observed after the second round , probably due to the higher diversity of phages present in the library , indicating that a second panning round might here be advisable. these results are in agreement with those shown in figure 2b, where a similar column panning procedure was performed except that the infection step was performed separately and not on-column. these results confirm that biopanning was achieved on the hulf column, and that on-column infection of the e. coli cells took place.

to further confirm the on-column infection of the e. coli cells we measured the amplification rate of the e. coli cells after infection on the column. e. coli cells that were not in contact with phages  did not grow on agar plates containing tetracycline. e. coli cells that were infected by phages on the column survived and grew on the agar plates containing tetracycline . after the cells were infected and eluted from the column, the cell suspension was centrifuged and the pellet re-suspended in lb buffer. at this point, the optical density at  <dig> nm  was measured. after plating, overnight incubation at 37°c and harvesting the cells in lb medium, od <dig> nm was measured again. a ~ <dig> fold increase in od <dig> was observed, which indicates that the cells were effectively infected on the hulf cryogel column. the new panning procedure is independent of the ligand or phage library used. we used different phage peptide libraries and two different proteins as the ligand. the results presented above are based on results obtained with hulf as ligand. similar results were obtained in an experiment with α-chymotrypsin as the ligand and the l <dig> phage peptide library .

chromato-panning procedure
to evaluate the chromato-panning procedure it was compared with the traditional biopanning procedure  as well with other protocols  described in the literature  <cit> . special attention was paid to the total time required for the procedure, the efficiency of the elution media, and the efficiency of the procedure in terms of the number of rounds necessary to obtain high-affinity binders.

a mean time frame of each step in the panning procedure is presented for one panning round. the total time represents the time frame for a complete panning procedure as described in methods.

a mean time frame of each step in the panning procedure is presented for one panning round. the total time represents the time frame for a complete panning procedure as reported in the literature.

the total time is considerably shorter when using a column procedure . advantages of the column procedure are: no target coating is needed for each round as the column is re-usable, no post-coating is needed, the contact time between the phage-containing solution and the column is shorter and, finally, a milder elution medium can be used. the first column panning round takes about 1/ <dig> of the time required for the first round in a tube panning procedure. if three rounds were needed a reduction of approximately 50% in time is obtained. only  <dig> round was necessary to obtain high-affinity binders in the column panning procedure, compared to  <dig> rounds in the tube panning procedure. in this case column panning takes only approximately 1/ <dig> of the time needed for a tube panning.

CONCLUSIONS
the use of macroporous cryogels in a chromato-panning procedure has various advantages. the large interconnecting pores of the cryogel allow  free passage of bacteriophages during the panning step without clogging the column, and  free passage of e. coli cells so that infection can take place on-column.  a significant time saving can be achieved as only one column panning round is needed to select high-affinity phage clones.  a milder elution solvent can be used to elute phages and e. coli cells, without denaturing the bound ligand on the column or having negative effects on the viability of the cells. at present we provided "proof-of-principle", it is clear that our procedure as well as the data need to be more extensively validated in the future before the method can be broadly used as an alternative for the classical biopanning and as a new platform for rapid screening of ligands.

