BACKGROUND
climatic oscillations of the pleistocene period have significantly affected the population dynamics and genetic structures of extant taxa. the effects of glacial expansions and contractions on genetic characteristics and population demographics depend on the latitude, topography and life history of the species in question  <cit> . genetic studies concerning temperate species in north america and europe reveal a widespread pattern of northern expansion and southern refugia after the retreat of continental ice sheets  <cit> . in contrast, the tropics and sub-tropics had relatively stable climates during the pleistocene period  <cit> , which could have initiated different responses to glacial cycles and allowed inhabitants to generate genetic and demographic patterns distinct from those of temperate species  <cit> . the general effects of the pleistocene ice ages on historical genetic structures of tropical and subtropical species remain largely unknown. however, several recent studies have demonstrated that tropical and subtropical species exhibit greater genetic diversity and limited post-glacial demographic expansion than temperate species  <cit> .

taiwan is a subtropical island of approximately  <dig>  km <dig> located almost  <dig> km from the asian mainland . the island was created by the collision of the philippine sea plate and eurasian plate approximately  <dig> mya  <cit> , and uplifting processes thrust the proto-taiwan above sea level approximately  <dig> mya in the pliocene  <cit> . land bridges between taiwan and the adjacent asian continent formed and submerged intermittently during pliocene and pleistocene glacial cycles owing to changes in sea levels  <cit> , resulting in taiwan's fauna and flora having periodic contact with the asian continent. taiwan's central mountain range  reached its current altitude approximately  <dig> to  <dig> mya, and currently includes more than  <dig> peaks exceeding  <dig>  m  <cit> . the cmr transects the island from north to south, leaving a small portion of flat plains along the southwest coast . the topographic complexity and high altitude of the cmr provided opportunities for diversification in taiwan's endemic organisms  <cit> .

a phylogeographic study of taiwanese terrestrial organisms including higher plants , vertebrates  and invertebrates  demonstrates that the cmr is a prominent geographical barrier to species movement and gene flow among populations. the lowland to mid-elevation species in taiwan exhibit a general pattern of eastern and western allopatric phylogroups separated by the cmr. however, several high-elevation small mammals including the mole-shrew   <cit>  and wood mouse   <cit>  display distinct patterns of north-south phylogeographic sub-divisions. these divisions suggest that high mountain ranges could function as sky islands, providing interglacial refugia for high-altitude species, but genetic studies investigating strong dispersers demonstrate that the cmr is not an effective geographic barrier for vagile organisms such as the horseshoe bat   <cit> , montane bird   <cit>  and wood spider   <cit> , which generally exhibit high gene flow among homogeneous populations.

the pleistocene river drainage plays a central role in shaping the biogeography and current genetic structures of taiwanese freshwater fauna. endemic freshwater vertebrates fall into three major biogeographic regions, the eastern, southern and north-central regions, reflecting the paleo-drainages of pleistocene land bridges  <cit>  . previous research concerning freshwater organisms including minnows   <cit> , ray-finned fish   <cit>  and stream crabs   <cit>  reveals substantial genetic differentiation among populations that primarily correspond to these paleo-drainages. studies investigating low-elevation wetland fishes suggest that low genetic divergence among populations  <cit>  could result from seasonal flooding or periodic connections to ancestral river drainages. early studies indicate that the genetic structure of freshwater fauna with strict aquatic life histories is primarily the result of interplay between vicariance caused by ancient river drainages and the organism's vagility. however, a phylogeographic study concerning the predominant and diverse aquatic insects in taiwan's freshwater ecosystems have not been conducted.

aquatic insects have a complex life history comprising an aquatic immature stage constrained by freshwater habitats, and a winged adult stage with dispersal being limited by terrestrial barriers and flying ability  <cit> . the dispersal abilities of aquatic insects vary greatly among taxa and according to age and sex, ranging from strong dispersers such as dragonflies to less vagile mosquitoes  <cit> . determining whether aquatic insects were affected by the same isolating barriers that generated genetic structure in terrestrial and freshwater fauna is a prerequisite for understanding the relative impact of river drainage and mountain vicariance in taiwan. euphaea formosa hagen,  <dig> , is a gossamer-wing damselfly species endemic to taiwan, found throughout the island in the lowlands and fast flowing mountain streams at an altitude of less lower than  <dig>  meters. the dispersal ability of adult e. formosa has not been estimated but observations from mark-recapture studies suggest that adult dispersal could be high . therefore, e. formosa is a suitable freshwater insect candidate that should have developed the same genetic signatures observed in more vagile terrestrial species in taiwan  <cit> .

the present study uses dna sequences of mitochondrial cytochrome oxidase ii  and nuclear internal transcribed spacer  to investigate the phylogeography and demographic history of e. formosa. the aim was to determine whether this endemic damselfly exhibits phylogeographic patterns and a genetic structure similar to terrestrial and freshwater fauna in taiwan. furthermore, the historical demography and lineage divergence time of e. formosa was investigated to determine the concordance between the population history and major climatic cycles during the pleistocene period.

RESULTS
sequence variation
a total of  <dig> bp of mitochondrial coii sequences were obtained from  <dig> individuals. the samples included  <dig> unique haplotypes in e. formosa and four in e. yayeyamana. the nuclear its sequence contained  <dig> bps including  <dig> unique haplotypes in  <dig> e. formosa and two in e. yayeyamana. the at content was 71% for coii but its demonstrated no bias towards a-t rich sequences . the pairwise sequence divergence of coii ranged from  <dig> to  <dig> % within e. formosa, and from  <dig>  to  <dig> % between e. formosa and e. yayeyamana. for its, the pairwise sequence divergence ranged from  <dig> to  <dig> % within e. formosa, and from  <dig>  to  <dig> % between e. formosa and e. yayeyamana. a microsatellite locus with ga repeats  appeared in the its <dig> region. the estimated ω ratio of coii sequences  was much less than one, and the lrt of m <dig> vs. m <dig> was insignificant . these results indicate that the m <dig> selection model did not fit the data significantly better than the m <dig> neutral model. therefore, the neutral evolution of coii nucleotide sites in euphaea damselflies is possible.

gene trees and species phylogeny
the hky+i+Γ  and tvmef+i  models were selected as the best-fitting models concerning sequence evolution of coii and its, respectively. the coii phylogeny was well resolved with strong support at the species level, suggesting a monophyletic e. formosa with respect to sister e. yayeyamana . this phylogeny identified two distinct coii haplotype clades  separated by a deep phylogenetic split. the north-central clade was restricted to northern and central taiwan, with the exception of two derived southern haplotypes , suggesting recent long-range dispersal. this clade had a balanced tree topology, suggesting a relatively large population that had been stable for a long time period. in contrast, the widespread clade contained two high frequency haplotypes  that were widely distributed throughout the island. the widespread clade had a star-like phylogeny, indicating rapid population expansion. the its tree suggested a monophyletic e. formosa sister to e. yayeyamana . this tree presented with a shallow topology and revealed no apparent population sub-structuring within e. formosa. the species tree estimated with *beast recovered e. formosa as a reciprocally monophyletic group, with e. yayeyamana being a sister species . within e. formosa, the haplotypes were grouped into the north-central and widespread clades, but the relationships among the sampled populations within these two clades were not resolved. this indicates a high number of shared haplotypes among the populations of both north-central and widespread clades.

population genetics
the haplotype diversities  of coii ranged from  <dig> to  <dig>  and the haplotype diversities of its ranged from  <dig>  to  <dig> . the nucleotide diversities  of these two gene regions varied between  <dig> and  <dig>  for coii, and between  <dig>  and  <dig>  for its. populations with the highest coii nucleotide diversities, representing ancestral sources of extant e. formosa, were present in five major river systems in northern and central taiwan . these populations corresponded to the two proposed paleo-drainage systems of taiwan, with the exception of the southern population from the fongkang river  . however, the populations from eastern taiwan  and the three river systems of the proposed paleo-drainage in the southwestern plains , exhibited low coii nucleotide diversities , indicating recent origins or population bottlenecks. the relatively high h  and low π  values within the widespread coii clade suggested rapid population growth from a small ancestral population . the north-central coii clade, which had high values for h  and π , indicated a stable population with a long-term, large population size or admixed populations from separated ancestral lineages. however, its exhibited high haplotype diversities and low nucleotide diversities in all populations, suggesting population expansion. population differentiation  was higher in the north-central clade than the widespread coii clade . the number of individuals estimated to be long-term effective migrants  in the widespread coii clade was greater than that of the north-central coii clade and its estimation. tajima's d of the widespread coii clade and its were negative and significantly different to zero, suggesting past population expansions. tajima's d of the north-central coii clade was positive, but not significantly different to zero. fu's fs calculated for the widespread, north-central coii clade and its were negative and significantly different from zero, implying past population growth. the amova of coii indicated non-significant  genetic differentiation between east and west groups and among east, south, and north-central groups . significant population differentiation  was evident among populations within groups  and within populations . the majority of its variance was evident within populations . no significant correlation was detected between pairwise genetic and geographic distances of the widespread coii clade , whereas significantly positive correlations between pairwise genetic and geographic were present in the north-central coii clade and its .

n, sample size; nh, number of haplotype; h, haplotype diversity; π, nucleotide diversity; d, tajima's d; fs, fu's fs; nm, number of effective migrants; fst, fixation index; **p <  <dig> ; ***p <  <dig> .

***p <  <dig> 

demographic history and coalescence time
the north-central coii clade exhibited a multimodal mismatch distribution, indicating a relatively stable population throughout time. this finding differs significantly from the simulation of sudden expansion and spatial expansion models  . the widespread coii clade exhibited a smooth unimodal distribution, suggesting past population expansions . however, this mismatch distribution did not converge with the expected sudden demographic and spatial expansion models using the least square procedure. the ebsp of the north-central coii clade revealed a slowly growing curve . these results suggest these were relatively stable populations during the past  <dig>  million years, with an approximate two fold increase in population sizes from  <dig>  to  <dig> , beginning approximately  <dig>  mya and during the late pleistocene glacial cycles  . for the widespread coii clade, the ebsp with 95% hpd demonstrated that the population underwent population growth approximately  <dig>  mya, towards the end of glacial würm mis <dig> in the riss period, with an estimated effective population size of  <dig>   . during the interglacial holocene period, the populations increased more than two-fold, reaching a size of  <dig>  . the estimated tmrca for e. formosa and sister species e. yayeyamana was approximately  <dig>  mya in the late pliocene . the tmrca for the origin of e. formosa was approximately  <dig>  mya in the middle pleistocene period .

discussion
evolutionary history of euphaea formosa
this study provides the first phylogeographic analysis of endemic freshwater insects in taiwan. the phylogenetic results suggest that the common ancestors of e. formosa and its sister species e. yayeyamana of the southern ryukyu archipelago, began diverging approximately  <dig>  mya during the late pliocene , approximately  <dig>  mya after the emergence of taiwan above sea level . during the pleistocene glaciations, the continental shelf under the east china sea emerged and provided land bridge connections between the southern ryukyus archipelago and the asian continent  <cit> . these land bridge connections allowed ancestral euphaea lineages from the asian mainland to disperse and colonize taiwan, ishigaki and iriomote island. the subsequent vicariant isolation and divergence between taiwan and the southern ryukyu archipelago is likely to have initiated diversification between these two insular species during the pleistocene glacial cycles. in addition to vicariant isolation, ecological adaptation to the greater availability of larval prey in taiwan compared with the ishigaki and iriomote islands is another probable factor contributing to the larger body size of e. formosa compared with e. yayeyamana  <cit> . with the exception of size, no morphological characteristics distinguish between these two damselflies, and the molecular phylogenies in this study clearly demonstrate that e. formosa and e. yayeyamana are monophyletic sister species with average genetic distances of 8%  and  <dig> % . therefore, these two insular gossamer-wings are distinctive "genetic" and "phylogenetic" species  <cit> .

the mitochondrial coii and nuclear its gene trees for e. formosa were not fully congruent. in addition to incongruence associated with the gene tree/species tree, the results suggested a possible introgression or incomplete sorting of lineages in the ancestral polymorphism of these two markers. the jointly estimated coalescence time for coii and its suggests that the extant e. formosa populations probably originated approximately  <dig>  mya, during the middle pleistocene period. the existence of a deep phylogenetic split and substantial genetic differentiation between the north-central and widespread coii clades, together with the monophyly of haplotypes from these two lineages, imply that there were at least two periods of colonization on the island. alternatively, there was a single colonization followed by divergence of the two clades within taiwan . these two evolutionary scenarios are equally plausible for the origin of extant e. formosa, where the ancestral e. formosa colonized northwestern taiwan via the emerging land bridges and rivers connecting it to the asian continent as a result of lowered sea levels during repeated glacial periods approximately  <dig>  mya during the middle pleistocene period  <cit> .

previous estimates of colonizing periods for taiwanese freshwater fishes are less than one mya, falling within the time frame of the middle to late pleistocene. these estimates include minnows , cyprinid fish  and goby , but the colonizing period for spiny loach is estimated to be the middle to late pliocene period . in contrast, several studies concerning taiwanese lowland terrestrial animals estimate the colonization periods to be greater than two mya, ranging from the pliocene to early pleistocene periods . assuming an average mitochondrial coii clock for the insects  and a scaled its clock, the estimate based on the current study is that ancestral e. formosa first colonized the island during the early to middle pleistocene period , preceding the colonizing periods for the majority of taiwanese freshwater fish, which have low migratory capabilities limited by availability of continuous aquatic habitats. therefore, e. formosa, a vagile aquatic insect present in lowland rivers and streams, exhibits an ancient colonization history older than most freshwater vertebrates but younger than lowland terrestrial animals.

in addition to the apparently higher dispersal ability assisted by winged adults, an explanation for the antiquity of e. formosa's colonization could be the past climate and vegetations in the continental land bridges during the pleistocene glaciations. paleo-environmental and palynological studies suggest that the climate of exposed land bridges connecting the asian continent to lowland taiwan during extended glaciations were cooler and dryer than at present, and the vegetation zones in these continental land bridges were predominantly grasslands  <cit> . dry grassland habitats with limited river systems and frequently interrupted water supplies caused by weaker monsoons acted as migratory barriers for freshwater fish, but were relatively weak barriers for euphaea damselflies, particularly at the larval stage. euphaea formosa are damselflies of the only two odonate families known to possess lateral abdominal gill appendages in addition to the usual three caudal gills . lateral abdominal gills were considered an adaptation to riverine habitats subject to intermittent oxygen deficiency  <cit> , which would allow heavy sclerotized larvae to take refuge in the hyporheal zone where oxygen concentration is low during dry seasons  <cit> . the ability of e. formosa larvae to survive in periodically dry streambeds, which probably characterized the river systems of the pleistocene dry grasslands, could facilitate an early colonizing history into the lowlands of taiwan compared with other freshwater fish.

phylogeography and lineage-specific population expansion
the amova indicated no significant genetic differentiation in mitochondrial coii or nuclear its between east and west groups or among east, south and north-central groups . therefore, it is unlikely that river drainages or the cmr constituted a strong physical barrier to current gene flow among populations. however, substantial genetic differentiation appears among populations within regions. these results suggest that e. formosa populations are not panmictic, and that current gene flow among populations is likely to be restricted by geographic distances. nevertheless, pleistocene river drainages and the cmr played major roles in shaping the colonization and diversification history of e. formosa. genetic analyses suggested that extant e. formosa populations could be derived from two independent ancestral source lineages due to past allopatric fragmentation, which reflected the pleistocene river drainages of continental land bridges. in this scenario, the north-central clade  likely derived from the paleo-drainages of northern minjiang and adjacent northwestern taiwan first colonized northern taiwan early during the pleistocene period . later, the ancestral widespread clade, which originated from the paleo-drainages of southern minjiang, reached central-southern taiwan in the middle of the pleistocene period. these interpretations have been supported by the findings that e. formosa populations with the highest genetic diversity were distributed between five major river systems corresponding to these paleo-drainages  <cit>  . an alternative scenario concerning postglacial re-colonization from two previously isolated refugia is equally likely to generate the genetic divergence between the north-central and widespread clades. the land bridges connecting the asian continent with the island of taiwan have been proposed as glacial refugia for lowland freshwater species such as endemic minnows and cyprinid fish  <cit> . the average temperature during the pleistocene glaciations in east asia was at least 5°c lower than at present  <cit> . therefore, during the glacial maxima the distribution of e. formosa would have been restricted to the edge of the island and the exposed continental land bridges. the paleo-drainages of northwestern taiwan and southern minjiang could have acted as isolated glacial refugia for ancestral e. formosa populations. as a warmer climate and more favorable habitats appeared during the pleistocene inter-glaciations, e. formosa repopulated the lowlands of western taiwan from the two refugia.

the phylogeographic and historical demographic analysis carried out in this study indicated that the effect of pleistocene climatic changes on the population dynamics of e. formosa were lineage-specific and depended predominantly on the colonization history and geography of the two evolutionarily independent clades. the haplotype diversity of coii was higher in northwestern populations than populations in the south, with the most eastern taiwan populations having only the widespread haplotypes h <dig> and h <dig>  this pattern of haplotype distribution indicates that the founders of the eastern populations originated from western taiwan and moved to southern regions of the island. this southern dispersal route into eastern taiwan is evident in an endemic cyprinid fish  <cit>  and the common cricket  <cit> . in addition to the historical range expansion, this study provides clear evidence that the widespread clade experienced a demographic expansion approximately  <dig>  mya during the late pleistocene period. the onset of this demographic expansion was associated with the holocene interglacial period, when the warmer climate and available lowland streams on the eastern side of the cmr could have permitted the damselfly to colonize and expand into eastern taiwan. in contrast, the north-central clade maintained a slowly growing population size throughout much of the early and middle pleistocene periods, possibly because of the stable aquatic habitats of northern taiwan. northern taiwan experiences northeast monsoons during the winter  and has much higher precipitation than central and southwestern taiwan  <cit> , and the water levels of these northern rivers and streams are stable throughout the year and are capable of sustaining constant population sizes and maintaining high genetic diversity. in contrast, the widespread clade of the central and southern rivers experienced more frequent seasonal droughts during winter-spring dry seasons, and consequently generated smaller population sizes and decreased genetic diversity due to genetic drift in fluctuating populations. the rivers and streams in eastern taiwan are much shorter than those of western taiwan owing to the steep slopes of the eastern cmr. therefore, they support smaller populations with lower genetic diversity.

the historical demography of extant species was affected by climatic cycles during the pleistocene period  <cit> . phylogeographic studies concerning european and north american fauna suggest that the last glacial maximum  was a major climatic event structuring the historical population dynamics of temperate taxa  <cit> . after the retreat of the lgm, temperate species frequently expanded from southern refugia into previously glaciated northern ranges. however, the findings of this study indicate that the onset of demographic expansion in subtropical e. formosa predated the lgm period, occurring during the middle or late pleistocene period . recent research investigating an endemic babbler in east asia suggests a similar late pleistocene population growth , after release from separated glacial refugia around southeast china  <cit> . e. formosa demonstrates a less drastic demographic expansion trend in terms of magnitude of population growth than many temperate taxa  <cit> . therefore, a post-lgm population expansion model that characterizes several temperate species cannot describe the pleistocene population dynamics of subtropical lowland taxa such as e. formosa. these results imply that earlier glacial periods such as riss and würm during the late pleistocene period could have had greater impact on the historical demography and levels of genetic diversity in subtropical and tropical species than previously thought. tropical species are often phylogeographically older than their temperate counterparts, and are likely to experience earlier climatic oscillations in the pleistocene period  <cit> . a relatively mild, late pleistocene climate in subtropical east asia  <cit>  and available glacial refugia in continental land bridges  <cit>  could have alleviated demographic stresses during the pleistocene glaciations, which in turn generated relatively modest population fluctuations in e. formosa.

CONCLUSIONS
this study has investigated pleistocene climatic, geographic and natural history factors underlying the evolutionary diversification of an aquatic insect in taiwan. the endemic gossamer-wing damselfly originated during the early to middle pleistocene period, earlier than the late pleistocene colonization of the majority of taiwanese freshwater vertebrates. the antiquity and colonization history of e. formosa could be due to the flying ability of the adult and larval tolerance to the periodically dry grassland habitats that characterized pleistocene land bridges. the extant e. formosa population consists of two phylogenetically independent lineages that either originated from the pleistocene river drainages of northern and southern minjiang or re-colonized from two separated refugia. each lineage has undergone divergent evolutionary trajectories within the island. the present findings revealed the spatial and demographic expansion of the widespread lineage that can be dated to the late pleistocene period . this population expansion was probably due to the availability of habitats in eastern taiwan during the warmer holocene interglacial period. in contrast, the north-central lineage has maintained a relatively stable population during the past one and half million years, possibly because of the stable aquatic habitats of northern taiwan. the ancestral e. formosa expanded into eastern taiwan via a southern dispersal route, indicating that the cmr formed a barrier to the east-west dispersal of this damselfly. however, the cmr and pleistocene river drainages are not strong geographic barriers to current gene flow among e. formosa populations, with genetic structures being shaped by geographic distances within the three biogeographic regions. this study led to the proposal that the riss and würm glaciations in the late pleistocene period had a greater impact on the evolutionary diversification of subtropical insular species than the lgm. further studies investigating taxa with diverse life history characteristics could elucidate the general effect of recent climatic oscillations on the evolutionary diversification of subtropical species.

