BACKGROUND
mutations caused by base changes can occur spontaneously during mitosis or meiosis, or through alterations of mechanisms required for fidelity of replication and repair, or through exposure to mutagenic environments. measuring the mutation rate is important for evolution, biochemistry, medicine and functional genomics. we are specifically interested in the functional genomic tool called tilling   <cit> . the combination of efficient mutation discovery via high-throughput sequencing and the ability to generate allelic series  enables reverse genetics in many species with limited genomics resources. however, populations with optimal mutation densities are necessary for screening efficiency and optimizing mutagenic treatments requires measuring mutation densities. for this purpose, pcr amplicons representing selected loci can be screened for mutations by mismatch-detecting assays  <cit>  or by high throughput sequencing  <cit> . both approaches, however, require testing of several hundred individuals  <cit> . with the advances in sequencing throughput, the entire genome of an individual can be resequenced with sufficient coverage to call changes with high reliability  <cit> , or sequencing can be targeted to the exome by capture with complementary oligonucleotides  <cit> . both methods, however, are still relatively expensive or laborious and required prior knowledge of the genome of interest or development of an oligonucleotide set suitable for exome capture.

a convenient approach to reduce genomic complexity for shotgun sequencing involves phasing the sequencing entry points at restriction enzyme sites to provide increased coverage of a subset of dna regions  <cit> . judicious selection of restriction enzyme and fragment size range can allow a coverage range that maximizes both discovery and economy  <cit> , even for large genomes. our variation of this method, rescan , involves simple illumina library construction using as little as  <dig> ng of input dna and can be multiplexed  by employing custom barcoded adapters. the method allows genotyping using both the entry point restriction enzyme site and the adjacent sequenced dna. if a reference sequence is not available, rescan read populations are intrinsically simpler than those derived from random fragmentation sequencing libraries and should be amenable to the construction of a reduced reference genome. here, we describe development of this method and its application for discovery and detection of single nucleotide polymorphisms  induced by mutagenesis, a type of variation much rarer and thus more difficult to detect than natural snp. we demonstrate its capabilities in the characterization of mutation density in single individuals with or without the use of a reference genome. the method greatly facilitates the development of optimally mutagenized populations.

RESULTS
method development
we devised a method  for the simple production of restriction enzyme-phased libraries for illumina sequencers. the method entails digestion of the input dna with a restriction enzyme, optional selection of a size range, ligation to modified illumina y adapters that feature sticky ends complementary to those produced by the enzyme , clean up of the ligation product, enrichment by pcr, and finally sequencing. to optimize this method, we used input genomic dna from rice and arabidopsis, two model systems with well-characterized genomes  <cit> . figure  <dig> compares the effect of the order of size selection versus ligation to the adapters by comparing the yield and size of sequenced fragments to the total number predicted from the genome sequence of the target. the importance of choosing the right molecular weight fraction is further demonstrated in figure  <dig>  the libraries were processed as described in the methods and sequenced in illumina ga.

the reads were aligned to the reference genome with eland . the position at which each read initiated was then extracted and the size of each corresponding restriction fragment was tabulated. the distribution of observed hits is displayed in figure  <dig> for each library construction strategy and compared to the corresponding genomic total. each library generated a nearly-normal distribution centered within the targeted range. ligation followed by fractionation, however , produced a bimodal curve with a maximum corresponding to low molecular weight fragments and another maximum corresponding to the selected range. contamination by the small fragments could be minimized by pre-selection of the target size range followed by ligation .

restriction fragment length polymorphisms are expected in different accessions and may shift a fragment into or outside of the optimally covered size range . the former instances should be manifest as outliers in a graph of coverage by size. this expectation was verified in the accession ler  where frequent fragments with good coverage are observed outside the optimal size range.

some rescan reads mapped on the reference genome appeared not to start at an msei site, but at sites differing by one base that we called proto sites. these degenerate sites may be cut by restriction enzyme star activity or they can be diagnostic of a polymorphisms between the reference genome and the sample  <cit> . in the case of msei fragments, modifications of the fourth base , can be identified because the sequence read from these sites would start with, respectively, "...ttabnnn..." vs "...ttaannn..." . we measured the frequency of star cutting by counting the two read types. the incidence of ttab sites in  <dig>  m reads was  <dig> % indicating that star activity was very low.

reads initiating at reference sequence proto sites should increase with phylogenetic distance. rescan reads from the reference variety nipponbare, two california varieties of japonica rice, and two indica varieties displayed progressively higher proto read counts . these reads were highly predictive of polymorphism even at very low coverage: 17/ <dig> proto sites tested were digested by msei in ir <dig> and not in nipponbare, confirming an msei-associated polymorphisms . depending on the proto site context, the polymorphism could be called unequivocally . the inferred snp corresponding to the proto to full site conversion were called type i contrasting to the type ii snp, detected within the reads. for example, with ttab  proto sites,  <dig> out of  <dig> predicted b > a snp confirmed snp already present in the ncbi rice snp database.

gel-based electrophoretic fractionation  is cumbersome and not easy to scale up. we substituted it with solid phase reversible immobilization  on magnetic beads  <cit> . clean up of digested dna with spri beads removed the bulk of the small restriction enzyme fragments. different size cuts could also be carried out because the molecular weight of the bound dna could be changed by the strength of the binding buffer . the method was tested and worked well with another restriction enzyme, nlaiii. the ratio of adapters to input dna required careful adjustment to avoid adapter dimers. the optimal ratio was considerably lower than that used for regular illumina libraries  <cit> . the resulting protocol proved robust and scalable as we increased the number of barcoded adapters from the few used above to as many as  <dig>  the amount of input dna digested with either  <dig> bp cutter enzyme could be as little as  <dig> ng without loss in efficiency.

discovery of rare polymorphisms
the method described above proved efficient at genotyping individuals in populations . a more challenging type of variation is the one resulting from mutagenesis because induced mutations occur at density lower than natural polymorphisms. for example, a well mutagenized population of rice has one base change every  <dig> kb of diploid dna  <cit> , which is about thousand time less frequent than the natural snp density between japonica and indica rice  <cit> .

to test the capabilities of the rescan system for discovery of induced mutation rates in plants we developed the experimental protocol described in figure  <dig>  we tested the effect of varying sodium azide  concentrations on mutation rate in rice  cv. kitaake. table  <dig> illustrates the progressively more deleterious effect of increasing naazide concentration. the highest treatment resulted in less than 2% survival to the m <dig> generation vs. ~20% for the next lower treatment. the genomic dna of three m <dig> individuals derived from  <dig> mm ,  <dig> mm  and  <dig> mm  naazide treatments and of a single control individual  was used for rescan library preparation with the restriction enzyme nlaiii. the four indexed libraries were each sequenced using 85b ×  <dig> paired-end reads on one and one half lane of the illumina gaii sequencer.

reference-dependent detection
we used the published rice cv. nipponbare genome  <cit>  to align the rescan reads using the program bwa  <cit>  with default settings. the analysis of expected and predicted restriction fragment sizes  demonstrates that the method using the spri bead-using method is comparable to size-selection after gel electrophoresis. by selecting fragments in the  <dig> to  <dig> bp size range we probed a relatively larger component of the genome . using a custom parsing script, we searched for candidate snps in the resulting alignment. we filtered out snps corresponding to poorly mapped reads and those that occurred in repeated regions by setting a maximum cumulative allowable coverage of  <dig>  we further required that candidates for homozygous mutations be unique to one individual and occur in sites where coverage was at least  <dig> in that individual and that all calls be identical and that position was covered at least once in each of the other  <dig> individuals . for heterozygous mutations the general criteria were similar, but, expectedly, we encountered higher noise. noise was evidenced by the high numbers of potential mutant calls in the control and in all genotypes by a high frequency of base change types that were not expected from the mutagenic action of naazide . we found that using a minimum of  <dig> or more variant calls as a bottom threshold largely eliminated the noise.

reference-independent detection
assessment of mutation density can be difficult if a reference genome is unavailable or diverges too much from the query sequences. in a parallel experiment, the same raw sequence data were used for reference-independent snp discovery. we used the first  <dig> bases of each read to construct a list of 70-mer substrings . we curated this set by eliminating the k-mers that had higher-than-expected coverage  and by discarding the minority member in pairs that had a hamming distance of  <dig>  <cit> . we then used the resulting k-mer set as a de novo reference. the first  <dig> bases of each rescan read were aligned to this reference using bwa with a maximum mismatch allowance of  <dig>  the resulting alignment was parsed as for the reference genome alignment.

snp types are consistent with a chemical mutagenesis mechanism
for each treatment, the de novo reference  was about 5% larger than the genome-aligned space . in both cases a set of snps consistent with mutation sites were identified. treatment with naazide is expected to yield only or predominantly gc > at  changes  <cit> . for the mutagenized individuals, gc > at snps were more frequent than other snp types in both types of analysis . candidates appeared to be randomly distributed throughout the genome. the fraction of gc > at changes observed in all t <dig> and t <dig> measurements  was significantly different from the expectation of random sequencing error  <cit> . for t <dig>  only the heterozygous changes were significant. fewer snps were identified using the o. sativa genomic reference than using the de novo reference:  <dig> vs  <dig> for putative homozygous mutations and  <dig> vs  <dig> for putative heterozygous mutations. of the  <dig> gc > at putative homozygous changes found with the o. sativa reference,  <dig>  were shared with the de novo-referenced analysis. of the other changes, only 21% were shared. for the heterozygous mutations, overall 75% of the positions present in the referenced analysis were also present in the de novo-referenced analysis. on average, the gc > at base changes were confirmed much more often  than the other types of changes .

1reference complexity:  <dig> mb. 2complexity for homozygous scoring is calculated according to the following requirements: i) covered at least once in each of the four libraries, ii) covered at least twice in the putative mutant, iii) covered less than  <dig> times cumulatively in all libraries. 3reference complexity:  <dig> mb.

measurement of mutation rate
to determine the mutation rate, the count of unique snps in each treatment was divided by total number of bps effectively assayed . the number of putative homozygous snps per mb in the o. sativa genome-referenced analysis was  <dig>  for the control,  <dig>  for t <dig>   <dig>  for t <dig>  and  <dig>  for t <dig>  for the de novo-referenced analysis the number was  <dig>  for the control,  <dig>  for t <dig>   <dig>  for t <dig>  and  <dig>  for t <dig>  these values were fairly similar suggesting that reference-less alignments can be as effective as reference guided ones for discovery of very rare polymorphisms. deriving the total mutation rate can be complicated by the assumptions used and is expected to be sensitive to the coverage . since the above calculation did not include the heterozygous snp, it is an underestimate of the real mutation rate. depending on the number of heterozygous mutations that were classified as homozygous  the actual mutation density may range from less than  <dig> times to  <dig> times the one reported above. nonetheless, the estimated mutations densities were generally consistent with previous work  <cit>  and provide a guide in the design of future mutagenesis experiments.

discussion
we demonstrate the use of a simple method to identify extremely rare snp in the genome of individuals and estimate the connected mutation rate, independent of availability of a reference genome. the method takes advantage of the facile construction of libraries for illumina sequencers using restriction-digested genomes. construction of reduced representation libraries using restriction enzymes was first described for sanger sequencing  <cit> . the method has since been applied to high throughput sequencing library construction for the  <dig> platform  <cit> , and for illumina  <cit> . these approaches have been reviewed recently  <cit> . restriction site associated dna tags  sequencing, described four years ago, has found multiple successful applications  <cit> . our method differs from rad sequencing because a genomic fragment in the sequencing library is defined by two symmetric restriction sites instead of asymmetric combination of a restriction site with a randomly fragmented and flushed end, thus being most similar to that of andolfatto et al.  <cit>  and of elshire et al.  <cit> . the one-step ligation for library construction used by all three methods provides a simple, robust and easily implemented step. our method differs from the first because the terminal portion of the illumina adapter sequence is left intact allowing the use of the standard illumina sequencing primers and combined sequencing with regular libraries. it differs from the second by the use of a single y-adapter instead of two fully double-stranded ones and the placement of the same barcode on both sequencing reads derived from paired-end sequencing . double barcoding identifies potential chimeric products in multiplexed libraries that are sequenced as paired reads. the method employs oligonucleotides with desalted purity and no phosphorothioate modification, enabling considerable savings in setting up 96-barcode multiplexing. similarly to the two methods above, different types of overhangs can be used. when used with a two-base overhang producing enzyme such as msei , the adapter can be ligated to the insert in the presence of the restriction enzyme because adapter-insert ligation eliminates the restriction site. when used with a four-base overhang producing enzyme such as nlaiii, the restriction enzyme must be removed or inactivated.

the complexity of the sequencing library can be modified by the choice of restriction enzyme and by size fractionation of dna. six-base cutters reduce complexity compared to four-base cutters. for example, the six-base cutter sphi  can be used with the nlaiii  adapters achieving satisfactory reduction in complexity of large genomes . spri bead cleanup before and after ligation of the digested dna can be tailored to produce different molecular size cuts. although size selection can be achieved by excision of dna from agarose gel after electrophoresis, we found that the latter method is less efficient, more laborious and not easily scalable. a drawback of the spri bead-based fractionation is that removal of the abundant smaller fragments can be incomplete, resulting in their capture through intrafragmental ligation and chimeric library products. these instances complicate analyses based on assumed contiguity of the paired end reads. often, however, the two reads are queried independently and this is not a problem.

analysis of reduced complexity libraries starts by mapping quality-filtered reads to a reference genome using software such as eland or bwa. bwa outputs two file types useful in this application: sam files and pileup files. the first provides the entry point of each read identifying restriction sites common to the input and the reference and restriction sites unique to the input and not present in the reference. interestingly, the latter sites can be highly predictive of snp even with very low coverage . for example, using msei  we demonstrated that sites where the fourth base  is verified in the read and the corresponding reference proto site is ttab, are confirmed in over 80% of the tested cases . of  <dig> snp inferred b > a snp,  <dig> were confirmed in the databases. we believe that the remaining snp are likely to be real as well.

more commonly, snp discovery employs the sequence of the read beyond the restriction site, a method that requires higher coverage, but is more productive because it queries more sequence  and can provide codominant information for any snp discovered. detection of these snp is achieved by parsing the pileup table produced by bwa, where calls for each position are listed with the corresponding qualities  <cit> . we searched for changes induced by naazide, which compared to changes derived from natural variation represent a considerable challenge because they are much rarer than variation snp  <cit> . typical mutations are present in mutagenized diploid genomes with frequencies ranging from less than  <dig>  to  <dig> per  <dig> bp of diploid dna. furthermore, while natural variation snp are shared by multiple individuals and can thus be confirmed through biological replication, most mutations affect a single individual. we were able to detect induced changes by applying a common sense strategy . we were helped by the specificity of the induced changes: the mutations conformed the naazide mutagenic spectrum detected in barley and consisted almost exclusively of g:c to a:t transitions  <cit>  in contrast to the 28% g:c to a:t  transitions expected from natural variation  <cit> .

reference-independent discovery using k-mers found more snp, including 70-80% of those found in the o. sativa-referenced discovery. the fact that  <dig> to 30% of the potential mutations found in the reference-analysis were not found in the k-mer analysis can partially be explained by the fact that the k-mers were trimmed  and the reads were further trimmed . another factor differentiating the two approaches is the potentially different treatment of repeated regions. snp that are in known repetitive regions would be excluded in the referenced search. however, if only one of the repeat was represented in the rescan library, it would behave as single copy and be scored in the reference-independent discovery. such cases may contribute to the efficiency of de novo-referenced discovery.

a considerable challenge in the analysis is constituted by the presence of heterozygous mutations, which in m2s are expected to be 2/ <dig> of the mutant sites. one difficulty lays in distinguishing homozygous from heterozygous sites: for example, a base position for which three calls are all variant could be homozygous mutant or heterozygous with associated probabilities of  <dig>  vs  <dig>  , respectively. similarly, an heterozygous site could yield three wild-type calls with a  <dig>  probability. a second difficulty, connected to the first, lies in estimating the covered genome because each coverage level has an associate probability of detection. in order to reduce noise, we set our algorithm to call heterozygous sites only if they carry a minimum of  <dig> mutant calls. for example, if a 100b dna was sequenced to a coverage of ten, any heterozygous site would yield call ratios according to the binomial distribution resulting in a connected probability of detection of  <dig>  . because heterozygotes are detected with lower efficiency, estimating the mutation density under these conditions would require adjusting the number of bases effectively assayed to  <dig> bases instead of  <dig>  in practical terms, this is laborious and may require the careful construction of an adequate statistical model. a simpler solution to the heterozygous problem would be increasing the coverage, which can be achieved as discussed above. for the purpose of our estimate, we derived a mutation rate using a simplified calculation with the homozygous mutants. we estimate that this might be between half and one third the real mutation rate, depending on the fraction of putative homozygous sites that are actually heterozygous.

number of snps consistent with naazide mutagenesis was higher in all  <dig> treated individuals than in the control, and mutation density peaked in the intermediate treatment according to the homozygous calls. this is not the case when considering the heterozygous calls. if we consider the homozygous analysis to be more accurate, a plausible outcome, this behavior requires potential explanations. the lethality of the mutagenic treatments increased from low to a very high 96% in the  <dig> mm naazide treatment. it is possible that the severity of the  <dig> mm treatment may be counterproductive and that, for example, survivors may have escaped the full treatment. a similar observation has been reported in barley using sterility as a proxy for mutation density  <cit> . alternatively, variation may result from the limited sampling. it is possible, for example, that different cell types in the embryo may respond differently to the mutagen and subsequently enter stochastically the transient germ line that gives rise to plant gametes  <cit> . therefore, the extent of individual variability remains to be assessed.

the method described here should be applicable to more studies than just those focusing on mutagenesis. for example, it will allow mapping and backcrossing of induced mutations in the background of the same accession used for mutagenesis by providing markers that allow discrimination of the mutagenized genome from the wild type. it should also allow comparison of substrains of the same variety and, if sufficient snp are found, genetic characterization of diverged traits. we have also applied the rescan to natural snp discovery and mapping in rice , arabidopsis suecica  and arabidopsis thaliana  <cit> . in all these systems, rescan proved robust in its application and analysis.

CONCLUSIONS
we describe here the development and application of a simple and economical method for reduced representation sequencing. we demonstrated it effectiveness by measuring the mutation rate in multiple individuals. rescan libraries, made by direct annealing and ligation of adapters to digested fragments of genomic dna, are easy to multiplex and analyze. coupled to the ability to assay a genome without a reference, the method should facilitate genotyping as well as the measurement of mutation densities in many systems.

