BACKGROUND
polytypic species and complexes of closely related species provide unusual opportunities to study the linkage between micro and macro evolutionary processes directly in nature because they are composed of taxa that persist at various stages of divergence, from genetically differentiated populations to ecologically divergent taxa. of particular importance are ring species  <cit> , or circular overlaps  <cit> , in which populations at intermediate stages of divergence are distributed around a geographic barrier and reconnect at a terminus as reproductively isolated taxa. by preserving genetic interactions that are typical of species at the ring terminus, as well as interactions typical of populations around the ring distribution, these systems provide a natural demonstration of how micro-evolutionary processes  result in a continuum of divergence, linking taxa that are generally recognized as species. although prized as examples of evolutionary clarity, ring species also present a pattern of taxonomic irresolution in which, facing continuous levels of differentiation, different taxonomists recognize a varying number of species, depending on their criteria. most previous studies of ring species have focused on the local geographical and ecological factors enabling species formation. here, we develop a generalized model of geographic barriers and use the known examples of ring species to evaluate the number and distribution of other barriers from around the world that are topographically similar and thus may be promoting ring speciation processes in equivalent taxa.

geographic species formation is intrinsically dependent on the spatial scale at which organisms interact with the landscape, encompassing both biological and historical factors that affect divergence , and others that affect homogenization through gene flow  . theoretically, ring species can arise frequently when the spatial scale of a geographic barrier matches the biological and historical 'scales' that are necessary for species-level divergence  <cit> . whether because that ratio is rarely met in nature or because of historical contingencies associated with the barrier or the organism, few polytypic taxa are in fact recognized by modern taxonomy as ring species  <cit>  and ring diversification is considered to be the exceptional mode of geographic diversification  <cit> . mayr  <cit>  stated that "circular overlaps can obviously develop only under highly exceptional constellations of geographical factors", so that the continuous levels of population divergence result from restrictions to gene flow within a species' range imposed by a central and long-standing geographic barrier. despite their apparent rarity, ring species were extremely influential to the evolutionary synthesis  <cit>  and remain a cornerstone to our understanding of how geography influences species formation. these few examples seem to indicate that - even though species formation is clearly a continuous process  <cit>  - the geographic conditions that promote ring speciation are extremely rare. perhaps there is a taxonomic impediment, in which discovery of parts of rings and their naming as species precedes  or, perhaps more commonly, impedes recognition of the ring. in this paper, we release ourselves from existing taxonomic classifications, and possible related artifacts, in order to consider the processes that have enabled ring-distributed taxa  to diversify in a continuous sense around geographic barriers, irrespective of whether the terminal forms are above or below species-level divergence.

long-term research programs on ring species complexes, such as the plethodontid salamander ensatina eschscholtzii and the greenish warbler phylloscopus trochiloides, provide empirical insights into the processes that can drive ring species formation:  conditioned by a long-standing geographic barrier, an ancestor expands around the barrier to form a ring distribution,  restrictions to dispersal imposed by the barrier are such that contiguous populations become increasingly more divergent, and  this divergence continues to the point where - at the ring terminus - the reconnecting terminal taxa are reproductively isolated or hybridize infrequently . the persistence of the central geographic barrier is fundamental for ring diversification because it restricts movement of individuals to the ring distribution, thus promoting non-adaptive divergence through the initial colonization of available habitat, genetic drift of each local population, and limiting gene flow among continuous populations around the ring. adaptive divergence may further affect neighboring populations around the ring distribution through such processes as local adaptation of anti-predatory strategies  or the development of assortative mating . while taxon-based studies have contributed to our understanding of the evolutionary processes that result in ring species, they are not easily generalized and thus cannot be used to evaluate the number and distribution of other geographic barriers around the world that may also favor continuous divergence in ring distributed taxa, so that terminal overlapping forms are near species-level divergence.

here, we advance a new modeling framework to address the general question of which geographic barriers provide the topographic 'canvas' necessary for the establishment of ring species . rather than modeling ring distributions of species, our predictive model targets geographic barriers that, according to biologically relevant summary statistics , are topographically similar to barriers associated with ring species, or taxa with a similar diversification process . by removing any subjective and ill-defined considerations of what constitutes a valid biogeographic barrier for species, our model simplifies environmental complexity so that barrier similarities may be quantified and evaluated consistently across taxa and environments. while 'environment' in our model can be defined according to a number of different variables, here we parameterize it using elevation because it is a major topographic variable leading to the formation of prominent ecotones and defined ecoregions  <cit> , which in turn are broad-scale determinants of species' distributions  <cit> . first, we analyze a multivariate 'barrier-space' to evaluate whether barriers associated with ring taxa share topographic features, and whether those features are in fact rare when considered relative to all other barriers on the planet. second, we use our model to identify candidate barriers with equivalent topographic features to those associated with ring taxa, and for taxa with comparable population biologies and histories provide spatially explicit hypotheses of where ring diversification might be occurring in nature.

RESULTS
reference ring taxa do not always encircle single topographic barriers
using a standardized set of criteria to formally define a barrier, our topographic model identified a total of  <dig>  geographically cohesive barriers on the planet. many of these barriers aligned with ecoregions , suggesting that barriers predicted by our model do indeed delineate areas that represent valid biogeographic barriers. furthermore, when overlaying the distributions of reference ring taxa, we find that they encircle topographic barriers identified by our model . however, contrary to expectations based on both classical  <cit>  and recent  <cit>  reviews of ring species, at the spatial scale of our analysis not all ring taxa encircle single topographic barriers. while ensatina and acacia encircle single barriers , the bird taxa larus and phylloscopus encircle two or more barriers that are in close geographic proximity . the seven barriers associated with our focal ring taxa align with major topographic features that define important climatic and ecological transitions  are:  ensatina: central valley, california, usa;  acacia: drakensberg massif, south africa;  larus: makarov basin, arctic ocean;  phylloscopus: tibetan plateau, central asia;  phylloscopus: takla maka and gobi deserts, central asia;  larus: amundsen and nansen basins, arctic ocean;  larus: canada basin, arctic ocean. the close spatial proximity of the individual barriers associated with the bird taxa  relate to larger topographic features generally known as central asia  and the arctic ocean . in addition to larus and phylloscopus, these composite barriers have also contributed to ring divergence in three other birds .

our finding that composite barriers exist and can promote ring diversification even in taxa that disperse widely is not simply an artifact of the model or the spatial resolution of the data. at different spatial resolutions of topographic slope  the model still predicted central asia and the arctic ocean as composite barriers. furthermore, composite barriers encompass such large geographic areas  that it is difficult to imagine any univariate or multivariate environmental approximation of a single barrier . if ring taxa that disperse widely are in fact distributed around composite barriers, then an important implication for ring speciation is that individual barriers in close spatial proximity can interact with one another to form effective barriers to species distribution that are orders of magnitude larger than any single cohesive barrier. more empirical work is required to determine the spatial characteristics of inter-barrier gaps that prevent ring taxa from maintaining genetic connectivity across composite barriers.

barriers associated with ring taxa share topographic features that are rarely found in nature
all barriers identified globally by our model are shown in a multivariate topographic space , computed using a principal component analysis on the six barrier summary statistics . principal component   <dig> explained 64% of the variation and loaded most heavily on size  and permeability ; pc <dig> explained an additional 19% of the variation and loaded most heavily on position  and permeability .

considering all geographic barriers identified globally by our model, most share topographic features that cause them to cluster in two high density peaks of the pca . meanwhile, the seven reference barriers cluster in a very discrete, low density area of the pca . despite known species idiosyncrasies, our model is evidently tracking barrier traits that exert effects  across taxa, since barriers involved in ring diversification in salamander and tree taxa are near one another in multivariate space , and all individual barriers that comprise composite bird barriers also cluster . this result indicates that barriers associated with ring taxa share similar topographic features, and that these topographic features are relatively rare on the planet. while our small sample size prevents any formal statistical comparison, the topographic features of the barriers associated with the reference taxa are also distributed along an axis of dispersal behavior . as expected, our model shows that ring taxa with higher dispersal  require larger barriers than lower dispersers . a better understanding of how characteristics of the barriers scale with the biology of the organism will benefit from the discovery of new ring taxa, which can fill in the biological continuum that is encompassed by the current reference ring taxa, and also expand model predictions.

compared to the most common barriers on the planet, reference barriers are larger in size  and less permeable . these results support initial predictions for four of our six summary statistics . notable exceptions include the two summary statistics on pc2:  position , where the small number of known ring species prevented us from evaluating whether larger barriers would be required at higher latitudes, and  fragmentation, where we expected more fragmented barriers to allow trans-barrier gene flow and thus prevent ring diversification. in actuality, our measure of fragmentation is reflecting the real topographic complexity of barriers. while small to medium sized barriers  can have lower values for fragmentation , larger barriers are more likely to encompass fragmenting features like valleys and ridges, so that fragmentation is maximum for all barriers above  <dig>  km <dig> . for the same reason, our model recognizes larger topographic features such as the arctic ocean and central asia as clusters of individual barriers that are so large that they can no longer remain cohesive. in contrast, permeability of the barrier as measured by shape , which loaded heavily on pc <dig>  fully matched our initial predictions, suggesting that this summary statistic might better reflect trans-barrier dispersal, or that its effect is biologically more meaningful than a finer fragmentation of the barrier. although shape as computed by a perimeter-to-area ratio scales with size, the reference barriers were some of the most geometrically compact barriers within their respective size classes .

a minimum bounding box around the seven reference barriers  encompassed approximately 1% of all candidate barriers on the planet. this statistic taken at face value suggests that geographic barriers with similar topographic characteristics to those that promote ring divergence are exceedingly rare. however, a statistic of 1% also results in about  <dig>  individual cohesive barriers that are similar in terms of size, position and permeability to known ring barriers. in agreement with mayr's  <cit>  assertion, those topographic conditions are indeed rare when compared to all candidate barriers on the planet, but numerous when considered relative to the handful of ring species that are well-described by science  <cit> . this further raises the possibility that a relatively large number of under-studied barriers on the planet may be associated with taxa that are evolving under ring processes of divergence.

opportunities for ring divergence are more common around smaller barriers
candidate cohesive barriers were identified based solely on their topographic similarity to the two cohesive reference barriers associated with ring diversification in lower dispersing taxa . when mapped back into geographic space, these candidates are predicted throughout tropical to temperate latitudes . this latitudinal bias is due to the influence of position  in the pca . the similarity level chosen  retrieved spatially unique candidate cohesive barriers that were topographically equivalent to the reference barriers. less stringent similarity levels  would recover candidates at similar latitudes, but with a greater likelihood of spatial overlap. because reference cohesive barriers are located in a portion of the pca where barrier density is relatively high , irrespective of one's choice of similarity threshold there are a relatively large number of individual barriers on the planet that are capable of promoting ring divergence. these candidate cohesive barriers should be evaluated in the context ring-distributed taxa with lower dispersal tendencies or, more generally, with population biologies or histories that are broadly similar to acacia or ensatina.

in contrast to cohesive barriers, candidate composite barriers were identified in two steps by choosing,  topographically similar individual barriers to those from reference composite barriers and  combinations of individual barriers with emergent properties similar to reference composite barriers . step  <dig> recovered  <dig>  barriers that were topographically similar to the five barriers associated with reference bird taxa . when mapped back into geographic space, these candidates are predicted throughout sub-tropical to polar latitudes, with different degrees of spatial overlap . the overlap is due to a combination of the relatively large number of candidate cohesive barriers considered, their large size , and their sensitivity to fragmentation . despite the large number of candidate composite barriers formed by combinations of two to three individual barriers , only  <dig> meet the criteria of similarity to the reference composite barriers . the number of candidates did not increase significantly with less stringent similarity levels . hence, at the larger spatial scales characteristic of composite barriers and higher dispersing ring taxa, very few areas on the planet present the topographic conditions associated with ring diversification. furthermore, because higher dispersing ring taxa can maintain panmixia over such large geographic areas, few will be expected to reach species-level divergence. for example, the existence of a prolonged pelagic life stage in some marine taxa can potentially increase the homogenizing role of gene flow, so that even after circumpolar divergence the terminal taxa do not develop reproductive barriers, and merge at the terminus of the ring distribution .

when considered in the context of composite barriers, our model corroborates mayr's  <cit>  assertion that few areas of the world present the topographic conditions necessary for ring speciation. however, when considered in the context of cohesive barriers, our model also suggests that a surprisingly large number of candidate barriers exist and merit further study. one possible explanation for this discrepancy is that - while most contemporary phylogeographic studies have explored well-developed parts of the globe, like europe and north america, the barriers most likely to be associated with ring divergence are located in under-studied regions  where new species continue to be described, their geographic ranges are still being mapped and genetic data are rare. an alternative explanation is that some of those areas have been studied but ring diversification has brought taxa to a stage when they are not clearly recognized as 'ring species'. instead, recently diverged taxa might express continuous variation at the population level, whereas segments of older taxa might have already 'decayed' into a ring of closely related species , thus making it unlikely that researchers would detect a near continuum of differentiation. therefore, by providing spatially explicit phylogeographic hypotheses that can be tested with adequate genetic or phenotypic data, the topographic ring model is designed to advance field studies of species formation in ring-like patterns.

the topographic model generates spatially explicit hypotheses that may be tested in nature
for both cohesive and composite barriers, our topographic model produces spatially explicit predictions of diversification across taxa and environments. depending on one's chosen taxonomic criteria, whether these candidate barriers affect taxa that presently constitute valid ring species or, more generally, ring distributed taxa in which terminal forms are above or below species-level divergence, is a question that can now be addressed. yet, the candidate barriers predicted by our model are hypothesized to result in taxa expressing continuous degrees of adaptive and non-adaptive divergence, thus allowing these processes to be investigated directly in the field. variation in biology and history will determine the level of divergence reached by taxa that are evolving under a ring diversification process, that is, whether taxa are currently recognized as a ring of populations, a ring species or a ring of species.

establishing whether taxa comprise a valid ring species ultimately requires extensive population-level sampling around the ring distribution to test for increasing levels of divergence between contiguous populations , and restricted genetic interaction in secondary contacts across the ring when compared to contacts around the ring  <cit> . however, there are three lines of evidence with respect to the candidate barrier that may be considered prior to investing in such detailed population-level sampling: barrier topographic traits, associated environmental gradients and species' distributions. we illustrate these in combination for a barrier in costa rica and panama that, while being a mountain barrier, is topographically similar in size, shape and permeability to the central valley of california, which has promoted ring diversification in the salamander ensatina eschscholtzii  <cit> .

in costa rica and panama, the candidate barrier is a mountain range  that separates the pacific and caribbean regions of the isthmus . as a result of its particular topography, the cordillera de talamanca is surrounded by warmer habitats that are recognized as isthmanian pacific and atlantic moist forest ecoregions  <cit> . these climatic conditions, plus the barrier, have shaped the distributions of many low elevation vertebrate and invertebrate species throughout the isthmus, and conditioned the diversification of lineages, which are currently recognized at various taxonomic ranks  and often present evidence of morphologic and genetic intergradation . this diversification process is clearly illustrated by the red-eyed tree frog, agalychnis callidryas, which forms a nearly complete ring distribution around the barrier . extensive phenotypic  and genotypic  data have been collected to evaluate diversification patterns and their consequences for genetic interactions around the focal barrier  <cit> . in agreement with our topographic model prediction, neutral genetic data suggest that taxa have expanded around the central mountain, gradually diverging along the pacific and caribbean slopes . morphologic  and genetic  intergradation occurs between populations along either side of the mountain, suggesting ongoing gene flow around most of the ring distribution. two notable exceptions occur between  the phenotypically most divergent populations in the northwestern portion of the range, where mitochondrial data suggest ancestral gene flow  but nuclear markers do not indicate ongoing connectivity , and  the phylogenetically most divergent populations in the southeastern portion of the range , where based on current sampling there is no such evidence of ancestral or ongoing gene flow. in order to corroborate the ring species hypothesis, evidence of ring closure with terminal reproductive isolation is needed, as demonstrated in other reference taxa . nevertheless, even without such evidence, published data demonstrate that the candidate barrier has strongly influenced adaptive and non-adaptive divergence among currently contiguous populations of a. callidryas, in the direction predicted for ring species.

additional barriers predicted by the topographic ring model are similarly surrounded by taxa showing continuous levels of divergence and exhibiting ill-defined taxonomic boundaries towards the terminus of a ring distribution - taxonomic irresolution characteristic of ring species . in all of these taxa, the absence of clear and concordant genetic and morphologic discontinuities around their distribution has promoted ongoing discussions among taxonomists , and such taxonomic irresolution is indeed expected when continuous stages of species formation are directly observed in nature.

CONCLUSIONS
by identifying the geographic barriers around the world that are most likely to promote ring diversification, our model provides a formal and flexible approach to discovering new examples of geographic speciation across a diverse range of taxa and environments. results of the model show that the topographic conditions required for ring speciation are rare when considered relative to all barriers on the planet, but remarkably common relative to the handful of known ring species. model predictions further suggest that the majority of barriers that are topographically most likely to provide new examples of ring speciation occur in under-studied parts of the world. although model predictions are presently limited by the few clear examples of ring species, the discovery of new ring taxa will allow iterations of this same model with numerous and biologically diverse taxa. new applications and parameterizations of the model using topography and other environmental gradients will create additional opportunities to study geographic divergence towards the formation of new species in nature, especially across taxa with different population biologies and that diversify at different spatial scales. as mayr  stated, "overlapping rings  are disturbing to the orderly mind of the cataloguing systematist, but they are welcome to the student of speciation". we predict that taxa associated with focal barriers emerging from our model will express patterns of clinal differentiation in a direction towards species formation, thus illustrating examples of taxonomic irresolution. irrespective of whether terminal taxa are above or below species level divergence, these examples allow us to identify the areas where additional evolutionary processes necessary for ring divergence can take place  and promote diversification in nature.

