BACKGROUND
l-ascorbic acid  is one of the most abundant low molecular weight antioxidants of plants, exerting a crucial role in the detoxification of reactive oxygen species generated following exposure to biotic stress factors. in addition to its antioxidant properties, asa also has major roles in plant development and hormone signalling, cell cycle, cell expansion, as a part of the cellular redox system, and as a cofactor for several important enzymes
 <cit> . an enhanced fruit asa pool has also been suggested to be associated with improved postharvest fruit quality in hard fruit species, such as pear and apple
 <cit> , as well as with higher polyphenolic compounds levels in both apple
 <cit>  and tomato
 <cit>  fruit. an increased dietary intake of asa has also long been associated with a decreased incidence of several human stress-related diseases and disorders
 <cit> . given its importance for all metabolically active tissues, understanding the regulation of plant asa metabolism has been a topic of widespread interest particularly towards the long-term aim of developing novel asa-rich cultivars with higher nutritional value, and potentially improved stress-resistance capabilities.

in plants, asa biosynthesis via the l-galactose pathway  as initially described by wheeler et al.
 <cit>  has been proposed to be the main route for asa accumulation in various species
 <cit> , and several structural genes from this pathway have been proposed to be key regulators of fruit asa concentrations in various species. these include gdp-l-galactose phosphorylase  in kiwifruit
 <cit>  and apple
 <cit> , and l-galactose-1-phosphate-phosphatase 
 <cit>  and gdp-mannose- <dig> -epimerase 
 <cit>  in tomato. possible alternative biosynthetic pathways  involving uronic acids
 <cit> , l-gulose
 <cit> , or myo-inositol
 <cit>  have also been demonstrated in several plant species, but to date, there is no convincing evidence that these contribute significantly to the asa pool under physiological conditions, except possibly in strawberry
 <cit> . nonetheless, we cannot exclude the possibility that these alternative routes could serve to supplement synthesis via l-galactose at certain developmental stages, such as during the later stages of fruit ripening
 <cit> .

oxidised asa is regenerated, or recycled via the ascorbate-glutathione cycle using reduced glutathione  as a source of reductant
 <cit> . the primary oxidation product, monodehydroascorbate  can spontaneously disproportionate to dehydroascorbate  and asa, or be reduced back to asa via the activity of the nad-dependent monodehydroascorbate reductase . dha itself can also be recycled back to asa via the activity of dehydroascorbate reductase . several studies have demonstrated the importance of the asa-gsh cycle in preventing the depletion of the asa pool including in tobacco leaves
 <cit> , and tomato fruit
 <cit> . more recently, overexpression of an orthologue of dhar  in tomato  resulted in an up to  <dig> -fold increase in asa concentrations in mature green and red fruits
 <cit> . however, the same group showed that overexpression of an orthologue of mdhar  in tomato resulted in  <dig> -fold decrease in asa concentrations in mature green fruits, highlighting the complexity of the control of asa pool size via recycling.

tomato has only moderate asa levels compared to some other fruit species
 <cit> , but its importance in the human diet and its high levels of consumption mean that even a relatively small increase in asa contents can have far reaching consequences for the consumer. we are not aware of a widespread systematic survey of asa concentrations in tomato cultivars, but data indicates that fruit asa concentrations of commercial cultivars are significantly lower than those of wild accessions
 <cit> , and further show only a limited variation
 <cit> . this suggests that there could have been an inadvertent selection for lower asa contents during the tomato domestication/breeding process.

while several studies on the control of fruit asa homeostasis in tomatoes are available
 <cit> , results to date have been contradictory, possibly due to the use of different cultivars, growth conditions and methodologies. here, we set out to identify the mechanisms underlying the regulation of tomato fruit total asa  and asa concentrations during ripening, and to understand why some cultivars are able to accumulate more asa than others. the experimental approach adopted involves a combination of fruit metabolite analyses, non- and radiolabelled substrate feeding experiments, asa-recycling and antioxidant enzyme activity measurements, and asa candidate gene expression profiling throughout ripening. the two cultivars studied were the ‘low-asa’ ‘ailsa craig’, a widely studied model cultivar, and the ‘high-asa’ ‘santorini’, a drought-tolerant cultivar originating from the island of ‘santorini’ in greece. integration of all results allowed us to build up a model for regulation in the two cultivars and to identify key regulatory components.

RESULTS
fruit ripening
under our standardised greenhouse conditions in a hydroponic system, ‘santorini’ fruit reached maturity slightly faster , than fruit of ‘ailsa craig’ . the size of ‘santorini’ fruit was also on average 60% of the size of ‘ailsa craig’ fruit, but there were no significant differences between the cultivars in fruit water contents or total soluble solids contents throughout ripening . to compensate for the differences in ripening time, and to mitigate the influence of variations in environmental conditions over the course of the experiment, fruits from both cultivars were harvested at identical physiological stages throughout the course of the experiment, based on both external and an internal fruit inspection as described in ‘methods’. these fruits were then pooled according to ripening status for analysis.

changes in asa and gsh concentrations during ripening
the concentrations of totasa , asa and % dha of pericarp tissues of the fruit differed significantly between the two cultivars, but also varied during ripening . specifically, totasa and asa concentrations of ‘santorini’ fruits were on average  <dig> -fold and  <dig> -fold higher than those of ‘ailsa craig’ fruits at the same developmental stage . the largest differences were observed at the mg stage when totasa and asa concentrations were  <dig> - and  <dig> -fold higher in ‘santorini’ fruits, respectively. this stage represents the end of the cell expansion period, when fruits have reached their final size. at the fully ripe red stage, ‘santorini’ fruits contained  <dig> -fold higher asa levels than ‘ailsa craig’ fruits, but due to a lower proportion of dha , totasa levels were only  <dig> -fold higher.
2: table s <dig> 

the changes in totasa during ripening showed that totasa concentrations were high early in development in ‘santorini’ fruits, but thereafter varied little. in comparison, totasa concentrations in ‘ailsa craig’ fruits were relatively low early in development but increased substantially after the breaker stage. in both cultivars, the highest totasa concentrations were measured at the breaker stage, where we observed a sharp and short-term spike in concentrations . to our knowledge, this is the first time that such short-time fluctuations in totasa concentrations have been observed in tomato or other fruits. since fruit at each ripening stage were harvested over a period of several weeks and then pooled, these changes in metabolite contents are unrelated to environmental conditions. the changes in fruit asa concentrations generally followed the totasa concentration profiles, the only exceptions being a slight increase in the size of the asa pool size in ‘santorini’ after the b +  <dig> stage, and larger concentration changes around the breaker stage in ‘ailsa craig . it is unclear what the biological basis of this spike in totasa-asa concentrations at the breaker stage is, but we considered it to be an important diagnostic feature and in this work it was used to help identify candidate genes whose expression was regulated or correlated with changes in fruit totasa-asa concentrations.

the proportion of dha present in the totasa pool  is an indication of the degree of oxidative stress being experienced by the tissue. in ‘santorini’ fruits, % dha decreased from  <dig> % to  <dig> %, during the breaker - red stage transition , indicating either a decreased level of oxidative stress or an improved capacity for asa recycling after the onset of ripening. in contrast, the % dha was consistently higher throughout ripening in ‘ailsa craig’ fruits, and at the red stage represented  <dig> % of the totasa pool, compared to only  <dig> % in ‘santorini’ fruits at the same stage. interestingly, % dha in ‘ailsa craig’ fruits specifically decreased at the breaker stage, but there were no significant changes in ‘santorini’ fruits .

the concentrations of total gsh , gsh, and % gssg differed between the two cultivars, and also varied during ripening . fruit totgsh-gsh concentrations were on average  <dig> - and  <dig> -fold higher in ‘santorini’ throughout ripening, with the largest differences being observed at the red stage, where totgsh and gsh concentrations were  <dig>  and  <dig> -fold higher than in ‘ailsa craig’ respectively .

changes in totgsh-gsh concentrations were similar in both cultivars throughout ripening , again with characteristic, but statistically non-significant, changes in gsh concentrations occurring around the breaker stage . highest gsh concentrations were measured at the ig stage in both cultivars, and similar to the results observed for totasa-asa pool, the gsh pool was consistently more oxidized in ‘ailsa craig’ fruits throughout ripening compared to ‘santorini’ .

changes in asa metabolism during fruit ripening
substrate feeding experiments with non- and radiolabelled biosynthetic precursors were used to examine changes in the capacity of fruit tissues to take up asa and dha, as well as their capacity to synthesise asa. these experiments had no significant effect on the redox status of the asa pool of the fruit tissues so that only the changes in tissue totasa concentrations are presented and discussed. since we were unable to detect asa-totasa in the control incubation medium , it is unlikely that a significant diffusion of asa or dha from the tissue occurred under our incubation conditions.

in control samples , there was a significant loss of totasa after  <dig> h leading to a ~2-fold decrease in the size of the totasa pool size in ig and red fruit discs of both cultivars . this presumably reflects losses due to asa oxidation as a result of the stress associated with tissue wounding, and is similar to findings in blackcurrant
 <cit>  and apple
 <cit> . somewhat surprisingly however, the totasa pool size of mg fruit discs remained essentially stable during the  <dig> h incubation period, suggesting an improved stress tolerance capacity for asa recycling at this stage.

non-radiolabelled substrate studies
incubations of fruit discs with non-labelled asa or dha provides an indication of the uptake capacity of tissues for these different forms of vitamin c. the results show that in both cultivars, dha is the preferred uptake form at the ig stage, and is also the preferred uptake form in mg fruit discs of ‘ailsa craig’ . in red fruit discs however, asa is most effective in increasing totasa levels, resulting in an up to 6-fold increase relative to controls in both cultivars . this suggests that the preference for reduced or oxidised asa differs according to the fruit ripening stage. in addition, the rate of uptake of asa and dha was found to be noticeably higher in fruits of the low-asa ‘ailsa craig’ cultivar early in development, indicating that the two cultivars have a different capacity to utilise external asa sources . this may reflect differences in the size and redox state of the asa pool , differences in the capacity for endogenous asa biosynthesis, or differences in the energetic requirements and capacity for transport of external asa/dha.

pericarp tissues from both cultivars were capable of de novo asa synthesis, but this capacity varied according to the substrate provided . incubations with  <dig> mm l-galactose  and/or l-galactono- <dig> -lactone  lead to significantly enhanced tissue totasa concentrations relative to control incubations at all ripening stages. in ‘santorini’, the greatest increase was caused by incubations of ig fruit discs with l-gal , while in ‘ailsa craig’, by incubations of mg fruit discs with l-gal . in contrast, incubations with  <dig> mm d-glucose  or  <dig> mm d-mannose  had no significant influence on totasa levels with the exception of incubations of red fruit discs of ‘ailsa craig’ with d-man. precursors from the alternative asa biosynthetic pathways  also had only a limited effect on the totasa pool size and only at specific ripening stages in ‘ailsa craig’ fruits. for instance, incubating mg and red fruit discs of ‘ailsa craig’ with l-gul or mi, respectively, enhanced totasa mean concentrations  <dig> - or  <dig> -fold, respectively, relative to the controls of  <dig> h .

in general, these substrate incubation experiments increased the totasa pool size more in the low-asa ‘ailsa craig’ cultivar compared to the asa-rich ‘santorini’, and more in young fruits compared to red fruits in both cultivars. this may indicate that ‘ailsa craig’ is more substrate-limited than ‘santorini’, or that the cultivars differ in their capacity for substrate uptake, similar to results observed for the uptake of asa and dha, possibly as a result of differences in fruit physiology/morphology. none of the incubations significantly influenced tissue totgsh-gsh concentrations at any developmental stage .

radiolabelled substrate studies; turnover and biosynthesis
incubations of fruit discs with radiolabelled biosynthetic substrates allows us to determine their rate of uptake  and the rate of conversion to totasa , without the possibility of substrate inhibition effects. incubations with l-asa was used to determine the net rate of uptake and turnover  of the asa pool as a significant proportion of total 14c-asa radiolabel recovered was found in other metabolic products due to asa degradation and/or conversion . results show that there were no significant differences between the two cultivars in the uptake capacity of l-asa over  <dig> h, with the exception of the mg stage , where ~15% more total radiolabel was recovered from ‘ailsa craig’ pericarp discs than from ‘santorini’ discs. however, from the amount of radiolabel recovered in total 14c-asa, we see that the mean rate of turnover of the totasa pool during ripening was higher in ‘santorini’ than ‘ailsa craig’ at  <dig>  and  <dig>  nmol totasa/gfw/h respectively . in contrast, the % turnover was higher in ‘ailsa craig’ fruits prior to ripening at the ig and mg stages. in ‘santorini’, the % turnover did not differ significantly across the different fruit developmental stages, and although the absolute turnover rates  were lower at the mg stage, the turnover rates at the red stage were as high as in young  fruit. by comparison, in ‘ailsa craig’, turnover rates consistently decreased throughout development, and turnover rate was only 18% of the rate of ‘santorini’ fruits at the red stage. this suggests that either asa recycling is more efficient, or that in general the demand for asa is lower in the ‘ailsa craig’ cultivar.

the % turnover of totasa pool was calculated as the ratio of the mean % of total 14c-asa recovered in the tissues and the mean % of total 14c taken up by the tissue following incubations with  <dig> μci l-asa for  <dig> h. results are represented as mean values of three replications ± sd. different letters indicate a significant difference  between values at different ripening stages based on duncan’s multiple-range-test in sas.

similar to results obtained with the l-asa incubations, there were no significant differences between the cultivars in their rates of uptake of the other radiolabelled substrates at any developmental stage examined. the uptake of 14c-d-man was found to increase around 2-fold with ripening , while the uptake of 14c-d-glc actually decreased slightly with ripening . from the amount of total 14c radiolabel recovered as total 14c-asa , we can see that recoveries were dependent on both the cultivar and the developmental stage, as well as on the substrate itself . also, as expected
 <cit> , d-man was a more effective biosynthetic substrate than d-glc. comparing the two cultivars, there were no significant differences in the amount of d-man radiolabel recovered as total 14c-asa except at the mg stage, where incorporation was approximately twice as high in ‘ailsa craig’. paradoxically, this is the stage where the greatest differences in totasa  - asa  concentrations exist between the two cultivars , suggesting that ‘ailsa craig’ could be substrate-limited at this stage. as reported in other systems
 <cit> , the rate of conversion of 14c-d-glc was much lower than that of 14c-d-man, with a maximum of only  <dig> % recovered as total 14c-asa in mg fruit in ‘ailsa craig’ . however, the measured rates of asa biosynthesis from 14c-d-glc during development showed the same variations as observed for the incubations with 14c-d-man, with highest rates for mg fruit from ‘ailsa craig’, and lowest rates at the red stage in both cultivars.

changes in the activity of asa recycling and antioxidant enzymes during fruit ripening
enzymes involved in asa recycling and antioxidant defence were profiled throughout ripening. in all cases the activity profiles were expressed as units of activity per mg fresh weight  since the profiles were identical to those obtained when activities expressed on the basis of soluble protein content .

as with the results of substrate feeding experiments , the two cultivars showed different activity profiles during ripening . generally, the changes in activities throughout ripening were much smaller in ‘ailsa craig’, and prior to the breaker stage, all enzyme activities except ascorbate peroxidase  were comparable in both cultivars. apx activity however was ~2-fold higher in ‘ailsa craig’ up to the b- <dig> stage. the main differences between the cultivars occurred after the breaker stage where all enzyme activities increased in ‘santorini’, and remained substantially higher than in ‘ailsa craig’, suggesting an increased capacity to deal with oxidative stress in ‘santorini’ fruits. this may help maintain the higher totasa-asa concentrations and lower % dha  in red ripe fruits, and could represent part of a constitutive adaptive mechanism to the high-light, high-temperature and low-water conditions where ‘santorini’ is normally cultivated.

the changes in asa concentrations throughout the ripening process were partially reflected in the changes in enzyme activity measurements. for example, the activity of apx , mdhar  and peroxidase  were correlated with asa concentrations during ripening in ‘santorini’ fruits, while the activity of apx , catalase  and superoxide dismutase  with asa levels in ‘ailsa craig’ fruits , suggesting again that the two cultivars have different mechanisms to deal with oxidative stress. of particular interest however were the changes in mdhar activity around the breaker stage which followed the same characteristic pattern as changes in totasa-asa concentrations in ‘ailsa craig’ . mdhar is also the enzyme that displayed the most striking increase in activity at the breaker stage, increasing by 65% and 56% compared to b- <dig> in ‘santorini’ and ‘ailsa craig’, respectively. this corresponds to an increase in asa concentration by 17% and 73% in ‘santorini’ and ‘ailsa craig’, respectively.

changes in the relative expression of asa-related genes during fruit ripening
the expression of  <dig> tomato orthologues of genes from the l-galactose biosynthetic and the asa-recycling pathways  were studied in pericarp tissues of ‘ailsa craig’ fruits throughout ripening . accurate real-time quantitative pcr  results depend on the use of a suitable reference gene
 <cit>  whose expression does not significantly change during ripening. from the seven possible reference genes tested in our sample set, a clathrin adaptor complexes medium subunit  and a protein phosphatase 2a catalytic subunit  showed the highest stability during ripening, with stability values of  <dig>  and  <dig> , respectively . therefore all expression data were expressed relative to the geometric mean of these two genes, essentially as previously described
 <cit> .

details of the gene id, the corresponding unigene, and the forward and reverse primers used in gene expression studies throughout ripening are shown.

the expression profiles during ripening allowed us to classify these orthologues into four groups  as follows; 1) genes whose expression increased dramatically during ripening, 2) genes whose expression decreased during ripening, 3) genes whose expression peaked at mg stage and 4) genes whose expression peaked one day before the breaker stage .

profile group  <dig> contained orthologues of gdp-mannose pyrophosphorylase  and of dhar . expression levels increased  <dig> -  or  <dig> -fold  from mg to red stage in ‘ailsa craig’ fruits .

the majority of the asa biosynthetic and recycling gene profiles were classified in group  <dig>  where gene expression was high up until the mg stage, and then dropped sharply and remained low throughout ripening . this group includes orthologues of gmp , gme , gpp , and dhar , as well as l-galactose dehydrogenase  and l-galactonolactone dehydrogenase . in this profile group, expression levels decreased from  <dig> -  to 120-fold  throughout ripening.

genes of group  <dig> displayed short-term but dramatic changes in expression around the breaker stage . this group contains orthologues of ggp , gpp , and mdhar . expression profiles were characterised by a peak at mg, followed by a decrease at the b- <dig> stage, and then a sharp increase at b +  <dig>  followed by constant expression through the remainder of ripening.

the fourth group contains the other orthologue of the key biosynthetic enzyme ggp , and two copies of the recycling gene mdhar  . these transcripts proved to be the most interesting as their relative expression profiles showed the same characteristic changes around the breaker stage as observed in totasa-asa levels in ‘ailsa craig’, but with delay of one day .

to confirm the role of group  <dig> transcripts in explaining the cultivar-specific differences in totasa-asa concentrations, the expression of these three genes was also tested in red fruits of the asa-rich cultivar . here, qpcr values were normalized against cac, as its expression was the most stable between red fruits of the two cultivars. results clearly demonstrated that only the expression of slggp <dig> was significantly higher  relative to expression in red fruit of ‘ailsa craig’ . however, while the relative expression of slmdhar <dig> and slmdhar <dig> did not differ significantly between cultivars, the mean mdhar activities were  <dig> -fold higher in ‘santorini’ red fruits, which again suggests a role for asa-recycling in maintaining elevated totasa-asa pools.

relative expression levels of slggp <dig>  slmdhar <dig> and slmdhar <dig>  as well as mdhar enzyme activity  in ‘santorini’ and ‘ailsa craig’ red fruits. qpcr values were normalized against cac. results are presented as the mean of at least four biological  and two technical replications ± sd. different letters indicate a significant difference  between values based on duncan's multiple-range-test in sas.

discussion
asa and gsh concentrations in two tomato cultivars
fully ripe tomato fruits have only ‘moderate’ totasa-asa concentrations
 <cit>  compared to the fruits of other species such as blackcurrant
 <cit>  and kiwifruit
 <cit> . under the standardised hydroponic greenhouse conditions used here, fruit asa concentrations of ‘santorini’ and ‘ailsa craig’ at the red ripe stage were  <dig>  and  <dig>  mg/100gfw, respectively, representing a  <dig> -fold difference between the cultivars. this is identical to the differences observed between the same cultivars when grown under field conditions in greece
 <cit> , indicating that there is a strong and stable genetic basis for the regulation of the asa pool size in tomato. however, the field-grown tomatoes had about  <dig> -fold higher fruit asa levels compared to greenhouse-grown tomatoes, presumably due to the higher levels of irradiance  experienced in the field
 <cit> . the differences in totasa concentrations of red ripe fruits however were not as great  due to the fact that the asa pool in ‘ailsa craig’ contained a higher % dha . this is possibly due to the lower activities of the enzymes involved in asa recycling at this stage .

on average, totasa, asa, and gsh concentrations were  <dig> -,  <dig> -, and  <dig> -fold higher in ‘santorini’ fruit than ‘ailsa craig’ throughout ripening. however, the concentrations of totgsh-gsh did not vary significantly during ripening. since the time to ripening was similar in both cultivars and there were also no significant differences in fruit water contents it is unlikely that the changes are related to a metabolite ‘dilution’ effect . these differences therefore represent clear genetic differences in the capacity to accumulate fruit totasa-asa.

asa and gsh accumulation in tomato fruits during ripening
the accumulation of totasa during fruit ripening has been well studied in several plant species, and reports show that patterns vary according to the species and the cultivar studied, as well as growth conditions. for example in fruits of different tomato cultivars, totasa concentrations were shown to both increase
 <cit> , or to remain essentially unchanged
 <cit>  during ripening. the two cultivars used here also showed different patterns of fruit totasa-asa accumulation even under identical growth conditions. nevertheless, one feature common to both cultivars was a characteristic spike in totasa-asa concentrations at the breaker stage, which proved useful to help understand the factors involved in regulating asa concentrations during ripening. the breaker stage in tomatoes  marks the onset of ripening linked to the induction of ethylene–related metabolic pathways, and leads to a major shift in fruit metabolism. the biological basis for this spike in asa  concentrations is unclear, but an increase in h2o <dig> accumulation at the breaker stage has previously been reported in tomatoes
 <cit> . while h2o <dig> levels were not measured here, the enhancement of the size of the totasa-asa pool could be indicative of an adaptive response to such an increase in h2o <dig> concentrations.

in ‘ailsa craig’, the breaker stage was associated with a 15% decrease in % dha and a 48% decrease in % gssg, due to an increase in both asa and gsh concentrations. taken together with the 56% increase in fruit mdhar activity in ‘ailsa craig’ fruits relative to the b- <dig> stage, these results suggests that the enhanced capacity for asa recycling could be linked to the observed increases in asa and gsh around these stages. unfortunately we do not have data on changes in the asa biosynthetic capacity  at this specific time point as there were insufficient fruit to carry out all incubations. however, similar results were observed in ‘santorini’, where a 65% increase in mdhar activity was correlated with an increase in the asa pool at the breaker stage. in fact, mdhar was the only enzyme whose activity was associated with the increase in fruit totasa-asa levels of both cultivars at the breaker stage, and although activity results represent the mean activities of all subcellular isoforms, the results are supported by changes in the expression of slmdhars in ‘ailsa craig’ – see discussion here under.

previous work on gsh levels in tomato fruits has shown that concentrations increase during the later stages of ripening, but that changes in gsh are not correlated with changes in asa
 <cit> . our results support these conclusions, and we see that both totgsh and gsh concentration profiles differ from the totasa-asa profiles during ripening in both cultivars, suggesting that these antioxidant pools are differently regulated.

asa uptake, biosynthesis and recycling in tomato fruits
earlier studies in foliar cell suspension cultures indicate that the preferred uptake form of asa is as the oxidized form, dha
 <cit> . our results with young tomato fruits of both cultivars support this, but by the end of ripening at the red stage there was a clear preference for asa, which increased the size of the totasa pool  <dig> -fold more than incubation with dha in ‘santorini’, and  <dig> -fold more in ‘ailsa craig’. these different responses of the cultivars may be related to the less oxidized redox status of the totasa pool in ‘santorini’ ripe fruits, or differences in the energetic requirements and capacity for transport of external asa/dha as reported in bean seedlings
 <cit> .

the ability of fruit tissues to synthesize asa de novo has been demonstrated by substrate feeding experiments in several fruit species, including courgette
 <cit> , apple
 <cit> , and blackcurrant
 <cit> . here, the highest accumulation of intercellular totasa-asa in both tomato cultivars took place following incubations of fruit discs with l-gal or l-gal. this is to be expected as these are the substrates for the last two enzymatic steps of the l-galactose pathway . the results also show that when supplied with an external carbon source, substrates of the l-gal pathway are more effective than precursors of alternative biosynthetic routes at increasing intercellular totasa-asa concentrations. nonetheless, incubations with l-gul or mi were also able to increase totasa levels of mg and red fruits, respectively, but only in the low-asa cultivar ‘ailsa craig’. incubations with l-gul have previously been reported to effectively stimulate asa levels in arabidopsis leaf suspension cultures
 <cit>  and in apple fruits
 <cit> , while overexpressing myo-inositol oxygenase in arabidopsis, the gene encoding the enzyme responsible for the conversion of mi to d-glucuronate , supports a role for mi as a potential precursor of asa, at least in foliar tissues
 <cit> . in agreement with previous reports in apple
 <cit> , incubations with d-glucuronolactone  did not increase fruit totasa levels at any ripening stage in either cultivar, however little is known about the efficiency of uptake or feedback inhibition effects of this substrate. therefore, the existence or functionality of alternative asa biosynthetic pathways seems to be cultivar and/or developmental stage-specific.

young fruits  of both cultivars displayed higher asa biosynthetic capacities than mature fruits, presumably to help support higher rates of cellular metabolism during the stages of fruit cell division and expansion. despite this, red ripe fruits had higher asa concentrations . similarly, despite having lower totasa-asa concentrations, ‘ailsa craig’ fruits had a higher asa biosynthetic capacity than ‘santorini’. therefore biosynthetic capacity is not related to totasa-asa concentrations. the lower biosynthetic capacities of the high versus the low-asa cultivar may represent the results of a feedback inhibition of asa on asa biosynthesis in ‘santorini’ fruits, or could be due to a lower demand for asa in these ‘santorini’ fruits, or differences in uptake capacities. feedback regulation of asa pool has been previously observed in spinach
 <cit> , as well as in pea seedlings
 <cit> , where the activity of gldh, the last enzyme in the l-galactose biosynthetic pathway, was competitively inhibited by increased asa levels.

since differences in the rate of asa biosynthesis do not correlate with cultivar-specific differences in fruit totasa-asa concentrations, or the changes observed during ripening, the accumulation of totasa-asa is possibly due to differences in the rate of asa turnover and asa recycling. indeed, our results indicate that both of these mechanisms significantly influence the size of the fruit totasa pool. for example, the % turnover of the asa pool was significantly higher  in young  compared to the red  fruits in ‘ailsa craig’, and  <dig> -fold lower in ‘santorini’ young fruits compared to ‘ailsa craig’ fruits at the same developmental stage. nevertheless, the actual turnover rate was higher in ‘santorini’ fruits, again indicating a possible link between the size and the rate of turnover of the asa pool
 <cit> . on the other hand, totasa pool is smaller and more oxidized in ‘ailsa craig’  which is also the cultivar with a lower capacity for asa recycling . interestingly, of all the enzymes measured, it is the enhanced mdhar activity that is associated with the increased totasa–asa concentrations measured at the breaker stage in both cultivars.

to summarize this section therefore, asa biosynthetic capacities are higher early in fruit development, even though concentrations of asa  and totasa  are higher in the later stages of ripening. the lack of accumulation of totasa-asa at ig fruits is due to higher rates of turnover of the asa pool. the two cultivars also differ in net de novo biosynthetic capacities, with the ‘low-asa’ ‘ailsa craig’ actually displaying a higher biosynthetic capacity. again, this is compensated for by a higher % turnover of the asa pool early in fruit development, and a lower rate of asa recycling, as manifested by a more oxidized redox status compared to ‘santorini’.

candidate genes for asa regulation throughout ripening
similar to results in kiwi
 <cit>  and tomato
 <cit> , we found high relative expression of most of the biosynthetic genes from the l-galactose pathway early in fruit development . this correlates with the higher biosynthetic capacities measured and may reflect increased requirements of asa for cell division/expansion
 <cit> . in a previous study, the enhanced expression of gpp, as monitored by northern blot analysis, has been correlated with increased asa concentrations during the later stages of the ripening process in ‘ailsa craig’ fruits
 <cit> . however, no such correlation between gpp expression and asa levels was observed by us during ‘ailsa craig’ fruit ripening. in fact of all genes examined, only the relative expression patterns of the ‘group 4’ genes   were strongly correlated  with the changes in fruit totasa-asa levels around the breaker stage, with a delay of one day . a similar delay between gene expression and changes in asa concentrations was noticed in tomato leaves
 <cit> . therefore these three genes seem to represent good candidates for the regulation of fruit asa concentrations. significant correlations were also found between the expression of slgmp <dig> and slggp <dig> and asa concentrations around this stage , but not with totasa concentrations , indicating that these transcripts may also play a role in regulating the size of the reduced asa pool.

ggp  represents the first committed step of asa biosynthesis, and has previously been suggested to be a key rate-limiting step in plants
 <cit> . recent results from our lab indicate that paralogues of apple ggp are key regulators of totasa-asa concentrations in fruits
 <cit> , and others have shown that ectopic expression of the single kiwifruit ggp orthologue results in enhanced totasa contents in both transgenic tomato  and strawberry 
 <cit> . therefore, our results here support a central role for ggp in the regulation of fruit asa pool in fruits of several different plant species. in addition, although we cannot exclude the possibility that other genes may play a role in regulating fruit asa pool size in the high asa cultivar during ripening, differences in slggp <dig> expression could also help to explain the differences in fruit totasa-asa concentrations between cultivars, as expression levels were twice as high in red ripe fruits of ‘santorini’ compared to the low-asa cultivar, ‘ailsa craig’ . these results should however be further validated by testing slggp <dig> expression in fruits of a larger collection of tomato cultivars with a wider range of totasa-asa concentrations.

on the basis of quantitative trait loci  studies in several tomato populations, stevens and co-authors have proposed a role for an orthologue of mdhar, as a candidate gene for the genetic control of asa in tomato fruits
 <cit> . this candidate gene corresponds to slmdhar <dig> , but gene expression profiles here do not support this conclusion, and others have shown that overexpression of slmdhar <dig> in tomato can even lead to a moderate decrease in asa levels of mg fruits
 <cit> . however, mdhar activity is well correlated with asa concentration in ‘santorini’ fruits during ripening , and is linked to the short-term changes in totasa-asa around the breaker stage in ‘ailsa craig’ fruits , while expression of the other two mdhar orthologues, slmdhar <dig>  and slmdhar <dig> , do closely mirror changes in totasa-asa concentrations in ‘ailsa craig’ fruits around this stage . in contrast, expression levels of the two orthologues of the other main asa-recycling gene dhar, did not reflect changes in totasa-asa changes .

although the results presented here indicate a role for the slmdhar <dig> and slmdhar <dig> gene products in the control of asa pool during ripening in ‘ailsa craig’, their relative expression levels did not differ significantly between the two cultivars at the red stage. despite this, mdhar enzyme activity was actually  <dig> -fold higher in fruits of the high-asa cultivar. this discrepancy between gene expression and enzyme activity is possibly related to the fact that activity results represent the mean activities of all subcellular isoforms, while expression results represent the expression of individual members of the gene family.

CONCLUSIONS
in this work, we set out to try and unravel the regulation of asa metabolism during fruit ripening in two tomato cultivars with different fruit totasa-asa levels, and so to identify key regulatory elements. substrate feeding experiments show that as in other fruit species, young tomato fruits have a higher capacity to accumulate and synthesize asa before the onset of ripening , and that biosynthesis occurs primarily via the l-galactose biosynthetic pathway. however, at these early developmental stages, despite an enhanced biosynthetic capacity, fruits do not accumulate high totasa-asa concentrations due to a higher rate of breakdown of the asa pool  perhaps as a result of the enhanced need for asa in cell expansion of the developing tissue, or due to low asa recycling activities .

in both cultivars , totasa and asa concentrations increase significantly later on in ripening and our results suggest that this is due to increased recycling and/or decreased breakdown again depending on the cultivar. comparing the two cultivars, increases in asa recycling capacities after the breaker stage seem to be responsible for the enhanced totasa-asa levels in fruits of the high-asa cultivar , even though it possesses lower net biosynthetic capacity than the low-asa cultivar  at the same developmental stage. this lower biosynthetic capacity could be due to either lower uptake capacities for asa biosynthetic precursors, or due to feedback inhibition of asa biosynthesis by increased levels of asa itself. one previously unrecognized characteristic of both cultivars is a sharp peak in fruit totasa-asa concentrations at the breaker stage. this peak could be of commercial relevance since tomatoes are typically picked at the breaker stage and then allowed to ripen off-vine.

from the range of asa metabolic genes examined, only the levels of slggp <dig> and of the two gene copies of slmdhar correlated with changes in totasa-asa concentrations during ripening in ‘ailsa craig’. at the red stage however only differences in the expression of slggp <dig> were sufficient to explain totasa-asa levels, although mdhar enzyme activity was higher in ‘santorini’ fruits. therefore it seems that fruit totasa-asa concentrations are regulated by changes in both biosynthetic and recycling activities, and that the relative contribution of these mechanisms depends on both the cultivar and developmental stage. identification of the functional alleles of these candidates will enable us understand their relative contribution to fruit asa regulation and can lead to the development of molecular markers suitable for breeding and selection.

