BACKGROUND
macromolecular complexation is key to many biological processes, and has been a subject of experimental study for many decades. the last few years have seen significant advances in high throughput detection of protein-protein interactions, for example with yeast two hybrid  <cit>  and affinity purification methods feeding into analysis by mass spectrometry  <cit> . these laboratory advances have led to a new area of bioinformatics analysis, interpreting the data in terms of interaction networks, and putting such networks in a biological context  <cit> . at the same time, structural biology continues to visualise interfaces at atomic resolution  <cit> , whilst computational biology addresses whether proteins can be docked into the correct complexes  <cit> , and develops models for the prediction of binding affinities  <cit> . these are fundamental questions, combining the physico-chemical properties of atomic interactions with biological activity.

docking of two proteins is determined by complementarity of shape and of pairwise interactions within shape-matched patches  <cit> . methods for predicting mainchain alteration are still relatively poor, so that successful docking methods have been largely restricted to proteins for which there is little conformational change between the complexed and uncomplexed forms  <cit> . the issue of sidechain rotameric variation upon complexation can also cause problems  <cit> , necessitating the development of methods to sample sidechain conformers  <cit> . there are promising advances in the handling of conformational variation, for both sidechains and mainchain, which simulate variation and show that the correct solution can be identified in a cluster of well-packed configurations  <cit> .

computational research in protein docking inevitably overlaps studies that construct models for binding affinities, through the common use of force-fields. one particularly important growth area is the assessment of binding potential for proteins that are homologous with the constituents of characterised complexes i.e. comparative modelling of complexes based on known interfaces  <cit> . whereas comparative modelling of individual domains based on homology demonstrates the fold for the sequence of interest, albeit with variations that may not be easy to model, similar modelling applied separately to non-covalently linked components must address the question of whether a viable interface is maintained. if effective algorithms can be developed in this area, then structural bioinformatics, combined with structural biology, will be a valuable complement to the high throughput experimental methods for determining protein-protein interactions. the question of what features determine interfacial stability had been extensively studied. a recurring theme is the importance, in many cases, of buried non-polar area  <cit> . this simple observation, along with the complexity and computational scale of attempts to calculate free energies of binding by simulation, has led to the development of empirical binding models  <cit> . these involve the separation into terms that each represent some physical feature or combination of features, and which are linearly combined and the relevant weights determined through fitting to a test set of experimental data. terms reflect properties such as: the hydrophobic effect/buried non-polar surface area; electrostatic interactions; van der waals interactions; sidechain rotameric entropy; rotational and translation entropy of complexation. the limitations of such models, especially the lack of a simulation component, are counteracted by their potential to detect trends through fitting to experimental data.

there is also widespread interest in modelling the influence of mutations at interfaces, which in biological terms could map for example to the role of single nucleotide polymorphisms in complexes  <cit> . binding models have been derived from fitting to measured differences in binding energies for mutant complexes relative to wild-type  <cit> . in the current work, we denote models for binding in complexes as Δg models, and those for differences  between complexes as ΔΔg models. since Δg and ΔΔg models use the same range of terms, apart from cancellation of rotational/translational entropy, it is of interest to compare them. this is the subject of the current study.

an important property of interfaces is the degree to which conformation changes between the complexed and uncomplexed forms. we have restricted our dataset of wild-type proteins to those for which there is no evidence in the literature for mainchain changes, and for mutant proteins the assumption is made that the backbone does not change. with regard to sidechains, we make use of a mean field technique adapted previously in our laboratory  <cit> , from earlier work  <cit> . with this method the probability of a rotamer is higher where it can fit with a larger number of neighbouring sidechain rotamers, at a given van der waals tolerance. thus higher probability values, in this framework, tend to select rotamers with higher solvent accessibility, and conversely lower probability generally maps to lower solvent accessibility. rotamer prediction is more difficult for sidechains without structural constraints  <cit> , and prediction accuracy reduces in these cases for commonly-used methods such as scwrl  <cit> . in the current work we study the effect of differential modelling of interfacial changes, using either the higher solvent accessibility scheme , or in the lower solvent accessibility  scheme. comparison with accessible solvent areas in experimental structures suggests that the more compact, lowsa, configurations may give a more appropriate representation.

in addition to the question of how to repack sidechains, there is also the issue of which sidechains to repack. in a minimal scheme for repacking, using the experimental rotamers where possible, wild-type complexes are not repacked at all, and mutations are modelled simply by rotamer selection for the mutated amino acid. such structural models we denote as "minimal". in contrast, it is also possible to repack all sidechains for all molecules, so that the packing can  change upon complexation and/or upon mutation. we label such schemes as "complete". thus minimal-highsa packed wild-type complexes in Δg models are simply the structures from the experimentally-determined complexes, and for mutations in ΔΔg models would simply be modelling of the mutated residue with the most solvent accessible rotamer, in the free and complexed states. complete-lowsa takes low solvent accessibility rotamers, and repacks all sidechains, in both free and uncomplexed states.

our results show that the importance of buried non-polar surface for Δg models is not reflected in ΔΔg models, when using highsa packing . we examine the effect of complete-lowsa packing, allowing for greater environment-specific relaxation. although the magnitude of calculated non-polar burial differences between wild-type and mutants is increased, the complete-lowsa packing does not significantly improve consistency between Δg and ΔΔg models. a key factor in the inconsistency is that changes in non-polar burial upon mutation can be either positive or negative, in comparison with the experimental ΔΔg values in our dataset that are almost exclusively unfavourable upon mutation. this is true for all packing schemes used, presumably reflecting inaccuracies in predicting conformation upon mutation and/or that structure is more fluid than can be represented by single conformers.

the inconsistency of Δg and ΔΔg models is substantially reduced when a simple volume-based representation of interfacial changes replaces the area-based description. we discuss this result in the context of comparative modelling for protein-protein interfaces.

RESULTS
non-polar surface area dominates Δg binding models 
a set of protein-protein complexes with known structures and binding energies was collated as described in the methods section. we ascertained that there was no evidence for substantial mainchain conformational change in these complexes through a survey of the literature. although structures for the uncomplexed components were not used in calculations, in several cases these were used for assessment of conformational change. table  <dig> lists the set of wild-type complexes used in the current study, together with their complexation energies.

protein constituents of the complexes are given, with the following abbreviations: omtky <dig>  turkey ovomucoid third domain; hewl, hen egg white lysozyme; bpti, bovine pancreatic trypsin inhibitor; im <dig>  immunity protein 9; sgpb streptomyces griseus protease b; ssi, streptomyces subtilisin inhibitor.

weights are either w for Δg models or w' for ΔΔg models. u/l is unlocked/locked interfacial sidechains, applied to sc-rot.

non-polar surface is a minor feature in ΔΔg binding models 
empirical binding models generally target either complexes or differences between wild-type and mutant complexes, but not both. we are interested in whether Δg and ΔΔg models show the same relative importance of model features. figure  <dig> shows results for ΔΔg models, where the rotation/translation term cancels between wild-type and mutant systems. again reasonable fits are obtained, although this time the unlocked interfacial sidechain entropy term gives a slightly better model than the locked term  and  of figure 2). as for the wild-type calculations, these two terms do not correlate well . a major difference to Δg models  is that non-polar surface area has a small weight, and a poor correlation with the measured binding data . the ΔΔgasa-p, ΔΔgionis-desolv and ΔΔgsc-rot terms correlate to such a degree that individually they can adopt a large and unphysical weighting, with compensation by the other features.

a Δg binding model fits poorly to measured ΔΔg 
repacking sidechains with the mean-field algorithm
the potential for lowsa prediction is shown with the wild-type complexes in figure  <dig>  where the total asa values are shown for: experimental structures, complete-highsa repacking and complete-lowsa repacking. lowsa gives an overall result more in accord with experiment. figure  <dig> shows an example for the barnase-barstar complex , where more sidechains packed with complete-highsa protrude from the crystal structure molecular surface, than do those packed with complete-lowsa. in terms of predicted buried asas , figure  <dig> shows that for the set of mutants used in this study, complete-lowsa repacking gives consistently more burial than does complete-highsa. this result holds when mutant systems are differenced to wild-type, and also whether the mutants are to alanine or other amino acids . therefore the ΔΔgasa-np and ΔΔgasa-p terms are larger  with complete-lowsa packing than with complete-highsa, and we next examined whether this alters the discrepancy between Δg and ΔΔg models.

combining Δg and ΔΔg binding models 
recalculating asa at lower solvent probe radius
since Δgasa-np drives agreement for Δg models, but not for ΔΔg models , we looked more closely at this property in the mutant interfaces. from figure  <dig>   it is apparent that both minimal-highsa and complete-lowsa schemes give a spread of ΔΔ values around zero, albeit with larger magnitude in the complete-lowsa scheme. since ΔΔgexp is almost exclusively of one sign, it is clear that ΔΔgasa-np will be down-weighted in a best fit linear model. figure  <dig> shows that the dual sign spread of ΔΔ is largely negated when the solvent probe radius is reduced from  <dig>  Å to  <dig>  Å, but the correlation with ΔΔgexp remains poor. these results indicate that ΔΔgasa-np, with the current repacking schemes, is not an effective feature with which to understand ΔΔg binding models. visual inspection  reveals that relatively large non-polar surfaces may be revealed upon mutation, and whether or not these are solvent accessible depends on the fine detail of packing differences between a complex and its components. whereas asa-np is the most prominent feature in Δg models, either it is not an appropriate description for interfacial relaxation in response to mutation, or current modelling of interfacial relaxation is insufficient.

volume-based solvation
we reasoned that a volume-based solvation function would be less sensitive to the details of packing changes than a solvent accessible area-based feature. this is consistent with the more prominent role played by Δgionis-desolv in ΔΔg models, as opposed to Δg models. solvation shell models have been investigated previously in the context of solute/protein structure and stabilisation  <cit> . here we develop simple properties to replace Δ/ΔΔgasa-np and Δ/ΔΔgasa-p in the binding models, in which solvation shell volumes are calculated for each atom, on a grid. the volumes cover a shell of  <dig>  Å thickness around atomic van der waals radii, and are assigned polar or non-polar according to atom type. then Δ  and ΔΔ  are calculated for gvol-np and gvol-p. this model affords a rapid calculation, and volume-based features give the uniform sign behaviour expected for mutants that generally involve reduction of sidechain size , unlike the distribution of ΔΔ ).

weights are w for Δg model, w' for ΔΔg models. u/l is unlocked/locked interfacial sidechains, applied to sc-rot.

looking at calculations with minimal-highsa repacking, it appears that even simple volume calculations are capturing common properties in the Δg and ΔΔg processes, a behaviour that has largely defeated the asa-based calculations. the volume-based terms are particularly rapid to calculate, and could provide the basis for simple, low resolution, computational screens of interface viability. table  <dig> shows Δg and ΔΔg models derived using only two volume-based solvation terms. the r <dig> values for minimal-highsa models with just two features are close to those of the best fits for the more extensive minimal-highsa models given in table  <dig> 

weights are w for Δg models, w' for ΔΔg models.

our investigation of simple, empirical models for binding that can generalise between Δg and ΔΔg applications, contrasts with interface-specific methods using quantitative structure-activity relationships that highlight residues of particular importance  <cit> . in practice both approaches have the same overall aim, i.e. predictive capability for protein-protein interactions; and the same constraints, with sets of correlated features  and an imprecise understanding of the underlying conformational and energetic framework. our observation that volume-based terms perform better than area-based terms in ΔΔg models highlights this latter problem. it is possible that modified area-based terms, for example with conformational sampling and weighting, could improve performance.

CONCLUSIONS
we find that binding models, using minimal sidechain repacking and asa-based solvation terms, are quite different depending on whether they are fit to data for Δg  or ΔΔg . whereas buried non-polar area dominates the Δg model , consistent with previous work  <cit> , other interactions assume much greater importance for the mutant complexes , and the Δg binding model does not reproduce the spread of Δgexp within mutant sets .

investigating whether different sidechain repacking could alter this discrepancy, a scheme for packing sidechains towards protein structure has been derived from a mean-field framework . this method, which we label complete-lowsa since all sidechains  are repacked, is promising in terms of a better agreement with total asa for experimental complexes, and in giving larger buried surface areas upon complexation than the minimal-highsa scheme . however, this does not lead to significant increase in the importance of non-polar buried area in best fit ΔΔg models, and there remains a discrepancy between Δg and ΔΔg models . further analysis of ΔΔ revealed a spread around zero that mitigates against fitting to ΔΔgexp, which is predominantly single sign . these results indicate that either non-polar buried area is not important for ΔΔg modelling, which would be surprising given its role in Δg modelling, or that we are not capturing the complexity of sidechain  conformational rearrangement upon mutation.

of the features studied, ionisable group-based electrostatics contributes relatively little in best fits to experimental data, for both Δg and ΔΔg models. clearly there will be instances where ionisable groups will contribute substantially to interfacial energetics, and mediate processes such as a physiological ph-dependence of binding. in general though, studies of optimal predictors of interfacial propensity show that net charge is  excluded, part of an overall tendency for ease of desolvation at interfaces  <cit> . for most Δg and ΔΔg models, sidechain rotameric entropy plays a relatively small part , and where the weight is large may be partly due to correlations with other properties . in ΔΔg models with asa-based solvation, ΔΔgasa-p and ΔΔgionis-desolv assume more importance. polar solvation may be reflecting overall burial change in the interface upon mutation, rather than indicative of particular favourable polar interactions. the effects of mutations on polar area relative to non-polar area are somewhat different. the polar area equivalent to the non-polar area data plotted in figure  <dig>  is qualitatively similar, whereas the polar area equivalent to figure  <dig>  is qualitatively different, being largely of a single sign .

empirical desolvation for ionisable groups, describing an estimate of the entropy of water molecule liberation, is a simple volume-based term. we therefore tested the capacity for volume-based terms in general to account for solvation changes in ΔΔg models, in place of area-based terms. the volume solvation features assume importance in all models, reducing the discrepancy between Δg and ΔΔg models . volume-based models are part of the molecular mechanics force-fields in some applications  <cit> , and ΔΔg models with volume-based solvation terms have been used, in part for faster calculation  <cit> . in the current work, we show that even a very simple solvation shell model is effective in improving consistency of Δg and ΔΔg models. surface area-based modelling for ΔΔg fails since asa is particularly sensitive to relatively small conformational changes, even for single site mutations. in contrast volume based models are less sensitive, and a simple binding model for Δg and ΔΔg can be constructed with just polar and non-polar volume-based features. this could be useful in computational assessment of the validity of comparative modelled interfaces, and our simple implementation is made available for such analyses.

