BACKGROUND
naturally occurring antisense transcripts  are sequences complementary to other transcripts and were first identified in prokaryotes and viruses, where their expression influences mrna transcription, processing and translation  <cit> . over the past few years, antisense transcription in human and other eukaryotic genomes has become increasingly evident due to the availability of high throughput sequencing technologies and strand-specific tiling oligonucleotide arrays  <cit> . the rigorous analysis of the human genome by the encyclopedia of dna elements  project fortified the notion that transcription is substantially more complex than previously conceived and that at least 15% of all transcripts could derive from antisense transcription  <cit> . so far more than  <dig>  potential sense/antisense  transcript pairs have been identified in both human and mouse genomes  <cit>  and several antisense containing databases such as anticode have been published  <cit> . while the majority of studies have focused on the mapping and evolutionary aspect of sas pairs, only a few studies have interrogated and validated their abundance in different human tissues  <cit> . here we report for the first time a comprehensive analysis of sas pairs with regards to their differential expression in the normal and malignant breast epithelium.

a discrete function of sas pairs in human tissues has not been identified, although their regulatory activity on protein expression at diverse levels, such as alternative splicing, post-transcriptional regulation, transport and epigenetic imprinting as well as transcriptional and translational interference through annealing to complementary sequences has been postulated  <cit> . since some functional data for their involvement in developmental processes have recently emerged  <cit> , their role in malignant transformation of human tissues may be foreseen.

initially, nats were identified using large collections of mrna, genomic and est sequences, as well as expression data from methods such as serial analysis of gene expression  and massively parallel signature sequencing   <cit> . by using these sequencing data for the identification of nats, stringent criteria were applied to determine correctly the orientation of each sense or antisense transcript relative to its genomic sequence. over the last few years microarray based experiments have validated the prevalence of nats in different human and mouse tissues  <cit> . using strand-specific microarray probes, oeder et al. interrogated the abundance of many different nats based on the mouse affymetrix moe <dig> microarray dataset  <cit> , while ye et al. identified several hundred nats in  <dig> human cell lines  <cit> . ge and colleagues extended the use of oligonucleotide based microarrays for the analysis of nat expression by altering the protocol for cdna synthesis and thereby strongly supporting the observation that encoding of transcripts on both dna strands often results in complementary mrnas  <cit> . recently, another human microarray chip based on the affymetrix genechip platform – namely the breast cancer dsa – was developed by almac diagnostics  <cit> . the design methodology of the dsa range of research tools has previously been described  <cit> . in brief, the breast cancer dsa microarray was designed utilising breast cancer-specific sequence information consisting of full length public mrnas and contigs generated by the assembly of a range of public and proprietary est datasets. the dsa is classified as a discovery platform and its content ranges from well-characterised transcripts to those whose function is currently unknown. furthermore, the content includes a large number of probe sets specific for the detection of antisense transcripts in addition to a significant amount of sense transcript information not found on other commercially available microarrays. it is therefore ideally suited to investigate the sense and antisense transcriptome of breast cancer.

in this study, we have used the breast cancer dsa research tool in conjunction with the affymetrix hg-u <dig> plus  <dig>  genechip and mpss data sets of our established differential tumour epithelial transcriptome  <cit>  to analyze the expression of sas pairs in immunomagnetically separated normal human luminal epithelial cells and primary breast cancers substantially enriched for their neoplastic epithelial component. the aim of the current study was not only to identify sas pairs expressed in the epithelial cells of human breast tissue, but also to validate their expression signature using several different technologies. our particular focus was upon sas pairs with deregulated expression in mammary epithelial cells, and to ascertain whether the expression of the antisense transcripts could be detected in several different breast cell lines and solid primary breast tumours. generating the first comprehensive dataset of sas pairs in epithelial breast tissue, our analysis has also shed light on the nuances of antisense and sense transcription.

RESULTS
microarray probe sets and mpss tags with sense and antisense orientation
the basis of all cross-platform comparison is reliability of annotation and mapping of microarray features and tag sequences, especially if transcripts from the sense or antisense orientation are to be distinguished. to ensure the correct annotation, probesets from both microarray platforms, as well as mpss tags, were mapped by sequence alignment to a human transcriptome  database that was previously used for a multiple platform comparison study  <cit> . to be included for further analysis, stringent filtering criteria were applied to the probe sets and mpss tags: firstly, probe sets and mpss tags that could not be mapped to a htr cluster or which aligned in silico to several clusters were eliminated; secondly, probe sets had to exclusively detect either the sense or antisense transcript – which was determined by the orientation of alignment of the probes or tags to the htr clusters.

both microarrays had approximately the same number of microarray features printed, of which  <dig>  out of  <dig>   and  <dig>  out of  <dig>   probe sets were unambiguously mapped to a htr cluster in sense orientation, for the breast cancer dsa and plus  <dig> , respectively . in contrast,  <dig>  out of  <dig>   probe sets on breast cancer dsa could potentially detect antisense transcripts which is more than double than the number detected by the plus  <dig>   . despite the fact that the overall magnitude of transcript detection by mpss was much smaller than those of the two microarray platforms, the percentage of tags mapping to the sense strand to the overall detected sequences was similar to the microarray platforms . due to the mpss technology and our stringent criteria for inclusion as a potential antisense detectable tag, only 215/ <dig>   mpss tags could potentially be derived from antisense transcripts .

numbers of representative human transcriptome clusters  mapping of the affymetrix hg u <dig> plus  <dig>  genechip  probe sets, almac diagnostics breast cancer dsa  probe sets and massively parallel signature sequencing  sequence tags to the human transcriptome clusters  in either sense or antisense orientation.

based on the htr database, transcript coverage of sense and antisense probes of these three technologies was compared. since both the affymetrix probesets and the htr database were based solely on public sequence data, the plus  <dig>  had the highest coverage of sense-mapped features.  <dig>   of those htr clusters were also represented on breast cancer dsa, as were an additional  <dig>  clusters not detected on the plus  <dig>  . the limitation of the mpss sequencing technology became apparent in this comparison, identifying only a third of all sense transcripts represented on these microarray chips . interestingly, when the coverage of antisense transcripts was compared between these three technologies, a different picture was obtained. the majority of antisense-containing htr clusters was found on the breast cancer dsa. out of the  <dig>  antisense-containing htr clusters  <dig>  overlapped with the plus  <dig>  and  <dig> htr clusters were also identified by mpss, illustrating the enrichment of antisense transcripts on the breast cancer dsa microarray platform. the full htr mapping information for the dsa microarray features , plus  <dig> microarray features , and mpss tags  are provided, and may provide a useful resource not only for inclusion in current antisense databases, but also to interrogate possible antisense transcription in several human tissues and in published human expression datasets. htr database sequences are available on request.

to determine which of these antisense strand-matching microarray features showed expression in the human breast epithelium, the absence or presence calls for all probe sets on both microarray platforms in either the normal luminal epithelial or the malignant breast epithelial sample were established using the mas <dig> algorithm. microarray features were included for further studies if at least two out of three technical replicates per platform agreed in their present calls, while mpss tags were kept when their tag count was at least  <dig> tags per million. their corresponding htr cluster identifier was used to represent mpss tags and microarray features. it was noted that more than 60% of all probe sets passed the present call criteria on the breast cancer dsa, only 39% had a concordant present call on the plus  <dig> . as a next step, the sense and the antisense transcriptomes of the normal and the malignant breast epithelia were compared. table  <dig>  shows an initial comparison of present calls obtained using the two microarray platforms and mpss in both normal and malignant cell-lines. these numbers provide an initial view of the number of transcripts detectable by each of the three technologies.

total number of probesets/tags mapped to the htr database and the number of present calls seen in normal and malignant breast epithelium in both sense and antisense orientations. these numbers indicate the actual detections levels of each technology.

as shown in figure  <dig>  the two microarray platforms had a concordance of ~ <dig>  transcripts in the normal setting, but nearly five times more transcripts were detected specifically on the breast tissue specific breast cancer dsa microarray platform in the normal and malignant epithelium . furthermore, expression profiles obtained by the breast cancer dsa identified three times more transcripts found by mpss than the affymetrix platform. this difference between the generic affymetrix plus  <dig>  and the tissue-specific breast cancer dsa became even more apparent when antisense-containing htr clusters were compared. while 43% of all antisense-detecting probes sets obtained a present call, only 14% on the plus  <dig>  could be detected, corresponding to the unique detection of >  <dig>  antisense-containing htr clusters in the normal and the malignant breast epithelium by breast cancer dsa. for the dsa platform,  <dig> antisense detecting probe sets were in common between the normal and the malignant epithelium, of which  <dig> showed more than two-fold difference in expression level with a pvalue <  <dig> . in contrast,  <dig> affymetrix probe sets mapping to antisense transcripts were detectable in normal and malignant breast epithelium, of which  <dig> passed the same criteria, and only  <dig> mpss tags showed different expression level.

selecting those htr clusters that mapped solely in antisense orientation and were detected by at least  <dig> of the  <dig> technologies created a set of  <dig> 'robust' antisense sequences. sequences could be detected in both the normal and the malignant setting or in either setting individually . as shown in figure  <dig>  the majority of these commonly represented antisense htr clusters were represented on the breast cancer dsa with the exception of one, which was only detected by the plus  <dig>  and mpss in the normal luminal breast sample.

novel sense-antisense pairs in the human breast tissues
having established a robust set of antisense containing htr clusters encompassing  <dig> antisense transcripts, we interrogated how many of those had a corresponding sense transcript also represented on the breast cancer dsa. sense and antisense transcript pairs were defined when their sequence overlapped on opposite strands of the htr database . according to our criteria,  <dig> sas pairs were identified. galante et al. published a comprehensive study on antisense sense transcripts derived from publicly available sequencing data  <cit> . to establish if our sas pairs had been reported previously, their sequences were analysed against the galante database. interestingly, only  <dig> of the  <dig> sas pairs produced matches against the database, while the remaining  <dig> produced no significant alignments and can therefore be considered as novel or previously unidentified. probeset mapping for the  <dig> htrs is provided .

as a next step, we wanted to interrogate if the antisense and sense transcripts of the sas pairs showed similar expression patterns in the breast epithelium. the differential expression between the normal and the malignant breast epithelium for all sas pairs was established and only probe sets whose differential expression had a significance level below  <dig>  were used. when the pearson's correlation coefficients for the log <dig> ratios of our sas pairs were calculated, all sas pairs showed a positive correlation as shown in figure  <dig> 

confirmation of differentially expressed sas pairs by strand-specific qpcr
since none of the identified sas pairs exhibited an opposite fold change between the normal and the malignant breast epithelium, we wanted to explore further whether these sas pairs were exclusively showing positive differential expression patterns. three of the  <dig> novel sas pairs were randomly selected and strand-specific rt-pcr used to measure their expression. the  <dig> pairs, corresponding to discoidin, cub and lccl domain containing  <dig> , matrix metallopeptidase  <dig>  and keratin  <dig>  had their expression interrogated in  <dig> breast cancer cell lines and ten solid primary breast tumours . to distinguish expression coming from the sense or the antisense strand, the first strand cdna synthesis of the rt-pcr was set up either with the sense primer  or the antisense primer . fam labeled fluorescent probes for each gene were used to determine the relative expression levels of the sense and antisense by qpcr. krt <dig> showed similar expression patterns in all tested samples with regards to sense and antisense transcription and overall expression levels. in contrast, dcbld <dig> and mmp <dig> showed significantly higher expression ratios in the solid tumours in comparison with the breast cancer cell lines. furthermore the sense and antisense transcripts of dcbld <dig> had different expression levels in bt <dig> and t47d, two hormone-receptor positive luminal-specific breast cancer cell lines. when the expression of the antisense and sense mmp <dig> transcript was interrogated, opposite expression levels were observed in five breast cancer cell lines  as well as in five solid breast tumours.

discussion
the initial goal of our study was to perform comparative expression profiling of normal and malignant breast epithelia using three different approaches – two commonly used technologies we had utilised previously  <cit>  and a recently released microarray designed specifically for investigation of breast cancer.

to ensure fair comparison, a human transcriptome database was used as a common mapping point for the three technologies  <cit> . this produced similar numbers of mapped features for the plus  <dig>  and breast cancer dsa and markedly lower amounts for mpss. the similar overall numbers of plus  <dig>  and dsa probesets unambiguously mapping to the htr database were contrasted when the orientation of alignment was considered, with the plus  <dig>  showing slightly higher numbers of sense features and the dsa showing significantly higher numbers of antisense transcripts. this is most likely explained by the plus  <dig>  design being focused on common protein coding genes from older public data while the dsa design employed tissue specific sequencing and is more likely to have discovered novel content. therefore whilst the plus  <dig>  could be expected to have more features mapping in the sense orientation, a proportion of these likely represent transcripts not necessarily of functional importance in breast cancer.

the fact that mpss produced fewer unambiguous maps than either of the other two technologies is a reflection of the short tag length utilised by the technology and the consequent increased likelihood of cross hybridisation. this fact highlights a major shortcoming of the mpss approach. whereas either of the microarray technologies utilise probesets containing eleven 25-mer probes and specially formulated to be reflective of a single transcript, the mpss approach generates single tags only  <dig> nucleotides in length. this fact creates significant potential for incorrect mapping of tags and means that much of the initial data generated becomes unusable when a stringent mapping methodology is utilised. this serves as a general reminder of the care that must be taken in the interpretation of any data generated on the basis of short, single tags or probes.

detection analysis showed further advantages of the dsa approach with higher numbers of present calls than the plus  <dig>  array in both orientations. the fact that this trend was observed regardless of the plus  <dig> 's higher number of sense mapped features is again suggestive of the advantage of the disease-focused approach used in the generation of the dsa – it would appear that a larger proportion of the plus  <dig>  content does not show expression in breast epithelia. mpss again under performed at this point, which is reflective of previous assessments of the technology  <cit> .

generic arrays have previously been suggested as a viable means of studying antisense transcription  <cit>  however the higher number of antisense transcripts and higher detection levels on the dsa suggest that antisense transcription would be better studied using a focused approach like the breast cancer dsa research tool. furthermore, the dsa achieved greater concordance with mpss data than the plus  <dig>  which is noteworthy as our previous studies conducted in the absence of the dsa had identified the affymetrix plus  <dig>  as the microarray platform that had the highest concordance with the mpss data set  <cit> .

our criteria for selection of a 'robust' set of antisense transcripts meant that a large proportion  of the dsa's antisense probesets were excluded from further analysis. it is likely that some of these antisense transcripts arose due to experimental artefacts  <cit>  and the use of actinomycin d during reverse transcription could have reduced the number of antisense transcripts as seen in the study of perocchi et al  <cit> . nevertheless, it is equally possible that many of these are probesets to genuine antisense sequences and could have yielded useful data –  <dig> probe sets on the dsa showed more than two fold differential expression, however in the absence of an extended validation of the antisense transcripts it was felt that they should only be considered when confirmed by one of the other two technologies used in the study. this leaves a substantial subset of remaining antisense transcripts whose expression in the breast tissue has to be validated by different technologies in the future.

the  <dig> robust sense-antisense pairs investigated on the dsa showed a high degree of novelty when compared to a recently created sas database, suggestive of the fact that a large number of sas pairs remain to be discovered and reported. numerous sas databases have been published by other researchers  <cit>  and comparison with these could form the basis of further studies. the large number of novel sas pairs identified here is understandable as the discovery of antisense transcripts and sas pairs is still considered a relatively new phenomenon in many quarters and work in this area has yet to reach maturity. this provides further indication of the potential value of the antisense transcripts represented on the dsa but excluded from this study. the nature and function of the  <dig> 'robust' antisense candidates and the subset of these forming the  <dig> sas pairs is currently unknown. as stated previously, the breast cancer dsa is a discovery platform containing many transcripts that have not yet been well characterised. whilst we have demonstrated the expression of these antisense transcripts, extensive subsequent validation would be required to elucidate their function and falls outside the scope of the current study. sequence alignment data for the sas pairs are provided  and may prove a useful resource for future functional analysis.

sas pairs have previously been classified as head-to-head, tail-to-tail or embedded based on their pattern of overlap  <cit> . a limitation of the dsa technology is that it utilises 3' biased protocols and therefore only the 3' end of transcripts are interrogated. as a result, sas pairs discovered using this technology will solely represent tail-to-tail overlap patterns. this fact also suggests that there may be a large body of alternatively classified sas pairs to be discovered by other experimental means.

the fact that all sas pairs differentially expressed between the normal and malignant settings showed positive correlation was surprising as negative correlation has previously been reported in several studies  <cit> . this led us to attempt validation of the sas expression in a range of malignant cell-lines and solid tumours by means of strand-specific rt-pcr. the results produced by this approach largely correlated with those obtained on the dsa platform, however negative correlation was observed in  <dig> of the  <dig> tested samples. so while our pooled samples suggested positive correlation of differential expression of all sas pairs between normal and malignant settings, individual assessment of a range of solid tumours and cell-lines indicated the existence of alternative patterns of differential expression. while differential expression of the sense and antisense transcript for mmp <dig> was more prominent in luminal breast cancer cell lines , significant different expression levels of the dcbld <dig> -sas pair were observed solely in two luminal, hormone receptor positive breast cancer cell lines. this data might suggest that the level of expression for certain sas pairs could be breast cancer subtype specific. nonetheless our studies suggest that coexpression of sas pairs may be more prevalent than inverse expression. the differing patterns of differential expression between samples suggests a potential functional relevance of sense-antisense expression patterns as has previously been reported  <cit>  and serves to highlight the importance of sas profiling in cancer research. such knowledge could be beneficial in the elucidation of pathways in cancer and might be exploited in potential future treatments like antisense therapy  <cit> . aberrations in sas expression patterns might well be indicative of disease or could prove useful in sub-classification of a given disease, potentially aiding in the development of targeted treatments.

CONCLUSIONS
in conclusion, the data presented in this study demonstrate a clear benefit in the use of a disease-focused platform such as the breast cancer dsa research tool for disease-specific studies. utilising only a subset of the sas pair data available on the platform we have shown expression of several hundred sas pairs, of which a large proportion appear to be novel. we have also identified the expression of many more antisense transcripts not identified by other means. these findings would suggest that many more sas pairs remain to be discovered and deposited in public databases. rt-pcr has validated the expression of a selection of these sas pairs and identified patterns of sas expression that support previous findings and appear to suggest functional relevance. while much of the work presented here is preliminary it still provides a strong indication of the importance of sas expression in breast and other cancers and highlights that much investigation is still required in this field of research.

