BACKGROUND
it is well known that some brain functions are asymmetrically represented in the human brain. while an elaborate representation for language has evolved in the human left hemisphere, a neural system involved in spatial orienting and exploration is dominantly represented in the right hemisphere. recently, catani and co-workers  <cit>  re-explored the putative pathways between the perisylvian language areas of the human left hemisphere using diffusion tensor imaging  tractography. dti is a technique to identify restricted motion of water molecules, which can be used to assess the in vivo connectivity of human brain areas by quantifying the diffusion characteristics in the white matter  <cit> . in each magnetic resonance imaging  voxel, the direction of the fastest diffusion represents the dominant direction of the white matter tracts  <cit> . thereby it is possible to obtain estimates of fibre orientation  <cit> , leading to three-dimensional illustrations of white matter pathways  <cit> .

using this technique catani and colleagues  <cit>  could visualize a direct connection between the lateral frontal and the superior temporal cortex, representing the arcuate fasciculus between broca's and wernicke's language areas. however, in addition to this classical direct pathway, the authors also found an indirect pathway between these two areas running lateral to the arcuate fasciculus and passing through the inferior parietal cortex. this indirect pathway consisted of a posterior segment connecting superior temporal cortex  with the inferior parietal cortex and an anterior segment connecting the inferior parietal with the lateral frontal cortex . catani et al.  <cit>  thus speculated that this pathway might serve for semantically based language functions such as auditory comprehension and vocalization of semantic content.

the present study used dti tractography to investigate the connectivity between the same perisylvian areas in the healthy human right hemisphere. we were interested to study the connecting fiber bundels between the superior temporal, inferior parietal, and the lateral frontal cortices since these distant, perisylvian regions have repeatedly been described to provoke the same disorder in the case of brain damage, namely spatial neglect  <cit> .

RESULTS
twelve right-handed male subjects without neurological deficits were investigated. figure  <dig> shows the tractography reconstruction using a two-region of interest approach obtained from the average dti data set of the twelve examined individuals. the averaged tractography shows a three-way connection between the superior temporal, inferior parietal, and lateral frontal cortex in the human right hemisphere. the three segments are color-coded as follows: the direct connection between the superior temporal and lateral frontal cortex is shown in red. the posterior segment of the indirect connection, running from the superior temporal to the inferior parietal cortex is shown in yellow. the anterior segment of the indirect connection, running from the inferior parietal to the lateral frontal cortex is shown in green.

discussion
this work investigated the neural connectivity of the perisylvian areas in the human right hemisphere. comparable with the anatomical findings in the human left hemisphere  <cit> , we found an indirect connection between lateral frontal and superior temporal cortices composed of a posterior segment connecting the superior temporal with the inferior parietal cortex and an anterior segment running from the inferior parietal to the lateral frontal cortex. running partly in parallel with the fibers from the indirect connection, we also found a direct connection between the superior temporal and the lateral frontal cortex representing the classical arcuate fasciculus. historically, the arcuate fasciculus  and the superior longitudinal fasciculus  have been considered a single entity  <cit> . in contrast to these classical descriptions, recent dti studies in humans  <cit>  and non-human primates  <cit>  could identify different fibre bundles. makris and co-workers  <cit>  identified four major subcomponents of the slf in the human brain with the arcuate fasciculus as its forth subdivision . it stems from the superior temporal gyrus, arches around the caudal end of the sylvian fissure, and extends to the lateral frontal cortex  <cit> .

while we were conducting the present investigation, catani and colleagues published a study  <cit>  in which they also had analysed the perisylvian connectivity in the human right hemisphere. in line with the present findings, they found an indirect connection with a posterior segment connecting the superior temporal with the inferior parietal cortex and an anterior segment running from the inferior parietal to the lateral frontal cortex. in contrast, they found the long, direct segment between the superior temporal and the lateral frontal cortices only in about 40% of their individuals, while this segment was present in all of our subjects. again in line with catani et al.'s  <cit>  findings, the present analysis also observed between-subject differences with respect to the long, direct segment. while some of the subjects showed a strong portion of this segment, it was less prominent in others. however, when we calculated the average template from the dti data sets of all our  <dig> subjects, we revealed a tractography reconstruction showing a three-way connection between the superior temporal, inferior parietal, and the lateral frontal cortex in the right hemisphere, similar to the one that catani et al.  <cit>  had reported for the human left hemisphere.

recent studies compared volume, bundle density, or location of the af and/or slf between the human left and right hemispheres  <cit> . unlike the recent findings of catani et al.  <cit>  these studies only reported slight numerical but insignificant differences comparing the corresponding fibre tracts between the two hemispheres  <cit> . except for a leftward asymmetry of subcomponent iii of the slf  <cit> , volume, bundle density, and location of the left- and right-sided fiber bundles appeared grossly symmetrical. however, discrepant observations also have been reported  <cit> . vernooij et al.  <cit>  found a clear leftward asymmetry for the af in about 80% of their subjects. however, they found this asymmetry irrespective of the lateralisation of language representation, while catani and co-workers  <cit>  found the leftward asymmetry negatively correlated with the performance in a verbal word-list learning task. possible reasons for the discrepancies between these studies  can be attributed to differences in fiber tracking methods , in the choice of the seeding rois, and/or the composition of subject samples. further research is needed to clarify these issues.

CONCLUSIONS
in summary, the present dti findings suggest that the perisylvian inferior parietal, superior temporal, and lateral frontal corticies are tightly connected not only in the human left but also in the human right hemisphere.

