BACKGROUND
eukaryotic dna replication initiates at loci known as origins of replication. in budding and fission yeast origins are short sequences  that allow autonomous replication of episomal plasmids  <cit> . this property allows for precise identification and manipulation of replication origins, also known as autonomously replicating sequences . studies in saccharomyces cerevisiae have identified a conserved ars consensus sequence   <cit> . this  <dig> bp motif is necessary, but not sufficient for the initiation of dna replication. other factors, such as flanking "b elements"  <cit> , nucleosome exclusion sites  <cit> , local transcription activity  <cit> , and elements influencing the helical stability of dna  <cit>  have also been shown to play a role in origin function. we recently showed that by using a  <dig> bp long  acs motif we are able to predict s. cerevisiae arss with a fairly high accuracy  <cit> . this high accuracy was achieved using a pwm  representation of the motif rather than the consensus representation that is commonly used for the "canonical"  <dig> bp acs motif. presumably the extended motif bundles the core acs with some of its flanking elements  <cit> . in contrast, in fission yeast schizosaccharomyces pombe and in metazoans, no consensus motifs have been identified to date and replication origins are selected in a mostly stochastic manner at regions of at rich dna sequences  <cit> .

in s. cerevisiae origins the acs is bound by the origin recognition complex  which coordinates the assembly of the pre-replication complex  and the subsequent initiation of dna synthesis  <cit> . however, while orc binding is required for replication licensing, orc also binds to regions where initiation does not take place. the strict  <dig> bp acs motif is present thousands of times throughout the genome and only a subset of these  <dig> bp acs motifs are bound by orc and an even smaller subset correspond to active origins  <cit> . in addition, not all origins fire in every cell division and a temporal program along with stochastic effects controls the timing of origin firing in s phase  <cit> . in s. pombe, orp <dig>  one of the subunits of orc contains a unique at-hook domain that allows orc to bind stochastically to regions of at-rich dna  <cit> . this stochastic nature of orc binding contributes to an increased number of potential origin sites, while simultaneously lowering the probability of any given site firing within a specific cell cycle  <cit> . s. pombe origin sites can be most accurately predicted using an approach that seeks a-t rich islands  <cit> . in metazoan cells, origin sites are much larger and less well defined than in yeast. replication initiation is thought to be largely stochastic, and in some systems random dna sequence serves as an initiation site  <cit> .

due to the large evolutionary distance between s. cerevisiae, s. pombe  <cit> , and metazoans, little is understood about the evolution of origins and the mechanisms of origin selection. since s. cerevisiae origins share a conserved motif, while other model organisms do not, it is tempting to speculate that motif-driven replication origins are unique to the saccharomyces yeasts and that species more similar to s. pombe would have more stochastic initiation mechanisms. however, a recent study in a pre-whole genome duplication  yeast kluyveromyces lactis has revealed origin structure that relies on a  <dig> bp acs motif that does not structurally resemble the s. cerevisiae acs, nor the at rich domains of s. pombe origins  <cit> . this motif is necessary and generally sufficient for k. lactis ars function and had been used to dependably predict genome-wide origin locations with a much higher accuracy than is possible in s. cerevisiae. notably, we have observed that k. lactis arss rarely function in s. cerevisiae and vice versa  <cit> . this finding suggests that though both species have retained a motif-driven origin selection process, they have significantly diverged in the motifs used. since k. lactis is much more closely related to s. cerevisiae and the other budding yeasts than to s. pombe, this finding suggests a diversity of origin structure as well as origin selection mechanisms among the budding yeasts.

to further explore the mechanisms of dna replication initiation among the budding yeast species, we have investigated the structure of arss from another pre-wgd yeast - lachancea  kluyveri whose genome has been recently annotated  <cit> . this species is thought to have diverged from the saccharomyces lineage ~ <dig> million years ago and has an  <dig>  mb genome organized into  <dig> chromosomes. in this study we have used a random genomic screen to isolate large numbers of arss from l. kluyveri. we found that l. kluyveri is characterized by a permissive mechanism of ars selection. all s. cerevisiae arss and most k. lactis arss function in l. kluyveri. however, fewer than half of l. kluyveri arss tested function in s. cerevisiae and very few function in k. lactis, suggesting that these organisms have more stringent requirements for a functional ars than l. kluyveri. we also identified a putative  <dig> bp long l. kluyveri acs motif that is similar to the s. cerevisiae acs but shorter. however, whereas ars activity can be predicted almost perfectly using a  <dig> bp acs motif in k. lactis and with fairly high accuracy using a  <dig> bp acs motif in s. cerevisiae, ars activity in l. kluyveri seems to be determined by a much longer sequence that includes the  <dig> bp acs. even with this extended sequence, prediction of ars function remains significantly less successful when compared to the other two yeast species. taken together, our findings suggest that l. kluyveri has an initiation mechanism bearing features of both motif-driven and stochastic models.

RESULTS
the isolation of l. kluyveri arss
in order to identify functional arss in l. kluyveri, we performed a random ars screen as described previously  <cit>  . genomic dna from l. kluyveri was digested to completion with mboi  and ligated into an ars-less vector bearing a ura <dig> marker. ligation mixtures were transformed into e. coli and the resultant colonies were pooled to construct genomic plasmid libraries. these genomic libraries were transformed into l. kluyveri and plated on selective media lacking uracil. cells bearing ars plasmids are able to propagate the plasmids and form colonies, while non-replicating plasmids do not yield colonies . plasmids from robust yeast colonies were isolated, sequenced, and transformed back into l. kluyveri to confirm ars function. using this approach we isolated  <dig> plasmids, from which we selected  <dig> as unique, non-overlapping sequences that unambiguously mapped to a single locus in l. kluyveri. from the set of  <dig> unique lkarss,  <dig> localize to a single intergene,  <dig> overlap two consecutive intergenes , and  <dig> lie entirely within the orf of an annotated gene . two lkarss are subtelomeric and  <dig> overlap with at least a single trna gene.

l. kluyveri has permissive origin selection determinants
previous work in k. lactis showed a striking divergence of the klacs motif from the canonical scacs  <cit> . this difference coincides with the inability of the s. cerevisiae dna replication machinery to initiate replication from the majority of klarss and vice versa. to gain insight into the similarities between the ars recognition mechanism of l. kluyveri and those of s. cerevisiae and k. lactis, we tested the lkarss for function in the two other species as well as tested scarss and klarss for function in l. kluyveri . the results of these experiments revealed a striking diversity in ars recognition mechanisms among these three species.

k. lactis seems to have the most selective ars recognition mechanism accepting only 5-7% of the arss from the other  <dig> species. l. kluyveri appears to have the most permissive mechanism: 80% of the  <dig> klarss function in l. kluyveri  compared with only 17% klarss that function in s. cerevisiae, in addition, 95% of scarss function in l. kluyveri compared with only 42% of lkarss that function in s. cerevisiae. l. kluyveri and s. cerevisiae arss apparently share greater similarity to one another than to k. lactis arss: 42% of lkarss tested function in s. cerevisiae versus only 17% of the klarss and 95% of scarss function in l. kluyveri versus 80% of the klarss . finally, a common sequence element appears to be critical for enabling klarss to function in both l. kluyveri and s. cerevisiae because all  <dig> klarss that function in s. cerevisiae also function in l. kluyveri . in contrast, the sequence elements of scarss or lkarss critical for activity in the other two species appear to be independent as the proportion of scarss that function in l. kluyveri and k. lactis and the proportion of lkarss that function in both s. cerevisiae and k. lactis, appear to occur by chance  . this result again suggests a closer relatedness between the origin recognition machinery of s. cerevisiae and l. kluyveri than the other pairwise relationship. this relationship is unexpected given that k. lactis and l. kluyveri are more closely related to each other than to s. cerevisiae  <cit> .

identification of the lkars consensus sequence
our findings raise questions about the molecular determinants of ars function in these three species. are the observed differences in the level of ars selectivity among the three yeast species reflected in the cis elements that are associated with replication initiation? similarly, can the higher degree of ars interchangeability between l. kluyveri and s. cerevisiae than between either one of these two and k. lactis be explained by specific dna sequence elements? in order to address these possibilities we first need to identify the sequence determinants of ars activity. we have previously shown that the  <dig> bp k. lactis acs motif, as well as the  <dig> bp s. cerevisiae acs motif, are particularly effective predictors of ars functionality in their respective species  <cit> . to identify conserved dna elements required for lkars function we applied the motif finder gimsan  <cit> , noted for its reliable significance analysis, to the set of  <dig> unique native lkarss. gimsan was instructed to look for motifs of various widths . for most of these widths it found a motif that it deemed to be statistically highly significant. however, unlike in s. cerevisiae and k. lactis where the longer motifs clearly include the shorter motifs, the relationship between the significant l. kluyveri motifs of different lengths is not always clear. specifically, while the motifs of lengths  <dig> bp- <dig> bp exhibit the same compatibility observed in the other two species across the entire range of lengths , the relation of these shorter motifs to the highly significant longer motifs, which are largely t-rich, is no longer clear .

since the longer motifs are largely t-rich, we tested the sufficiency of a/t rich dna for lkars function. we cloned into our ars-less vector a sequence of  <dig> and of  <dig> consecutive t nucleotides. when tested for ars function, none of these plasmids had ars activity in l. kluyveri . this result suggests that despite general t-richness of the lkacs, the functionally relevant motif contains information not captured by a stretch of a or t nucleotides alone.

we note that all the related l. kluyveri motifs in the range of  <dig> bp- <dig> bp show some distinct resemblance to the scacs motif. at the same time the longer, 25- <dig> bp, motifs do not exhibit obvious resemblance to either the klacs or the scacs . while it is not necessary that the lkacs should resemble either the scacs or the klacs, if such resemblance is found it may lend some credence to the putative l. kluyveri motif. this resemblance to the scacs motif is particularly important here as it may help explain our finding that l. kluyveri and s. cerevisiae have a much higher rate of mutual acceptance of arss than any one of them has with k. lactis, as well as explain the significant number of functional klarss they share. while this argument suggests that the 8- <dig> bp motifs are more relevant for ars function than the longer ones, more data is needed to determine the most relevant one among them.

truncation and mutagenesis analysis
in s. cerevisiae, arss retain function when truncated to fragments shorter than  <dig> bp provided the dna fragment includes the acs and flanking elements required for function  <cit> . to further delineate the molecular determinants of lkars function, we constructed plasmids bearing truncated versions of  <dig> lkarss . fragments bearing dna elements sufficient for lkars function retain their ability to maintain plasmids and generate colonies, whereas the deletion of functionally essential sequences would destroy ars function. in all  <dig> cases, shortened fragments of lkarss contained a/t sequences resembling the putative  <dig> bp- <dig> bp lkacs .

we isolated functional fragments of three of the lkarss  that are shorter than  <dig> bp and performed mutagenesis scanning experiments to identify specific sequences necessary for the ars function of these dna fragments . using site-directed mutagenesis we systematically replaced tri-nucleotides every 8- <dig> bp within the functional lkars fragments. the resulting mutants were tested for ars function. in each of the three cases we identified a single mutant which destroyed ars function .

if the putative lkacs is necessary for lkars function, then the deleterious mutations would be located in regions that fit the best match to the lkacs motif. conversely, we can use this data to identify the most informative acs motif: such a motif would have better matches in all the functional mutants than in the non-functional mutants. we used the site scan mode of the program sadmama  <cit>  to find in each of those  <dig> sequences the best match to each of the pwms representing our candidate l. kluyveri acs motifs. we then compared the score of each sequence  against the observed functionality of that sequence. in particular, for each pwm we ranked the sequences within each of the three sets of ars mutations according to the best pwm match score . we then inspected the relative ranking, within each set, of the non-functional mutations with respect to all functional mutations.

we found that our putative l. kluyveri motifs of lengths  <dig> bp,  <dig> bp,  <dig> bp and  <dig> bp correctly ranked the non-functional mutations of a given ars below all the functional mutations of that ars. the motif of length  <dig> bp showed particularly good separation between the functional and non-functional scores. all other candidate l. kluyveri motifs did not properly rank all sets of mutations . for this reason, we used the core  <dig> bp putative lkacs for further analyses.

the selectivity of the acs pwm models
going back to our observation of the different levels of selectivity of the replication machinery in our three yeast species  we ask whether those differences are mirrored in the varying degrees of selectivity of the corresponding acs pwm models. by selectivity of a pwm model we refer to the ability of the model to distinguish between sites generated by the model and "sites" observed in "random dna". the results summarized in additional file  <dig>  table s <dig> show that the ranking of the selectivity of our three species acs pwms is consistent with our interchangeability data: lkacs is the least while klacs is the most selective . while this consistency is reassuring, it is difficult to draw any further conclusions from it as this pwm selectivity is a feature of the model and we have yet to establish the validity of these models. this is the subject of our next section.

as an aside we note that our definition of selectivity of a pwm is highly correlated with its information content  <cit>  but the former is more readily interpretable as comparing the information content of pwms of varying lengths can be quite challenging.

the predictive power of acs motifs for ars function
to assess the effectiveness of our acs models in predicting ars functionality in their respective species we use an extended version of our ars interchangeability data presented earlier. specifically, for each acs model we test how well it predicts the host species functionality  of the set of "foreign" arss. the latter set consists of all the arss that were originally screened in one of the other two species. for example, in the case of l. kluyveri the set of foreign arss consists of  <dig> arss that were screened either in s. cerevisiae or k. lactis  <cit> . of these  <dig> foreign l. kluyveri arss,  <dig> are functional in l. kluyveri,  <dig> are weakly functional and  <dig> are non-functional . the prediction is specified in terms of the score of the foreign ars' best match to the host species acs pwm .

we used several correlated measures to gauge the predictive power of each species pwm model: a 2-class aroc  that measures how well the model can distinguish between functional and non-functional  arss, a 3-class aroc that measures how well it can distinguish between all three functional categories  and a measure of how well the weak arss are placed between the non-functional and functional ones .

all three measurements gave the same consistent answer: the predictive power of the acs motif is highest in k. lactis, followed fairly closely by s. cerevisiae with the l. kluyveri acs trailing far behind these two . moreover, approximate 95% confidence intervals we constructed for the aroc show that the predictive power the lkacs is statistically significantly lower than that of the klacs and the scacs .

the rightmost column of additional file  <dig>  table s <dig> shows that both the acs models of s. cerevisiae and k. lactis are able to correctly resolve the weak arss in the sense that over 50% of the time they are correctly scored between the functional and non-functional foreign ars. in contrast, the  <dig> bp l. kluyveri model cannot distinguish between the weak arss and the other two categories: it correctly places the weak ars between the functional and non-functional ones just over 1/ <dig> of the time .

the last observation as well as its generally low predictive value raise the question of whether our  <dig> bp lkacs model, selected based on the mutagenesis experiment, fails to capture some of the sequence elements that are crucial for a functioning lkars. to investigate this possibility we first checked whether some of the longer putative acs motifs offer a significantly improved predictivity. while a couple of the longer motifs do offer a slightly better predictive power, the 95% confidence intervals show that none of these differences are statistically significant and moreover these motifs are not fully consistent with the mutagenesis experiments . among the candidate lkacs motifs that are consistent with these experiments the width  <dig> has the highest aroc.

analysis of auxiliary sequence elements
another possible explanation for the weak predictivity of our lkacs model is that ars activity is conferred by several sequence elements that cooperatively offer binding sites for the replication initiation machinery. this could also help explain the lack of consensus between the 9- <dig> bp and the group of longer putative motifs. we therefore searched for auxiliary motifs in our set of  <dig> native l. kluyveri arss by masking out the sites of the  <dig> bp acs motif. while several of these reported motifs are statistically significant  we did not observe any particular positional preference with respect to the location of the candidate  <dig> bp acs site that was removed. such a preference is often observed when cooperative binding takes place. in addition, these significant motifs are largely t-rich.

nevertheless, we tested whether an augmented sequence model that combines any of these auxiliary motifs with our acs model could offer a significantly improved predictivity of lkars function. specifically, we use a "paired linear model" that assigns to each sequence a score that is the maximal weighted sum of two pwm match scores: one for the putative  <dig> bp acs and the other for a candidate auxiliary motif . note that the two matches cannot overlap so this optimal score is generally not the same as taking the weighted sum of the respective optimal matches of each of these two pwms. the optimal weights are learned and evaluated for their ability to predict the functional category of each of the foreign arss using a 10-fold cross validation scheme .

the estimated arocs in additional file  <dig>  table s <dig> show that combining some of the auxiliary motifs with the acs can improve the model's predictivity. note that the approximate 95% confidence intervals for the 2-class, as well as for the 3-class, aroc for each of the combined models heavily overlap the corresponding 95% confidence for the aroc of the acs alone . a more powerful statistical test than simply comparing the confidence interval gives a mixed result: the improvement that the  <dig> bp auxiliary motif adds to the acs model is statistically significant for the 2-class aroc but not for the 3-class aroc .

alternative approaches to utilizing extended sequence information for predicting origin locations were introduced by breier et al.  <cit>   and more recently macalpine et al  <cit>  . in both cases the causal link between the computational predictor and the biological function is not fully understood yet both have been fairly successful at predicting origin locations in their respective species. we next describe applying variants of these methods for predicting ars functionality in l. kluyveri.

pwm contextual model
breier et al.  <cit>  showed that they can increase the power of predicting s. cerevisiae arss by extending their positional model significantly beyond the scacs. specifically, their model extended over  <dig> bp starting with a t-rich region that ends with the acs  and is followed by an a-rich region. interestingly, although the klacs is very different from the scacs, the same pattern of a t-rich region preceding the klacs, and an a-rich region following it, emerges . a similar pattern also emerges in l. kluyveri regardless of which specific candidate lkacs motif was used. note that this observation can potentially explain the longer, t-rich, candidate acs motifs, as well as the t-rich auxiliary motifs described above.

we compared the extent to which the patterns we observe in these extended profiles can improve our prediction of foreign ars function in each of our three yeast species. for each species, we divided each of the extended sequence profiles into segments based on visual inspection, with one segment reserved for the acs itself, and estimated a pwm for each segment. a candidate match is then scored as a weighted sum of pwm match scores, one for each segment .

we again used cross validation to learn the optimal weights for each species and evaluate the corresponding predictivity of the resulting combined model . the results of this analysis are presented in additional file  <dig>  table s <dig>  using pwms to capture the signal contained in the regions flanking the acs  improves our ability to predict the foreign ars functionality in all three species with arguably the only pronounced improvement being in l. kluyveri where we again used the 9-bp candidate lkacs . importantly, the improvement, offered by the contextual pwm model over the acs-only model, in predicting the foreign ars function in l. kluyveri is statistically significant: the 95% confidence interval for the difference between the  aroc of the two methods is . similarly, the predictivity of the contextual pwm model is statistically significantly better than that offered by the combined model of the acs and the  <dig> bp auxiliary motif: 95% confidence interval for the aroc is . similar statistically significant improvements are observed in the differences of the 3-class aroc:  and  respectively. finally, the contextual model demonstrates a significant improvement over the acs-only model in correctly placing the 'weak' arss between properly ordered functional and non-functional arss .

unlike breier et al.  <cit>  we find that the s. cerevisiae pwm contextual model shows only a modest improvement over the scacs model in predicting the function of foreign arss in s. cerevisiae and our test shows that this improvement is statistically insignificant for the given data. this may be due to the fact that at  <dig> bp the scacs motif used here is significantly longer than the  <dig> bp acs used by breier et al., so most of the improvement is already contained in our extended  <dig> bp scacs. for k. lactis the improvement is marginal.

to test whether the overall span of the l. kluyveri contextual model  can be significantly reduced, we examined two intermediate pwm contextual models between this full-length model and the one using only the  <dig> bp lkacs. the first added to the  <dig> bp acs a  <dig> bp pwm on both sides and the second used the first three of the full model's four pwms . using the same 10-fold cross-validation scheme we found that the predictive power of these intermediate models is ordered exactly as we would expect assuming the full-length model cannot be trimmed .

taken together our contextual pwm model provides statistically sound evidence that ars activity in l. kluyveri is determined from the sequence information that is spread over a fairly large region that includes the acs. this is quite different than the case of k. lactis where the  <dig> bp acs is necessary and sufficient for ars activity. our analysis also shows that s. cerevisiae is much closer to k. lactis than to l. kluyveri in this regard with the  <dig> bp acs predicting ars activity with fairly high accuracy.

markov contextual model
recently macalpine et al  <cit>  showed that locations of dna replication origins in drosophila can be well predicted by relying on a support vector machine  using as features the frequencies of characteristic k-mers of varying length. we do not have enough data on l. kluyveri arss to apply the svm approach here . however, their analysis raises the question of whether our use of pwms to model the segments flanking the acs is optimal. to partly address this question we studied an intermediate model between the pwm contextual model and their svm approach that we describe next.

we begin as in the pwm contextual model by partitioning the alignment of the native arss into segments, with one segment reserved for the acs. we then learn a low order markov chain  for each of the alignment segments instead of the pwm we previously used to model that segment. consequently, each non-acs segment is scored using its markov chain likelihood and the score of the whole match is again the weighted sum of the scores of all the segments including the acs segment, which still uses a pwm . using cross-validation again to estimate the performance of this approach to predicting foreign ars functionality we found that in all three species the estimated predictive power is inferior to that of the pwm contextual model . this suggests that the sequence elements conferring replication are more constrained spatially in l. kluyveri than they are in drosophila.

discussion/
CONCLUSIONS
the study of eukaryotic replication origins in budding yeast has been largely limited to the well-studied s. cerevisiae. it has been shown that replication origins in k. lactis, a pre-wgd budding yeast species, are dramatically different in sequence structure than s. cerevisiae origins  <cit> . this finding suggests that other yeast species may have also evolved distinct functional paradigms for selection of dna sequences as sites of replication initiation. in this study we have characterized origins/arss from another pre-wgd species - l. kluyveri. the arss used by this species, while not as different from s. cerevisiae as k. lactis arss, show a number of novel properties.

we used the classic ars screen  <cit>  to identify a large number of lkarss . in addition, we tested scarss and klarss for function in l. kluyveri and used this information to test and improve our understanding of lkars function. our computational and experimental studies have identified a lkacs motif that resembles the well-studied scacs . this similarity helps explain the higher rate of common foreign ars usage observed between l. kluyveri and s. cerevisiae than between any of them and k. lactis .

despite this similarity at the acs level, replication origins in l. kluyveri exhibit unique characteristics that are very different from origins in the other two yeast species. first, the sequence determinants of origin function seem to spread out over a much longer sequence. while our contextual models in s. cerevisiae and k. lactis do not show a significant improvement in predictive power over the acs-only model, the predictive power of the contextual models in l. kluyveri substantially grow with the length of the context . moreover, the difference in the predictive power of our full l. kluyveri pwm contextual model and the acs-only model is statistically significant. second, the l. kluyveri replication machinery exhibits a permissive behavior . our pwm selectivity analysis  might explain the differences observed between the permissiveness of l. kluyveri and k. lactis. however, given that this analysis is based only on the  <dig> bp acs and that the replication sequence determinants in l. kluyveri extend over a much longer sequence, the relatively small difference in selectivity between the l. kluyveri and s. cerevisiae acs cannot fully explain the large difference in their acceptance rates of foreign arss . an alternative explanation, phrased in terms of a control system, is that the replication initiation machinery of s. cerevisiae and even more so of k. lactis have a sharp response curve as a function of the sequence composition: these machineries do not tolerate significant deviations from the optimal composition. on the other hand, the corresponding machinery of l. kluyveri has a much flatter response curve, in other words, it can tolerate sequences that deviate significantly from its peak response, albeit with reduced efficiency.

we have evidence that supports this flat response curve hypothesis. first, the same computational models that show very high accuracy in predicting ars function in s. cerevisiae and k. lactis are significantly less adept in predicting ars function in l. kluyveri. second, l. kluyveri is far more accepting of foreign arss than the first two species are. thirdly, about 22% of the foreign arss tested for function in l. kluyveri exhibit "weak" function compared with only 4% and 1% of the foreign arss tested, respectively, in s. cerevisiae and k. lactis . in other words, we see a statistically significant higher number of cases of much reduced, albeit functional, replication initiation in l. kluyveri than in the other two species . note that while the first point might simply indicate our model is too crude, the last two points suggest that this may be a real biological property rather than a modeling artifact.

this behavior of l. kluyveri ars function is reminiscent of the stochastic mechanism of ars selection utilized by s. pombe  <cit> . however, our experiments show that l. kluyveri does not use an entirely stochastic mechanism for origin selection. our scanning mutagenesis experiments have delineated specific essential sequences in each ars tested while other similar sites are not required for function. in addition, stretches of t-rich dna are not able to initiate dna replication in l. kluyveri suggesting some level of sequence specificity. experiments measuring replication timing show that approximately two-thirds of our lkarss fall in zones of active replication . these findings suggest that the lkars function mechanism is more reminiscent of s. cerevisiae than of s. pombe, yet bearing hallmarks of relaxed sequence selection requirements.

a difference in dna sequence requirements must correspond to a difference in the protein machinery that interacts with origin dna. the stochastic mechanism used by s. pombe is largely achieved by a long at-hook domain on the n-terminus of orp <dig>  a subunit of orc  <cit> . comparison of the protein sequence of scorc <dig> and lkorc <dig> reveals that the l. kluyveri version of this protein has an extended n-terminal sequence that is not present in scorc <dig> . in addition, this extended n-terminal domain is not present in other related budding yeasts, even other pre-wgd species such as lachancea waltii, a close relative of l. kluyveri. it is thus tempting to speculate that the permissive nature of lkars function is conferred by an extended n-terminus of lkorc <dig> in a manner similar to sporp <dig>  in support of this hypothesis, the n-terminal extension is not observed in the orc <dig> of l. waltii while recent work shows that l. waltii does not demonstrate the permissive features of ars selection and instead uses a more defined acs motif . however, the extended domain of l. kluyveri orc <dig> does not share similarity to the at-hook domain of s. pombe and we have yet to directly test its structural and functional significance. further investigation of the molecular determinants of l. kluyveri ars function will shed light on the divergence of the relationship between origin sequence and dna replication initiation machinery.

finally, we caution that while we consistently used a  <dig> bp model for the lkacs the exact length might vary. however, we note that the  <dig> bp is one of the few putative acs motifs that correctly identify the essential elements of our mutagenesis experiment experiment <dig> and it has the highest predictive power among those models. moreover, we constructed several contextual models based on other putative acs motifs  and none of these models had a higher predictive power than the  <dig> bp based model.

