BACKGROUND
human stomatin  was first identified as an integral membrane protein in human red blood cells  <cit> . it has since been shown to be expressed in many cell types and organisms, although hstomatin function remains unclear  <cit> . loss of stomatin in humans is associated with a condition called overhydrated hereditary stomatocytosis, in which the red blood cells leak na+ and k+ ions  <cit> , although the hstomatin gene is not mutated in these patients  <cit> . other human proteins showing high similarity to human stomatin  have also been described. human stomatin-like protein- <dig>  is a  <dig> kda, widely expressed, oligomeric, peripheral membrane protein that associates with the spectrin-actin cytoskeleton in the red cell  <cit> . it has recently been shown to be overexpressed in a variety of human tumours  <cit> , being one of the  <dig> most upregulated proteins in superinvasive cancer cells, although its function is again unknown  <cit> . human stomatin-like protein- <dig> , an olfactory neuronal protein  <cit> , shares  <dig> % similarity with hstomatin and is important for the function of skin mechanoreceptors in the mouse  <cit> . podocin is  <dig> % similar to hstomatin and, like stomatin, is raft associated  <cit> . podocin is expressed exclusively in the kidneys, where it is localised to the membrane of podocytes; these are specialised cells involved in the ultrafiltration of blood  <cit> . mutations in the podocin gene  result in nephritic syndrome, in which protein appears in the urine; the end stage of this condition is renal failure  <cit> . the final member of this putative family is human stomatin-like protein- <dig> , which differs from the other stomatin proteins in that it is a bipartite protein that contains a stomatin-like region fused to a non-specific lipid transfer protein  <cit> .

stomatin-like proteins are not confined to humans. work on caenorhabditis elegans has identified at least nine proteins showing similarity to human stomatin. one of these, unc- <dig>  is necessary for the movement of another protein from the endoplasmic reticulum to the cell membrane  <cit>  and has recently been shown to share a common ancestor with hslp- <dig>  <cit> . the apicomplexan parasite plasmodium falciparum contains a stomatin-like protein that co-localises with invasion-associated rhoptry organelles and is involved in the formation of the invasion vacuole during infection of red blood cells  <cit> . of particular interest to us is the prokaryotic group of stomatin-like proteins. these were first identified by you and borthakur  <cit>  who showed, through a mutagenesis screen, that a stomatin-like protein was involved in the competitiveness of rhizobium etli for nodulation of the roots of phaseolus vulgaris. the widespread distribution of stomatins and their associated diseases strongly suggests that their biological functions are of great importance, yet to date these remain unclear. if we are to understand the function of human stomatins by studying these proteins in other organisms then it is important that we can distinguish sequences that have evolved by speciation  from those that have evolved by duplication : to achieve this end we need a stomatin family phylogeny. so far, stomatin family evolution has always been considered in the context of a superfamily involving stomatins, prohibitins, flotillins and hflk/c proteins  <cit>  and plant disease response genes  <cit> . however, more recently this superfamily concept has been revisited, and is now regarded to have little phylogenetic support  <cit> . it is therefore likely that similarity among members is a result of convergent evolution and not shared ancestry.

in this paper we have chosen to undertake a phylogenetic analysis of stomatin-like proteins only. our results reveal an intriguing story of ancient origin, duplication and diversification of stomatin family members and identifies candidate organisms that should be used when attempting to understand stomatin function outside of primate systems.

RESULTS
two different origins of eukaryotic stomatins
blast searches for hstomatin and hslp- <dig> revealed highly similar proteins in prokaryotes, both in archaea and bacteria . proteins showing high similarity to hslp- <dig> were also identified in eukaryotes, although slp- <dig> distribution is confined to specific organisms among the fungi and protista and only becomes well represented in plant and metazoan lineages. in contrast, proteins showing high similarity to hstomatin were only found in prokaryotes, fungi, ciliates and animals. slp- <dig> and podocin proteins were again found to be restricted to specific metazoan species .

accession numbers or jgi protein ids of the proposed subfamily members are listed in each column. if genomes contained multiple copies of the same protein, the sequence with the highest blast score was selected. numbers in parentheses indicate % amino acid identity to the human protein in the column heading. – indicates that no match was found in that species. * indicates the new subfamily name, , ** indicates a newly reported subfamily, ‡ = eoslipin , Ω = alloslipin. note that slipin- <dig>  proteins are not included but are highly diverged members of the stomatin protein family.

using the amino acid sequences retrieved by the blast searches, a phylogeny was created using both neighbour joining  and maximum likelihood  methods to get an overview of the relationships among the various family members . in both cases an essentially congruent topology was generated, with the phylogeny identifying at least four distinct groups: slp- <dig> proteins, p-stomatin proteins, a group uniting fungi, ciliates and an acanthamoeba polyphaga mimivirus sequence, and a group containing only animal subfamilies. bootstrap support for the internal branches is mostly good. the branching order of eukaryotic subfamilies in figure  <dig> is addressed later by constructing smaller trees with longer alignments. p-stomatin proteins form a paraphyletic group in figure  <dig>  but this is poorly supported  and is in conflict with the nj phylogeny, where p-stomatin proteins were recovered as a well supported group . archaeal slp- <dig> proteins form a paraphyletic group with the inclusion of bacteria, whilst bacterial slp- <dig> proteins form another paraphyletic group with the inclusion of eukaryotes. both ml and nj methods support the rickettsia-eukaryotic slp- <dig> group, although their position within this clade is much less resolved.

from figure  <dig> it is clear that not all stomatin family proteins are equally related. indeed, slp- <dig> is much more stomatin-like than slp- <dig>  yet current nomenclature does not reflect this. to make this distinction clear we propose to split the stomatin family into four major groups: slipins , eoslipins , alloslipins  and paraslipins . the phylogenies we present here reveal slipin subfamilies to include stomatin, podocin, slipin- <dig> , slipin- <dig> , slipin- <dig> and protostome stomatin. the former slp- <dig> proteins become paraslipins whilst p-stomatin proteins become eoslipins. from this point forwards, the stomatin subfamilies will be named according to this new nomenclature, which is clarified in figure  <dig> 

paraslipin subfamily phylogeny
in order to obtain a better-resolved phylogeny of paraslipin proteins, an alignment excluding all other subfamilies was constructed and this was used to build a maximum-likelihood phylogeny . the evolution of prokaryotic paraslipins deserves detailed consideration, but we confine ourselves here to the briefest outline as context for the eukaryotic paraslipins. the phylogenetic tree shows two major clades, both of which contain bacterial species. the upper clade contains both archaeal and bacterial species, with archaea forming a clade that appears to branch within bacteria. although related species are generally grouped together, such as the cyanobacteria and the firmicutes, the tree is inconsistent in several respects with the consensus phylogeny based on ribosomal and other core genes  <cit>  suggesting prokaryotic paraslipin has encountered various gene duplication and lateral transfer events.

the lower paraslipin clade contains both bacterial and eukaryotic species. representatives of the gamma proteobacteria, chlorobi and spirochetes each have two, divergent copies of prokaryotic paraslipin suggesting an early duplication event. a very significant feature of the lower group is the strong support  for a monophyletic group containing rickettsiales and eukaryotic paraslipins, with rickettsiales forming the sister group to the eukaryotic clade. this suggests a possible mitochondrial origin of eukaryotic paraslipins. within eukaryotes we see a mostly well-resolved phylogeny with many of the major taxonomic groups being recovered as monophyletic. as expected, fungi form the sister group to metazoa with plants and protists falling outside of this opisthokont clade  <cit> ; the ecdysozoan group of insects and nematodes is not supported, but neither is it significantly contradicted.

protostome stomatins
much of the work on the stomatin family has concentrated on a group of c. elegans proteins that were identified in a screen to identify touch-insensitive mutants  <cit> . with this in mind, we wanted to construct a comprehensive phylogeny of invertebrate stomatins. within invertebrates it is evident that a large number of gene duplication events have occurred. constructing a single phylogeny of all invertebrate slipin sequences proved problematic due to a large number of long-branched, species-specific paralogues. to overcome this problem, smaller phylogenies of closely related taxa were first constructed to identify orthologous groups; these were subsequently combined to give the phylogeny in figure  <dig>  ciona intestinalis sequences were included to allow comparison with figure  <dig>  whilst cnidarian sequences were used to root this phylogeny. within figure  <dig> we see two main clusters. one such group contains arthropods, annelids, the mollusc lottia gigantea and the nematode c. elegans, and we tentatively name this group protostome stomatin as a consequence of it members and short branch lengths, despite the low bootstrap for this clade. the other group concerns only arthropods and appears much more divergent than protostome stomatin, but nevertheless recovers the same insect phylogeny; this group we have named slipin- <dig> 

vertebrate stomatins
from figure  <dig> it was apparent that many stomatin subfamilies arose within the vertebrate lineage. to try to understand the origin and evolution of vertebrate sequences, two separate phylogenies were constructed and are shown in figure  <dig>  the first phylogeny was based on an alignment of chordate and echinoderm sequences, and this was rooted with slipin- <dig> and protostome stomatin sequences. although poorly supported, chordate and protostome sequences form separate groups.

to gain more information about the duplication events that occurred within the vertebrate portion of our tree, a vertebrate-specific phylogeny were constructed that allowed for a longer alignment . stomatin sequences from the echinoderm strongylocentrotus purpuratus and the urochordate ciona intestinalis were included so that an approximate time frame for the origin of these subfamilies could be established. the vertebrate-specific phylogeny recovers the same topology as seen if slipin- <dig> and protostome sequences are included but, in addition, provides strong support  for the monophyly of vertebrate subfamilies with the ciona intestinalis sequences forming the sister group. within vertebrates there are three well-supported monophyletic groups. podocin proteins form the most basal vertebrate group and are clearly quite divergent from the other subfamilies, as judged by their long branch. the other two clades group stomatin and slipin- <dig> proteins into two well-resolved clusters. in each case the three clades support congruent phylogenies, although not all vertebrates were found to have all proteins . however, recently derived paralogues may be substituting for the function of missing genes.

domain characterisation
in order to make a meaningful functional assignment to a protein family it is important to characterise the ancestral and derived motifs. to achieve this end, consensus sequences were generated and aligned for each of the proteins identified in monophyletic groups in figures  <dig>   <dig>   <dig>   <dig> . the alignment supports the premise that these proteins are members of the same family, as judged by the length of the alignment  and the degree of shared conservation. paraslipin proteins are quite different from the other family members and lack many of the conserved motifs that are shared by the other subfamilies. in terms of sequence conservation, eoslipin sequences most resemble slipin subfamilies and share at least three conserved motifs  to the exclusion of alloslipins. interestingly, many of the major difference between the stomatin subfamilies occur within the c-terminus region; for example, all podocin proteins can be characterised by a unique five amino acid motif  present in their c-terminus, whilst paraslipins share an axaxa motif.

discussion
our analyses suggest that the stomatin family is a sound concept, with all its members showing high levels of sequence conservation over a region of  <dig> amino acids. eukaryotic stomatin proteins have two independent prokaryotic origins: one gave rise to all eukaryotic paraslipin proteins, whilst the other gave rise to the remaining subfamilies .

the stomatin family first arose in prokaryotes . it is supposed that paraslipin and eoslipin are ancient paralogues that evolved from an ancestral sequence, possibly present in luca  . evidence for their homology lies in their sequence similarity  and their genomic organisation. green et al.  showed a conserved genomic association between eoslipin and a serine protease. within prokaryotic genomes the gene encoding paraslipin has a conserved genomic association with a gene encoding only the c-terminus of the serine protease  <cit> . it is therefore probable that these two gene clusters share a common ancestor and arose by duplication. the ancientness of this duplication is supported by the observation that eoslipin and paraslipin proteins, as well as their gene partners, are present in both archaea and bacteria, with the bipartition that separates eoslipins and paraslipins being one of the most internal branches in our phylogeny . although eoslipins are more similar in sequence to stomatins than to paraslipins, we avoid the term 'prokaryotic stomatins' because they are not exclusively related to the stomatins. indeed, since the root of the tree is uncertain, we are unable to show formally that eoslipins are the sister group of the slipins rather than of the paraslipins.

the eukaryotic slipin and alloslipin subfamilies probably evolved from a common ancestor shared by archaea and eukaryotes, to the exclusion of bacteria, although our phylogeny is too poorly resolved at present to support such a hypothesis. the discovery of alloslipins is an important finding in our quest to understand stomatin family phylogeny, as these are the first eukaryotic slipin-like sequences identified outside metazoa. however, despite detailed searches of protist and basal metazoan genomes, we have been unable to resolve the currently bizarre taxonomic distribution of alloslipin proteins. within metazoa, slipins have been subjected to numerous gene duplication events, and at least one gene fusion event with a sterol carrier protein that occurred prior to the divergence of protostomes and deuterostomes  <cit>  and gave rise to slp- <dig>  now named slipin- <dig>  within protostomes, there are at least two other subfamilies . one of these groups includes arthropods, molluscs, annelids and a nematode, uniting the protostomes into a monophyletic group, which we have named protostome stomatin to reflect the short branches and phylogenetic range. the topology of figure  <dig> suggests that slipin- <dig> and protostome stomatin may in fact be paralogues that arose before ecdysozoans and lophotrochozoans diverged; following this duplication event slipin- <dig> was lost from most taxa.

within vertebrates, we see the origin of podocin, slipin- <dig> and stomatin proteins, and we propose that these arose as a result of two gene duplication events . the inclusion of danio rerio sequences within all three vertebrate groups suggests both duplication events occurred before the teleost/tetrapod split. the placement of the sea squirt sequences as the sister group to this clade dates the time of divergence to after the chordate/urochordate divergence. if we accept the loss of a paralogue, this phylogeny supports the two whole genome duplication events that are proposed to have occurred prior to the origin of vertebrates  <cit> , accounting for the origin of slipin- <dig>  podocin and stomatin. whilst there appears to have been little sequence divergence in vertebrate stomatin sequences, podocin and, to a lesser extent, slipin- <dig> have undergone significant sequence evolution  making it likely that they are functioning in a distinctly different manner to other family members.

CONCLUSIONS
the goal of this study was to provide a conceptual framework within which to study this family. this can be used to improve understanding of stomatin function in humans and to identify relevant homologs to investigate subfamily function. whilst it is likely that slipin- <dig>  podocin and alloslipin proteins are functioning in new ways , it is not clear whether hstomatin has retained its ancestral function. the lack of any significant divergence within this clade, the conservation of protein length and the sequence conservation, all suggest that vertebrate stomatin may indeed be functioning in a similar way to protostome stomatin and possibly eoslipin. the conservation of motifs  suggests a shared mechanism among these subfamilies, although the downstream effects might be very different. the placement of rickettsiales as the sister group to eukaryotic paraslipins  suggests that alphaproteobacteria may serve as a relevant system to investigate human paraslipin function.

it seems clear that the stomatin-like proteins have their origin in an ancient duplication event that occurred early on in the evolution of prokaryotes. a high degree of conservation implies that they have important functions, though these remain almost completely unknown. by constructing a phylogeny of this family, we have identified and named a number of orthologous groups. investigation of many different organisms could potentially contribute to an understanding of stomatin-like proteins, and we hope that our analysis will make it easier to describe and interpret such studies.

