BACKGROUND
regions of the genome that are under constraint across multiple species have previously been used to identify functional sequences in the human genome  <cit> , with the idea being that areas that remain conserved over large evolutionary time scales are likely to be involved in key biological processes. projects such as encode use information about evolutionary constraint, together with laboratory techniques, to identify putative functional regions in the human genome  <cit>  and various metrics have been developed that attempt to formalise the level of constraint at a particular site or region of the genome, sometimes including structural information, to predict the functional consequences of mutations at those sites  <cit> . since many metrics provide a fine scaled measure of the level of constraint, they may allow identification of the most functionally important sites and guide our understanding of fundamental evolutionary processes; for example less conserved regions may be prime targets for balancing or positive selection  <cit> , whereas more highly conserved sites may show signatures of negative selection  <cit> .

furthermore, within individual genomes, less highly conserved sites may point to regions that can tolerate mutations without affecting the fitness of the individual, whereas mutations at more highly conserved sites may be lethal. indeed, numerous studies on disease phenotypes attempt to rank putative disease causing mutations by levels of constraint or predicted impact on protein structure in order to prioritise mutations for further study  and it has been suggested that an individual that carries the minor allele within a population at a highly conserved site may have a greater mutation load  <cit> ; an accumulation of such events across the entire genome may well impact on the overall fitness of the individual. similarly, the frequency of an allele segregating at a site also appears to be a good indicator of functional importance, and it has been shown that variants segregating at non-synonymous sites, which are putatively functional, tend to be at lower frequency than those at synonymous sites, regardless of the function of the gene  <cit> . thus, the large proportion of rare variants identified in recent studies  <cit>  may have an impact on fitness.

recent work has also sought to utilise information from an individual genome to better understand the causes of disease, and many studies have been successful in identifying causal variants on a case-by-case basis  <cit> , although often only in the context of mendelian disorders. beyond this, ‘personal’ genomic approaches using various types of information from whole-genome sequencing, transcriptomics, proteomics and metabolomics seek to assess disease risk and tailor therapeutics  <cit> . although in their infancy, these types of approaches are already proving successful in identifying risk factors and pre-empting symptoms through early treatment  <cit> , highlighting the potential of considering individual genomes in the context of population genetics.

in this study we utilise the fine-scaled nature of one particular measure of evolutionary constraint, genomic evolutionary rate profiling , together with the substantial information now available from a large-scale genome sequencing effort, the  <dig> genomes project, to both validate and utilize comparative and population level information to capture critical genetic events. it has previously been shown that there is a relationship between gerp and derived allele frequency  using a few individuals or considering a small proportion of the genome  <cit> . using polymorphism data across  <dig>  individuals from  <dig> populations in phase  <dig> of the  <dig> genomes project  <cit>  we confirm the relationship between gerp and the minor allele frequency  of a site, both in coding regions and genome-wide . given that we find a strong relationship between levels of evolutionary constraint and human genetic diversity, we consider how evolutionary constraint can be used to infer patterns of selection and potentially represent genetic fitness in human populations. we make three observations: 1) the depression in average maf around coding regions is more severe for genes that are most highly conserved across species and decreases as genes become less conserved, a pattern that is repeated at conserved sites in non-coding regions. this direct evidence suggests that negative selection is the primary mechanism shaping patterns of diversity within functionally important regions of the human genome and in the surrounding sequences via background selection, 2) effective population size correlates with patterns of allele frequencies in the regions surrounding genes, with more extreme depressions in maf observed in populations with a smaller effective size. this suggests that selection may be less efficient in these populations, allowing more putatively deleterious alleles to segregate, which translates into higher individual mutation load 3) we detect significant differences between some individuals within populations for the number of putatively deleterious rare alleles they are carrying by comparing the distributions of constraint scores for rare alleles on an individual level. this implies that there are differences in the accumulation of putatively deleterious alleles between supposedly healthy individuals.

RESULTS
variability in constraint distinguishes modes of selection
in humans, it is known that there is a reduction in maf around coding regions that increases further away from genes  <cit> , however there is still some debate as to which mechanisms drive genetic diversity within a species  <cit> . in order to distinguish between the impact of positive and negative selection in coding regions we considered how allele frequencies in regions surrounding genes correlate with the level of sequence conservation within a gene; we observe two striking results . first, the deepest depressions in maf occur in the regions surrounding the most highly conserved genes. by splitting genes into ten groups based on average gerp score, we observe a depression in maf around genes for the eight most conserved groups of genes  and the depth of the depression in maf correlates significantly with the average gerp score of genes in each bin . as the reduction in diversity reflects the fraction of mutations under selection  <cit> , and by logical extension so does the depth of the depression in maf, these direct observations are most consistent with negative selection being the mechanism that primarily drives the distribution of alleles among individuals, with background selection affecting allele frequencies in the flanking regions of genes, since it is counter intuitive to expect more positively selected mutations at sites that have been rigorously conserved in the past. to ensure that the pattern is not driven by direct selection acting on variants falling at functional sites away from coding regions, such as regulatory elements, we repeated the analysis removing any snps that fall at a functionally annotated coding site or at a site with a gerp score greater than one ; we observe almost identical results and the depth of depression in maf correlates significantly with the average gerp score of genes in each bin . low coverage  <dig> genomes data is known to have a higher error rate than the high coverage  <dig> genomes exome data   <dig> % for low coverage,  <dig> % for high coverage, see tables s <dig> and s <dig> from  <cit> ). however, our observation is unlikely to be a consequence of snp calling errors for two reasons. first, it seems unlikely that a high proportion of errors would systematically cluster in certain regions. second, in order to reduce the impact of false positive calls if any, we repeated the analysis excluding singletons, since it is at these sites where the highest proportion of error is expected , and we observed identical results, replicating the pattern of reduced maf around the most conserved genes .

second, across populations the lowest overall depressions in maf occur around the most highly conserved genes for populations with the largest effective population size  . resequencing in populations with larger ne has discovered both more diversity in general, as well as a high number of sites with lower maf   <cit>  and in line with this we see reduced overall maf in the regions flanking genes in these populations. however, the difference in maf between more distal flanking regions and those adjacent to the most conserved loci is higher in populations with smaller ne  again, this is not driven by direct selection acting on functional sites away from coding regions; removing functionally annotated sites and those with gerp >  <dig> we observe almost identical results . finally, we also observe an increase in average maf in the sequences surrounding the least conserved genes that appears to most likely be a consequence of sequencing/mapping errors of common snps, since the increase in maf is only present around multi-copy genes and is also less dramatic when snps out of hardy-weinberg equilibrium are removed .

non-coding regions that have been conserved over large evolutionary timescales are also likely to be functionally important, and recently noncoding transcribed elements that are not conserved across species were shown to be undergoing lineage specific purifying selection in humans  <cit> . to test for evidence of selection in non-coding regions at conserved sites we isolated any snps that are at least 200 kb from known genes. amongst these we observe a significant decrease in average maf in sequences surrounding snps at positions that are most highly conserved , yet a depression is not present around sites with intermediate gerp scores . we also observe a significant decrease in average maf in the sequences surrounding the least conserved snp positions . this is probably a consequence of linkage to conserved sites and is likely to be associated with the way that gerp is calculated, since we find that sites with the most negative constraint scores tend to be preferentially located adjacent to runs of conserved sites in non-coding regions . splitting noncoding sites into ten groups based on gerp score, we again observe a gradient in the depth of depression of average maf in the surrounding sequences, with more conserved sites causing the deepest depression . for the same reasons as before, these patterns are most likely driven by negative selection, and consistent with this, we also find that there is significantly less differentiation amongst all  <dig> genomes populations for non-coding snps with the highest gerp scores compared to those with lower gerp scores .

variation in mutation accumulation within  <dig> genomes populations
it has been suggested that an individual that carries the minor allele at a conserved site may have a greater mutation load  <cit> . in line with this, we compared all individuals within a population in an attempt to identify any individuals that are carrying a higher proportion of putatively deleterious alleles. since interspecies constraint appears to be a consistent proxy for both observed allele frequencies and inferred selection acting on alleles, we considered the potential differences in genetic fitness at the individual level by testing whether individuals have significantly different distributions of gerp scores for nonsynonymous sites at which they carry the minor allele using high-coverage exome sequencing data from the  <dig> genomes project . within each population we performed pairwise comparisons for all possible pairs of individuals and found no evidence to suggest that any individuals have a significantly different median gerp score  or significantly different distributions of gerp scores  across all comparisons . this suggests that there are not large differences in fitness between individuals from the same population at nonsynonymous sites. however, since many alleles are shared across individuals within a population, including all observed polymorphisms in an analysis of mutation accumulation may reduce the variance in the distributions of gerp scores between individuals. considering only rare alleles  carried by individuals within a population using high-coverage data only, we observe  <dig> pairs of individuals that have significantly different distributions of gerp scores , coming from five different populations , mexican ancestry from los angeles, usa , puerto ricans from puerto rico , british in england and scotland  and luhya in webuye, kenya ). three of these populations are admixed  and therefore potentially contain individuals that are contributing alleles from different ancestral populations, however we also detect significantly different pairs of individuals that are not drawn from admixed populations.

p-values are shown for mann–whitney u and kolmogorov-smirnov tests after bonferroni correction, unless the result is non-significant .

variation in mutation accumulation between  <dig> genomes populations
by averaging the numbers of nonsynonymous mutations that fall into each gerp category for all individuals within a population, we can make comparisons between  <dig> genomes populations for the accumulation of putatively deleterious variants. across populations, we find very similar distributions for the proportions of minor allele sites that fall into each gerp score category . however, for similar datasets that are sequenced to similar levels of coverage, the absolute number of sites may be more informative. it is known that non-african populations have lower genetic diversity compared to african populations as a consequence of the out-of-africa bottleneck  <cit> , and non-africans also tend to carry a higher number of putative deleterious alleles in homozygous form due to relaxed selection  <cit> . however, little is documented about other populations. considering heterozygous sites as a measure of genetic diversity , non-african populations indeed have significantly fewer mutations falling across all constrained positions  compared to african populations , but there are also significant differences between non-african populations. individuals from admixed american populations carry more heterozygous variants at constrained sites than individuals from european populations , which in turn carry more than individuals from south east asian populations . furthermore, for derived homozygous alleles, we observe the exact opposite trend across all positive gerp score categories , with individuals from south east asia carrying the most homozygous derived alleles, followed by europeans, admixed americans and then africans . these observations are consistent with a greater relaxation of selection in south east asian and then european populations, that is most likely a consequence of the reduced efficiency of selection in populations with smaller effective size , and increased genetic diversity caused by admixture in american populations. finally, african and admixed american populations tend to carry a higher number of within population singletons than europeans and asians , which is consistent with african populations having a higher genetic diversity and admixed american populations containing individuals from different ancestral populations. although singletons may impact upon the fitness of an individual, particularly since they are enriched at highly constrained sites, it is likely that these mutations are newer and selection has not had time to act to purge them from the population.

discussion
since we confirm a relationship between gerp and maf in phase  <dig> data from the  <dig> genomes project, measures of constraint can be used to capture critical genetic events. previously, hernandez et al. <cit>  described a reduction in diversity around exons using  <dig> genomes pilot data  <cit>  and concluded that it is at least partly consistent with background selection. furthermore, loehmueller et al. <cit>  inferred that background selection is shaping human diversity by comparing various genomic parameters in genic and non-genic regions. however, in both cases simulations were used to implicate background selection as the model that best fits the observed diversity data. in this study we present genome-wide empirical evidence of deeper depressions in maf around the most conserved genes, which is most consistent with purifying selection being the primary mechanism driving allele frequencies in and around  coding regions. as a consequence, it may be difficult to detect genuine evidence for selective sweeps and previous scans for such events, which rely on detecting reduced diversity around genes  <cit> , may be contaminated with the effects of background selection. our approach is robust to demographic effects and recombination, since we group genes by a measure that is calculated over long evolutionary time scales and thus is not affected by short term phenomenon, and also to variations in mutation rate, since we consider maf rather than snp density in the regions surrounding genes.

we also observe similar patterns in sequences surrounding the most conserved sites in non-coding regions and although drake et al. <cit>  have previously shown that alleles segregating within conserved non-coding elements have lower maf on average, this study provides evidence that conserved non-coding sites are not only under purifying selection but also affect alleles in the surrounding sequences via background selection to shape human diversity. the patterns are less extreme than for coding regions, but that is likely due to the spatial distribution of conserved sites being denser within a gene than in non-coding regions. furthermore, since the variants analysed here are far away from known genes, it is unlikely that these patterns are driven by linkage to coding sites and although some regions are likely to contain functional elements such as transcription factor binding sites, these results provide yet more evidence that background selection is highly prevalent throughout the genomes of humans.

the demographic history of a population is known to impact on the frequency of alleles segregating among individuals  <cit> . by comparing  <dig> worldwide populations from the  <dig> genomes project we can measure fine-scaled differences in the effect that demography has on the efficiency of selection. first, we observe differences in the depression in maf around the most conserved genes for different populations that correlates with ne and subsequently it is likely that deleterious alleles are segregating more readily in populations with a smaller effective size. over time, selection has been more efficient in removing deleterious variants in populations with larger effective size, such as those from africa, and this is clear from the reduced maf of variants segregating in all parts of the genome in african populations  and the fact that african populations carry fewer putatively deleterious homozygous derived alleles . however, it is possible that there is now more potential for selection to act on variants in populations with smaller effective size, since they are at higher frequency due to past demographic events. as a consequence, perhaps as a result of recent population expansion or even a changing environment, it is possible that previously freely segregating alleles are now being driven to lower frequency in regions close to conserved genes, leading to a larger difference in the depression in maf for populations with a smaller ne. second, by considering the average distribution of gerp scores for mutations segregating in each population we find differences across  <dig> genomes populations for the entire positive gerp score range. in general, we find that populations with smaller ne tend to carry fewer heterozygous alleles, but have accumulated more variants in homozygous form. the implications for fitness depend highly on the level of penetrance at functionally important sites; if the majority of mutations are dominant, individuals from populations with more heterozygous mutations will have a higher genetic load, yet if the majority of mutations act in a recessive manner, which seems most likely since alleles at putatively damaging sites tend to persist in the population in the face of selective pressures, individuals from populations carrying more homozygous derived alleles may carry more load.

finally, measures of constraint can also be used to classify individual genomes by the accumulation of mutations at functional sites. within populations we infer very little variation in the accumulation of deleterious mutations across individuals when considering all nonsynonymous variants. however, it has been suggested that rare alleles drive more of the differences in phenotype between individuals, an idea that is supported by a large fraction of ‘missing heritability’ in many genome-wide association studies that focus mostly on common variation . considering only rare alleles we detect a number of significantly different pairs of individuals that show a difference in the distributions of putatively deleterious alleles they are carrying. although these only represent a small fraction of the total number of pairs of individuals compared across all populations, it shows that the framework of comparing distributions of constraint scores on the individual level is able to detect significant differences, even for supposedly ‘healthy’ individuals from the  <dig> genomes populations. additionally, our approach to detect differences is conservative and may only detect the most extreme differences in mutation accumulation. first, the statistical thresholds applied in our study are likely overly conservative given that the pairwise comparisons of individual distributions of gerp scores are not independent. second, it is also possible that by limiting this analysis to high-coverage exome data we are not accounting for the effects exerted by sites further away from the exons that may contribute further to fitness differences between individuals. third, we predict that individual differences in the distributions of putatively deleterious variants are likely to be higher in diseased groups. as such, individuals that, for example, develop complex diseases may be more likely to come from the tails of the distribution.

CONCLUSIONS
using polymorphism data to infer fitness is not a new idea  <cit> , however by confirming the relationship between interspecific constraint and maf it allows us to make inferences about key genetic processes and gain a greater insight into how selection operates in human populations. by doing so we have highlighted the extent of background selection across the human genome and the interplay of selection and demographic history in shaping human diversity. furthermore, the utility of this relationship also allows us to make predictions about disease and fitness based on a score that is not dependent on having population level data. by applying this method and using a stringent statistical threshold we were able to detect differences between ‘healthy’ individuals from the  <dig> genomes populations. subsequently, it may be promising to consider the constraint profiles of individuals with complex diseases, a strategy which may be effective in capturing the signatures of damaging mutations that don’t necessarily occur at the same sites for a given phenotype , but instead act in a cumulative manner across the genome. this approach is a useful first step to characterise the nature of mutation load on an individual level, and may have important implications in studying human fitness and disease.

