BACKGROUND
molecular evolution is governed by the interplay of mutational processes which constantly give rise to the emergence of mutant alleles, and selective forces that influence the dynamics of mutants within the population, either leading to their fixation or loss. the decisive factor determining the probability of fixation of a new allele is its relative fitness compared to the wild type. if fitness differences are weak, the dynamics of a mutant within the population is essentially determined by genetic drift, reflecting stochastic fluctuations that result from a finite population size. in this regime of so called neutral evolution, the rate of fixation of new mutants in the population resembles the rate at which mutants are generated in individuals. on the other hand, if fitness differences between mutant and wild type are sufficiently large, stochastic fluctuations are overruled by deterministic selective forces which can lead to accelerated fixation of a beneficial mutant , or its rapid removal as a consequence of strong selective constraints . these considerations have been put on a quantitative basis in the famous kimura-ohta theory of population genetics for finite populations evolving by stochastic fluctuations and selection  <cit> .

as an immediate consequence of this theory, reduction of mutational rates in particular genomic regions compared to presumably neutrally evolving regions are indicative for selective constraints associated with the particular mutational processes. in our analysis, we use this approach to investigate selective forces on a specific class of mutational processes, insertions and deletions of short dna segments in protein coding regions of the human genome.

together with nucleotide substitutions and genome rearrangements, dna insertions and deletions  are the major mutational mechanisms to cause genetic variation. comparative studies between human and chimp revealed that indels between both species cover approximately 3–5% of the two genomes, and therefore clearly outnumber the ~ <dig> % divergence resulting from single nucleotide substitutions  <cit> . indels in human protein coding regions that occurred since the human-chimp split were measured to be highly suppressed compared to intergenic and intronic indels  <cit> . this finding reflects strong purifying selection in protein coding regions throughout recent human evolution. coding indels in the human lineage should therefore provide a promising class of mutational processes to study the characteristics of selective constraints on protein coding regions in more detail.

we identified recent coding indels in the human lineage from whole-genome multiple alignments of human, chimp and rhesus. insertions were explicitly distinguished from deletions using rhesus as an out-group species. all identified events were subjected to thorough quality filtering. the resulting set of reliable insertion and deletion events was analyzed under several aspects that reflect commonly regarded manifestations of selective constraints on protein evolution. among them are variations in insertion or deletion rates between different amino acids, preferential occurrence of indels in specific secondary structure regions of proteins, and higher or lower rates of indels in genes associated with particular molecular functions, biological processes, or cellular components.

our analysis indicates that indels in human protein coding regions are indeed subject to distinct levels of selective pressure with regard to their structural impact on the amino acid sequence, as well as to general properties of the genes they are located in. the results extend several known characteristics of selective constraints for amino acid substitutions  <cit>  and indels in other species  <cit>  to coding indels in the human lineage, and substantiate these findings by quantitative data.

RESULTS
insertion and deletion events
we investigated multiple alignments of the human, chimpanzee, and rhesus genomes to identify indels in the human branch since its split from the common ancestor with chimp. using rhesus as an outgroup, indels were separated into insertions and deletions in the human branch by means of maximum parsimony  <cit> . to reduce the number of false-positive indels due to alignment or sequencing errors we applied rigid quality filtering on indels and their flanking regions . this way we identified a set of  <dig>  insertions and  <dig>  deletions in a total of  <dig>  mbp  of the human genome, which are covered by the multiple alignments.

in this set,  <dig> indels were detected to be located within protein coding sequence segments according to the ensembl  annotation of the human genome  <cit> . coding indels hence account for only  <dig> % of all indels in our set. comparison of this fraction with the density of protein coding segments, which is about  <dig> % for the human genome  <cit> , indicates that indels in coding regions are highly suppressed relative to those in the genomic background. this can be expected since coding indels will always change the amino acid sequence of the translated protein . the effects of indels on the protein sequence can range from insertions or deletions of amino acids if indel lengths are multiples of  <dig> bp , up to complete non-functionalisation of the protein in case of frameshifting indels. mutants carrying frameshifting indels are consequently more likely to be removed from the population by purifying selection than those with frameshifting indels  <cit> . indeed, it has been found that the rates of frameshifting indels in protein coding regions are only about 5% of those in the genomic background, while non-frameshifting indels still occur at about 50% of their background rates  <cit> .

despite the approximately  <dig> times higher suppression of frameshifting indels compared to non-frameshifting indels, we still find  <dig> events  in our set to be frameshifting. this is due to the fact that length distributions of insertions and deletions rapidly decay with increasing indel lengths  <cit> . for instance, on a genome-wide average  <dig> bp indels occur approximately  <dig> times more often than  <dig> bp indels. the number of  <dig> identified frameshifting indels is still unexpectedly high concerning their presumably profound impact on the translated protein sequence. one possible scenario could be that there is only a small number of wrongly predicted ensemble genes that give rise to many frameshifting indels. yet, this is not supported by our data; there is no gene containing more than two indels of our set, and only  <dig>  genes have two non-frameshifting  indels. another likely origin of frameshifting indels could be falsely annotated coding regions. to further investigate this possibility, we checked the fraction of indels that are located in experimentally validated refseq peptides  <cit> . while  <dig> of the  <dig> non-frameshifting indels  occured in exons of ensembl transcripts that could be mapped to refseq peptides with at least 99% target and query identity, it was possible for only  <dig> of the  <dig> frameshifting indels . this disproportionality is indeed indicative for a significant fraction of frameshifting indels being located in erroneously predicted ensembl exons, but still a substantial number of events cannot be explained this way. so far, we are not able to rate what fraction of the remaining frameshifting events is biologically meaningful, and what are the contributions of alignment, sequencing, and other sources of error. in principle, it is also possible that a frameshift caused by one indel can be compensated by a second frameshifting indel. if both events occur within a close distance, changes in the amino acid sequence can be minimized.

in contrast to frameshifting indels, which are generally "global" events causing changes on a protein scale, our analysis focuses on the contribution of indels to protein evolution on a "local" scale, and we therefore restricted our set to the  <dig> insertions and  <dig> deletions which are non-frameshifting. their length distribution is shown in figure 1; it is strongly peaked at  <dig> bp and rapidly decays for larger indel lengths. a table containing chromosomal position, length, and inserted/deleted sequence of all identified non-frameshifting indels in coding regions is provided online  <cit> .

conservative and non-conservative indel events
insertions and deletions can occur between two codons , or after the first or second nucleotide of a codon . often, the exact phase of an indel cannot be reconstructed unambiguously on the sole basis of a multiple alignment. for instance, if an indel has occurred in a local repeat structure, the alignment algorithm has multiple possibilities to place the gap without changing the overall score of the alignment .

on the level of the translated amino acid sequence the different phases are not entirely equivalent: non-frameshifting indels in phase  <dig> always introduce or delete complete codons of the protein coding sequence without affecting adjacent amino acids . indels in phase  <dig> or  <dig> can in addition to the inserted/deleted amino acids also change an adjacent amino acid . notice that phase  <dig> and  <dig> indels can also be conservative depending on the nature of the inserted or deleted sequence. in contrast to its exact phase, the conservative or non-conservative nature of an indel can unambiguously be determined from the multiple alignment. the classification into non-conservative and conservative events partitions indels into events causing an additional amino acid substitutions and those without. it is therefore a reasonable classification of indels whenever one is interested in their actual effect on the protein sequence.

in our set, we find non-conservative insertions and deletions to be strongly suppressed; they make up only 3%  of all insertions and 4%  of all deletions . indels in protein coding regions are hence predominantly of conservative nature, i. e. they occur in a way that minimizes the number of changed amino acids.

there are two hypothesis capable of explaining the strong bias towards conservative indel events: the first is a mechanistic explanation based on the observation that the majority of dna insertions on short length scales are actually tandem duplications of adjacent sequence segments and that deletions also occur frequently in preexisting tandem duplicates  <cit> . these signatures are also found among the insertions and deletions in our set:  <dig> of  <dig> insertions  are tandem duplications,  <dig> of  <dig> deletions  removed one copy of a preexisting tandemly repeated motif. non-frameshifting tandem duplication insertions and deletions of a repeated motif are always conservative events, irrespective of the phase they occur in. the measured overrepresentation of conservative indel events could hence be solely caused by the characteristics of the underlying molecular processes that generate indels.

the second hypothesis presumes that in addition to the previous "selectively neutral" explanation at least part of the observed strong bias may reflect a higher amount of purifying selection associated with non-conservative indels due to their larger number of effective changes in the protein sequence compared with conservative events.

to test whether the duplication mechanism can fully suffice to explain the observed underrepresentation of non-conservative indels we conducted a simulation study. indels were thereby randomly placed in a test set of protein coding regions of the human genome. for each event the length of the simulated indel was drawn from the observed distribution of indel lengths in coding regions . as the crucial feature of our simulation we further assured that indels were generated with realistic duplication characteristics as observed on the genome-wide scale .

the measured frequencies of non-conservative events in our simulation are shown in figure 2b. in comparison to the original set we obtained substantially higher frequencies of non-conservative events in the simulation set . for deletions, we can clearly reject the hypothesis that the small frequency of non-conservative events in our observed set is simply a result of the preferential deletion of copies within preexisting duplicates . the corresponding statement is less significant for insertions  due to the small number of predicted non-conservative events in our set . we actually observed  <dig> events. we conclude from this analysis that non-conservative indels are highly suppressed in protein coding regions. this can for a large part be explained by inherent duplication features of indels. however, non-conservative deletions are in addition subject to a significantly larger amount of purifying selection compared to non-conservative events, and a similar statement is likely to be true also for insertions.

inserted and deleted amino acids
to investigate whether indels in protein coding regions preferentially induce insertions or deletions of specific amino acids, we counted the distributions of inserted and deleted amino acids in our set . these distributions were compared to the overall abundance of amino acids in proteins of the human genome. as shown in figure 3a, both distributions are significantly different from the background abundance .

in particular, we found that glycine  and alanine  were inserted more often than expected under the assumption that insertion frequencies of different amino acids follow the average distribution of amino acid frequencies in all coding regions of the human genome. glycine is the smallest among all proteinogenic amino acids, it can therefore be located in parts of the protein that are structurally forbidden to all other amino acids . alanine is the second smallest amino acid, it is very non-reactive and thus rarely involved directly in protein function  <cit> . among deletions, glutamic acid is significantly overrepresented . it is negatively charged and polar, and prefers to be located on the surface of proteins.

on the other hand, for insertions and deletions phenylalanine and tyrosine , for insertions isoleucine , lysine  and valine , and for deletions asparginine, leucine and tryptophan  are significantly underrepresented among indels. most of these amino acids prefer to be buried within protein hydrophobic cores . leucine is preferentially located in alpha helices, isoleucine and valine are often found in beta sheets. asparginine and lysine predominantly reside on the surfaces of proteins  <cit> . generally, all significantly underrepresented amino acids are restricted to particular positions in the protein structure. insertions and deletions of these amino acids are likely to cause major changes in protein structure, stability and function, and are therefore strongly suppressed by purifying selection.

in order to obtain a more general survey of the underlying characteristics that dispose amino acids to be over- or underrepresented in our set, we grouped them with respect to their physio-chemical properties. results are shown in figure 3b. this analysis revealed that indeed small and tiny amino acids are preferentially inserted  and tiny amino acids deleted , whereas aliphatic and aromatic amino acids occur less often in inserted  and hydrophobic , aliphatic and aromatic  amino acids in deleted sequence segments compared to their average abundance in protein coding regions.

insertions and deletions in protein coding regions primarily involve amino acids that have a minor impact on the structure and function of the protein. in contrast, amino acids which are preferentially located in structurally important regions of the protein are highly suppressed. these results agree with the observed dependence of amino acid substitution rates on their local environment within the protein derived from protein alignments  <cit> . for example, amino acids buried in protein cores have been found to be far more conserved than those at surface positions  <cit> .

structural preferences of indels
insertion and deletion rates of amino acids depend on the structural region of the protein they are preferentially located in, as pointed out by the previous analysis. to investigate whether this effect can also directly be measured on the structural level, we retrieved secondary structure information for protein sequences affected by indels from the protein data bank   <cit> .

secondary structure information could be obtained for  <dig> indels in our set . in figure  <dig> we show the distribution of structural features  among inserted and deleted coding sequence segments in comparison to the background abundance of these features in the analyzed proteins. the analysis corroborates our presumption that coding indels in human preferentially occur in protein regions lacking important secondary structure features, as has already been reported for indels derived from alignments of protein families  <cit>  and coding indels in rodents  <cit> . in contrast, indels in alpha helices are significantly suppressed . this is consistent with the fact that alpha-helices are the most robust secondary structures. for instance, they often form the skeleton of the protein. amino acid insertions or deletions in protein regions that are supposed to form a alpha helix can have a great impact on the helical structure, since they are likely to destroy the internal periodicity of the helix. the observed suppression of indels in these regions is therefore likely to reflect the influence of purifying selection.

strength of selection in indel containing genes
the strong suppression of frameshifting indels, the low ratio of non-conservative indel events in our indel phase analysis, or the underrepresentation of events which presumably affect protein structure, all these findings indicate that indels in protein coding regions are exposed to a substantial amount of selective pressure. it is therefore reasonable to assume that indels preferably occur in genes where overall selection strength is lower compared to other genes.

to verify this presumption we analyzed the distribution of dn/ds ratios for indel containing genes in comparison to the background distribution of dn/ds values in all human genes. the ratio of non-synonymous substitution rate  to synonymous substitution rate  is a widely-used method to investigate the general strength of selection in protein coding regions. a low ratio dn/ds ≪  <dig> indicates strong purifying selection, while genes with dn/ds ≈  <dig> are usually considered to evolve under approximate selective neutrality  <cit> . in order to obtain meaningful estimates of dn and ds on the scale of individual genes by cross-species comparison, the divergence between the analyzed species should not be too low. dn/ds values were therefore calculated on the basis of human-mouse alignments, which could be obtained for a total of  <dig> orthologous genes .

in figure  <dig> we show the measured distributions of dn/ds values for all genes, compared to the subsets of genes that contain at least one coding insertion/deletion event. as expected, coding indels indeed occur preferentially in genes evolving under lower levels of selective pressure, indicated by higher dn/ds values.

we are aware of the fact that this approach determines the strength of selection on a considerably larger time-scale compared to the period where indels in our set were generated. however, the regime of strong purifying selection we are interested in, typically denotes genes associated with important biological functions. such genes are often conserved over long evolutionary periods, and selective constraints on them are unlikely to have changed rapidly throughout recent evolution.

gene ontology analysis
to identify possible correlations between rates of coding indels and categories of proteins that are associated with particular molecular functions, biological processes, or cellular components, a gene ontology   <cit>  analysis was performed among a broad set of  <dig> go slim categories.

the standard method to investigate whether a certain go category is over- or underrepresented in a particular subset of genes  is to compare the fraction of genes annotated by that go category in the subset with the fraction of annotated genes in the analyzed background set. however, when analyzing indels, such an approach can be misleading if certain go categories are systematically biased towards shorter or longer genes, since the probability of long genes to contain an indel is higher than for short genes. in order to eliminate such possible cross-correlation we directly measured the rates of coding indels in events per coding sequence length for all genes that could be mapped to our  <dig> go slim categories . these rates were then compared to the average rate of coding indels in all  <dig>  genes of the human genome with available go annotation.  <dig> of these genes contain at least one indel of our set. the average rate of coding indels in all annotated genes was calculated to be  <dig> event per  <dig> kbp of coding sequence. all measured rates are shown in figure  <dig>  the most interesting result is that we found  <dig> categories in the ontologies molecular function and biological process which are significantly underrepresented : catalytic activity , ligase activity , electron transport , amino acid and derivative metabolic process , transport , catabolic process . all of them are related to biochemical reactions. suppression of indels in genes associated with these categories may be explained by the fact that biochemical reactions are very specific and are therefore highly conserved throughout evolution.

chen et al. reported an overrepresentation of indels in genes associated with transcription regulatory activity  <cit> . we also measure  <dig>  fold higher indel rates in this set of genes. however, we find that this overrepresentation is statistically not significant  after correcting for multiple testing. the slight overrepresentation may actually result from the known enrichment of tandem repetitive sequences in transcription factors  <cit> , which are therefore more prone to frequent insertions and deletions.

the category transcription regulatory activity characterizes genes that are related to the regulation of other genes. the measured higher indel rates in this class – although not significant after a conservative bonferroni correction for multiple testing – conforms well with the hypothesis that many changes between human and chimp took not only place on the amino acid level, but also on the regulatory level  <cit> . alongside amino acid substitutions, dna indels in protein coding regions of regulatory genes could thereby also play an important role among the mutational processes on sequence level that drive such evolutionary changes.

in the ontology cellular component all categories besides nucleus are suppressed. especially genes in categories related to extracellular components have lower indel rates. however, this suppression is only marginally significant .

CONCLUSIONS
in this study, we investigated recent dna insertions and deletions in protein coding regions of the human genome. mutational processes of this type were found to occur at substantially lower rates compared to indel events on a genome-wide average, indicating strong purifying selection. to enlighten particular selective constraints on coding indels in more detail, their characteristics were examined from miscellaneous angles.

dna indels in coding sequence lead to insertions or deletions of amino acids in the translated proteins. yet, frequencies of inserted and deleted amino acids do not resemble background amino acid frequencies in the human proteome. in particular, we found small amino acids to be preferentially inserted and deleted, while indels involving hydrophobic, aliphatic and aromatic amino acids are underrepresented. indel rate variations could also be measured between different secondary structure regions of proteins. amino acid insertions and deletions tend to occur in protein regions that do not form important structural domains, and are significantly underrepresented in alpha helices. we further found that indel rates in genes related to elementary biochemical reactions are subject to substantially stronger purifying selection.

identifying selection in evolution of human proteins has drawn a considerable amount of attention since the advent of molecular sequence data. most studies have thereby focused on the effects of amino acid substitutions  <cit> . with the increasing availability of single nucleotide polymorphism data, the scope has nowadays been extended to the search for events ascribed to positive selection  <cit> . however, one has to keep in mind that the emergence of beneficial mutants is certainly rare compared to deleterious ones. the vast majority of newly arising alleles in protein coding regions is subject to strong selective constraints. our findings corroborate that many commonly accepted characteristics of these constraints for substitutions do also apply to amino acid insertions and deletions.

