BACKGROUND
wood cell  initials are produced by the vascular cambium and subsequently undergo cell expansion, primary cell wall biosynthesis, secondary wall deposition, lignification, and finally programmed cell death  <cit> . in perennial woody plants, secondary xylem  is derived from the annual activity of the vascular cambium, with wood laid down in different seasons and tree ages frequently having distinct mechanical properties  <cit> , particularly in gymnosperms  <cit> . the mechanical properties of secondary xylem not only provide support for woody plants to maintain their shape, resist maturation stress , and respond to various environmental forces ; they also affect the suitability of wood for different commercial applications. a number of factors influence the mechanical properties of wood, including individual cell walls, anatomical structure, cell-cell adhesion and cell turgidity  <cit> . the mechanical properties of plant cell walls also play a crucial role in cell expansion  <cit> , tissue or organ morphogenesis  <cit>  and responses to various signals  <cit> . understanding wood biomechanics at the cell and organ levels will provide unique insights into many biological processes in plants, such as cell wall biosynthesis and wood formation.

the mechanical properties of plant cell walls and organs are largely controlled by the architecture of the cytoskeleton  <cit> . of the three main types of cytoskeleton polymers, microtubules are the stiffest while actin filaments are the least rigid  <cit> . tethering of galactose residues in xyloglucans to cellulose microfibrils is essential for mechanical strength such as tensile properties of primary cell walls  <cit>  and expansion relies on cooperation between specific expansins and xets  <cit> . previous studies have showed that cellulose microfibril orientation dominates mechanical properties in both primary and secondary cell walls of xylem  <cit> , particularly microfibril angle  in the middle layer  of secondary cell walls. in eucalyptus, mfa alone has been estimated to account for 86% of the variation in wood stiffness with an additional 10% to be influenced by wood density  <cit> .

the complex nature of the genetic control of wood properties was first showed by quantitative trait loci  mapping. several qtls have been identified that contribute to mfa and wood stiffness in pines  <cit> , eucalypts  <cit>  and poplar  <cit> . recently several individual genes have been found to play roles in the regulation of microfibril orientation and mechanical properties of xylem cell walls. a β-tubulin gene has been found to influence cellulose microfibril orientation in wood cell walls of eucalyptus  <cit> . two fasciclin-like arabinogalactan proteins  have been found to affect mfa and tensile stiffness in eucalypts and arabidopsis by altering cellulose deposition and the integrity of the cell wall matrix  <cit> . association studies have recently showed single nucleotide polymorphisms  in a number of cell wall-related genes that influence mfa in loblolly pine   <cit> , radiata pine   <cit> , white spruce   <cit>  and eucalyptus nitens   <cit> . furthermore, associations between allelic variation and other mechanical properties of wood have also been observed, including stiffness  and density  in radiata pine  <cit>  and specific gravity  in loblolly pine  <cit> . while the research described above provides important insights into the molecular mechanisms of microfibril orientation and mechanical properties of wood cell walls, genes involved in the regulation of cell wall mechanics remain poorly characterised at the transcriptome level.

radiata pine  is the most important conifer species in commercial forest plantations in australia and several other countries and is grown primarily for structural timber. to gain further insight into the molecular control of microfibril orientation and cell wall mechanics, cdna microarrays were used to investigate differential gene expression in radiata pine developing xylem with contrasting stiffness and mfa. radiata pine trees with contrasting wood stiffness were selected in two progeny trials using acoustic velocity with an iml electronic hammer  <cit> . stiffness, mfa and other wood property traits were further assessed in wood cores of the sampled trees using silviscan  <dig> technology  <cit> . this high resolution technology can measure the properties of wood produced in different seasons and different years, and allowed us to compare gene expression and wood properties  in a single season. the aim of this study was to identify putative candidate genes involved in the regulation of microfibril orientation and cell wall mechanics in wood cells.

RESULTS
selection of sampled trees with contrasting wood stiffness
measurements of acoustic velocity of standing trees in the two progeny trials showed that variation in juvenile wood stiffness, or the longitudinal modulus of elasticity   <cit> , had roughly normal distributions at the family level . continuous variation of wood stiffness in the two trials is a typical feature of quantitative traits. overall average moe in the flynn and kromelite trials were  <dig>  and  <dig>  gpa with standard deviations  of  <dig>  and  <dig> , respectively. the lower moe in the kromelite trial may be due to the higher tree growth rate in that trial, as there is a negative correlation between moe and tree growth in radiata pine  <cit> .

in each trial five families with the highest moe and five families with the lowest moe were selected for further study , thus between  <dig>  and  <dig> % of the total families were selected from each trial. the two groups of selected families had large differences in wood stiffness . the families mpb <dig> and mpb <dig> were among the five low stiffness  families selected in both trials, which is likely to be due to the moderate to high heritability of juvenile wood stiffness  <cit> . two individuals with higher  moe and above average growth rates were sampled from each selected family for further study . developing xylem tissues of these individuals were collected at three different seasons , and total rnas were extracted for microarray experiments.

silviscan profiling of microfibril angle and other wood traits
the acoustic velocity-based method using an iml hammer provides an overall measurement of wood stiffness  of a standing tree. wood cores of the  <dig> high stiffness  and low stiffness  trees selected in each trial were further analysed using silviscan  <dig>  this high resolution technology measured mfa, moe and wood density along wood cores in earlywood and latewood of each ring formed in different seasons of each year. the three wood traits were compared in each ring between the hs and ls trees . annual growth rates as seen in the width of each ring were similar between the two groups , suggesting growth rate of the sampled trees should have a limited impact on comparisons of wood stiffness. in the first 3- <dig> rings  the differences in mfa, moe and wood density between the two groups were not statistically significant; while from ring  <dig> or  <dig> onwards mfa in each ring of hs trees was significantly lower and moe significantly higher than that in ls trees  . in contrast, wood density in these rings was not significantly different between the two groups. thus, the  <dig> standing trees with contrasting stiffness based on acoustics were further confirmed by the silviscan measurements. the silviscan results also showed that the two groups of trees had contrasting stiffness and mfa in individual rings produced after  <dig> or  <dig> years. thus, when developing xylem tissues were sampled for microarray experiments from the two plantations at year  <dig> and  <dig>  respectively, the single ring produced in the two groups of sampled trees had contrasting stiffness and mfa. these provided a basis for the relatively precise analysis of wood traits  and gene expression in the same ring. thus, differential gene expression between the two groups of sampled trees is expected to be largely related to their contrasting stiffness and mfa rather than wood density.

for comparisons between gene expression and wood formed in a particular growing season, silviscan data was analysed in different seasons of each year. three wood properties  were compared between hs and ls trees in both trials in earlywood  and latewood  . mfa showed a marked decline while moe increased with tree age  in the ew and lw of both hs and ls trees. compared to the  <dig> trees with ls  in both trials, the  <dig> hs trees  had a significantly higher moe  and lower mfa in the ew and lw of each ring . in the two groups of sampled trees, lw stiffness of each ring was generally greater than that of ew stiffness; while mfa of lw in each ring was consistently lower than that of ew in both trials . unlike moe and mfa, wood density was not significantly different between the two groups of trees in both ew and lw, except for a few rings produced in the earlier years in the kromelite trial . in summary, the two groups of sampled trees produced annual rings and both ew and lw with contrasting moe and mfa, but similar wood density . these results further suggested that differences in xylem gene expression in different seasons between the two groups of sampled trees would most likely be related to wood stiffness and mfa rather than density.

in order to obtain more reliable patterns of wood property variation between hs and ls trees, an additional  <dig> and  <dig> trees from the  <dig> hs and ls families in the flynn and kromelite trials, respectively, were measured by silviscan and the data combined with silviscan data from the  <dig> trees used for the microarray experiments. the magnitude of mfa variation between the hs and ls trees in both trials was similar in ew and lw of each ring, particularly in the outer rings closest to the sampling time . in contrast, in both trials variation in moe between these trees was typically higher in ew than in lw in each ring, suggesting that ew tissues formed in spring could be a major contributor to overall variation in wood stiffness. however, wood density had an opposite pattern compared to wood stiffness. in the kromelite trial, the density difference between the hs and ls trees tended to be higher in lw than in ew of each ring; while in the flynn trial greater density differences were also observed in lw in the two rings closest to the bark.

differential gene transcription in wood with distinct stiffness and mfa
transcripts differentially accumulated in radiata pine developing xylem with contrasting wood stiffness and mfa were identified in the flynn trial in spring  and autumn  and the kromelite trial in summer . of  <dig>   <dig> xylem unigenes present on the cdna microarrays,  <dig> % were differentially regulated in flynn-ew, including  <dig> and  <dig> unigenes preferentially transcribed in hs  and ls , respectively . in contrast, more unigenes  were differentially transcribed in the same trees in autumn , including  <dig> unigenes preferentially transcribed in hs and  <dig> in ls trees . however, the largest proportion of differentially accumulated transcripts was found in trees  sampled in summer  in the kromelite trial. thus, lw tissues had 3- <dig> times more differentially accumulated transcripts than ew tissues, suggesting that expression of genes regulating wood stiffness and microfibril orientation is impacted by the season.

while the number of differentially transcribed unigenes was 3- <dig> times higher in lw than in ew , the greatest differences in wood stiffness  in rings formed in the sampling years were observed in ew laid down in spring . this suggests that the number of differentially transcribed unigenes alone does not explain the seasonal pattern of moe variation. comparisons of differentially accumulated unigenes in the flynn trial showed that only  <dig>  are common to both ew  and lw  in juvenile wood with hs and low mfa  . similarly, only eight  unigenes were common in both ew  in flynn and lw  in kromelite. in contrast, considerably more differentially regulated unigenes were conserved in lw tissues sampled in autumn  and summer , including  <dig> unigenes for hs  and  <dig> for ls  wood . taken together, these results suggested that distinct sets of genes control microfibril orientation and cell wall mechanics in different seasons.

microarray expression of  <dig> differentially transcribed unigenes  selected in the flynn-lw experiment were validated by rt-mlpa using the same rna samples as for the microarray experiments. transcript accumulation measured by the rt-mlpa method was relatively consistent with the microarray results for all  <dig> validated genes , particularly in the ranking of expression magnitude, suggesting the microarray experiments in this study were sufficiently reliable for the identification of candidate genes that may influence juvenile wood stiffness and mfa.

functional analysis of differentially accumulated transcripts
a total of  <dig> and  <dig> xylem unigenes  preferentially transcribed in juvenile wood with hs  and ls , respectively, were identified in the three microarray experiments. more than 64% of the unigenes had homologs in the uniprot known protein  <cit>  and refseq  <cit>  databases  . functional analysis showed that 52-59% of the unigenes had been assigned a gene ontology  term, while the remaining 41-48% were functional unknowns . among the differentially transcribed unigenes with assigned go terms, the majority were classified as molecular functions  or biological processes , with fewer as cellular components  . slightly more go terms were assigned to unigenes preferentially transcribed in wood with hs and low mfa  compared to ls trees with high mfa , and more genes with molecular functions and/or involved in cellular components are preferentially transcribed in ls wood with high mfa .

                              unigenes
                              blast matchesb 
                              go terms assigned
                              c
hs
ls
ajuvenile wood included two types: wood with high stiffness  and low microfibril angle , and wood with low stiffness  and high microfibril angle . brefer to the matches in the uniprot known protein and refseq databases . ccc- cellular component; mf- molecular function; bp- biological process. percentage  of cc, mf and bp were calculated using the total unigenes assigned with go terms.

further comparisons of lower level go terms assigned to the differentially transcribed unigenes showed distinct differences between juvenile wood with contrasting stiffness and mfa in  <dig> sub-categories . in terms of cellular components, genes involved in vacuolar membrane and proton-transporting two sector atpase complexes had higher representation in hs wood with low mfa; whereas genes with functions in external encapsulating structure were preferentially transcribed in ls wood with high mfa. genes more abundantly transcribed in trees with hs and low mfa included more genes with different molecular functions, such as binding activities , translation elongation factors and transmembrane transporters. in contrast, only two sub-categories of molecular functions  had higher representation in juvenile wood with ls and high mfa. in the hs wood , genes involved in translational elongation, transport , stress responses and ribonucleotide biosynthetic process were more highly transcribed; whereas ls wood with high mfa had increased transcription of genes involved in different metabolic and developmental processes and rna processing.

                              go terms
                              classa
                              hs b
                              ls b
                              p-value
acc: cellular component; mf: molecular function; bp: biological process. bhs: wood with high stiffness and low microfibril angle; ls: wood with low stiffness and high microfibril angle; the number of go terms assigned in the identified unigenes was normalized at  <dig>   <dig> unigenes.

putative candidate genes for microfibril orientation and wood stiffness
to identify putative candidate genes involved in the regulation of wood stiffness and microfibril orientation, differentially accumulated transcripts identified in a single microarray experiment were examined in the other two microarray experiments. in the two experiments with lw tissues,  <dig> % of transcripts identified in flynn-lw  were confirmed in kromelite-lw , and  <dig> % transcripts identified in kromelite-lw  were detected in flynn-lw . in contrast, fewer genes identified in flynn-ew  were confirmed in flynn-lw  and kromelite-lw . this is likely to be caused by differential gene expression in wood tissues formed in different seasons.

a total of  <dig> and  <dig> candidate genes were identified with differential transcription in juvenile wood with hs  and ls , respectively, in at least two of the three microarray experiments . among these candidate genes  <dig> were functional unknowns based on the uniprot known protein and refseq databases. the remaining candidate genes for hs  with relatively clear functions are listed in table  <dig>  and table  <dig> . of the  <dig> candidate genes for hs  eight genes are involved in secondary cell wall formation, including four lignin genes  and four secondary wall cellulose synthases   <cit> . other genes involved in cell wall synthesis included sucrose synthase  and genes involved in actin filament  and microtubule development . in contrast, only three of the  <dig> candidate genes preferentially transcribed in ls  wood had a clear function in cell wall development  and none were specifically involved in secondary cell wall synthesis.


                              candidate genes 
                              genbank accession
                              flynn-ew 
                              flynn-lw 
                              kromelite- lw 
                              mean ratio
                              mean p-value
agenbank accession number for the representing est of each gene.bthree microarray experiments: flynn-ew , flynn-lw  and kromelite-lw . gene expression ratios with  are presented.


                              candidate genes
                              genbank accession
                              flynn-ew 
                              flynn-lw 
                              kromelite- lw 
                              mean ratio
                              mean p-value
agenbank accession number for the representing est of each gene.bthree microarray experiments: flynn-ew , flynn-lw  and kromelite-lw . gene expression ratios with  are presented.

discussion
the mechanical properties of wood are complex traits
tensile stiffness of xylem cells is largely determined by the angle of cellulose microfibrils in the middle layer  of the secondary cell wall  <cit> . wood stiffness has been shown to be under moderate to strong genetic control  <cit>  and a number of qtls for moe or its major component traits  have been identified in a range of tree species  <cit> . the present study showed that wood stiffness had continuous variation with a nearly normal distribution at the family level, thus providing additional evidence that wood stiffness is a typical quantitative trait which is likely to be controlled by variation in numerous genes of small individual effect. over  <dig> candidate genes were differentially transcribed in juvenile wood with contrasting stiffness and mfa, providing further molecular evidence that wood stiffness and mfa are complex traits controlled by numerous genes. the  <dig>   <dig> xylem unigenes on the microarrays were derived from relatively abundant xylem transcripts in radiata pine  <cit>  and they may only represent 30-40% of genes moderately to highly transcribed during wood formation  <cit> . therefore, the total number of genes influencing wood stiffness and mfa in radiata pine may be up to 2- <dig> times more than the number identified in this study.

the complexity of wood stiffness and mfa was also demonstrated by the relatively low magnitude of changes in transcript accumulation observed between juvenile wood with contrasting stiffness and mfa. in the three microarray experiments, the unigenes showing differential accumulation had average expression ratio values of  <dig>  ,  <dig>   and  <dig>  , respectively. these values are much lower than those observed in comparisons between ew and lw  <cit> , and between juvenile and mature wood  <cit>  using the same cdna microarrays and experimental protocols. the smaller changes in transcript accumulation suggested that genes involved in the regulation of wood stiffness and microfibril orientation may individually have small effects.

cytoskeletal genes are implicated in stiffness and mfa
there is growing evidence that cortical microtubules, the dynamic arrays of alpha- and beta-tubulins in the cytoskeleton, play a key role during the crystallization of cellulose microfibrils  <cit>  by directing their orientation during deposition in the wall  <cit> . in this study a beta-tubulin gene was preferentially transcribed in hs  wood of radiata pine, providing molecular evidence that tubulins have functional roles in regulating mfa in the secondary xylem of gymnosperms. several alpha- and beta-tubulins have previously been observed to be highly expressed in poplar xylem and tension wood with significantly reduced mfa  <cit> . allelic variation in an alpha-tubulin was significantly associated with mfa in loblolly pine  <cit> . in eucalyptus nitens a beta-tubulin gene was preferentially expressed in xylem from the upper sides of branches which had low mfa  <cit>  and its over-expression in transgenic eucalypt xylem tissue directly influences mfa  <cit> . however, different beta-tubulin proteins have been observed to be expressed in both compression and opposite wood of maritime pine  <cit> .

this study showed genes encoding actin and actin depolymerising factor  that were more strongly transcribed in juvenile wood with hs  in radiata pine. adf plays an important role in regulating the optimum balance between unpolymerised actin molecules and assembled actin filaments  <cit> . actin filaments are one of the three major polymers in the cytoskeleton, but they are much less rigid compared to microtubules  <cit> . actin microfilaments have been observed to align with cortical microtubules which in turn aligned with the orientation of cellulose microfibrils in cultured cotton fiber cells  <cit> . the actin and adf genes identified in this study may affect wood stiffness and mfa by influencing interactions between actin filaments and microtubules.

secondary cell wall genes are implicated in stiffness and mfa
candidate genes involved in secondary and primary cell wall formation may contribute to variation in moe and mfa observed between trees. many candidate genes preferentially transcribed in hs  wood had clear roles in secondary cell wall formation. this included four secondary cellulose synthases   <cit>  and several genes involved in the biosynthesis of lignin . in addition, transcripts  preferentially transcribed in hs  juvenile wood in a single microarray experiment included many other secondary cell wall genes, such as 4cl, ccoaomt, chitinase-like, sams, ppbg, agp <dig>  grp <dig>  prp, etc . in contrast, none of the candidate genes transcribed preferentially in ls wood  have clear roles in secondary wall development. in fact, cell wall genes identified in juvenile wood with ls  were involved in cell division  and primary wall formation . taken together, increased secondary cell wall synthesis appears to be a fundamental process in the formation of hs  wood.

crystalline cellulose microfibrils are synthesised by cellulose synthase  complexes in the plasma membrane then extruded into the external matrix  <cit> . this study showed four secondary wall prcesa genes and a susy gene that were transcribed more highly in hs wood with reduced mfa. three other secondary cellulose synthases were present on the microarrays but were not differentially regulated , suggesting that certain members of the cesa family may have specific roles associated with modification of cell wall stiffness and microfibril orientation. previous studies showed that an over-expressed susy gene in poplar increased cellulose content, secondary wall thickness and wood density, but did not affect microfibril orientation  <cit> . however, a recent study identified an allelic variant in a radiata pine susy gene that was significantly associated with mfa  <cit> .

lignification is a distinct feature of secondary xylem development. many lignin pathway or related genes were preferentially transcribed in hs  wood, including c4h, c3h, cad and pcber, as well as several other genes that were identified in individual microarray experiments . more transcription of these genes in hs wood  could increase lignification of secondary walls, resulting in higher density as seen in hs wood . the lignified matrix in secondary walls can also generate compression resistance which additionally contributes to tensile stiffness of cells  <cit> . antisense 4cl transgenic poplar produced low stiffness wood with reduced lignin content  <cit> . associations of lignin genes with mfa have been observed in eucalyptus   <cit>  and radiata pine   <cit> , suggesting lignin genes may also be involved in the regulation of microfibril orientation. previously, several genes involved in lignin biosynthesis have been found to be differentially regulated in the formation of tension wood  <cit>  and compression wood  <cit>  in which stiffness and mfa have been drastically altered. taken together, candidate genes involved in lignin biosynthesis may influence both mfa and wood density through their key roles in secondary wall deposition.

hormone signalling genes associated with wood stiffness and mfa
it is well known that wood formation is largely regulated by different hormones. in the poplar xylem transcriptome approximately 2% of ests are involved in hormone biosynthesis  <cit> . higher ethylene levels have been observed in compression and tension wood formation during which mfa is significantly altered  <cit> , and an acc oxidase protein involved in ethylene biosynthesis was more strongly expressed in compression wood  <cit> . increased transcription of a gene encoding an ethylene-forming enzyme in high mfa wood and an ethylene responsive element binding factor  in low mfa wood was observed in this study. these data suggested that ethylene levels may affect mfa and wood stiffness via the transcription factor, erf. the present study also identified a cytokinin-binding protein gene  that was more abundantly transcribed in hs wood  in both summer and autumn. cbp has an essential role in cytokinin signal transduction pathways  <cit>  and extra supply of cytokinin increases the formation of secondary xylem with higher lignification and thicker cell walls  <cit> . thus, hormone signalling genes could be involved in the regulation of cellulose and lignin biosynthesis, and their differential expression may produce wood with contrasting stiffness and mfa. identification of ethylene- and cytokinin-responsive genes in this study suggests their possible co-regulatory roles in juvenile wood formation leading to distinct stiffness and mfa. interestingly, phytochrome, a light-responsive gene, was more abundantly transcribed in hs  wood in radiata pine. phytochrome regulates a large number of genes involved in hormone signalling or enzymes involved in cell wall modification  <cit> . however, the role of the phytochrome gene in the regulation of microfibril orientation and deposition remains unclear.

CONCLUSIONS
naturally occurring variation in microfibril orientation and mechanical properties of wood was correlated with distinct xylem transcriptomes, particularly in wood synthesized late in growing seasons . genes involved in cytoskeleton development and secondary cell wall formation  were preferentially transcribed in secondary xylem with reduced microfibril angle and higher stiffness. in contrast, a few genes with a role in cell division and primary wall synthesis were more highly transcribed in wood with low stiffness and higher mfa. many genes with unclear functions were also differentially regulated in wood with altered microfibril orientation and distinct mechanical properties. the identified candidate genes are a valuable resource for future transgenic studies and association analyses aimed at improving the mechanical properties of wood through manipulating cellulose microfibril orientation.

