BACKGROUND
the increasing prevalence of obesity worldwide has drawn research on adipose tissue into the spotlight. adipose tissue is a complex and highly active tissue with important metabolic and endocrine functions. it not only plays a central role in energy balance but also functions as an endocrine organ secreting various adipokines and cytokines  <cit> . on the basis of its distribution, adipose tissue is divided into three main regions: subcutaneous, intramuscular and visceral fat  <cit> .

accumulation of excessive visceral fat  is associated with an array of metabolic perturbations including type  <dig> diabetes, insulin resistance, non-alcoholic fatty liver disease , non-alcoholic steatohepatitis , cardiovascular disease, hypertension and hyperlipidemia together referred to as "metabolic syndrome"  <cit> . however, the role of visceral obesity in metabolic syndrome is yet to be fully elucidated  <cit> . furthermore, a causal relationship between insulin resistance and metabolic syndrome has not been shown conclusively; obesity seemingly causes insulin resistance, on the other hand insulin resistance appears to aggravate and propagate the adverse effects of obesity  <cit> . this somewhat co-dependent and circular relationship is difficult to untangle and has generated a multitude of clinical and research publications.

another area of disagreement involves nafld, a common condition affecting about 70% of obese and overweight individuals and increasingly being recognized as a major cause of liver-related morbidity and mortality  <cit> . the pathological picture of nafld encompasses a spectrum of liver injury ranging from simple hepatic steatosis to more severe manifestations, including nash, which can progress to fibrosis, cirrhosis, and liver failure  <cit> . studies have reported frequent association of metabolic syndrome and diabetes in patients with nash, which can progress to nafld  <cit> . it has even been suggested that hepatic steatosis itself may be the primary cause of insulin resistance and metabolic syndrome in obesity  <cit> . however, it is still unclear whether nafld is a cause or a consequence of insulin resistance  <cit>  and if metabolic syndrome precedes nafld or is a result of nafld  <cit> . many nafld centered studies involve the profiling of adipose samples for the production of various soluble mediators of inflammation produced by components of the visceral fat and released in circulation.

real-time pcr  is the standard method for studying changes in relative gene expression in different tissues and experimental conditions. the popularity of this technique is attributed to its high sensitivity and specificity  <cit> . however, variations in amount of starting material, enzymatic efficiency and presence of inhibitors can lead to quantification errors. hence the need for accurate data normalization is vital  <cit> . among several known strategies for data normalization  <cit> , the use of reference genes as an internal control is the most common approach  <cit> .

an ideal reference gene is one which is consistently expressed at the same level in all samples under investigation regardless of tissue type, disease state, medication or experimental conditions, and exhibits expression levels comparable to that of the target gene  <cit> . 18s, β-actin , glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase , beta-2-microglobulin , rna polymerase ii , tyrosine- <dig> monooxygenase/tryptophan- <dig> monooxygenase activation protein, zeta polypeptide , ubiquitin c  and hypoxanthine phosphoribosyl transferase  <dig>  are some of the most commonly used reference genes in rt-pcr studies  <cit> . however, numerous studies have shown that expression of these common reference genes vary with tissue type as well as physiological state  <cit> . this variation can potentially explain the often encountered divergence between studies and more seriously, may ultimately result in misinterpretation of data  <cit> . the suitability of a particular reference gene thus depends on the system being investigated and the inherent experimental conditions  <cit> .

recent studies have shown differences in reference gene expression in omental fat tissue between lean and obese patients. in addition there is strong evidence to suggest that obesity and type  <dig> diabetes mellitus  exert a detectable influence on reference gene expression in subcutaneous and visceral fat depot  <cit> . in light of these findings, it is crucial for studies involving visceral adipose tissues to validate the stability of the reference genes being used.

increasing concerns about normalization using ideal reference genes have led to the development of several mathematical algorithms aimed at determining the stability of reference genes  <cit> . in  <dig>  vandesompele et al. have developed the software genorm that addresses the critical issues of reference gene validation and ranks candidate reference genes according to their expression stability using raw, non-normalized expression levels. pfaffl et al. have developed similar software, bestkeeper that takes into account ct values of candidate reference genes instead of relative quantities. this software employs a statistical algorithm wherein the pearson correlation coefficient for each candidate reference gene pair is calculated along with the probability of correlation significance of the pair. andersen et al. used a model-based evaluation strategy which ranks candidate genes with minimal inter and intra-group variation and developed the software normfinder  <cit> . in all three softwares, the top ranked genes are recommended for further use in the similar experimental systems as endogenous controls.

in this study we used genorm  <cit> . normfinder  <cit>  and bestkeeper  <cit>  to validate candidate reference genes suitable for qrt-pcr profiling experiments using visceral adipose samples from obese and lean individuals with and without diabetes.

RESULTS
to determine the expression stability of eight selected reference genes, rna expression levels were measured in  <dig> visceral adipose tissue samples  and cross-validated using three popular algorithms genorm v <dig>   <cit> , normfinder  <cit>  and bestkeeper  <cit> . genes encoding for 18s, beta-actin , glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase , beta-2-microglobulin , hypoxanthine guanine phosphoribosyl transferase <dig> , tyrosine 3-monooxygensae/tryptophane 5- monooxygenase activation protein, zeta polypeptide , ubiquitin c  and rna polymerase ii  were selected according to previously published studies that relied on these genes as reference controls  <cit> . for each tissue sample, expression stability of each gene was calculated using the mean ct values. the input data for bestkeeper algorithm was raw ct values, while the analysis using genorm and normfinder converted raw ct values to relative quantities using the comparative ct method  <cit> .

genorm analysis
investigation of raw non-normalized data of  <dig> obese and  <dig> lean visceral adipose tissue samples  allowed sorting of genes ranked on the basis of their expression stability  from least stable to most stable . the respective individual m values compared to the other candidate genes were  <dig> ,  <dig> ,  <dig> ,  <dig> ,  <dig> ,  <dig> ,  <dig>  and  <dig>  . successive elimination of the least stable genes based on the highest m values led to the identification of actb and rpii as the two most stable reference genes. to determine the effect of sample size on the analysis, analysis was done with additional  <dig> obese and  <dig> lean visceral adipose tissue samples . yet again actb and rpii were found to be the most stable genes. however the ranking of the least stable and intermediate genes was slightly changed. sorting of genes from least stable to the most stable revealed ubc as the least stable . the respective individual m values compared to the other candidate genes were  <dig> ,  <dig> ,  <dig> ,  <dig> ,  <dig> ,  <dig> ,  <dig>  and  <dig>  . thus increasing sample size did not alter the ranking of the most stable genes indicating the robustness of genorm.

pair-wise variation calculated between two sequential normalization factors  for all genes indicates the sufficiency of these two reference genes for accurate normalization .

normfinder
analysis of the gene expression of candidate reference genes in the two subgroups:  <dig> obese visceral fat and  <dig> lean visceral fat tissue samples, found hprt <dig> and gapdh as the two genes with the lowest stability values . further manual inspection for genes with lowest inter group variations showed that although ubc ranked third it had the highest intra-group variation after 18s. the next two genes in the stability ranking, b2m and actb had similar inter-group variation but b2m had slightly higher intra-group variation. rpii was ranked below b2m, and was found to have a slightly higher inter-group variation and minimal intra-group variation. thus, using assistance of the process of elimination, gapdh, hprt <dig>  actb, b2m and rpii were considered as the best candidate reference genes . to assess the robustness of this model, sample size was increased to include additional  <dig> obese and  <dig> lean visceral adipose tissue samples . the ranking, however led to a different set of stable genes. genes were now ranked similar to genorm with rpii and actb as the most stable . sorting the remaining genes on basis of inter and intra group variability showed gapdh, ywhaz, hprt <dig> as the next most stable genes . thus normfinder results varied with increase in sample size and with larger sample set the results are in agreement with genorm analysis.

gene name
gene name
bestkeeper analysis
unlike genorm and normfinder, input data for analysis by bestkeeper was raw ct values of each gene. initial analysis of the data with  <dig> samples calculated variations  and cv ) for all the candidate reference genes in the samples, and showed the overall stability in gene expression. none of the candidate reference genes under study showed a sd value higher than  <dig> indicating that all of the genes under study were suitable to be considered for selection as reference genes.

however, further data processing using pairwise correlation and regression analysis assessed the inter-gene relations and eliminated 18s, as the gene with the highest variation  and least correlation . the lowest variation was seen for the gene ywhaz . however, ywhaz demonstrated only a weak correlation to bestkeeper index compared to other candidates . therefore, both 18s and ywhaz were excluded from further analysis. subsequent elimination singled out ubc and b2m as genes with low correlation with the bestkeeper index. the analysis of the remaining four genes  showed a strong and significant correlation  between their expression levels and the bestkeeper index .

to further assess the consistency and reliability of the bestkeeper index, sample integrity of all four tightly correlated genes was investigated. the invar values of all samples were found to have low cp variation as well as low x-fold expression regulation. ranking the four tightly correlated genes on the basis of variation from the most stable to the least stable was as follows: gapdh → hprt <dig> → actb → rpii, and yielded the best genes for defining a robust standardizing index. amongst these four genes actb and rpii were the most highly correlated  to the bestkeeper index .

in order to determine the influence of sample size on robustness of this algorithm, additional  <dig> obese and  <dig> lean visceral adipose tissue samples  were included in the analysis. further data processing using pairwise correlation and regression analysis assessed the inter-gene relations and eliminated ubc, as the gene with the highest variation  and least correlation . 18s gene showed similarly a high variation . therefore, both ubc and 18s were excluded from further analysis. subsequent sequential elimination based on low coefficient of correlation singled out b2m and hprt <dig> as genes with low correlation with the bestkeeper index. the analysis of the remaining four genes  showed a strong and significant correlation  between their expression levels and the bestkeeper index  .

bestkeeper calculates the stability measure for each candidate gene and then ranks them from the most to the least stable . the coefficient of correlation  and the p-value measure the correlation between each gene and the bestkeeper index. genes that ranked the best are highlighted.

ranking the four tightly correlated genes on the basis of variation from the most stable to the least stable was as follows: ywhaz → gapdh → actb → rpii, and yielded the best genes for defining a robust standardizing index. amongst these four genes actb and rpii were the most highly correlated  to the bestkeeper index .

discussion and 
CONCLUSIONS
to eliminate non-biological variation, gene expression analysis involving qrt-pcr requires stringent normalization strategies. among the several approaches proposed, use of reference genes is currently the preferred way of normalization  <cit> . however, the use of improper reference genes is known to lead to erroneous results  <cit> . importantly, the studies of the expression levels for the reference gene themselves, particularly, for gadph and actb  <cit> , showed considerable variation in different tissues and experimental conditions. specifically in omental and subcutaneous fat depots, a variation in expression of these reference genes was found to be dependent on the presence of obesity and type  <dig> diabetes mellitus   <cit> . these findings necessitate the need to validate reference genes for studies of human visceral adipose samples.

scientifically, the validation of reference genes presents a circular problem: assessing stability of expression of a given gene cannot be achieved without using another gene as a reference. several algorithms have been proposed to address this conundrum  <cit> . genorm software  <cit>  is one of the most popular algorithms for validating candidate reference genes with low variability. it utilizes two parameters to quantify the reference gene expression stability: m  and v . a low m value is indicative of a more stable expression, hence, increasing the suitability of a particular gene as a reference gene. another feature of genorm is that it does not require a normal distribution of data. however, co-regulation of candidate genes does seem to influence the efficiency of this algorithm due to the use of pair-wise comparisons. to minimize this risk, the eight candidate reference genes selected for this analysis were chosen on the basis of the difference in their physiological functions-cytoskeleton , carbohydrate metabolism , signaling pathways , transcription , metabolic salvaging of nucleotides , protein synthesis  and protein degradation .

the genorm algorithm determines expression stability  via a pair-wise comparison of one candidate reference gene and all other candidate genes independent of the level of gene expression for each sample. an identical expression ratio of two reference genes in all samples is used as an indicator of expression stability. thus genorm analysis is independent of variation in amount of starting material between samples. according to this analysis, actb and rpii represented the best combination of reference genes for visceral adipose tissue among lean and obese patients , while hprt <dig> and gapdh were ranked third and fourth, respectively. after completion of this step, a pairwise variation  was calculated between two sequential normalization factors  for all genes. a large variation indicates that the added gene has a significant effect and should be included for calculation for a reliable normalization factor. figure 2a, b show that further inclusion of additional reference genes did not significantly increase the pair-wise variation and that the use of two reference genes is sufficient for accurate normalization. an advantage to the genorm algorithm is that it is minimally affected by expression intensity of the candidate genes. in addition, since the approach is based on multiple pair-wise comparisons, the need for large sample size is mitigated. this was reinforced by the observation that increase in sample size did not dramatically alter the final results. on increasing sample size from  <dig> to  <dig>  actb and rpii were again found to be the most stable genes with gapdh and hprt <dig> being ranked the next two best genes .

housekeeping genes, in addition to their basic functions, exert pleiotropic effects on other cellular systems, decreasing the value of the function-based predictions of co-regulation. to overcome this problem anderson et al., proposed a model based approach incorporated into the software normfinder. this algorithm ranks candidate reference genes according to the least estimated intra and inter group variation, which serves as an effective method to overcome the influence of co-regulation. although normfinder takes into account the heterogeneity in the tested samples, and attempts to distinguish between stability and bias, this model-based approach is self-restricted by the importance it places on overall expression intensity of each candidate gene. a close inspection of the analysis of the results produced by normfinder showed that it biased towards candidate reference genes that have overall similar expression values . consequently, the robustness of this method is linked to the sample size.

the ultimate objective of normfinder is to identify candidate reference genes with an inter group variation as close to zero as possible, while at the same time having small intra-group variation. when the genes were ranked solely by their stability values, gapdh and hprt <dig> appeared to be the best combination of endogenous controls . further examination of the results reveals that although ubc was ranked third, its intra-group variation was large , therefore, ubc gene was eliminated from further consideration leaving the next most stable reference genes: actb, b2m and rpii.

the same genes, gapdh, hprt <dig>  actb and rpii, were ranked as the most stable both by genorm and normfinder softwares. however, the best combinations of two genes proposed by these two algorithms were different. this variation was expected based on the vastly different approaches used by each of the analysis softwares and dependence of robustness of normfinder on sample size. in genorm, gene expression stability  based on the expression ratio of the two genes  is the most important criteria for evaluating a reference gene, while normfinder focuses on genes with the least intra and inter group variations. thus, in cases when two genes show high expression variation while their ratio  remains unchanged, there will be discordance in ranking by the two algorithms.

further, normfinder gains in robustness as the number of samples is increased. this was confirmed by increasing sample size to  <dig>  ranking of genes from most stable to least stable revealed - actb and rpii as the best combination of genes and this was in accordance with with genorm results .

in contrast to the previous study by catalan et al., in visceral adipose tissue samples both the algorithms highlighted 18s as one of the least stable gene. this was not unexpected, as several arguments against the use of rrna as reference genes have been previously put forth. the strongest argument against its use in real time rt-pcr data analysis is its high abundance compared to other target mrna which hinders accurate subtraction from the baseline value  <cit> .

in order to compare the genorm and normfinder results with an independent ranking method, the data was also analyzed with the bestkeeper tool  <cit> . in this approach, ideal reference genes are expected to have stable expression, indicated by low variation in the tissue under consideration  <cit> . with bestkeeper, stability  and relationship to the bestkeeper index  are the two most important criteria for evaluating the stability of reference genes. this algorithm uses a pair-wise correlation analysis for all pairs of candidate genes based on the raw ct values and calculates the geometric mean of the best suited ones. based on low cv and high coefficient of correlation  to the bestkeeper index, actb and rpii followed by gapdh and hprt <dig> were ranked as the top four genes . high correlation coefficient is an indicator of stable expression of the reference genes in visceral adipose tissue. again, 18s was ranked as the least stable and excluded from further analysis. robustness of the algorithm was assessed by increasing sample size . sample size was found to have minimal effect on the results. the same two genes actb and rpii were identified as the most stable followed by ywhaz and gapdh .

overall, the bestkeeper results were in line with the normfinder data, and with minor differences, the genorm data, indicating the reliability of the validation for reference genes in the present study . regardless of the algorithm used, all three software ranked the same set of genes as the most stable.

in conclusion, we recommend actb and rpii as stable reference genes most suitable for gene expression studies of human visceral adipose tissue. the use of these genes as a reference pair may further enhance the robustness of qrt-pcr in this model system.

