BACKGROUND
tobacco smoke affects vascular endothelial physiology
active and passive tobacco smoke are associated with dysfunction of vascular endothelial physiology  <cit>  in a causative and dose-dependent way. in the brain, ts increases the risk of silent cerebral infarction   <cit>  and stroke which by approximately 50%  <cit>  due to its; pro-coagulant and atherogenic effects  <cit> . the risk increases proportionally with the number of cigarettes smoked  <cit> . furthermore, oxidative stress caused by the exposure to ts can facilitate the pathogenesis and progression of several neurological disorders including parkinson's and alzheimer's diseases  <cit> . previous study has shown that chronic smokers have a higher incidence of small vessel ischemic disease  than non-smokers  <cit> . svid is a pathological condition characterized by leaky brain microvessels and loss of bbb integrity. since ts generates superoxide and other ros, some of the adverse effects of smoking may result from oxidative damage to ecs,  <cit> , which may be aggravated by nitric oxide  and antioxidant depletion . recent observations strongly suggest that ros are key mediators of bbb breakdown  <cit> .

while the harmful effects of smoking on public health have been well demonstrated and detailed in many organs, the bbb has received much less attention despite the strong evidence for an association between tobacco smoke and vascular impairment  <cit> . our recently published data  <cit>  have shown that ts promotes the pro-inflammatory activation of bbb ec and the release of pro-inflammatory mediators. this occurred in the absence of other pro-inflammatory stimuli and independently from the presence of peripheral blood cells. furthermore; ts can significantly exacerbate the loss of bbb integrity caused by concurrent cerebrovascular rheological alterations,  <cit>  facilitating the further pathogenesis and progression of secondary brain injuries.

tobacco smoke: a harmful cloud of free radicals
the role of free radicals in the pathogenesis of smoking-related diseases has been substantiated by a large number of studies. a free radical is a highly unstable and reactive molecule containing one or more unpaired electrons. free radicals, despite being essential for biological systems  <cit>  have a potential to cause extensive oxidative damage to cells and tissues if their levels become excessive  <cit> . at the vascular level free radicals can lead to oxidative damage of endothelial cells  <cit>   and inflammation  <cit> . free radicals arise normally during cell metabolic activity and are also purposefully produced by immune cells to neutralize potentially harmful pathogens such as bacteria and viruses. in vivo, under normal circumstances the oxidative stress caused by naturally generated free radicals is counterbalanced by antioxidants  <cit>  . however, environmental factors including active and passive tobacco smoking  can spawn these highly reactive oxygen species , nitrogen dioxide, peroxynitrite , etc  <cit> ) beyond the levels which the human body can eliminate effectively. in fact, several studies have shown that 1) chronic smokers suffer of antioxidants shortage caused by the increased demand that the ros derived from ts place on their cells  <cit> ; 2) antioxidant supplementation reduces the oxidation and inflammation induced by tobacco smoke in animals and cells  <cit> . in response to these studies, the food and nutrition board of the national academy of sciences has established a higher recommended dietary allowance  of vitamin c for smokers,  versus the recommended  <dig> mg/day for non-smokers.

is there a role for antioxidant vitamins supplementation?
antioxidants such as vitamin c  and e  are compounds that hinder the oxidative processes and thereby delay or prevent oxidative stress. although there is still no unequivocal evidence that an increased intake of antioxidant nutrients can fully counteract ts toxicity, there are many supporting data suggesting that antioxidants may prove to be effective scavengers of exogenous-derived ros  <cit> . previously, vitamin c has been shown to act not only as a potent reducing agent but also to play a role  in modulating the production of lymphocytes and cytokines, the activity of phagocytes, and the expression of a number of cell adhesion molecules in monocytes  <cit> . furthermore, vitamin c seems to prevents histamine release and increases the detoxification of histamine  <cit> , thus acting as an anti-inflammatory agent as well as a potent antioxidant. considering the major role played by ros in the pathogenesis of bbb impairment as well as that of neurological disorders  <cit>  we evaluated the independent and complementary effectiveness of antioxidants vitamins supplementation, such as vitamin c , in shielding the bbb from the chronic exposure to ts-generated oxidative stress.

RESULTS
tobacco smoke pro-inflammatory response induced in brain microvascular endothelial cells was reduced by antioxidant vitamins supplementation
chronic exposure of confluent cultures of human brain microvascular endothelial cells  to ts  resulted in a significant increase in the number of hbmec cells expressing the pro-inflammatory adhesion molecules p-selectin, vcam- <dig> and e-selectin the expression levels of p-selectin, vcam- <dig> and e-selectin  as compared to sham-smoke-exposed controls . the augmented expression of these pro-inflammatory adhesion molecules was paralleled by over a  <dig> fold increase  of interleukin- <dig>  levels in the medium, and over a  <dig> fold increase in that of tumor necrosis factor-alpha  . il-1β levels were unaffected . exposure to ts also increased the release of matrix metalloproteinases- <dig>  from  <dig> ± sem  <dig> to  <dig> ± sem  <dig> pg/ml. no release of mmp- <dig> was detected . gelatin zymography of electrophoresed medium samples showed a small  yet significant increase in mmp- <dig> activity  <dig> minutes following ts exposure, which substantially increased to  <dig>  ± sem  <dig> % at  <dig> minutes .

pre-treatment with vitamins c and/or e  significantly reduced the pro-inflammatory activity of ts on hbmec. specifically the over-expression of endothelial adhesion molecules during ts exposure  was significantly reduced. this was paralleled by a decrease in the release of il- <dig> and tnf-α . mmp- <dig> release  and activity  were reduced in cultures pre-treated with vitamin e and e+c  but not vitamin c alone. overall, the combined treatment showed the most effective protection against ts exposure.

monocytes activation by tobacco smoke was partially inhibited by pre-treatment with vitamin c and/or vitamin e
our results showed a very marked increase of tnf-α  and il-1b  levels in the culture medium of thp- <dig> monocytes upon exposure to ts  . il- <dig> level was only moderately effected but the difference was not statistically significant. in parallel, we observed a significant increase in the medium levels  of mmp- <dig> and mmp- <dig> . increased mmps activity  was already evident after  <dig> minutes of ts exposure  and became significantly more prominent at  <dig> minutes .

ts-triggered release of pro-inflammatory cytokines was most significantly reduced by pre-treatment with vitamins c and e. in contrast to vitamin c, vitamin e alone also demonstrated significant anti-inflammatory protection.

the ts-induced release of mmp- <dig> and mmp- <dig> was also decrease by the antioxidant vitamins however, there were no statistical significant differences in terms of efficacy between individual  and combined pre-treatments. by contrast, the most effective blockade of mmps activation was attained using combined  vitamins supplementation . vitamin e alone was also effective while only short term mmps activity reduction was observed when using vitamin c .

antioxidant vitamins reduced endothelial-monocytes adhesion and synergistically decreased the release of pro-inflammatory mediators during ts exposure
hbmec and thp- <dig> cells cultures were individually exposed to ts as described above. parallel sham-smoke cultures were used as control. after the ts exposure cycle was completed, the wells containing the endothelial cells underwent a wash out and medium replacement using a ts-free one. in parallel, thp- <dig> cells were isolated by centrifugation, then re-suspended  with the endothelial cells and left to undergo adhesion for one hour without agitation. non-adherent monocytes were then washed away by gentle shaking and the medium was collected for a content analysis of pro-inflammatory mediators . visual inspection  and quantification of adherent monocytes  showed a dramatic increased in the percentage of monocytes bonded to endothelial cells following ts exposure  in comparison to sham-smoke cultures . pre-treatment with normal physiological concentrations of vitamins e and  c reduced the percentage of adherent cells in ts pre-exposed cultures . the combined pre-treatment with both vitamin e and c was the most effective . as previously observed in addition to enhanced endothelial-monocytes adhesion, ts exposure lead to a significant increase in the medium content of il-1β, il- <dig> and tnf-α . antioxidant vitamin pre-treatment was effective  in reducing the ts-induced release of these pro-inflammatory cytokines . as expected, culture medium analysis showed that the interaction between ts-activated thp- <dig> cells with ts-activated hbmec prompted a synergistic increase in the release and activation of mmp- <dig> and mmp- <dig> . vitamin c reduced the release of mmp- <dig> and mmp- <dig> but was ineffective in blocking their corresponding activation as demonstrated by the zymogram gel analysis of medium content . by contrast the anti-inflammatory protection provided by vitamin e and the combined treatment  were significantly more effective.

ascorbic acid and α-tocopherol protect the bbb viability from the harmful exposure to tobacco smoke
the effect of ts exposure  respectively) on bbb integrity was evaluated fully established div-bbb  <cit>  modules . sham-ts-exposed modules were used as control. ts levels equivalent to 5c did not significantly impaired bbb integrity as demonstrated by teer  and adenylate kinase  release measurements . in contrast, exposure to higher ts levels  resulted in rapid and dose-dependent loss of bbb integrity, which was accompanied by a significant increase of ak release when compared to controls, and to the release of ak that followed the exposure to a low level of ts . we assessed the protective efficacy of antioxidant vitamins against the bbb exposure to ts levels equivalent to 20c/day. bbb integrity was partially protected against ts exposure-related damage by vitamin e and c as demonstrated by teer  and ak release  measurements. the independent administration of these substances resulted in a delayed and a less severe loss of bbb viability. note that the co-administrations of these vitamins provided the most significant protection. in addition to bbb deterioration during ts exposure, the analysis of the media samples showed a statistically significant increase in the levels of il-1β, il- <dig>  and tnf-α . administration of antioxidant vitamins significantly reduced the ts-induced release of these pro-inflammatory cytokines with the combo approach being the most effective.

hydrogen peroxide impairs bbb integrity: protective role of antioxidant vitamins
the effect of hydrogen peroxide  exposure on bbb integrity was assessed in the div-bbb. three levels of h2o <dig> exposure comparable to that yield by  <dig>   <dig>  and  <dig> 2r <dig> research cigarettes  were tested. sham- h2o2-exposed modules were used as control. exposure to h2o <dig> equivalent to that generated by  <dig> cigarettes  did not affect bbb integrity  as demonstrated by teer measurements. in contrast, exposure to higher levels of h2o <dig>  resulted in rapid and dose-dependent loss of bbb integrity. pre-treatment with vitamin e and c provided only a partial protection against oxidative damage to the bbb . note that the efficacy of the antioxidative protection was assessed against the effect of the highest of the  <dig> levels of h2o <dig> exposure . co-administration of vitamins c and e fully prevented the loss of bbb integrity and viability.

tobacco smoke can impair bbb viability through alteration in nitric oxide bioavailability
no release by ts and by the vascular endothelium was assessed in real time by amperometric determination through electrode in contact with the luminal and the abluminal compartments of the div-bbb modules. we determined a sudden and transient increase in the medium levels of no  in bbb modules exposed to ts versus sham systems, which correlated with the concentration of ts . no started declining immediately after reaching the peak level. however, the no decline was negligible in div-bbb modules pre-treated with antioxidant vitamins c and e.

during the recovery time  we observed a diametric decrease of no, which also correlated with the concentration of ts to which the corresponding bbb modules were initially exposed . no remained below the baseline level for ≈  <dig> hours before returning to normal. pre-treatment with vitamins c and e did not prevent the reduction of no bioavailability nor accelerated the return to a baseline level .

tobacco smoke can alter the normal bbb bioenergetic metabolism: role of antioxidant vitamins
under normal physiological conditions bbb endothelial cells are characterized by a predominant oxygen-depended bioenergetic metabolism   <cit> . the increased demand for reducing equivalents  to neutralize the reactive oxidative species from ts can cause metabolic alterations in the bbb endothelium  <cit> . as shown in figure 7a  glucose consumption and lactate production levels were stable during the pre-ts phase treatment with a metabolic index  ≅  <dig> . administration of vitamins c and e at physiological concentrations  did not alter the metabolic behaviour of the bbb. however, exposure to ts  caused a decrease in glucose consumption  and an unparalleled increase in lactate production, demonstrating a shift toward predominantly anaerobic bioenergetic metabolism . co-administration of vitamins c and e gradually restored the bioenergetic metabolism of the bbb.

discussion
the bbb maintains brain homeostasis and selectively excludes most blood-borne and xenobiotic substances from entering the brain, protecting it from systemic and exogenous influences  <cit> . deterioration in bbb functions have been clearly shown to play a major role in the pathogenesis and progression of a steadily increasing number of neurological disorders such as multiple sclerosis, alzheimer's disease, neoplasia, hypertension, dementia, epilepsy, infection, and trauma  <cit> . while the harmful effects of smoking on public health have been well demonstrated and detailed in many organs, the bbb has received much less attention despite the strong evidence for an association between tobacco smoke and vascular impairment. recently published data  <cit>  have shown that ts negatively affects vascular endothelial physiology and directly promotes the pro-inflammatory activation of bbb endothelium.

many of the over  <dig> components contained in ts are thought to facilitate the development of a proatherosclerotic environment  <cit>  by triggering a complex pro-inflammatory response. this is mediated by the recruitment of leukocytes through cytokine signalling , matrix metalloproteinase upregulation , and by promoting the adherence of monocytes to the endothelial wall  <cit> .

ts's status as a powerful pro-inflammatory agent is suggested by the observation of elevated levels of white blood cells, primarily neutrophils and monocytes, in smokers  <cit> . elevated c-reactive protein  levels caused by ts promotes endothelial dysfunction by lowering the production of no and diminishing its bioactivity  <cit> , thereby limiting the smoker's ability to vasodilate via no release.

one well accepted yet poorly understood mechanism by which smoking can directly hamper bbb viability and function relays upon oxidative stress caused by the many highly reactive oxygen species and free radicals of which ts is highly enriched. the gas-phase of tobacco smoke alone is a complex mixture of high concentrations of ros and free radicals . this represents an exorbitant load of oxidant to body tissues which can lead to bbb breakdown by oxidative damage, tight junction  modification, and matrix metalloproteinases  activation  <cit> . the results presented herein suggest that antioxidant vitamins may provide an effective shielding against oxidative stress thus, protecting the bbb during ts exposure.

our data have shown that the administration of physiological concentration of vitamin e and/or c reduced the bbb endothelial pro-inflammatory activation solicited by ts exposure . while the precise mechanism/s by which ts triggers an immune vascular response at the bbb cannot be determined from these experiments, our data strongly suggest that: 1) the imbalance between tissue/plasma concentrations of antioxidants and reactive oxygen species caused by ts played a major role in the process; 2) this can be partially prevented by administration of antioxidant vitamins.

the bbb endothelium is not the only tissue affected by ts. our data also showed that ts directly activated monocytes which resulted in the release of il-1β and tnf-α and mmps . we also observed a time dependent increase in the activity of mmp- <dig> and mmp- <dig> which initiated as early as  <dig> minutes of ts exposure and increased substantially after  <dig> minutes. the increased activity of matrix metalloproteinases reflected the continuous release of these enzymes during ts exposure suggesting an ongoing pro-inflammatory stimulation of the cells. similar to what observed in bbb ecs cultures, pre-treatment with antioxidant vitamins reduced monocytes pro-inflammatory activation by ts.

in this study we used a final concentration of vitamin c  equivalent to that found independently of gender in healthy non-smoker subject  according to literature data  <cit> . not surprisingly the anti-inflammatory activity of vitamin c was limited to the initial  <dig> minutes of ts exposure. vitamin c is an hydrophilic reducing agent making it the first line of defense against ros and the first to be consumed in the process. therefore, it very likely that higher concentrations and/or a sustained supplementation of vitamin c are necessary to maintain a protective effect for a longer period of time. this is agreement with the decision of food and nutrition board of the national academy of sciences to raise the rda of vitamin c for smokers to over  <dig> mg/day  versus the recommended  <dig> mg/day for non-smokers. this help counteracting vitamin c depletion caused by ts-derived ros over time.

on the other hand, when vitamin c was co-administered with vitamin e  the protective effect was significantly enhanced both in efficacy and duration. the interaction between vitamins e and c has been recognized and extensively studied showing an ascorbate-mediated regeneration of oxidized membrane alpha-tocopherol back to its reduced form. a process that extends the protective effect of vitamin e against oxidative stress  <cit> .

whether ros can directly hamper bbb viability was also clearly demonstrated. our results showed a time and dose dependent loss of bbb viability when in the absence of physiological antioxidants protection the div-bbb modules were exposed to h2o <dig> levels comparable to those a chronic smoker is routinely exposed . our findings are in agreement with studies by others showing that plasma antioxidant vitamins  levels in chronic smokers are significant decreased due to accelerated turnover in response to ts-evoked oxidative stress  <cit> . this is also in agreement with the fact that administration of antioxidant vitamins c and e  prevented the loss of bbb integrity.

not surprisingly, direct bbb exposure to ts showed similar results. we observed a similar time and dose dependent pattern of bbb impairment , which was paralleled by the release of adenylate kinase . this suggests that the increased paracellular permeability is not exclusively dependent  on the exposure to nicotine  <cit>  contained in ts but also to cell damage caused by ros. this hypothesis is supported by the fact that pre-treatment with antioxidant vitamins significantly reduced the loss of bbb viability during ts exposure . this was accompanied by a similar decreased in the release of ak  and that of pro-inflammatory cytokines . the latter is also in agreement with previous studies showing that vitamin c plays an important  role in the modulation of cytokines release as well as other immune surveillance activities  <cit> .

another mechanism through which tobacco smoke can impair bbb viability is through the alteration of nitric oxide bioavailability. no is a molecular mediator involved in a variety of physiologic and pathological processes. three isoforms of nos have been described: neuronal nos , endothelial  and inducible or immunological nos . vascular endothelial cells generate small bursts of no from l-arginine via increase in intracellular ca2+ through a calcium-dependent constitutive no synthase . in contrast, inos induced in pathological/inflammatory state is ca-independent manner and releases no continuously in large amounts. our data showed a sudden burst in no  immediately after the initial exposure to tobacco smoke. consequent to the sudden raise of no we observed a steady decline on no levels which suggests a rapid reaction of no with other ts-released ros and its conversion in peroxynitrite   <cit> . this hypothesis is in agreement with the fact that no decline was prevented by pre-administration of antioxidant vitamins, which neutralized the ros contained in ts. this being the case, it is possible that antioxidant treatments may indeed prolong the initial no-dependent vasodilatation experience by smokers during ts exposure.

by contrast, during the recovery time  no dropped below the baseline level. the magnitude of this decline appeared to be proportional to the amount of ts to which the corresponding bbb modules were previously exposed. while the precise mechanisms by which ts affected no bioavailability cannot be entirely determined from these experiments, some inferences can be still derived. nicotine contained in ts has been shown to inhibit enos activity, thus decreasing the constitutive level of no release by the vascular endothelium  <cit> . as shown in figure 6b pre-treatment with antioxidant vitamins did not affect the decline of no during the recovery phase. this supports the hypothesis that perhaps nicotine rather than ros are responsible for the observed decline of no during this phase leading to vasoconstriction and aggravating the vascular impairment of the brain  <cit> .

tobacco smoking has also been associated with impairments of glucose metabolism and glycemic regulation  <cit> . our data have clearly shown that ts exposure determined a decrease in glucose consumption , paralleled by an increase in lactate production. this is indicative of a potential change in the bbb bioenergetic behaviour toward a more predominant anaerobic metabolism . the mechanisms through which ts affect glucose metabolism may be related to free radicals and other ros contained in tobacco smoke  <cit> . in vivo, this effect can be further exacerbated by the carbon monoxide  also contained in tobacco smoke. co through binding to hemoglobin, myoglobin and mitochondrial cytochrome oxidase  <cit> can cause a relatively prolonged impairment of glucose oxidative metabolism and a decrease in glucose utilization  <cit> 

one way through which bbb endothelial cells can try to counteract the increased levels of ros is through the generation of reductant equivalents such as glutathione peroxidase . generation of glutathione peroxidase requires oxidized glutathione to be reduced by glutathione reductase using nadph generated in the pentose phosphate pathway . this process generates nadph  and pentoses   <cit> . a shift toward the pentose phosphate pathway to compensate for the excess of ros would explain the reduced glucose consumption we observed during ts exposure.

furthermore, bbb endothelial cells could also use the krebs cycle reducing agents  to counteract ts-derived ros. this would leave the cellular mitochondria underequipped to sustain the oxidative glucose metabolism and would explain the increased lactate production also observed during ts exposure. this hypothesis is supported by our data which showed that administration of antioxidant vitamins c and e gradually restore the normal bioenergetic metabolism of the bbb   <cit> . however, a more specific and detailed study will be necessary to confirm this hypothesis and unravel the underlining mechanism/s.

CONCLUSIONS
our data indicate that loss of endothelial viability as well as bbb function and integrity in vitro caused by ts exposure can be significantly reduced by pre-treatment with physiologic concentrations of α-tocopherol and ascorbic acid. these antioxidant vitamins may act synergistically in preventing oxidative damage and pro-inflammatory stimulation induced by tobacco smoking exposure, thereby reducing ts toxicity at the bbb level.

study limitations
in vitro toxicology studies of tobacco and tobacco smoke have been used widely used to assess the toxicologic impact of tobacco product. however, there are limitations with respect to the generality of the findings inherited in such studies which reflect the inability of any in vitro model to fully recapitulate the biological and physiological make up a living organism. in this study we used an artificial vascular system to assess the effect of ts exposure on the bbb and whether administration of vitamin c and/or e can reduce ts toxicity. however, our model cannot reproduce for example, the effect of hepatic clearance and peripheral metabolism on the concentration of ts components to which the bbb and the immune system are exposed. this can lead to a relative over-exposure of the bbb and its constituents  to ts thus, exaggerating its acute harmful effects. in vitro studies on ts toxicity  more likely reflect the impact of chronic smoking over a long period of time  were cumulative harmful effect builds up overtime.

