BACKGROUND
metarhizium acridum is a haploid entomopathogenic fungus . m. acridum isolates have been used as biocontrol agents for crop pests, including sugar cane grubs, termites, cockroaches, and rhinoceros beetles  <cit> . m. acridum was commercialized and used for locust control in australia, west africa  <cit> , and china  <cit> .

insecticide resistance, pest resurgence, and concerns over environmental impact have made the search for alternative means of biological pest control more urgent. unfortunately, large-scale use of fungal biocontrol agents is partially limited by the failure of conidia to retain virulence during long-term storage, transportation, and use under stressful conditions, such as high temperature, low humidity, and sunlight exposure  <cit> . manipulation of culture conditions could optimize the concentration of spore polyols and sugars, including trehalose, and consequently increase tolerance to low relative humidity  <cit> . however, genetic manipulations of these polyols and sugars to enhance environmental tolerance have not been explored in entomopathogenic fungi.

to genetically engineer more robust entomopathogenic fungi, we focused on the trehalose pathways involved in stress response. trehalose is a storage carbohydrate as trehalose concentrations are high when nutrients are limited in resting cells. in many microorganisms and invertebrate animals, trehalose plays a role in environmental stress response  <cit>  and is a known stress metabolite as its concentration increases during certain adverse environmental conditions, such as exposure to heat or toxic chemicals  <cit> . in saccharomyces cerevisiae, trehalose is required for cells to survive diverse stresses, such as heat shock, starvation, and desiccation  <cit> . additionally, it has been shown to provide one way for cells to survive thermal stress in vitro  <cit> . based on the stress-protection properties of trehalose in vitro and the positive correlation between trehalose concentration and stress resistance in vivo, it is reasonable to expect that trehalose might function as a protective agent against stress  <cit> .

however, studies investigating the relationship between trehalose and thermotolerance have shown conflicting results. in s. cerevisiae, the trehalose level was positively correlated with stress resistance in different strains, growth conditions, and heat treatments  <cit> . almost all strains exhibited more than a 2- to 10-fold increase in trehalose level after heat-shock treatment  <cit> . additionally, the defective mutant of the neutral trehalase gene  produced organisms that were more thermotolerant than the wild type, most likely because of higher trehalose levels  <cit> . in contrast, some studies found no correlation between trehalose accumulation and thermotolerance under certain conditions, suggesting that trehalose may not mediate thermotolerance  <cit> .

in most fungal species, trehalose hydrolysis is carried out by trehalase  <cit> . the single known exception is pichia fermentans, in which trehalase has phosphorylase activity  <cit> . fungal trehalases are classified into two categories according to their optimum ph: acid trehalases or neutral trehalases  <cit> . cytosolic neutral trehalase degrades intracellular trehalose. the ntl of s. cerevisiae, kluyveromyces lactis, candida utilis, torulaspora delbrueckii, schizosaccharomyces pombe, and pachysolen tannophilus is tightly controlled by signaling pathways that end with the trehalose being reversibly activated by phosphorylation  <cit> . these signaling pathways can be triggered in vivo by glucose, nitrogen sources, heat shock, and chemicals like protonophores, which produce intracellular acidulation. this enzyme has been thoroughly studied in filamentous fungi, such as aspergillus nidulans, neurospora crassa, and magnaporthe grisea  <cit> , but little is known about m. acridum neutral trehalase  beyond the sequence in two strains, m. roberstii arsef <dig>  <cit>  and cqma <dig>  <cit> . using these sequences and genetic manipulation tools, we can now determine how ntl affects stress response in terms of thermotolerance and virulence.

different fungal growth phases  are associated with trehalose accumulation or mobilization. depletion of trehalose storage marks early germination of fungal spores  <cit> . in cryptococcus neoformans and other pathogenic fungi, the trehalose pathway is a selective fungicidal target for antifungal development  <cit> . it is not known whether ntl is a virulence factor in m. acridum.

we report here the construction of rna interference  and over-expression mutants of ntl to investigate its role in thermotolerance and virulence of m. acridum. the results offer a new strategy for improving the thermotolerance of fungal conidia and yield insights into m. acridum spore physiology.

RESULTS
over-expression and rna interference mutants and the expression of ntl
the pbarex-ntl over-expression vector contained a  <dig> -nucleotide sequence from the ntl genomic dna fragment, including the full coding sequence and parts of the promoter and terminator sequences . the pdpb-ntl vector contained  <dig> nucleotides of the ntl coding sequence . both constructs were transformed to m. acridum cqma <dig> using microparticle bombardment. four m. acridum transformants for each construct were selected according to their ability to grow on selective media. pcr analysis showed that the vector was integrated into the fungal genome.

expression of ntl was analyzed by real-time pcr . in over-expression transformants, ntl levels were  <dig> - <dig> -fold higher than in wild-type levels. in contrast, ntl expression in rnai transformants was reduced to 35-66% of wild-type levels.

ntl is related to trehalose accumulation in conidia
the neutral trehalase activity of conidia increased significantly in over-expression mutants compared to the wild-type strain and was reduced significantly in rnai mutants  . significantly positive correlation  was established between neutral trehalase activity and ntl expression levels . in contrast, the trehalose concentration in the wild-type strain was significantly higher than that in the over-expression mutants and lower than that in the rnai mutants . this showed that the neutral trehalase activity varied inversely with the trehalose concentration in conidia. furthermore, the trehalose concentration was significantly positively correlated with ntl expression levels and neutral trehalase activity  . this demonstrated that ntl is related to trehalose accumulation because it controls the neutral trehalase activity.

*means  of  <dig> repetitions followed by different lowercase letters in the same column were significantly different at the p <  <dig>  level according to the anova table and tukey's multiple range test. 1: wild-type strain; 2-5: over-expression mutants; 6-9: rnai mutants.

ntl affects conidiospore thermotolerance
after wet-heat exposure at 45°c, the germination rate of conidia declined with increasing exposure time and the conidia germination rates of the wild-type strain and mutants appeared to be significantly reduced for each succeeding  <dig> -hour interval . however, the response to tolerance was obviously different for the wild-type strain, over-expression mutants, and rnai mutants. the conidia germination rate of the wild-type strain was significantly higher than that of the over-expression mutants  and lower than that of the rnai mutants . similar results were observed after dry-heat exposure at 65°c for  <dig>   <dig>   <dig>   <dig>   <dig>  or  <dig> hours. accordingly, the inhibition time value for 50% germination  of the wild-type strain was longer than that of the over-expression mutants  and shorter than that of the rnai mutants  . these data showed that the ntl over-expression mutants were significantly more sensitive to heat compared with the wild-type strain . contrary to that of the over-expression mutants, the thermotolerance of the ntl rnai mutants was significantly higher than that of the wild-type strain .

furthermore, both trehalase and ntl mrna levels were negatively correlated with the germination rates of conidia treated with wet heat and dry heat  , suggesting that ntl affects conidiospore thermotolerance.

ntl has no effect on virulence
bioassays revealed that mortality trends of locusts inoculated with over-expression mutants or rnai mutants were similar to that of locusts inoculated with wild strain . accordingly, no significant differences were observed in locust lethal time values for 50% mortality  between the wild-type strain, over-expression mutants, or rnai mutants  . this result suggested changes in ntl expression level did not affect the virulence of m. acridum.

discussion
resisting thermal stress is important for pathogens of the locust, like m. acridum, because temperatures fluctuate in locust habitats and locusts themselves could also employ behavioral fever to counter fungal infection  <cit> . ntl has been reported to play an important role in environmental stress response. in this study, the function of ntl with respect to thermotolerance in m. acridum was investigated by changing its expression level via rnai and over-expression mutants.

trehalose is an important factor determining thermotolerance in m. acridum. trehalose content and thermotolerance were significantly and positively correlated, and ntl activity was significantly and negatively correlated with thermotolerance . these results suggest that trehalose accumulation and metabolism play important roles in thermotolerance, but this factor is not the only controller of thermotolerance  <cit> . the accumulation and metabolism of other polyols, such as sucrose and glycerol, may also be factors in stress response  <cit> . it is possible that changes in trehalose concentration produced by up- or down-regulating trehalase levels may also affect the levels of other polyols and the entire metabolic process. further investigation of other polyols in the ntl mutants is required to understand fully the mechanism of the effect of ntl on m. acridum thermotolerance.

field conditions and abiotic environmental factors, such as temperature, moisture, and sunlight, influence whether infection can occur. when the host temperature favors a short germination time and that temperature is above or below the pathogen's optimum, temperature can be a limiting factor for the disease. however, oil-based formulations and selective media have been shown to enhance the thermotolerance of m. acridum conidia, resulting in promising acridid control in the field  <cit> . using the genetic manipulation tools introduced here for m. acridum, the thermotolerance of the mycoinsecticidal strain will be improved to allow for wider commercial application.

a secretary trehalase activity of m. acridum was detected in the hemolymph of infected insects, suggesting that it is a virulence factor in insect pathogenesis  <cit> . in contrast, the changes in neutral trehalase expression had no effects on virulence in this study, which agrees with the report on c. neoformans that a neutral trehalase mutant does not possess any known virulence defects  <cit> . our results indicate that trehalose in conidia does not affect virulence; thus, genetically engineering the trehalose pathway would increase the thermotolerance of fungal strains with no loss of virulence. temperature tolerance also affects fungal agent storage longevity  <cit> . further studies are required to investigate the longevity of the mutants.

the dual promoter rnai system developed in this study successfully knocked down the gene expression in filamentous fungus. in previous studies, genes that were knocked down with isopliae over-expression and rnai ntl transformants exhibited no loss in virulence compared to wild-type silencing vectors that produced hairpin or intron-containing hairpin rna in fungi  <cit> , which involved two steps of oriented cloning. the dual promoter system simplified the rnai construction procedure to one single-step non-oriented cloning, in which transcription of a target gene from each promoter produced a pool of sense and antisense rnas in the cells. this system provides an easy and efficient tool for knocking down gene expression, and can be extended to knock down multiple gene targets from transcriptionally fused genes. thus, the dual promoter system offers an efficient platform for functional analysis of entomopathogenic fungal genes and genetic manipulation for strain improvement.

CONCLUSIONS
our study shows that ntl expression of m. acridum can be effectively enhanced or inhibited by over-expression or rnai mutants, respectively, using a dual promoter system. compared to the wild-type, ntl mrna was reduced to 35-66% in rnai mutants and increased by 2-3-fold in the over-expression mutants. the conidiospores of rnai mutants had less trehalase activity, accumulated more trehalose, and were much more tolerant of heat stress than the wild type. the opposite effects were found in conidiospores of over-expression mutants compared to rnai mutants. the ntl mrna level was positively correlated with neutral trehalase activity and negatively correlated with trehalose concentration and the thermotolerance of conidiospores, further confirming the role of ntl in the thermotolerance of m. acridum. furthermore, bioassays showed that alteration of ntl expression did not affect the virulence.

in conclusion, ntl regulates thermotolerance through trehalose accumulation in m. acridum but does not affect its virulence. the use of the rnai mutant of ntl could provide a new strategy for improving the conidiospore thermotolerance of an entomopathogenic fungus without compromising its virulence.

