BACKGROUND
mathematical modeling has been applied to the study and analysis of complex biological
systems for a long time. many mathematical models for dynamic biological systems are
formulated as nonlinear ordinary differential equations . some processes in
biological systems, such as the gene expression and feedback control in signal
transduction networks, involve a time delay. these systems are represented as delay
differential equation  models. many dde models have been proposed in the last
decade  <cit> . bocharov et al.  <cit> 
reviewed various applications of dde models in population dynamics, epidemiology,
immunology, neural networks, and cell kinetics. sensitivity analysis can shed light on
the dynamic behavior of biological systems and assist the modeling process by
identifying the critical parameters that determine the essential behavior of the system.
numerical sensitivity analysis of a dde model by the direct method requires to obtain
the solutions of model and sensitivity equations with time-delays. to do dynamic
sensitivity analysis on dde models, an efficient and accurate approach to compute the
solution of ddes is the basic requirement. many sophisticated dde solvers are available
recently  <cit> . the major
effort is the computation of jacobian matrix when computing the solution of sensitivity
equations. the computation of partial derivatives of complicated equations either by the
analytic method or by symbolic manipulation is time consuming, inconvenient, and prone
to introduce human errors. to surmount this problem, an automatic approach to obtain the
derivatives of complex functions efficiently and accurately is necessary.

dynamic sensitivity analysis is an important tool for assessing dynamic behavior of
biological systems. the common used approach for sensitivity analysis is the numerical
differentiation by finite difference approximation. the main drawback of this approach
is that the accuracy is hard to analyze. due to the efficiency and accuracy, a variety
of direct methods are proposed  <cit> . rihan  <cit>  derives a general theory for sensitivity analysis of dde
models by using adjoint equations and direct methods to estimate the sensitivity
equations with variable and constant parameters, respectively. the kinetic preprocessor
 numerical library is a comprehensive set of software tools for direct and adjoint
sensitivity analysis  <cit> . an-other approach
which can be used to evaluate sensitivity equations is automatic differentiation.
automatic differentiation is a non-approximate differentiation technique that permits
the fast and accurate evaluation of partial derivatives in jacobian matrix. the values
for the derivatives obtained by automatic differentiation are exact if we do not take
account of the unavoidable round-off error due to the finite precision arithmetic of a
computer. the theoretical exactness of the automatic differentiation comes from the fact
that it uses the same rules of differentiation as in differential calculus, but these
rules are applied to an algorithmic evaluation of the function rather than to a formula.
the implementation of automatic differentiation can be divided into two different
classes: source code transformation and operator overloading. the most widely used
source code transformation program is adifor  <dig>   <cit> . this program, like as the preprocessor of a compiler, accepts
and analyzes fortran  <dig> source code and produces code to evaluate the derivatives of the
function in fortran  <dig> standard. the output code is optimized by eliminating unnecessary
arithmetic operations and temporary variables and then compiled with a standard compiler
into an object code that can simultaneously evaluate derivatives and function values.
hwang et al.  <cit>  demonstrated that adifor is a
powerful tool for ode models from three aspects of performance: accuracy, efficiency,
and scaled capability. griewank et al.  <cit> 
developed an open-source code, automatic differentiation by overloading in c++ ,
for the automatic differentiation of c and c++ programs. the implementation of adol-c
utilizes the operator overloading capability of c/c++ compilers that accept user-defined
data types, operators and functions. the implementation of either the source code
transformation or the operator overloading is a compile-time solution. it allows one to
generate derivatives from complicated existing code or user-provided model equations
that expressed by user-defined data types, operators and functions. these available
codes are implemented for odes and is suitable for users with programming
background.

we have proposed an efficient algorithm with an adaptive step size control, called
adaptive modified collocation method , to compute the solution and dynamic
sensitivities of biological systems described by odes  <cit> . the algorithm is extended to solve the solution and dynamic
sensitivities of time-delay systems described by ddes in this paper and named as
extended adaptive modified collocation method . the eamcm is implemented as a
user-friendly program that facilitates the dynamic sensitivity analysis of dde models
through the implementation of adaptive direct-decoupled method and automatic
differentiation. eamcm requires the user to supply only the model equations at run-time
in a form of mathematical expression to compute dynamic sensitivities of dde models. the
evaluation of sensitivity equations is done automatically by automatic differentiation
technique along with the inevitable evaluation of model equations. by combining the
adaptive direct-decoupled amcm algorithm with automatic differentiation technique and
extending its usage to dde models, the extended algorithm, eamcm, is efficient,
accurate, and easy to use for end users without programming background to do dynamic
sensitivity analysis on complex biological systems with time-delays.

to evaluate the applicability of the extended algorithm, it is applied to two realistic
models with time-delays: the cardiovascular control system and the tnf-α
signal transduction network. the first dde model for human cardiovascular control
system was developed by fowler et al.  <cit>  to
explore the interactions between the heart rate and blood pressure under the baroreflex
control. the time delay arises from the slow activity of sympathetic nervous system.
sensitivity analysis is applied to this dde model through the eamcm program to identify
the key parameters that could provide useful diagnostic information about the state of
the cardiovascular system. the second dde model for tnf-α signal
transduction network built by rangamani and sirovich  <cit>  considers both the nf-κb-mediated survival pathway
and the caspase-mediated apoptosis pathway simultaneously. due to the delay of
translocation of nf-κb to the nucleus, the transcription processes of ciap
and iκb in the nf-κb-mediated survival pathway were
represented by ddes. the eamcm is applied to this model to analyze its dynamic
sensitivities and decipher the relationship between the nf-κb-mediated
survival pathway and the caspase-mediated apoptosis pathway.

RESULTS
cardiovascular disease is the major cause of human death. a detailed understanding of
cardiovascular systems is important for the diagnosis of cardiovascular disease,
ultimately leading to improved treatment. the eamcm program can be used to do dynamic
sensitivity analysis on the cardiovascular control system to investigate the
hemodynamics and regulation control of cardiovascular systems.

apoptosis is central to the development of cancer. in the recent years, the prevalent
model to explain why cancer therapies fail has been that cell resistant to or inhibition
of apoptosis  <cit> . so now, the new treatment
goal is how to control apoptosis that brings on cell death of the cancer cells.
nf-κb is a transcription factor family that activating numerous genes
that are related to cell survival pathways. most commonly, nf-κb
activation inhibits apoptosis pathways, as evidenced by several knockout mouse models
 <cit> . based on
these findings, the goal to design more effective cancer therapies can be initiated by
apoptosis induction and inhibition of nf-κb. many mathematical models
describing the dynamics of apoptosis and nf-κb pathways have been
published in last decade  <cit> . most of the models to date have concentrated on only one of
signaling pathways and do not consider the delayed transcription processes. the eamcm
program is applied to a tnf-α-induced signaling network considering both
signaling pathways simultaneously to investigate how these two pathways work together to
regulate cell fate in response to tnf-α.

cardiovascular control system
mathematical models are useful to investigate the hemodynamics and regulation control
of cardiovascular systems. in general, cardiovascular models consist of two major
systems: the hemodynamic system and the autonomic nerve control system. the
hemodynamic system is a systemic circulatory blood distribution network to deliver
oxygen, nutrients, and hormones to cells and remove carbon dioxide and metabolic
wastes. the left ventricle pumps blood to arteries, capillaries, veins, and back to
the heart. the blood hemodynamics of this circulation can be represented by the
relationship between blood pressure and heart rate in the cardiovascular system. the
control of the blood pressure is crucial to human health due to that the blood
pressure is the energy, generated by the heart, to push blood around the body.
although the endogenous regulation of arterial pressure is not completely understood,
there are evidences that baroreceptors are important for minimizing changes in blood
pressure. animal studies have shown that blood pressure is much more variable if the
influence of baroreceptors is removed  <cit> . baroreceptors detect changes in arterial
pressure and send signals ultimately to the medulla of the brain stem. the medulla,
by way of the autonomic nerve control system, adjusts the mean arterial pressure by
altering the heart rate and the total peripheral resistance. the autonomic nerve
control system includes the sympathetic and parasympathetic nervous systems. when
blood pressure starting to fall, the baroreceptor stimulation decreasing and the
reflex response causes the peripheral resistance increasing and the heart to beat
faster and harder by slow-acting sympathetic nerves. this negative-feedback mechanism
largely restores the blood pressure. conversely, if blood pressure increases,
stimulation of baroreceptors gives rise to nerve impulses which run to the brain and
slow down the heartbeat through the fast activity in the parasympathetic pathway.

fowler et al.  <cit>  developed a lumped dde
model of the integrated cardiovascular system combined with a baroreflex feedback
control of blood pressure to describe the interactions between heart rate, blood
pressure, and respiration. this dde model is a simple model without considering the
pulmonary part of the cardiovascular system and is derived from the model introduced
by ottesen  <cit>  by adding an intrinsically
controlled heart rate and baroreflex control of peripheral resistance. this simple
model consists of only  <dig> delay differential equations which include  <dig> parameters and
is expressed as

  dx1dt*=h0εh+δεh, 

  dx2dt*=μp0εph0x1−x2εp, 

where x <dig> is the heart rate, x <dig> is the
arterial pressure, and t* = t/τ is the dimensionless
time. the functions g <dig> and g <dig> are defined
by

 g1=11+n,g2=1−11+n,r1=a1sin{2πfrτ−ϕ},r2=a2sin{2πfrτt*−ϕ}, 

where x <dig> and x2
 denote the blood pressure with and without a time delay,
respectively. the values and definitions of system parameters are given in table
 <dig>  the state variables are the heart rate and blood
pressure. a sinusoidal function is added to the model equations to mimic respiration.
the hill function gi with an exponent n is used to model
the baroreflex feedback control of heart rate. this simple model has shown to be able
to reproduce many of the empirical observations such as respiratory sinus arrhythmia
, mayer waves, and synchronization  <cit> .

the definition of system parameters in the dde model developed by ottesen
 <cit> . the parameter values are
obtained from the literature  <cit> .

the eamcm program is used to do sensitivity analysis on the lumped cardiovascular
model. the non-constant exponent of hill function and sinusoidal functions in
differential model equations complicate the evaluation of jacobian matrix for
computing the solution of sensitivity equations. by the help of automatic
differentiation embedded in the eamcm program, user can provide the model equations
only at run-time for solving the dynamic sensitivities of the cardiovascular system.
the dynamic sensitivities of heart rate and blood pressure with respect to all system
parameters and initial conditions are computed. all relative parameter sensitivities
are presented by 100% stacked column chart and shown in figure  <dig>  it is easy to find which parameter makes more effects on heart rate and
blood pressure than the others from figure  <dig>  the values of top
five sensitivities for the heart rate and blood pressure are shown in table  <dig>  the uncontrolled average arterial blood pressure
, breathing rate ,
sympathetic delay , sympathetic control of heart rate
, and strength of vagal tone  are identified as
the key parameters for the control of heart rate and blood pressure. the relative
sensitivities of heart rate and blood pressure with respect to the uncontrolled
average arterial blood pressure are shown in figure  <dig>  the
dynamic sensitivities of heart rate with respect to p <dig> oscillate
symmetrically between positive and negative values. this result indicates that the
uncontrolled average arterial blood pressure amplifies the variation of heart rate.
in contrast, the dynamic sensitivities of blood pressure with respect to
p <dig> oscillate but are all positive. this means that an increase
of the uncontrolled average arterial blood pressure shifts the blood pressure to a
higher value but does not change the variation of blood pressure. as shown in table
 <dig>  the effect of uncontrolled average arterial blood
pressure on the variation of average heart rate is tenfold larger than the variation
of blood pressure. there is evidence that the slow-acting sympathetic nerves and the
fast-acting vagal nerves compete with each other to increase and decrease the heart
rate, respectively  <cit> . the relative
sensitivities of heart rate with respect to parameters for slow sympathetic control
 and fast vagal control  are investigated and
shown in figure  <dig>  figure  <dig> shows the
sympathovagal balance in physiology and both sympathetic control and vagal control
amplify the variation of heart rate. the relative sensitivities of blood pressure
with respect to parameters for slow sympathetic control  and fast
vagal control  are shown in figure  <dig>  the
slow-acting sympathetic control upregulates the blood pressure, but does not change
its variation. the relative sensitivity of blood pressure with respect to the
sympathetic control is positive over the time. in contrast, the fast-acting vagal
control downregulates the blood pressure and has a negative relative sensitivity over
the time.
the stack column chart shows all relative parameter sensitivities for a state
variable. the proportion of a parameter sensitivity to the total sensitivity
for a state variable is displayed as a color area in each column. the values of
time-averaged relative parameter sensitivities are used as the data.

the dynamic sensitivities of heart rate  and blood pressure
 with respect to all parameters are ranked based on the
time-averaged relative sensitivities over the response time. the values of
time-averaged relative sensitivities are shown in the second row and the
corresponding ratios to the total relative sensitivity are shown in third
row.
p <dig>  the relative sensitivities of heart rate and
blood pressure with respect to the uncontrolled average arterial blood
pressure. the time is in dimensionless scale.
ν. the relative sensitivities of heart rate with
respect to parameters for slow sympathetic control and fast vagal control. the
time is in dimensionless scale.
and ν. the relative sensitivities of blood pressure
with respect to parameters for slow sympathetic control and fast vagal control.
the time is in dimensionless scale.

apoptosis signal network
the tnf-α signal transduction network was developed by rangamani and
sirovich  <cit> , which considers both the
nf-κb-mediated survival pathway and the caspase-mediated apoptosis
pathway simultaneously. these two pathways involve  <dig> species in  <dig> reactions and the
schematic diagram is shown in figure  <dig>  the formation of this
network involves binding reactions between ligand and death receptor, protein-protein
reactions, enzymatic reactions, translocations, and transcription processes. the
network is induced by ligation of tnf-α to the cell surface receptor
tnfr <dig>  the ligation of tnfr <dig> by tnf results in the recruitment of the adaptor
proteins such as tnfr-associated death domain , tnfr-associated factor 2
, receptor-interacting protein  <dig> , and possibly other yet unidentified
proteins to form the early complex. in the nf-κb-mediated transcription
pathway, the inactive inhibitor kappa b kinase  binds to the early complex leads
to the activation of ikk, iκb phosphorylation, and release of
nf-κb. the free nf-κb translocates to the nucleus,
binds to dna, and leads to the transcription of iκb and cellular
inhibitor of apoptosis protein  that protects cells from tnf-induced apoptosis
by binding to activated caspase- <dig>  <cit> . the
newly synthesized free iκb enters the nucleus and binds to nuclear
nf-κb and this complex is exported to the cytoplasm  <cit> . this nf-κb-iκb
complex is the target for iκb phosphorylation by active ikk and the
liberating nf-κb will translocate to the nucleus again. nelson et al.
 <cit>  proposed that this oscillatory
feedback behavior of nf-κb regulates the expression of ciap. in the
caspase-mediated apoptosis pathway, tradd, rip <dig>  and traf <dig> are dissociated from tnfr1
and recruit fas associated death domain  and caspase- <dig> to form a protein
complex called the death-inducing signaling complex   <cit> . as a result of disc formation, caspase- <dig> is cleaved at
the disc resulting in the activation of caspase- <dig>  the activated caspase- <dig> in turn
activates effector caspases, such as caspase- <dig>  causing the cell to undergo
apoptosis.
the solid lines indicate reversible reactions and the dash-dot lines denote
irreversible reactions. the dash lines indicate the delayed transcription
processes. the reactions and components of the survival pathway are shown in
green. the reactions and components of the apoptotic pathway are shown in blue.
the boxes with red border denote the components with nonzero initial value in
the network.

the transcription processes of ciap and iκb due to the translocation of
nf-κb to the nucleus are represented as delayed reactions. the delay
time used for transcription is  <dig> minutes as suggested by sung and simon
 <cit> . based on material balance, this
model consists of  <dig> delay differential equations which include  <dig> parameters. the
state variables are the concentration of the molecules in the survival and apoptosis
pathways and the input variable is the concentration of tnf-α that
stimulates the signal transduction pathways. the output variable is the concentration
of fragmented dna, which can be used as a marker for apoptosis. the fragmented dna is
defined as the fraction of dna sites that have been attacked by the activity of
effector caspase. the set of delay differential equations, all of the relevant
definitions of variables, and parameters appearing in the dde model, together with
the nominal values can be found in additional file  <dig>  the
reason for representing the model equations here and not just referring to the
article by rangamani et al.  <cit>  is that some
of the parameters and state variables have different names as that in the original
model.

the eamcm program is applied to the tnf-α signal transduction model
using the initial conditions as described in table s <dig> of additional file  <dig>  all dynamic sensitivities with respect to  <dig> parameters and
 <dig> initial conditions are computed simultaneously without any difficulty. all
time-averaged semi-relative parameter sensitivities for each state variable are shown
in figure  <dig>  most of the time-averaged semi-relative parameter
sensitivities for each state variable are too small compared with the largest and can
be ignored. it is easy to find from figure  <dig> that only some few
parameter sensitivities get significant percentage of the total sensitivity for each
state variable.
the stack column chart shows all semi-relative parameter sensitivities for a
state variable. the proportion of a parameter sensitivity to the total
sensitivity for a state variable is displayed as a color area in each column.
the values of time-averaged semi-relative parameter sensitivities are used as
the data.

the dynamic sensitivity profiles for all species with respect to
k <dig>  the rate constant of the formation of survival complex,
are nearly identical to that with respect to x <dig>  the initial
value of ikk . this is not surprising because the kinetic order
is set to one for each flux in the model. so each relative effect on the output with
respect to the rate constant is the same as that with respect to the initial
concentration of the corresponding species. the same situation can be found for each
pair of k <dig> /x <dig> 
k18/x <dig>  etc. in the following, we
analyze the dynamic parameter sensitivities only, because the same results for the
corresponding dynamic initial sensitivities can be found from the dynamic parameter
sensitivities.

all of the dynamic sensitivities with respect to k <dig>  the rate
constant of the formation of survival complex, and k <dig> , the rate
constant of the formation of death complex, are symmetric with respect to the time
axis. this means that if we have plotted the sensitivity profile of a species with
respect to k <dig>  the corresponding sensitivity profile with respect
to k <dig> can be obtained simply by reflecting about the time axis.
to elucidate the effects of ikk  and fadd
 on the oscillatory behavior of nf-κb
 and iκb  in the
survival pathway, the semi-relative sensitivities of nf-κb and
iκb with respect to the rate constants k <dig> and
k <dig> , of the formation of survival complex and death complex
are shown in figure  <dig>  we observe, from figure  <dig>  the negative regulation of oscillatory behavior of nf-κb
and iκb when the rate constant  or the initial
concentration of fadd increases. the reverse effect is seen by increasing the rate
constant  or the initial concentration of ikk. we also
investigate the responses of the apoptosis pathway to the variances of fadd and ikk.
the activation of effector caspase- <dig>  is the finial reaction
of the apoptosis pathway, so the concentration of the active caspase-3
 can be used as the response of the apoptosis pathway.
the semi-relative sensitivities of active caspase- <dig> with respect to k9
and k <dig> are shown in figure  <dig>  the
negative values of the semi-relative sensitivities of active caspase- <dig> with respect
to k <dig> show that the active caspase- <dig> decreases when the rate
constant  or the initial concentration of ikk increases. by
contrast, increasing the rate constant  or the initial
concentration of fadd induces the increase of the active caspase- <dig>  these results are
in agreement with observations by mutant studies  <cit>  and show the interplay of the apoptotic and survival pathways
in response to the variations of ikk and fadd. as figure 7
shows, a combination of increasing the initial concentration of fadd and decreasing
the initial concentration of ikk gets more effects on the dna fragmentation.
and k <dig>  the solid lines are the semi-relative
sensitivities with respect to the rate constant k <dig> of the
formation of survival complex and the short dash lines are the semi-relative
sensitivities with respect to the rate constant k <dig> of the
formation of death complex. the semi-relative sensitivities of
nf-κb  are shown in red,
iκb  in green, activated caspase-3
 in blue, and fragmented dna
 in pink.

the fragmented dna  is the output of the signal transduction
model in response to tnf-α stimulus. our goal is to identify the
essential reactions that have significant effect on the system output. the
semi-relative sensitivities of fragmented dna are used to achieve this goal. since
dynamic sensitivities vary with time, it is hard to determine the most important
reaction that has the largest effect on the system output. we consider the usual used
significance measure, time-averaged semi-relative sensitivity defined similar to
equation , as the strength of effects on fragmented dna for individual reactions.fragmented dna with respect to all parameters based on time-averaged semi-relative
sensitivities. the values of time-averaged semi-relative sensitivities and the
corresponding ratios to the total semi-relative sensitivity are shown if the ratios
are greater than 2%. six out of the top seven key parameters belong to the apoptosis
pathway. this means that the apoptosis pathway dominates the cell fate in response to
tnf-α. the rate constants for the formation of phosphorylated
caspase- <dig>  and phosphorylated caspase-3
 and the regulation of activating caspase- <dig> by
phosphorylated caspase- <dig>  are identified as important
parameters. this result indicates that the activation cascades of caspase- <dig> and
caspase- <dig> are important reactions in the apoptosis signal transduction pathway.fragmented dna. all key parameters positively regulate the activity of dna
fragmentation except parameter k <dig> 

the dynamic sensitivities of fragmented dna  with
respect to all parameters are ranked based on the time-averaged semi-relative
sensitivities. the values of time-averaged semi-relative sensitivities and the
corresponding ratios to the total semi-relative sensitivity are shown if the
ratios are greater than 2%.
sensitivities of fragmented dna  with respect to the
rate constants of the formation of survival complex ,
the formation of death complex , the formation of disc
without tnfr <dig> , the caspase- <dig> activation
, the cleavage of procaspase-3
, the caspase- <dig> activation
, and the fragmentation of dna
.

the transcription factor nf-κb  plays an
important role in the survival pathway. to further understand the control of
nf-κb, we analyze the semi-relative sensitivities of
nf-κb with respect to all parameters. the ranking of parameter
sensitivities of nf-κb based on the time-averaged semi-relative
sensitivities is shown in table  <dig>  a parameter is referred to
as an important parameter if the ratio of its time-averaged semi-relative parameter
sensitivity to the total parameter sensitivity of nf-κb is greater than
2%. ignoring the rate constants for the reverse reactions, all parameters
-k <dig>  k <dig>  k <dig> 
k <dig>  k <dig>  and k <dig> - in
the survival pathway are identified as important parameters. the parameter
k <dig> is also identified as an important parameter, although
nf-κb is negatively sensitive to it. the top seven sensitivities of
nf-κb are shown in figure  <dig>  the dynamic
sensitivity of nf-κb with respect to the ikk activation
 is similar to that with respect to the
nf-κb activation  as figure  <dig> shows. this means that the inhibitor of ikk acts the same function as
the inhibitor of nf-κb to inhibit the activity of nf-κb.
the activation of nf-κb in most types of cells leads to the inhibition
of apoptosis, accelerates cell proliferation, and promotes tumorigenesis. to inhibit
cell growth, some small-molecule inhibitors targeting ikk have already been developed
to treat certain type tumors  <cit> . several
synthetic drugs that are be able to inhibit the activities of ikk and
nf-κb have been shown to have the same effects on tumor development
 <cit> . larger
the rate constant for the transcription of iκb
, more iκb is generated to deactivate
nf-κb and causes lower active nf-κb. a large rate
constant for the formation of death complex  leads to less
signals to activate ikk that then phosphorylates iκb and triggers the
activation of nf-κb. both rate constants regulate negatively the
activation of nf-κb as shown in figure  <dig>  the
sensitivities of nf-κb with respect to the rates of ikk activation
, the formation of
nf-κb/iκb/ikk* , the
nf-κb activation , and the deactivation of
nf-κb  alternate between positive and
negative values. these oscillations of sensitivities may be caused by the negative
feedback regulation of iκb.

the dynamic sensitivities of nf-κb 
with respect to all parameters are ranked based on the time-averaged
semi-relative sensitivities. the values of time-averaged semi-relative
sensitivities and the corresponding ratios to the total semi-relative
sensitivity are shown if the ratios are greater than 2%.
semi-relative sensitivities of nf-κb 
with respect to the rate constants of the formation of survival complex
, the ikk activation , the
formation of nf-κb/iκb/ikk*
, the nf-κb activation
, the formation of death complex
, the deactivation of nf-κb
, and the transcription of ciap and
iκb .

following similar procedures mentioned above, we investigate the regulation of the
apoptosis pathway. the disc complex is essential for tnf-induced apoptosis and it is
required for casepase- <dig> activation. to investigate the regulation of apoptosis, we
identify the important reactions that regulate the formation of disc by sensitivity
analysis. the ranking of dynamic sensitivities of disc based on the time-averaged
semi-relative sensitivities is shown in table  <dig>  the key
parameters -k <dig>  k <dig>  k <dig> 
and k <dig> - are identified and the dynamic sensitivities of disc
with respect to these four parameters are shown in figure  <dig> 
the reaction of dissociation of disc from the death receptor tnfr <dig> is essential for
the following caspase- <dig> activation and its corresponding rate constant
k <dig> is identify as an important parameter. this result is in
agreement with the observation in an in vitro binding assay by harper et al.
 <cit> .
of disc  with respect to the rate constants of the
formation of survival complex , the formation of death
complex , the formation of disc without tnfr1
, the caspase- <dig> activation
.

the dynamic sensitivities of disc  with respect to all
parameters are ranked based on the time-averaged semi-relative sensitivities
over the response time. the values of time-averaged semi-relative sensitivities
and the corresponding ratios to the total semi-relative sensitivity are shown
if the ratios are greater than 2%.

efficiency and accuracy
to verify the result obtained by the eamcm algorithm, it is compared with the finite
difference method using the dde <dig> as the dde solver. the dde <dig> solver is available in
matlab  <dig>  and later. forward difference is considered in the finite difference
method. the dynamic sensitivities of these two systems mentioned above are solved by
the finite difference method with spacing ratio  <dig>  and  <dig> , respectively. the
relative parameter sensitivities of heart rate and blood pressure with respect to
β obtained by the finite difference method with spacing ratio  <dig> 
and  <dig> , respectively, and the eamcm method are shown in figure  <dig> as an illustration .
according to the definition of relative sensitivity, the theoretical value of
relative sensitivity is obtained when the spacing ratio is approaching to zero. fromare close to the theoretical values. we analyze the performance of the finite
difference method and the eamcm method for computing the dynamic sensitivities by
measuring the number of evaluations of model equations. the results are shown inxeon cpu with  <dig> gmb ram is shown in the parenthesis for reference. based on the
comparison, the eamcm program surely outperforms the finite difference method using
dde <dig> solver. the eamcm program can be accessed from
http://www.che.ccu.edu.tw/~bioproc/index_english.files/page <dig> htm
and a brief manual can be found in the additional file  <dig> 
eamcm method. a) the relative sensitivities of heart rate with respect
to the uncontrolled average arterial blood pressure ; b) the
relative sensitivities of blood pressure with respect to β. the
green and red lines are obtained by the finite difference method with spacing
ratio  <dig>  and  <dig> , respectively. the blue line is obtained by the eamcm
method. the time is in dimensionless scale.

the number of evaluations of model equations for cardiovascular and apoptosis
systems when computing all dynamic parameter and initial sensitivities by the
finite difference method and the eamcm method, respectively. the cpu time in
second running by an  <dig>  ghz intel xeon cpu with  <dig> gmb ram is shown in the
parenthesis.

CONCLUSIONS
we extend the applicability of the adaptive direct-decoupled algorithm for ode models to
dde models and include the implementation of automatic differentiation technique among
it. the most attractive feature of the eamcm program is minimal user intervention that
can reduce the human effort required for solving the dynamic sensitivities of complex
biological systems and reduce the number of human errors introduced. eamcm requires the
user to supply only the model equations at run-time to compute dynamic sensitivities of
dde models. the evaluation of sensitivity equations is done automatically by automatic
differentiation technique along with the inevitable evaluation of model equations. the
computations of partial derivatives and values of model equations simultaneously induce
less overhead cost of computer time. the exact accuracy of the computed derivatives is
achieved by the property of automatic differentiation. by compared with direct-coupled
methods in theory, the adaptive direct-decoupled eamcm algorithm is efficient, accurate,
and easy to use for end users without programming background to do dynamic sensitivity
analysis on complex biological systems with time-delays.

we illustrate the use of the eamcm program in the sensitivity analysis of two dde
models: the cardiovascular control system and the tnf-α signal
transduction network. the parameters for sympathetical and vagal control of heart rates
are identified as key parameters in the cardiovascular control system. from the symmetry
of dynamic effects of sympathetical and vagal control on heart rate obtained by
sensitivity analysis, it reflects the sympathovagal balance in physiology. the
tnf-α signal transduction network is a more complicated system than the
first model and symbolic differentiation is unaffordable in this case to obtain the
sensitivity equations. by using the eamcm program, users can provide the model equations
only for solving the dynamic sensitivities of the model. the formation of survival and
death complexes are identified as the key reactions for the fragmentation of dna via
sensitivity analysis. this result reveals that the interplay between the components of
the survival and apoptosis pathways plays an important role in the tnf-α
signal transduction network.

