BACKGROUND
vector-borne helminthic diseases, such as onchocerciasis and lymphatic filariasis, are major human diseases in endemic areas. novel treatment approaches have been recently focusing on the interaction between the causative helminth agent and its bacterial symbiont. consequently, antibiotics, such as doxycycline, are used instead of, or with, anti-helminthic drugs for treatment  <cit> . however, because of difficulties in application, various bacterial targets are constantly studied  <cit> . this approach has also been adopted in veterinary helminthic diseases, such as bovine onchocerciasis and canine heartworm disease  <cit> .

spirocercosis is a vector-borne helminthic disease, mostly affecting carnivores, especially canids  <cit> . it is caused by the esophageal nematode spirocerca lupi  that has a wide distribution, but is mostly prevalent in warm, humid areas. the exact annual number of dogs affected annually worldwide has never been assessed. however, the disease has a wide distribution in the mediterranean basin, africa, central and south america  <cit> .

the definitive canid host of s. lupi is infected by ingesting an obligate intermediate coprophagous beetle vector, or a variety of paratenic hosts including birds, reptiles, amphibians and small mammals  <cit>  that are infected by s. lupi . the main vector of s. lupi in israel is the scarab beetle onthophagus sellatus   <cit> . the beetle ingests s. lupi eggs upon feeding on the definite host's feces, and within the beetle intermediate host, the infective larvae  develop. upon ingestion of the beetle, or the paratenic host, by the definitive host, l <dig> are released in the stomach, penetrate the gastric mucosa and migrate within blood vessel walls to the caudal thoracic aortic wall, where they develop to l <dig>  from there, larvae migrate to the caudal esophagus, where they mature and sexually reproduce. in the esophageal wall the nematodes are surrounded by a nodule, comprised of fibroblasts. the female worms burrow a tunnel through the esophageal wall and pass their eggs, which contain larvae  to the gastrointestinal tract, and into the feces. dogs infected by s. lupi present variable clinical signs, depending on the stage of the disease. the esophageal nodule can undergo neoplastic transformation, resulting in development of sarcomas . in israel, spirocercosis is an emerging disease since the 1990's, with  <dig> dogs diagnosed with the disease annually at the hebrew university veterinary teaching hospital , most from the greater tel aviv area  <cit> . since then, the geographic distribution disease in israel has widened, and during  <dig>   <dig> dogs were diagnosed with spirocercosis at the huvth, of which  <dig> dogs had neoplastic esophageal disease, and died or were euthanized shortly post presentation. additionally, the geographic distribution of the disease during this period had widened, and is no more restricted to the greater tel-aviv area, but includes all the subtropical areas in the country .

diagnosis of spirocercosis is always challenging, because the clinical signs are variable and occur in advanced disease stages. most animals are thus diagnosed only in the advanced stage of the disease, once nodules containing adult to egg shedding worms, are present in the esophagus  <cit> . the diagnosis of the disease in its early stages, prior to formation of esophageal nodules and egg shedding, is currently difficult and is almost impossible.

recent studies have shown a relationship between bacterial symbionts of the genus wolbachia and filarial pathogenic nematodes  <cit> . wolbachia which is estimated to infect 66% of arthropods and nematodes  <cit>  can manipulate various aspects of its arthropod hosts’ biology  <cit> . wolbachia was found to be an obligatory symbiont of certain filarial nematodes, with a possible role in the pathogenesis and immune response to filarial infection in the mammalian host  <cit> .

in the current study, we tested for the presence of wolbachia species and other specific symbionts in the nematode s. lupi, and detected a novel and stable infection in the worm. our findings are expected to promote further understanding of the interactions among various organisms in complex systems such as spirocercosis, and may have clinical implications, because this stable bacterial infection can potentially be used for novel simple diagnostic methods of this disease and aid in its prevention and treatment.

RESULTS
identification of novel bacterial symbiont in s. lupi from the thelazioidea super family
dna of s. lupi adults and larvae was extracted as described below, and was used for the detection of possible bacterial symbiont species including wolbachia, cardinium and rickettsia, by diagnostic pcr using specific primers. all s. lupi dna samples were found to be negative for these bacteria, while all the control dna samples were positive, as expected. this is in agreement with other studies, that have failed to detect wolbachia in certain species of the super family filarioidea  <cit> , and in other previously tested non-filarial nematode groups . thus, in order to detect other possible bacteria within the nematode, general 16s rdna  primers able to detect most known eubacteria were used in pcr. adult nematode's dna templates were positive for this bacterial gene, and the pcr products were cloned and sequenced. blast analysis  revealed initial similarity to sequences of the genus comamonas, a beta-proteobacterium of the comamonadaceae family, as published in genbank. consensus sequence of the identified comamonas sp. was determined, and deposited in genbank under the accession number: jq <dig>  in addition, for detection of other bacteria, rrs pcr-dgge analysis was performed. dgge separation resulted in a single product, suggesting that s. lupi probably carries only a single bacterial species . sequences of the excised dgge band were also highly similar to the genus comamonas. based on the consensus sequence, comamonas sp. specific primers were designed and used in nested pcr on dna template extracted from s. lupi adults, larvae  and eggs. all these stages were found to carry the same comamonas bacterium . these findings suggest that this novel comamonas sp. is vertically transmitted, and suggests that a long-term association between comamonas sp. and s. lupi exists.

phylogenetic analysis of the s. lupi symbiont
based on a nearly full length rrs gene from the above identified comamonas symbiont of s. lupi, and other selected comamonas spp. sequences, a phylogenetic tree was built. the phylogeny analysis showed that the current comamonas sp. sequence is clustered in a separate branch, together with c. testosteroni, known to participate in steroid degradation  <cit> , and other soil-derived comamonas species, represented herein by c. composti  <cit>  . comamonas spp., however, are not strict soil bacteria, and have recently been described in several insect species. interestingly, the s. lupi-dervied comamonas sp. is clustered in the same clade of comamonas spp. identified in blood feeding insects, such as mosquitoes  <cit>  and a flea  <cit> . this clade is separated from comamonas spp. identified in non-blood feeders, namely the termite odontotermes formosanus  <cit> , a plant hopper, and a moth . the same clade also includes a comamonas sp. identified in a soil nematode, oscheius sp. . none of these studies, however, have suggested a role for these comamonas spp. in their invertebrate hosts.

at present, the role that the identified comamonas sp. plays in the biology of the nematode remains unknown, and so is its potential role in canine spirocercosis. a recent study, however, showed that benign infection with s. lupi induces an immune response that is atypical to chronic helminthic infection, but rather suggests a bacterial infection  <cit> .

localization of comamonas sp. within s. lupi
based on the rrs sequence of the novel comamonas sp., a specific probe for fluorescent in situ hybridization  analysis was designed. using the comamonas-specific probe, we were able to demonstrate a specific signal in the gut epithelium of s. lupi larvae . the localization of the present comamonas bacterium in the nematode's gut epithelium, and the phylogenetic proximity to other comamonas spp. detected in blood-feeding insect hosts, may suggest that this novel comamonas sp. plays a role in blood digestion or degradation within s. lupi, which feeds on its vertebrate hosts’ blood and tissues  <cit> . in addition, the fish result, combined with the detection of comamonas sp. in all the tested developmental stages of s. lupi using pcr, as described above, are in support of a stable, non- axenic infection of s. lupi by this bacterium.

detection of s. lupi-derived comamonas sp. in blood samples of infected dogs
dna detection from the s. lupi-derived comamonas sp. in infected dogs may potentially be important in understanding the pathogenesis and promoting the diagnosis of spirocercosis. recently, the symbiotic bacterium wolbachia was detected in blood samples of dogs infected by the heartworm dirofilaria immitis  <cit> . in the present study, we used a diagnostic semi-nested pcr with comamonas-specific primers on dna extracted from blood samples of dogs definitely diagnosed with spirocercosis and of negative control dogs. comamonas sp. dna was detected in 9/ <dig>  samples obtained from dogs with spirocercosis, but in none of  <dig> negative control samples . the rather low detection rate of comamonas sp. in the dogs infected with the nematode may be due to several reasons; an unavailable bacterial template; improper storage of blood samples, resulting in insufficient dna preparation, or an undetectable symbiont template in standard pcr due to unknown pcr inhibitors on a low concentration of comamonas dna in the blood. alternatively, detection of the symbiont in blood samples may depend on the specific interactions between the bacterium and the nematode within the definitive canine host. it may be speculated that bacteria are only released from the nematode upon its death and disintegration, or within a limited specific time-point during infection within the definitive canine host. further studies are warranted, to assess the optimal blood storage protocols and dna extraction methods of canine samples, along with spiking experiments with comamonas sp. and quantitative pcr in order to devise an efficient molecular diagnostic protocol.

CONCLUSIONS
in the present study, we detected an additional organism, a bacterial symbiont of the genus comamonas, within the causative agent of spirocercosis, the nematode s. lupi. recently, microbial symbiosis has been repetitively shown to be a driving force in the biology and evolution of many organisms. the present study adds yet additional evidence of this trend, in a highly complex system. resolution of the complex interactions among the different organisms involved in the spirocercosis system may lead to novel, applicable methods for the early diagnosis, prevention and treatment of canine spirocercosis, in a similar manner as has been applied when the interaction between wolbachia spp. symbionts with their filarial nematode hosts has been elucidated .

