BACKGROUND
the large-mammal  diversity of north america and eurasia was considerably reduced by extinctions that occurred around the time of the pleistocene/holocene transition   <cit> . interestingly, some megafaunal species  became extinct at this time in north american and eurasian continental areas but survived on nearby islands for thousands of years thereafter  <cit> . some other species whose ranges likewise straddled the old and new worlds became extinct on one continent, but not the other, at the end of the pleistocene . a third pattern, involving a much lengthier decline, characterizes ovibos moschatus , the subject of this paper .

according to the available fossil record, the lineage terminally represented by o. moschatus arose in eurasia but entered north america at least as early as the early pleistocene  <cit> . at roughly the same time several other closely-related asian ovibovine lineages  also entered north america, where they evidently prospered before disappearing later in the pleistocene. by the start of the holocene, muskox diversity had been reduced to surviving o. moschatus; the species is now native only to the islands of the arctic archipelago and greenland , if late 20th-century efforts to reintroduce muskoxen into various parts of their ancient range are ignored  <cit> .

this lengthy history of muskox diversification in quaternary holarctica stands in sharp contrast to the extremely limited genetic diversity characterizing modern o. moschatus. groves'  <cit>  analysis of sequence data for cytochrome b  and the mitochondrial hypervariable region in  <dig> individuals of o. moschatus from various localities in alaska, canada, and greenland revealed only marginal genetic differentiation within extant populations. groves  <cit>  identified a total of  <dig> hypervariable region haplotypes, but these differed individually by only  <dig> or  <dig> nucleotide substitutions in approximately two-thirds of the cases, for a maximum of  <dig> differences – a total of  <dig> % variation across  <dig> bp , including insertions and deletions. extreme genetic homogeneity is also indicated by microsatellite analysis  and the nuclear mhc drb <dig> gene  <cit> . as several different populations were sampled for these studies, in the absence of any other plausible explanation it seems reasonable to conclude that living muskoxen simply lack genetic diversity. the nuclear and mitochondrial data therefore complement each other and imply that muskoxen either passed through a long period of very small effective population sizes, or experienced one or more genetic bottlenecks in very recent times. the investigation reported here was prompted by the possibility that ancient dna  analyses might shed some light on the complex history of extirpation, replacement, and differential survival that have evidently affected muskoxen populations during the late quaternary. ancient dna analysis has been successfully applied to late pleistocene and holocene  remains by various groups . because of existing uncertainty concerning species boundaries among some late quaternary members of tribe ovibovini, the terms "ovibovine" and "muskox" will be used to make general reference to such taxa, without endorsing any particular view as to their taxonomic distinctiveness or geographical distribution.

RESULTS
our results permit empirical recognition of two haplotype groupings within late quaternary muskoxen. the first consists of haplotypes recovered from pleistocene samples collected at various localities in northeastern asia, including islands north of the mainland . these haplotypes, which differ from all new world material so far examined as well as from the few known asian specimens that are of holocene age, appear to have completely disappeared and may therefore be grouped as "ehs" . all other known haplotypes, which include those found in all living muskoxen, are very similar inter se and thus comprise a second grouping, "shs" .

sequence verification
a total of  <dig> fossil samples yielded reproducible sequence covering cyt b and the hypervariable region of the mtdna genome; with the exception of omtai <dig>  each fragment from these samples was successfully amplified at least twice . one other sample  yielded consistent results for cyt b but the hv sequence could not be accurately scored . sequences were then determined via multiple clones produced from each pcr product, a standard adna protocol for insuring correct sequence determination  <cit>  . in addition, several samples were independently extracted by different individuals, amplified, and cloned. clones were sequenced in one or another of the three separate laboratories involved in this investigation .

haplotype grouping
                              a
                              b
                              c
                              d
                              e
                              e
notes. – aeh, extinct haplotype group; sh, surviving haplotype group . for clarity, in table eh and sh samples are separated by a horizontal line; italics distinguish pleistocene samples.

binstitutional abbreviations: cme, cerpolex/mammuthus expeditions, khatanga; cmn, canadian museum of nature, ottawa; zin, zoological institute, russian academy of sciences, st. petersburg.

cin 14c yrbp ±  <dig> σ .

dradiocarbon dating lab abbreviations: b, beta analytic, inc.; to, isotrace laboratories, university of toronto; i, isotopes ; lu, geological institute, leningrad state university.

eentries indicate whether sequence was obtained for each of  <dig> overlapping fragments; number indicates number of times bases in fragments were separately covered by pcrs .

fc.r. harington , correcting date of " <dig> ±  <dig> yrbp" reported by  <cit> .

galso dated by harington  <cit> , who reported an age estimate of  <dig> ±  <dig> yrbp.

has reported by harington  <cit> .

for example, to determine the cyt b sequence for sample omtai <dig>  two pcrs were performed for the first fragment and second overlapping fragment and five clones sequenced for each pcr product . the sequences summarized in tables  <dig>   <dig>   <dig> are thus the consensus of independent replications and multiple-clone sequences for each individual pcr fragment , and are unlikely to be laboratory artifacts . for this particular sample, all clones from the 3' fragments were identical with one exception: in clone  <dig> , there is a c-t transition which most likely represents a polymerase error. in the 5' fragment, all five clones of the first pcr were identical. in the second fragment three classes of sequence were obtained, represented by clones  <dig>  and  <dig> ; these were identical to the clones from the first pcr and matched the 3' fragment in the overlap. the second and third class of sequences  were different from all other clones obtained in the study, unique to the second pcr amplification, and did not match the 3' fragment in the overlap. blast searching the sequence revealed perfect or near perfect homology for both divergent sequences with other bovid species such as the domestic sheep, ovis aries. these likely represent nuclear mitochondrial dna sequences  and thus the sequence represented in the two independent fragments was scored as the bona fide mtdna sequence, the consensus of which was used for further study.

notes. – sample names and symbols as in table  <dig>  positions numbered from first base of atg start codon of cyt b. extinct haplotypes italicized; "nd", not determined.

notes. – samples were divided into two populations for comparison: >  <dig>  yr old  and <  <dig>  yr old .

notes. – sample names and symbols as in table  <dig>  positions numbered from a of atg start codon. extinct haplotype italicized.

this example represents a relatively extreme case, as most pcrs yielded identical or nearly identical sequences that differed by minor among-clone variations that can be explained by dna polymerase/sequencing errors or dna damage in the templates . where a position or several positions were not determinable after two independent amplifications, additional pcrs were performed, clones sequenced, and the majority base scored as the bona fide mtdna sequence for each position of each sequence. in other words, each base of each sequence was covered by multiple pcrs and multiple clone sequences to determine the majority base for a given position as in krings et al.  <cit> .

in addition, six other samples  yielded some sequence information, but the amount of dna recovered was insufficient to permit two independent replications for each fragment and/or retrieve all four fragments of interest in this study .

overlapping pcr reactions were used to identify possible numts and to prevent mischaracterizing numts as organellar mtdna  <cit> . in some species dna extracted from hair may yield numts at a higher frequency than do other tissues  <cit> , making it a useful proxy for gauging the possibility of numt contamination. a hair sample  from a living muskox was amplified, products cloned, and multiple sequences determined using several of the primer combinations used in this study. sequences were consistent in the overlapping regions and matched dna from other modern muskoxen, indicating that the primers used in this study do not favor numts over organellar mtdna .

cytochrome b
a 114-bp segment of cyt b was successfully retrieved from most of the working fossil samples ; in three cases  it was possible to amplify a  <dig> bp fragment. all specimens identified as shs that yielded cyt b sequence were identical. only partial sequence data could be recovered for omwra <dig> and omyak <dig> . however, for comparable runs of sequence, these specimens were identical to all other shs.

owing to institutional sampling restrictions and the low quality of retrieved dna, analysis of omtai <dig> had to be based on one repetition of each of the two overlapping fragments. although results for this specimen are therefore tentative, its sequence does not differ from that of omtai <dig> and omtai  <dig> . thus, despite some individual variation, in all cases samples could be classed unambiguously as either eh or sh.

specimens in the eh group differed uniformly from those classed as sh by three fixed differences . there were also some internal differences within the eh group. omtai <dig> and omtai <dig> possessed an additional base substitution not seen in other members , and omboll <dig> expressed a unique a to g substitution at position  <dig>  given the difficulties encountered in determining the mitochondrial hv region sequence for this last sample, this result was excluded from analysis.

the holocene samples  exhibited no variations. only one haplotype was retrieved , which is consistent with groves and shields'  <cit>  evidence for limited among-individual variation at the cyt b locus in living muskoxen. by contrast, the pleistocene samples yielded  <dig> haplotypes among  <dig> sequences and thus greater among-individual haplotype and nucleotide diversity in a much smaller sample.

as a proxy for resolving the magnitude of differences among cyt b haplotypes,  <dig>  bp of sequence in overlapping fragments was determined for one of the best-performing specimens, omtai <dig>  and aligned by eye against  <dig> modern muskox cyt b sequences deposited in genbank . among modern muskoxen, within-group differences in cyt b sequences range from  <dig> to  <dig> base substitutions . by comparison, omtai <dig> differed from all modern samples by 5– <dig> substitutions. domestic sheep   and goat   were used as outgroups for phylogenetic analysis. the takin budorcas taxicolor was not included in the analysis as groves and shields  <cit>  have shown that the relationship between this species and muskox is not demonstrably closer than that of other caprines. when submitted to phylogenetic testing using maximum parsimony, neighbor joining, and maximum likelihood methods, omtai <dig> placed in all analyses outside modern muskoxen cyt b sequences  supporting the distinctiveness of pleistocene vs. holocene haplotypes .

hypervariable region
samples from yukon and islands in the canadian arctic archipelago  displayed minor haplotype variation affecting 2– <dig> positions in the studied portion of the hypervariable region . no fixed differences were found between these samples and sequence data on modern muskoxen in genbank  <cit> .

one position in the genbank samples was not observed in any of the fossil sequences, nor was it found in a modern muskox sequence  that was acquired specifically to test results from this study . because all of the sequences presented here are consensus results, generated from multiple pcrs and multiple clones sequenced on both strands, the difference in the database for modern samples is best interpreted as a sequencing artifact in the published sequences.

notes. – sample names from table  <dig>  base positions numbered from first readable base from 5' amplified fragment. identity to first sequence designated by a dot; differences indicated by base sequence. deletions indicated by "-". for some samples, specific bases were not covered; these are designated "nd" .  extinct haplotypes as determined for cyt b and hv region are italicized.

omtai <dig>  one of two holocene samples from taimyr, yielded two unique haplotypes for the hypervariable region, identified here as a and b . multiple pcrs, cloning, and sequencing of clones by two independent laboratories established that these haplotypes differ by  <dig> base, the difference likely being due to heteroplasmy . haplotype a differed by 0– <dig> positions and haplotype b by 1– <dig> positions from sequences recovered for other fossil muskoxen from the canadian arctic archipelago. the difference between both haplotypes of omtai <dig> and modern muskoxen was 1– <dig> substitutions.

all of the other successfully sequenced samples from taimyr  are of pleistocene age . they were found to differ by 0– <dig> substitutions from one another but by 2– <dig> positions from modern muskoxen and the canadian fossil samples. in addition, all the pleistocene taimyr samples presented  <dig> fixed difference not observed in any of the other samples studied , while omtai <dig> and omtai <dig> shared  <dig> base changes not found in any other specimen group . omtai <dig> and omtai <dig> shared one position not found in any other specimen group .

the dna yield from one other sample, omboll <dig> from the new siberian islands, was low. however, it yielded reproducible eh sequence for cyt b. this is consistent with the sample's origin  and age . unfortunately, the hv region yielded several different sequences per amplification, including sequences that were similar to sh sequences, eh sequences, and ones that diverge from all others encountered in the course of this study . since results for this specimen were highly inconsistent, we suspect some form of sample contamination but cannot identify the likely source. this required that we remove it form further analysis.

as may be seen in table  <dig>  the pleistocene sequences had more transversions  and slightly higher haplotype and nucleotide diversity per site measured than did holocene sequences. however, given the almost 9-fold higher representation of holocene compared to pleistocene sequences, the statistics should be treated with caution. higher among-sequence diversity  for holocene samples supports the concept that genetic diversity in muskoxen has been restricted. this is also consistent with the results obtained for cyt b .

to further clarify among-sequence relationships, we depict the sequence network suggested by our data in figure 5: nodes reflect missing intermediates and correlate with the number of mutational steps between sequences. as expected, all haplotypes of the sh group are very closely related. most of the extinct haplotypes recovered differ somewhat among themselves, and all taimyr ehs differ more substantially from shs than do shs among themselves. the distance between the extinct haplotypes and the closest sh sample is two to three mutational steps. the network supports the distinctiveness of most of the hv haplotypes of pleistocene age.

discussion
in view of the small number of specimens analyzed, conclusions have to be tentative. the conclusion best supported by the data is that, compared to modern muskoxen, late quaternary ovibos populations were less homogeneous for the loci sampled in this investigation. in particular, one group of haplotypes  occurring in fossil specimens from northeastern asia differs from haplotypes in existing databases . the actual number of differences is not great , but their existence is thrown into sharp relief by the virtual lack of variation in the modern wildherd. in view of the multiple safeguards utilized to insure accuracy and repeatability , we feel that we can exclude laboratory artifacts or dna damage as the source of these differences.

when the extinct haplotypes might have disappeared is not known. in our sample, the latest accepted record  is  <dig>  ±  <dig> yrbp , which tells us that populations in which these haplotypes occurred survived at least into the late glacial maximum, but not whether they lasted until the period of intensified megafaunal extinction at the end of the pleistocene approximately  <dig>  years ago .

another conclusion that is supported by the limited evidence currently available is that the sh group was present in mid-holocene asian muskoxen. this inference is based on the fact that omtai <dig> from taimyr yielded sequence data indistinguishable from modern.  given available data, however, it is premature to conclude that ehs were definitely not present as late as the middle holocene. if in the future other specimens of holocene age come to light in asia, it would be well worthwhile to sample them for adna studies.

a last point of interest is that ovibos, one of the few high-latitude megafaunal mammals to have survived into recent times, has clearly done so with reduced genetic variability. as already noted, at what point before the present this variability was lost cannot be satisfactorily established with existing data. for species for which adna sequence information is substantially better, such as bears and bison, there is molecular evidence for repeated loss and turnover of haplotype diversity during the late quaternary . although no adna investigation of the giant irish deer, megaloceros, has yet been published, stuart et al.  <cit>  have recently shown that the radiocarbon record for this taxon reveals dramatic changes in population distributions during the late pleistocene, followed ultimately by total collapse in the mid-holocene. thus, the data presented here, in combination with studies performed on other megafaunal species, is consistent with a scenario in which genetic diversity in muskoxen was reduced prior to the pleistocene/holocene transition.

it would also be of great interest to know whether late quaternary small mammals  were affected by population crashes at the same time as larger species were. extensive work on the mitochondrial genetics and phylogeography of extant lemmings by fedorov and coworkers  <cit>  suggests that, in these rodents at least, bottlenecking and catastrophic loss of genetic diversity did not occur in late glacial/postglacial time. the robustness of this inference could be tested with adna methods similar to the ones utilized here, as there are large samples of reasonably well-dated fossil lemming material in the paleontological collections of various museums .

CONCLUSIONS
in summary, the combined genetic and chronometric evidence presented in this paper establishes that ovibos moschatus was genetically more diverse in the late pleistocene than it is today. precisely when haplotypes not found in extant muskoxen were lost, and under what conditions, are matters that cannot be well constrained at present. however, the data decisively show that now-extinct haplotypes persisted in asia to a point only a few thousand years earlier than the accepted onset of the end-pleistocene extinctions. it is reasonable to predict that, with better sampling, it may eventually be possible to show that populations of ovibos moschatus, far from passing through this period of heightened extinction unscathed, were in fact brought down to small numbers over much of their original range, perhaps almost to the vanishing point  <cit> . why muskoxen should have survived nevertheless in these circumstances, while many other high-latitude species did not, is yet another puzzle within the overarching mystery of late quaternary extinctions.

