BACKGROUND
there is great hope among clinical proteomics researchers that mass spectrometry  will soon become a powerful diagnostic tool. extensive research has been conducted on statistical learning methods for disease prediction from ms data . the data considered in this context are mainly spectra of complex peptide mixtures, such as plasma or serum samples. these spectra contain signals of thousands of peptides. the dimension of the input space is therefore very high, while the number of available samples is relatively small . furthermore, only a small fraction of the peptides may potentially be significant in determining the health state of the patient. most classification algorithms do not perform well in this setting, and for the ones that do  the results become difficult to interpret. here we consider two paradigms for reducing the dimension of the data and identifying informative variables: feature selection and feature extraction. we review commonly used feature selection and extraction procedures and propose a new approach based on aggregating the preferences of several competing methods.

appropriate feature selection for mass spectrometry data is crucial from diagnostic point of view. selected peaks from ms datasets corresponding to peptide signals should be further studied in order to identify functional relationships and biological processes underlying the given disease. peptides from proteins, which have clear biochemical functionality, can be treated as biomarkers for the disease. one typical approach to feature selection is to rank the features according to the value of some statistic. we examine four popular feature ranking criteria  and show that even though each of these methods is intuitively compelling, they result in different feature rankings . similar observations have been made in  <cit>  and  <cit> . this stands in contradiction with the overall objective to use proteomic ms datasets for identification of biomarkers specific of a given disease. it is natural to postulate that one does not obtain many different biomarker lists for the same dataset. at the same time it is not obvious, which single criteria best describes a biomarker. we are inclined to assume that each scoring function provides unique information about the variables. therefore, we propose to take into account information coming from various sources. this should also aid in eliminating false positive biomarkers, as they are less likely to be scored favorably by all of the distinct methods.

we present two novel solutions to the biomarker selection problem, both of which aim at unifying the preferences of a number of feature scoring functions. the first approach is based on computing a consensus ranking, given the individual rankings from several scoring functions. this is often referred to as rank aggregation. this problem was formulated in the context of the web search engines in  <cit>  and several heuristics have been proposed therein for this task. in our application the consensus is found as the stationary distribution of an appropriately defined markov chain over the set of features.

a different way of reducing the dimension of the data is by feature extraction. instead of selecting a subset of the original features, the aim is to construct a group of new features that optimize a given objective. often the method of choice is principal component analysis , which retains as much of the original variance of the data as possible, with the condition that the output variables are uncorrelated. typically pca is applied to all of the variables to extract a small number of new variables, which convey the greatest amount of the variance. we argue that in the case of ms data  it is unrealistic to assume that the directions of the greatest variance of the data capture the differences between the observed health conditions. instead many other factors, independent of the given patient classification, like age, diet, or sample processing may contribute to the variance of the data. for best results and interpretability we propose to apply pca only to a selected group of features. this selection is based on the outcome of a number of scoring functions.

RESULTS
we have evaluated our methods on two ms datasets. the first dataset is a prostate cancer seldi-tof dataset provided by the clinical proteomics program of the national cancer institute. this dataset contains  <dig> samples , and  <dig> from patients with prostate cancer). the motivation was to be able to discriminate prostate cancer against other conditions, therefore we have decided to classify these samples into two groups: one with cancer samples and the other with all the rest. we note that overall better classification accuracy can be achieved on this dataset with the exclusion of bph samples . the second dataset used in our experiments is a maldi-tof ovarian cancer dataset from the keck laboratory at yale university. we have obtained a preprocessed version of this dataset by contacting the authors of  <cit> . the dataset contains  <dig> samples . each sample contains intensity levels for  <dig> peaks. all methods were evaluated by ten fold cross-validation in which all the steps  were repeated for each fold on the training part of the samples. the average accuracy  is shown. figures  <dig> and  <dig> show classification results for the prostate cancer and ovarian cancer datasets respectively.

markov chain rank aggregation
to evaluate the performance of the markov chain rank aggregation algorithm we first scored each feature using the four scoring functions, thus obtaining four rankings. next, we selected top  <dig> features from each list and aggregated the resulting partial rankings using the markov chain method. note that this process was repeated for each training block of the data in the cross-validation scheme. best results were obtained using the mc <dig> transition matrix for the prostate cancer dataset and mc <dig> transition matrix in the case of the ovarian cancer dataset . figures  <dig> and  <dig> compare the classifier accuracy  obtained using different feature selection methods and their aggregation for the two datasets. it can be observed that consensus ranking found by the mc rank aggregation performed well compared to the separate feature rankings. it did not achieve the highest overall score, but was clearly better than most of the input rankings it was computed from. in case of the prostate cancer dataset  the classification accuracy for features selected with mc <dig> closely followed the results for the best input method, while all other input methods performed much worse. in case of the ovarian cancer data , mc <dig> also outperformed three of four input methods. best features selected with the t-statistic yielded the highest prediction accuracy on this dataset. however, the accuracy of most classifiers significantly decreased when more features from this ranking were used. the mc <dig> ranking displayed a more stable behavior increasing the prediction accuracy as more features were included.

consensus feature extraction via pca
to evaluate the performance of the proposed consensus feature extraction method, for each cross-validation split we took a union of  <dig> best features from each ranking and applied pca to the data reduced to only those features. a specified number of the outcome consensus features  was chosen each time to construct the classifier. due to the limited number of the input variables, pca outputs only a small number of significant features. we decided to take only those which constitute for at least  <dig> % of the variance. the performance of standard pca and the proposed "consensus" version for the two datasets are presented in figures  <dig> and  <dig>  features obtained from consensus pca for the prostate cancer dataset  were far more informative than the ones extracted using regular pca . the accuracy achieved using a small number of the consensus features also compared favorably with the results for a large set of features selected by the best input ranking function. in the case of the ovarian cancer data using consensus pca significantly improved the performance of the decision tree classifier. remaining classifiers yielded better predictions using the standard pca version. we also note that in the case of this dataset using standard principal components, which convey the variance of all features, overall resulted in more accurate predictions than using features selected by ranking methods . based on these observations we suspect that in the case of this dataset lower ranked features provide additional information useful for class prediction. this would explain the lower accuracy of the classifiers constructed using the consensus features, which only convey information about the top  <dig> features from each method.

CONCLUSIONS
we have proposed and tested two biomarker selection methods: one based on rank aggregation and second applying pca to the informative variables selected by different scoring procedures. both methods raise the possibility of identifying predictors supported by several competing feature ranking procedures. although we focused on the analysis of ms data, our methods can just as well be applied to extract consensus predictors from other large-scale experiments .

in order to confirm the relevance of predictors found by any computational means one must study their underlying biological function. we are currently involved in two proteomic projects carried out by the laboratory of mass spectrometry of the polish academy of science and the warsaw oncology center, which aim at identifying prognostic biomarkers for cystic-fibrosis and diagnostic biomarkers for colorectal cancer. these studies will provide us a chance to validate our procedures with respect to their ability to identify more biologically meaningful predictors and less false positives.

