BACKGROUND
members of the genus microbotryum are pathogenic fungi that have a global distribution and infect over nine families of host plants, with most replacing floral structures with fungal spores  <cit> . within this genus, the anther-smut fungi of plants in the caryophyllaceae, consist of many recognized and cryptic species, most possessing a very narrow host range, although some are more generalist  <cit> . hybrid incompatibilities for the species examined in this complex leads to post-zygotic isolation in the forms of inviability and sterility . the high rates of selfing and ecological specialization on different host plants are factors that should promote speciation in microbotryum  <cit> . the anther smut fungi thus allow examination of the ecology and evolution of host/pathogen interactions in “wild,” non-agricultural environments  <cit> , where the genetically variable hosts provides an important contrast to the heavily studied, more monocultural hosts of agricultural systems. microbotryum species also serve as a model for emerging infectious disease through host shifts  <cit> , for studying the evolution of mating systems, non-recombining mating-type chromosomes and sex chromosomes  <cit> , and for examining pathogens that alter the development of the host  <cit> .

as obligate parasites, microbotryum anther smut fungi must complete their life cycle in association with a host plant. their fungal diploid teliospore masses give the flowers a dark, powdery appearance, thus the name “anther smut.” teliospores of microbotryum are transported from diseased to healthy plants by direct transmission when plants are in close proximity  <cit>  or by pollinating insects  <cit> , where once deposited the diploid fungus germinates and undergoes meiosis to give rise to four haploid cells  <cit> . each of these cells can bud off yeast-like sporidia on the plant surface. new infectious dikaryotic hyphae are rapidly produced by conjugation of two cells of opposite mating-type  and enter the host tissue to grow endophytically until they reach the bud meristems and anthers  <cit> . here the nuclei fuse  and teliosporogenesis occurs thus completing the life cycle .fig.  <dig> lifecycle of microbotryum lychnidis-dioicae. the infection cycle for m. lychnidis-dioicae) is shown. infection begins when diploid teliospores germinate on a suitable plant surface, and after meiosis, produce linear tetrads of haploid basidiospores. these cells may mate with cells of opposite mating-type , either directly within the tetrad or after budding to yield free yeast-like sporidia. mated cells form conjugation bridges and, upon receiving suitable cues from the host plant, develop into dikaryotic hyphae that penetrate the host tissue. the hyphae progress systemically through the plant and migrate to the flower primordia. there nuclear fusion  occurs, as the hyphae break up and develop into diploid teliospores that replace the pollen in the anthers of the developing flowers. pollinator species are then able to transmit the spores to other uninfected flowers, thus completing the cycle



the commandeering of insect pollinators for disease transmission is associated with significant pathogenic alterations of the host’s floral morphology, particularly in relation to male and female structures. although diseased plants are only slightly affected in vegetative morphology and survival  <cit> , infection often results in complete host sterility, as no pollen is produced in the anthers and the ovary becomes rudimentary. interestingly, in dioecious or gynodioecious species of silene , ovaries of diseased female plants are aborted while a male morphology develops with spore-bearing anthers. the basis for the changes in female plants is not fully understood. studies have identified host genes expressed during infection of females that are also normally expressed in uninfected males .

the formation of a hyphal dikaryon by mating between haploid cells is a prerequisite for infection in microbotryum, and thus each newly diseased plant represents the completion of a sexual reproductive cycle. in heterothallic fungi, mating can occur only between haploid cells carrying different mating-types, which are controlled by alleles at one or two loci  <cit> . in a few fungi, recombination suppression has evolved around the mating-type locus/loci , sometimes leading to structurally dimorphic chromosomes similar to the sex chromosomes in plants and animals  <cit> . the suppression of recombination on mating-type chromosomes is expected to lead to degeneration; this can be manifested as transposable element accumulation  <cit> , codon usage degeneration  <cit> , accumulation of deleterious mutations  <cit> , and eventually to chromosomal dimorphism, and thus the emergence of allosomes  <cit> . such degeneration has in fact been observed on the mating-type chromosomes of some fungi, including the ascomycete neurospora tetrasperma  <cit>  and the basidiomycete microbotryum lychnidis-dioicae  <cit> , the most well-studied representative of the anther-smut fungi.

we sequenced the genome of haploid isolate lamole p1a <dig>  <cit> , of the a <dig> mating type, to represent the m. lychnidis-dioicae species found in association with the perennial, dioecious host, silene latifolia. rna-sequencing of distinct life cycle stages was incorporated to validate gene content and measure expression changes during infection. we identified gene family expansions that could play a role in plant infection by comparing m. lychnidis-dioicae to other basidiomycetes, taking advantage of increasing genome coverage of the pucciniomycotina subphylum. the identification of genes that are induced or repressed during infection highlighted carbohydrate active enzymes  that may be involved in host cell degradation or manipulation of host development. additionally, the m. lychnidis-dioicae genome is riddled with a diverse array of transposable elements , including a higher proportion of helitron elements than found in the much larger and more highly-repetitive genomes of related rust fungi. genome regions corresponding to the mating-type chromosomes of m. lychnidis-dioicae  <cit>  are enriched for repetitive sequence. further analysis of the sequence of the entire a <dig> mating-type chromosome identified more than  <dig> genes linked with mating-type. together, these findings provide an in-depth portrait of genetic architecture and adaptation in a specialized fungal plant pathogen.

RESULTS
genome sequence and content
the  <dig>  mb haploid genome of m. lychnidis-dioicae was sequenced using  <dig> technology, generating high coverage of three different-sized libraries , and assembled using newbler . the assembly was comprised of  <dig>  scaffolds where the average base was present in a scaffold of 185 kb and a contig of 50 kb . despite the large number of contigs, the assembly was a nearly complete representation of the sequenced genome, comprising 97 % of sequenced bases. the assembly included five scaffold ends with the typical fungal telomere repeat , though three of these scaffolds were smaller than 1 kb in size.table  <dig> genome statistics of nuclear genome and mating-type chromosome regions

mean intercds length c

anon-recombining regions . bpseudo-autosomal regions . caverage length between coding sequence  start and stop



high coverage strand-specific rna-seq, generated from three biological conditions  assisted with the prediction of  <dig>  protein coding genes and identified expression changes potentially important for the pathogenic lifecycle. sampled conditions included two in vitro conditions, haploid cells grown on yeast peptone dextrose media  agar  or on 2 % water agar . these were compared to a sample from infected male plant tissue during the late stages of fungal development, where teliospores form on partially and fully opened smutted flowers  <cit>  . incorporation of rna-seq into predicted gene structures  defined utrs for the vast majority  predicted genes; the average length of 5′ and 3′ utrs was  <dig> bases and  <dig> respectively. coding sequences average  <dig>  bases  in length and contain  <dig>  exons; genes are separated by intergenic regions  <dig> bases in length on average. the m. lychnidis-dioicae gene set has high coverage of a core eukaryotic gene set  <cit> , highest in fact than any of the fungal gene sets used in comparative analysis , suggesting the assembly includes a highly complete gene set.

the mitochondrial genome consisted of a single finished contig of 97 kb and included the canonical set of genes. these were the respiratory-related proteins of the nadh dehydrogenase family , apocytochrome b , cytochrome oxidases , the proteins related to atp synthesis ; ribosomal rnas ; ribosomal proteins ; dna polymerase  and  <dig> trnas. homing endonucleases of the laglidadg and giy-yig families and a maturase protein were located in mitochondrial intronic regions, including within three introns of cox <dig> 

to examine the presence of at-rich isochores and more generally the genome structure in gc composition in m. lychnidis-dioicae, we measured the fluctuation of gc percent along the assembly. although the genome is not organized in discrete isochores as in some fungal genomes  <cit> , we observe some large-scale variation  in base composition within chromosomes, as well as finer-scale fluctuations . the gc content was positively correlated with coding density, with the most significant correlations for  <dig> and 10 kb windows explaining  <dig>  % of the variance . this correlation has been explained in other systems by biased codon usage toward gc-rich codons or alternatively biased gene conversion occurring more frequently in coding than in non-coding sequences  <cit> . in fact, an analysis of the preferred codons , showed that  <dig> out of  <dig> had a gc base in the third position, which is the most degenerate position and therefore primarily influences the gc composition of genes .

shifts in transposable element type, location, and impact of rip
the genome of m. lychnidis-dioicae contained diverse transposable elements , represented by  <dig> consensus elements, covering 14 % of the total assembly. the overall te content was lower than of other species in pucciniomycota; in puccinia graminis f. sp. tritici or melampsora larici-populina, in which tes account for nearly 45 % of the assembled genomes, contributing to the expanded genome size of these fungi  <cit> . among class i retrotransposon elements , long terminal repeat  elements were the most common , in particular copia-like elements , in agreement with prior studies of genome sampling and expressed sequence profiles  <cit> . the remainder of class i elements consisted of long interspersed nuclear element   and dictyostelium intermediate repeat sequence  elements . among class ii dna transposons , terminal inverted repeat  and helitron elements, which transpose by rolling-circle replication  <cit>  account for 12 % and 10 % of te sequences, respectively . the helitron proportion was an order of magnitude higher than in the more repetitive genomes of other pucciniomycota fungi p. graminis f. sp. tritici and m. larici-populina, for which a similar analysis characterized only 1 % of te elements as helitrons  <cit> .table  <dig> genome coverage of te families 



the te categories varied significantly in their proximity to genes. a chi-squared test of heterogeneity found a significant difference in the te content of regions nearby genes, comparing regions less than versus greater than 1 kb upstream and downstream of genes . in particular, class ii elements  were closer to genes than class i elements , with a greater enrichment upstream of genes compared to downstream . in addition, there appeared to be an association between te-rich regions in m. lychnidis-dioicae and genes for small secreted proteins , which can include effector proteins involved in host-pathogen interactions as suggested in some pathogen genomes  <cit> . ssps were indeed located nearer to tes than the set of all other non-ssp genes .

hypermutation in tes that resembles the genome defense, repeat-induced point mutation , has previously been observed in the ltr elements  and helitron transposons of m. lychnidis-dioicae  <cit> . some genes that appeared similar to those necessary for rip in neurospora crassa  <cit>  were found in the m. lychnidis-dioicae genome. these include a cytosine methyltransferase , but establishing the orthology with the rip-essential rid gene from n. crassa versus other cytosine methyltransferases  would require further investigation. m. lychnidis-dioicae sequences similar to the dim-5h <dig> histone methyltransferase that is essential for marking rip regions in n. crassa  were also found.

evaluation of dinucleotide signature at transition mutations in  <dig> te families  revealed that 40 % of these te copies exhibited elevated substitution rates that were particular to which nucleotide was 3′ to the cytosine . eighty per cent of te copies with high frequencies of cytosine mutation showed a bias toward cpg dinucleotides, consistent with the “cpg effects”  <cit>  of maintenance methylation known in eukaryotes , including fungi  <cit>  where cpg methylation of tes have been shown in ascomycete and basidiomycete fungi  <cit> . notably, the rate of cpg mutations varied according to te order and superfamily examined: te copies exhibiting a pattern of frequent transition at cpg sites appeared lower for class ii dna transposons  than that of class i retrotransposons  . in addition, the gc content in tes  was very close to gc content in genes  and genome .

in addition, the m. lychnidis-dioicae genome was found to contain the core rnai machinery components, that may act to constrain proliferation of transposable elements, contrasting with some other basidiomycetes that have lost this pathway  <cit> . the rnai pathway components were identified based on similarity to known rnai genes in fungi and validated by examining predicted functional domains . the genome of m. lychnidis-dioicae was also found to contain one copy of a rna-dependent rna polymerase , two copies of argonaute , and one copy of dicer . all of these components of rnai machinery were expressed under each of the conditions examined, suggesting the pathway is active across life cycle states, although one copy of argonaute  was significantly more highly expressed  during infection compared to nutrient limited and rich agar media.

mating-type locus and chromosome
the central proteins involved in mating-type determination in basidiomycetes were found in m. lychnidis-dioicae. orthologs of the two-component homeodomain transcription factor that functions in post-mating compatibility, hd <dig>  and hd <dig> , were assembled in a  <dig>  kb region; as previously described hd <dig> and hd <dig> are adjacent and divergently transcribed in m. lychnidis-dioicae  <cit> , similar to other fungi  <cit> . both the mating pheromone receptor  <cit>  and the homeodomain compatibility factor identified above are located at the ends of their respective supercontigs, such that the genomic proximity of these two essential mating-type-determining loci is unclear. the chromosomes bearing these two mating-type loci show suppressed recombination across most of their length, with only two small recombining regions at their ends, i.e., pseudo-autosomal regions   <cit> . the assembly scaffolds corresponding to the non-recombining regions  and to the pars were identified based on alignment to an optical map of the mating-type chromosomes  <cit>  and by performing additional sequencing of gel purified chromosomes . a total of  <dig> genes mapped to the a <dig> mating-type chromosome, including  <dig> genes found on the nrrs and  <dig> genes found on the pars . other than the genes for the pheromone receptor, the homeodomain transcription factors, and the ste <dig> protein kinase, no other genes on the mating-type chromosome have a predicted function linked to mating in other systems.

consistent with the expectation in regions of suppressed recombination , the te density  was several fold higher in the non-recombining region  of the a <dig> mating-type chromosome  relative to the autosomes , confirming prior studies of a te accumulation on the mating-type chromosomes as a whole  <cit> . the pseudoautosomal regions  displayed a te content  more similar to the estimate for autosomal regions than to the nrr of the mating-type chromosome. gene density in the nrr of the mating-type chromosome , estimated as cds density, was less than half the gene density of the autosomes  . the number of genes predicted per 10 kb positions also indicated a lower density in the nrr of the mating-type chromosome  than in the autosomal partition  . as with te content, the pars displayed gene density values  closer to the autosomal estimates than the nrr of the mating-type chromosome. the nrr of the mating-type chromosomes contained genes of the same distribution, with the exception of 2-fold elevated density of small secreted proteins  and, in particular, a 5-fold enrichment of cys-rich ssps compared to the autosomes.fig.  <dig> comparisons of sequence characteristics in non-recombining regions  of the mating-type chromosome, pseudoautosomal regions , and autosomes. the genomic regions are shown, with results for the two supercontigs  corresponding to the two pars presented separately. a transposable element  density is shown as the total length of te sequences over the total length of dna analyzed. b, c gene density is shown as the proportion of the total length of coding region  over the total length of dna analyzed, and number of putative genes identified per  <dig> nucleotides, respectively. d–f proportion gc base pair contents are shown for cds, tes, and for the remaining, predominantly intergenic regions. g–i proportion gc base pair content for protein-coding genes are shown relative to first-, second-, and third-codon positions 



with regard to base pair composition, again the nrr exhibited a pattern distinct from the pars or autosomes in gc content. the gc content in protein coding genes, irrespective of codon position, were similar among the nrr of the mating-type chromosome, par, and autosomes , as were the contents represented by tes . however, in other sequences, representing inter-genic regions not consisting of tes, the nrr displayed markedly reduced gc content  while pars and autosomes had similar gc levels. gc content of codon positions within protein-coding genes did not vary among the nrr, pars, and autosomes , notably in that the third-codon position patterns was not reflective of intergenic gc composition variation across regions. this pattern as well as the lower gc content observed for the second-codon position compared to first or third positions is consistent with some prior research  <cit> . the correspondence analysis of codon usage  among the non-recombining region of the mating-type chromosome, par and autosomal did not indicate obvious differences in codon usage.

gene conservation and lineage-specific changes
the comparison of  <dig>  predicted proteins of m. lychnidis-dioicae to those of diverse basidiomycetes revealed gene loss and gain patterns relevant in terms of the growth and pathogenesis of this organism. we included representatives of the three subphyla of basidiomycetes , as well as three ascomycota species as outgroups . within the pucciniomycotina, species compared included m. lychnidis-dioicae and two closely related microbotryomycetes  and three other more distantly related species; within this group the two other plant pathogens  are biotrophic, like m. lychnidis-dioicae. these comparisons revealed  <dig>  microbotryum gene clusters representing  <dig>  genes that were broadly conserved in the basidiomycota . the gene families specific to pucciniomycotina, with orthologs present only in m. lychnidis-dioicae and/or the other pucciniomycotina species,  was composed of a small set of  <dig> predicted proteins from m. lychnidis-dioicae; the two rusts  share a larger number of pucciniomycotina-specific proteins in part due to their expanded genome size. examining proteins conserved across the microbotryomycetes, orthologs of  <dig>  m. lychnidis-dioicae proteins were present in at least one other species, and of these  <dig> were specific to the microbotryomycetes. a set of  <dig> gene duplications occurring specifically along the m. lychnidis-dioicae lineage were identified using phylogenetic analysis ; these did not display functional enrichment for gene ontology  term assignments, as go terms were only assigned for  <dig> of the  <dig> genes. while most genes  were shared with occurrence in at least one other species, the remaining set of  <dig>  genes appear specific to m. lychnidis-dioicae.fig.  <dig> phylogenetic relationship and gene conservation of microbotryum lychnidis-dioicae and  <dig> compared fungi. phylogeny  is based on concatenated muscle alignments of  <dig> single copy genes. species phylogeny was inferred using raxml  with  <dig>  bootstrap replicates; all nodes were supported by at least 99 % of replicates. ortholog conservation  highlights genes conserved in all species , genes conserved in at least two species , genes unique to the pucciniomycotina or microbotryomycetes  and genes unique to a given species 



the identification of enriched or depleted pfam domains for m. lychnidis-dioicae compared to other fungi revealed significant differences in functional categories between these genomes. a total of six protein domains were significantly enriched or depleted  in m. lychnidis-dioicae compared to the other basidiomycetes examined . enriched domains include secretory lipases, and two domains of unknown function, duf <dig>  and duf <dig> . duf <dig>  was present in five copies in m. lychnidis-dioicae and was only present otherwise in mixia osmundae and s. roseus in our comparison; three of these five genes were mapped to the gt <dig> cazy family expanded in m. lychnidis-dioicae . both m. lychnidis-dioicae and the rusts contain a large number of proteins with the duf <dig> domain;  <dig> of the 10 m. lychnidis-dioicae proteins with a duf <dig> domain also contained a subtilase family protease domain. phylogenetic analysis of proteins with the duf <dig> domain suggested that independent gene family expansions occurred in different species; the rusts formed a separate clade from microbotryum that is further subdivided, mostly along species lines . domains depleted in m. lychnidis-dioicae relative to other basidiomycetes were also identified, including cytochrome p <dig>  nacht, and f-box domains . a more narrow comparison of the three microbotryomycetes to the other species within the pucciniomycotina identified additional expansions and depletions common to the species in this lineage. a fungal trichothecene efflux pump  gene family was enriched in m. lychnidis-dioicae and s. roseus, with  <dig> copies in each genome . by contrast, the alpha-kinase family that is highly expanded in the rusts  <cit>  was absent in the microbotryomycetes. the cutinase domain shows a similar conservation pattern; while multiple cutinase genes are found in other biotrophic pathogens, no copies were detected in m. lychnidis-dioicae. at lower levels of significance, the cbm <dig> cellulose binding domain was detected as absent from all species in the pucciniomycotina with the exception of r. glutinis . more specific analysis of these enriched and depleted domains is presented below.table  <dig> expanded or depleted pfam domains in microbotryum lychnidis-dioicae


m. lychnis-dioicae
s. roseus
r. glutinis
m. osmundae
m. larici-populina
p. graminis-tritici
s. reilianum
u. maydis
m. globosa


am. lychnis-dioicae compared to all other basidomycetes; b microbotryales  compared to other pucciniales ; cagaricomycetes represent average of the  <dig> species in this group; see additional file  <dig> for counts per species



the expansion of the secretory lipases appeared specific to m. lychnidis-dioicae within the pucciniomycotina . among all other basidiomycete genomes compared, secretory lipases are also highly represented in malassezia globosa , a skin fungus associated with human dandruff and dependent on its host for lipids. malassezia globosa has an additional gene family expansion associated with lipid acquisition; this species has  <dig> copies of phospholipase c, whereas m. lychnidis-dioicae contains only a single phospholipase c protein. unlike m. globosa, m. lychnidis-dioicae does not depend on lipids for growth, and contains a predicted fatty acid synthase . the secretory lipase family is also present at lower copy number in the two ustilaginomycotina corn smuts, sporisorium reilianum and ustilago maydis, of which the latter responds to lipids, including corn oils, as part of a developmental switch  <cit> . a phylogenetic analysis of the secretory lipases in this comparison revealed that the m. lychnidis-dioicae lipases have undergone a lineage specific expansion, as in m. globosa . most lipases were predicted to be secreted including three of the seven m. lychnidis-dioicae lipases. however four of the seven genes appeared partial based on alignment of the protein sequences; the missing 5′end from two genes deleted the region containing a secretion signal in paralogous copies. further refinement of the assembly or transcripts is needed to identify the full length version of these genes or confirm if they are perhaps pseudogenes , and establish their relative location in the genome.

previous work in m. lychnidis-dioicae has shown that mating mixtures of haploid cells produce hyphae in response to phytols and to tocopherols  <cit> . we therefore exposed haploid sporidial cells  or mated cells  to various lipids or oils, including commercially available corn oil, -α-tocopherol, and phytol. each stimulated filamentous growth of mated mixtures , but had no observable effect on haploid cells . the observation that mated cells also respond to corn oil supports the hypothesis that lipid response may be important for the development of this species. this is possible, as lipids are likely present on the host meristem  <cit> . moreover, we find that at least three lipase genes are differentially expressed when exposed to phytols , compared to similarly treated cells in the absence of phytols .fig.  <dig> expansion of lipase gene family in microbotryum lychnidis-dioicae and malassezia globosa. both m. lychnidis-dioicae and m. globosa contain a higher number of proteins with a lipase domain  relative to the other fungi examined. a phylogenetic tree of proteins with this domain. protein sequences were aligned with muscle, and a phylogeny was inferred from this alignment using raxml . a total of  <dig> bootstrap replicates were performed, and the percent of replicates shown is on the tree nodes. all m. lychnidis-dioicae proteins are indicated by their respective mvlg designation. similar lipase genes from other species are included, with the gene prefix denoting the species as follows: an, aspergillus nidulans; um, ustilago maydis; sr, sporisorium relianum; mgl, malasezzia globosa. scale corresponds to substitutions per site. b–e treatment of mated m. lychnidis-dioicae cells with various lipids. b water-treated mated cell control ;  mated cells treated with commercially-available corn oil ; d, mated cells treated with α-tocopherol; , mated cells treated with phytol. the green arrows show areas of filamentation emanating from mated cells after treatment with each specific type of lipid. b and c size bars, 25 μm;  and , size bars, 50 μm



an important group of proteins identified as being expanded or depleted in m. lychnidis-dioicae are those predicted to be involved in cell wall modifications, both in terms of fungal cell walls, but also as might affect host plants. families of structurally-related carbohydrate catalytic and carbohydrate-binding modules  are described in the cazy database   <cit> . such enzymes break down, modify, or build glycosidic bonds. the assignment of the predicted proteins derived from a genome to cazy families helps to shed light on the particular glycobiological features of an organism  <cit> . a total of 236 m. lychnidis-dioicae protein models were mapped to protein families in the cazy database based on sequence conservation  . the cazy family profile of m. lychnidis-dioicae was then compared to that recently published for  <dig> basidiomycetes  <cit> , in order to identify expanded and reduced families .table  <dig> selected cazy expansions and depletions


microbotryum lychnidis-dioicae
average basidiomyceted

piriformospora indica

ustilago maydis

puccinia graminis f. tritici

melampsora laricis-populina

agh <dig> gh <dig> gh <dig> gh <dig>  bgh <dig>  gh <dig>  gh <dig>  gh <dig>  gh <dig>  gh <dig>  gh <dig>  gh <dig>  aa <dig>  and cbm <dig>  cgh <dig>  gh <dig>  gh <dig>  gh <dig>  gh <dig>  gh <dig>  gh <dig>  gh <dig>  daverage count for  <dig> basidiomycete genomes; see additional file 20




with  <dig> candidate glycosyltransferases , m. lychnidis-dioicae has more than any of the  <dig> basidiomycetes used in the comparison . both m. lychnidis-dioicae and puccinia graminis contain a candidate fucosyltransferase, which is not present in the other basidiomycetes surveyed. this is compatible with the known presence of fucose in the cell wall of microbotryum  <cit> . two other families expanded in m. lychnidis-dioicae include alpha-mannosyltransferases , suggesting that the cell wall includes a larger fraction of alpha-mannan than in other species. in fungi, the synthesized cell wall carbohydrates are frequently remodeled by the action of dedicated glycoside hydrolases and transglycosidases that are found in distinct cazy glycosyl hydrolase  families. a notable feature of m. lychnidis-dioicae is that it has a reduced number β- <dig> -glucan cleaving or modifying enzymes of families .

examination of the other gh families and of the other categories involved in carbohydrate breakdown  revealed that m. lychnidis-dioicae completely lacked cellulases  . in addition no cellulose-targeting lytic polysaccharide monooxygenase of family aa <dig>  nor any broad specificity β-glucanase of family gh <dig>  nor any cellulose-binding module of family cbm <dig> could be found. this clearly shows that m. lychnidis-dioicae does not interact with nor digests cellulose during its interaction with plants, a finding confirmed by the failure of m. lychnidis-dioicae to grow on cellulose as a sole carbon source . microbotryum lychnidis-dioicae also completely lacks xylanase , xyloglucanase , and the enzymes for the cleavage of side-chains of xylan, xyloglucan and rhamnogalacturonan , indicating that these cell wall polymers are not a carbon source for the fungus . consistent with this prediction, m. lychnidis-dioicae failed to grow on xylan as a sole carbon source .

microbotryum lychnidis-dioicae was able to grow on pectin as a sole carbon source , although it does not break down pectin by the action of pectin/pectate lyases, as these enzymes are also absent from the genome . instead, the genome harbors a suite of six family gh <dig> enzymes, which cleave polygalacturonic acid after its methylester groups have been removed by the action of six family ce <dig> pectin methylesterases. this ce <dig> family is present at high numbers in the two rust fungi and m. lychnidis-dioicae; the copy number amplification in m. lychnidis-dioicae appears to be due to tandem duplication, with one array of two genes and a second array of four genes. four of the six ce <dig> copies have a predicted secretion signal, supporting a potential role in interacting with the host plant. compared to  <dig> other basidiomycetes, m. lychnidis-dioicae stands out in having a significant expansion of its enzymatic arsenal for the breakdown of β-mannan, a polysaccharide present throughout plants but more abundant in flowers, siliques and stems  <cit> . microbotryum lychnidis-dioicae encodes four candidate β-mannanases of family gh <dig> and a comparison with biochemically characterized enzymes shows that  <dig> out of its  <dig> gh <dig> enzymes also target β-mannan , glucocerebrosides  and β- <dig> -glucan ). this β-mannan digestion arsenal is augmented by the presence of a gh <dig> enzyme, which shows a strong relatedness to characterized β-mannosidases.

homogalacturonan is a major component  of plant pectin and the degradation pathway is required in several stages of plant development. one of these stages is anther dehiscence when pollen grains are released; this process requires pectinesterases and polygalacturonases. as indicated above, a total of six ce <dig> family pectin methylesterases are found in m. lychnidis-dioicae, of which four are predicted secreted proteins . part two of the pathway requires polygalacturonase; a total of six m. lychnidis-dioicae proteins contain the polygalacturonase gh <dig>  domain, of which mvlg_ <dig> is highly induced  in mi-late. the homogalactorunan degradation pathway of m. lychnidis-dioicae may thus perform a similar role as pollen in anther dehiscence when the flowers bloom, since during teliospore formation of m. lychnidis-dioicae, host pollen is no longer available to perform that function.

multiple classes of transporters are expanded in m. lychnidis-dioicae , enabling uptake of diverse substrates. major facilitator transporters, sugar transporters, and the fungal trichothecene efflux pump are present at high copy number relative to other pucciniomycotina. a fungal trichothecene efflux pump, tri <dig>  was first described in fusarium sporotrichioides as part of the gene cluster involved in trichothecene biosynthesis  <cit> ; trichothecenes are a group of mycotoxins produced by various species of fungi. as the tri <dig> domain is present at high copy number in m. lychnidis-dioicae and other basidiomycetes are not known to produce trichothecenes, this suggests that this domain may have a role in transporting other small molecules.

sugar transporters also play an important role in virulence of biotrophic plant pathogens, such as ustilago maydis and several species of rust fungi. specifically, a plasma membrane-localized sucrose transporter  in u. maydis facilitated direct utilization of sucrose, thus eluding the plant defense mechanism  <cit> . the hexose transporter  <dig>  gene in the rust fungus uromyces fabae is localized to haustoria to take advantage of that structure for sugar uptake  <cit> . the m. lychnidis-dioicae genome contains a total of  <dig> potential sugar transporters, with multiple high identity matches to srt <dig> and hxt <dig>  which may fulfill similar roles.

one additional contrast between m. lychnidis-dioicae and the two plant pathogenic rust fungi examined suggests a difference in the relative importance of response to superoxides. reactive oxygen species , including superoxides or h2o <dig> produced by the host plant, are a canonical part of the defense response to pathogens. microbotryum lychnidis-dioicae is depleted in domains for peroxidase  and copper/zinc superoxide dismutase ; the two other microbotryomycetes also lack proteins with these domains. despite the reduced repertoire of such predicted proteins in m. lychnidis-dioicae relative to the rust fungi, six proteins  were identified as containing peroxidase  <dig> , peroxidase , redoxin , or glutathione peroxidase  domains. of these predicted proteins, only mvlg_ <dig> was differentially expressed under the conditions examined and was up-regulated in mi-late relative to growth in vitro in rich medium. in addition, four predicted proteins with iron/manganese superoxide dismutase domains , glutaredoxin  or catalase  domains were found . finally, pathway analysis via metacyc predictions  suggests that m. lychnidis-dioicae contains components of the glutathione-mediated detoxification pathway: glutathione transferase  and membrane alanyl aminopeptidase . however, there appears to be a missing component  in this pathway to facilitate formation of an intermediate of a glutathione-toxin conjugate. biochemical and functional analyses will be required to determine the importance of these predicted enzymes in the ability of the pathogen to survive and flourish in its host.

secreted proteins  and candidate effectors
a total of  <dig> secreted proteins  were predicted in m. lychnidis-dioicae and their expression and conservation examined to identify candidates for interacting with the host . among the  <dig> sps that were smaller than  <dig> amino acids ,  <dig> were species specific in our comparative set and further do not share sequence similarity  with any protein in the ncbi protein database. ssps indeed often appear species-specific, likely because they co-evolve rapidly in an arms race with their hosts  <cit> . notably,  <dig> of the ssps were significantly up-regulated during plant infection , but were not differentially expressed when comparing expression on rich and nutrient limited agar , suggesting that these ssps may play a specific role during plant infection.table  <dig> properties of predicted secreted proteins



several cysteine-rich multigene families were identified among predicted secreted proteins. in some cases these families include tandemly duplicated genes; the mvlg_ <dig> family contains  <dig> members predicted to be ssps , three of which are adjacent in the genome on the mating-type chromosome . although these proteins lack pfam domains, two of these are induced during infection. an additional family of cys-rich proteins with nine members has a subset of six clustered in the genome . seven of the nine proteins in this family were predicted to be secreted, yet their expression was highly variable, with two up-regulated in nutrient limited conditions and two down-regulated during infection. a small subset of cysteine-rich proteins contains known protein domains. two proteins  contain the cysteine-rich secretory protein family domain . in addition, a total of  <dig> proteins contain the fungal-specific cysteine rich cfem domain . all of these cfem proteins were predicted to be secreted; four of these were significantly induced and three were repressed in mi-late relative to rich and nutrient limited agar.

to identify genes that could provide a mechanism for linking flower development to fungal development, we compared expression of the predicted secreted proteins with the s. latifolia est library produced from flowers  <cit> . a total of  <dig> genes share sequence similarity with s. latifolia ests; ten secreted proteins matched plant ests with at least an e-value of e- <dig>  one s. latifolia est  showed similarity  with two m. lychnidis-dioicae proteins ; the best match, mvlg_ <dig>  encodes a predicted secreted gamma-glutamyltranspeptidase . another est  shared sequence similarity with two m. lychnidis-dioicae proteins ; these in turn share similarity with the expansin family of “ripening related” proteins and were down-regulated during either growth on nutrient limited agar or late in infection . the precise function of plant expansins is poorly defined at the molecular level, and the predicted function of the similar fungal proteins is even less well established. however, one such expansin-related protein in laccaria bicolor was recently found to be expressed specifically in the extracellular matrix  of symbiotic tissues and localized within the fungal cell wall  <cit> .

two cysteine-rich secreted proteins  matched a s. latifolia flower est annotated as having similarity with the plant pr- <dig> class of pathogenesis related proteins ; these are proteins defined as encoded by the host plant but induced only in pathological or related situations . to be included among the prs, a protein must be induced upon infection but not necessarily in all pathological conditions  <cit> . another s. latifolia gene of interest, slm <dig>  is expressed in the stamens of smut infected flowers but not uninfected flowers  <cit> ; four m. lychnidis-dioicae proteins showed blast similarity with e-value less than e- <dig>  all of the hits were hypothetical proteins that contained the srf-type transcription factor domain , and three of the four were predicted to be targeted to the nucleus .

response to oxidative environments
laccase-like multi-copper oxidase proteins are capable of degrading phenolic compounds like polymeric lignin and humic substances  <cit>  and may be involved in the interacton of fungal pathogens with their host plants. four proteins in m. lychnidis-dioicae contain the three multi-copper oxidase  domains . two mco proteins were predicted to be secreted, and another mco was predicted to have a gpi-anchor to the membrane. the fourth mco was a membrane-anchored protein , with the n-terminus of the polypeptide outside the cell.

the glyoxal oxidase catalyses the oxidation of aldehydes to carboxylic acid and is an essential component of the extracellular lignin degradation pathway of the root rot fungus, phanerochaete chrysosporium. of a total of seven m. lychnidis-dioicae proteins that contain the glyoxal oxidase n-terminal domain , two are predicted to be secreted and four have a predicted gpi-anchor. while two of these glyoxal oxidase genes are adjacent in the genome, they do not form a gene cluster with any mco as observed at the lignin peroxidase gene cluster in p. chrysosporium.

genes similar to plant hormone synthesis genes
since m. lychnidis-dioicae infection of female s. latifolia hosts can alter normal flower development so as to produce pseudomale flowers, we investigated whether the genome might contain genes for pathways that could be associated with such changes. the predicted m. lychnidis-dioicae protein database was examined for components of biosynthesis pathways of eight plant hormones , as well as for other signaling pathways that could have an impact on host gene expression or development. based on sequence similarity to components for these pathways from plants and microbes, as well as additional confirmation of some complete pathways using metacyc predictions , we found evidence that m. lychnidis-dioicae encodes enzymes that could participate in hormone biosynthetic pathways, such as polyamine biosynthesis pathways, which produces compounds known to play developmental and stress-response roles in plant physiology  <cit>  . if these enzymes are, in fact, promoting hormone biosynthesis pathways, one possible explanation is that precursors for these pathways are provided by the plant. alternatively, the potential components of these pathways we have identified are used by the fungus for functions other than manipulating host development. for example, cytokinin degradation could be mediated by a predicted fad-oxidase , if this enzyme can function as a cytokinin dehydrogenase ; however, this predicted protein most closely resembles other fungal d-lactate dehydrogenases based on sequence similarity. similarly, a predicted 2β-dioxygenase   could be involved in gibberellin inactivation via hydroxylation, although this protein falls more generally into the 2og-fe oxygenase superfamily.fig.  <dig> model of microbotryum lychnidis-dioicae interactions with its host. the potential pathways identified in m. lychnidis-dioicae based on inventory of the genome were used to predict products potentially secreted or taken up by the fungus that could affect host development . ga, gibberellic acid



another potential set of pathways for plant signaling involves the production of glycerol lipids, such as diacylglycerol  or triacylgycerol . many studies have demonstrated the importance of compounds like dag in mammalian signaling  <cit> , and dag is important in pollen tube elongation in some plant species  <cit> . such pathways often involve the action of phospholipase c; a predicted phospholipase c gene  and potential phospholipase a  and d  homologues are found in the genome. therefore, the organism contains the proteins necessary for synthesizing  <dig> -diacylglycerol,  <dig> -diacyl-sn-glycerol-3-phosphate, 2-lysophosphatidylcholine, and 1-lysophosphatidylcholine. based on metacyc prediction, m. lychnidis-dioicae possesses the requisite components of the cdp-diacylglycerol biosynthesis i pathway. in addition, a number of the secretory lipases whose pfam domain is enriched in m. lychnidis-dioicae  are implicated in these phospholipase pathways.

gene expression changes during infection and in response to lipids
to focus on genes potentially important for infection and interaction with the host, we identified genes whose expression was altered in mi-late. a total of  <dig>  genes were differentially expressed in mi-late compared to either rich or nutrient limited agar; of these, a common set of  <dig> genes were induced in mi-late and  <dig> were repressed in mi-late compared to both other conditions . of the  <dig> genes in both comparisons with a predicted pfam domain, transporter domains were most frequently observed; a total of  <dig> of the  <dig> functionally assigned proteins corresponded to transporters, with mfs, sugar, opt, and amino transporters each represented by two or more genes . carbohydrate active enzymes, kinases and transcription factors were also highly represented in these mi-late induced genes.

several different classes of transporters were transcriptionally induced during infection, potentially promoting the uptake of small molecules and nutrients from the host plant. significant enrichments include domains found in mfs transporters  and sugar transporters , the largest classes of transporters in m. lychnidis-dioicae and many fungi. the oligopeptide transporter protein was also enriched at a lower level of significance  and four predicted proteins with this domain  were up-regulated in mi-late. an mfs domain-containing protein of note up-regulated in mi-late was a nitrite transporter ; this gene is linked to two other genes associated with nitrate assimilation, a nitrite reductase  and a nitrate reductase . all three genes involved in nitrate assimilation were significantly up-regulated during infection.

in evaluating the expression of the  <dig> proteins predicted to be secreted,  <dig> were induced in planta. several cysteine-rich secreted proteins were induced during infection. a pair of linked cysteine rich small secreted proteins  was induced during infection. four other proteins  with the cys-rich cfem domain-containing family  were significantly induced in infection. these proteins are good candidates for being potential effectors, based on proteins with similar properties that have been shown to be effectors in other systems  <cit> .

cell wall degrading enzymes may play a role in the infection, particularly during the stage where the fungus causes necrosis of host plant tissue. a total of nine glycoside hydrolases were up-regulated in mi-late; among gh families, gh <dig> polygalacturonase proteins are mostly highly enriched during infection . polygalacturonase is required for the second part of the homogalacturonan pathway implicated in pollen dehiscence. mvlg proteins that contain a glyoxal oxidase domain  were also significantly enriched  in genes induced during mi-late.

mated cells of m. lychnidis-dioicae respond to corn oil, in addition to the other lipids previously reported  <cit> . this supports the hypothesis that lipid response may be important for the development of this species. although we observed no alteration of phenotype for un-mated haploid cells treated with lipids, three predicted cytoplasmic proteins with a secretory lipase domain  were highly induced in haploids grown on nutrient limited agar compared to rich media or mi-late infections. to validate the expression levels from rna-seq data, relative levels for lipase genes were measured for mated and unmated cells, grown in nutrient limited, rich media, or treated with phytol by qrt-pcr . notably, when mated haploid cells were treated with phytol, after 12 h treatment, two genes  displayed substantial up-regulation, while the remaining three either increased slightly or decreased . this could reflect priming of cells that are ready to mate for plant cues that would ultimately lead to stable dikaryon formation after successful mating.

discussion
this analysis highlights genomic features of m. lychnidis-dioicae that reflect its particular lifecycle. microbotryum lychnidis-dioicae grows as a biotroph, similar to the rust fungi, for most of the plant infection cycle. notably in its capacity as a castrating pathogen, m. lychnidis-dioicae also causes necrosis that appears to be limited to developing flowers. our analysis revealed that gene content contains a different profile than purely biotrophic or necrotrophic plant pathogens. this included a global number of cazymes that is larger than other biotrophic fungi ; however, at the same time it shows complete loss of many cazyme families that target the plant cell wall. this is consistent with a primarily intercellular colonization pattern of host apical meristems  <cit> , though it raises questions about how appressorium penetration is accomplished.

necrotic growth stages may be enabled by the subtilases, laccases, and copper radical oxidases, which are ligninolytic enzymes ; subtilases, in particular may play a key role in regulating the activities of laccase  <cit> . by contrast, certain cazymes present in the biotrophic rust fungi are absent in m. lychnidis-dioicae; in particular the absence of cutinases suggests that penetration of the plant surface by m. lychnidis-dioicae does not require cutin degradation. this may reflect the fact that the normal portal of entry for infection is via the flower, a tissue that poses less of a barrier to the fungus. of the plant polysaccharides that constitute a carbon source for many fungi, m. lychnidis-dioicae has lost the ability to digest cellulose, xylan, xyloglucan, and the highly substituted forms of pectin . retention of enzymes that breakdown polygalacturonic acid and β-mannan, components of pollen tubes and flowers, respectively, illustrates the high degree of specialization of this fungus.

whereas smut fungi generally cause necrosis as a space-making process during sporulation  <cit> , microbotryum anther smuts are more aptly characterized as a growth-altering parasite  <cit> . at the stage of anther development, m. lychnidis-dioicae causes abortion of pollen production, and replacement by the diploid teliospores for dispersal by pollinator species  <cit> . moreover, in the female, atrophy of pistils occurs during infection. there are a number of candidate pathways that might participate in pollen tube elongation or in blocking this process. aspartyl proteases are involved in pollen tube elongation or prevention by metschnikowia reukaufii  <cit> ; seven candidate aspartyl proteases are predicted in m. lychnidis-dioicae. additionally, consistent with transcriptional up-regulation of some component enzymes for the homogalactorunan degradation pathway of m. lychnidis-dioicae, this pathway may take over the role of pollen in anther dehiscence when the flowers bloom, since during teliospore formation of m. lychnidis-dioicae, host pollen is no longer available to perform that function fig.  <dig> 

finally, since m. lychnidis-dioicae appears to lack a large repertoire for dealing with host-generated defenses that utilize reactive oxygen species  one could expect that the interaction with its host normally does not elicit such host responses or the fungus actively down-regulates them. paradoxically, m. lychnidis-dioicae also appears to secrete some proteins that would serve to bring on this plant response by serving as prooxidants . further elucidation of the roles of the predicted peroxidases superoxide dismutases, and glutathione-mediated detoxification pathway components will require functional analyses to evaluate their biological importance, if any, in the interaction of the pathogen with its hosts.

secretory lipases represent one of the most significantly expanded gene families in m. lychnidis-dioicae compared to the other fungi examined. while haploid cells show no outward phenotype alteration in response to lipids like phytol, several secretory lipases of m. lychnidis-dioicae in haploid cells are up-regulated on nutrient limited agar. we propose that regulation of secretory lipases primes haploid cells so that, after mating, they can respond to the appropriate plant-derived cues  to progress to the next developmental stage, stable dikaryotic hyphae. in fact, most of the secretory lipases we investigated were up-regulated in mated cells and when such cells were exposed to phytol .

the identification of genes induced during infection  suggests their involvement in host invasion and evasion of physical and chemical defense systems of the plant. a role for cazymes, including pectin methylesterases and ghs, during plant infection in m. lychnidis-dioicae is further supported by increased transcription in the mi-late sample. analysis of the gene expression profile of both wheat stem and poplar rust  also found that many cazyme genes related to cell wall degradation were up-regulated during plant infection  <cit> . in addition to the cazymes, m. lychnidis-dioicae shows significant induction of diverse transporters during plant infection, which may be critical for uptake of small molecules during biotrophic growth.

as in other plant pathogenic fungi, candidate effectors in m. lychnidis-dioicae were predicted based on predicted localization, expression during infection, and sequence conservation. notably, ssps are located closer to tes than other protein coding genes, suggesting that this could impact ssp expression or duplication. tes probably play a role in the expansion of such a family. indeed they contribute to genome rearrangements and gene duplications  <cit> . in fusarium oxysporum f. sp. lycopersici, effector genes are present on chromosomes or regions enriched for dna transposons  <cit> . some secreted proteins are predicted to act on host cell walls and proteins, either for the remodeling of host development in the flower or for acquisition of additional nutrients by the fungus.

in assembling sequence of the a <dig> mating-type chromosome, we characterized how the content of this allosome differs from autosomal regions, contrasting the non-recombining regions of the mating-type chromosome with the pseudo-autosomal regions  capable of recombination and with autosomes. both the lower gene density and higher transposable element content in the non-recombining region of the mating-type chromosome relative to autosomal regions are consistent with a reduced efficiency of purifying selection due to the suppression of recombination, as occur on non-recombining sex chromosomes  <cit> . the two recombining pars of the mating-type chromosome displayed te content and gene density more similar to autosomes than the non-recombining part of the mating-type chromosome. by contrast, we observed no difference in codon usage nor in the gc content at third codon positions between autosomes and the mating-type chromosome, though this has been observed in the non-recombining part of the fungal mating-type chromosome of neurospora tetrasperma  <cit> . overall the maintenance of homologous meiotic pairing and recombination in par regions may render them more similar to autosomes than allosomes with respect to evolutionary forces of selection and drift. however, their physical linkage to the non-recombining region of mating-type chromosomes suggests intermediate modes of evolution  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
altogether, this study provides an in-depth genomic portrait of a fungal castrating, biotrophic plant pathogen reflecting its unique life cycle. in particular, the unique absence of enzyme classes for plant cell wall degradation and maintenance of enzymes that break down components of pollen tubes and flowers provides a striking example of biotrophic host adaptation. in addition, while there are fewer enzymes to digest cellulose, xylan, xyloglucan, and highly substituted forms of pectin, as well as proteins that could protect the fungus from oxidative stress, the repertoire of predicted cell wall modifying enzymes and those that could manipulate host development has expanded . given the place of m. lychnidis-dioicae in a large species-complex with a vast host species pool, the insights from this genomic and transcriptomic analysis combined with comparative approaches with other members of the microbotryum species complex will be most informative on the evolutionary processes involved in a radiation and specialization on a wide array of plant species from different genera.

