BACKGROUND
identification of the amino acid residues involved in the ion transport activity of bacillus thuringiensis  δ-endotoxins remains an interesting challenge. the δ-endotoxins are insecticidal crystal proteins  produced by the bacterium during the sporulation stage  <cit> . the icps are composed of several proteins  with insecticidal activity against insects of the orders lepidoptera, diptera and coleoptera. the ingested crystals are dissolved in the insect midgut to release the protoxin form of the proteins. the action of proteases in the insect midgut cleaves the protoxin at specific locations, releasing the toxic fragment of the protein. in the case of the lepidopteran-specific cry1a δ-endotoxins, the protoxins have a molecular weight of approximately  <dig> kda, while the molecular weight of the toxic fragment is approximately  <dig> kda  <cit> .

the toxic action of the protein is initiated by the binding of the active fragment to receptors located on the membrane lining the insect midgut. it has been suggested that after binding to the receptors, the toxin induces ion pores capable of disrupting the membrane potential  <cit> . the molecular events occurring between binding and intoxication remain unclear. some authors proposed that the binding to these receptors triggers conformational changes that allow the protein to translocate into the membrane, becoming inserted into the lipid moiety  <cit> ; such conformational changes, and the membrane bound state of the toxin have not yet been elucidated.

cry1ab δ-endotoxin is one of the many insecticidal toxins expressed by bacillus thuringiensis. the three dimensional structure of cry1aa , is composed of three structural domains  <cit> . domain i is formed by an α-helix bundle formed by seven helices with the α-helix  <dig> located in the core of the domain. domains ii and iii are mainly composed of β-sheets. there is evidence that at least α-helix  <dig>  located in domain i, is involved in the ion transport activity  <cit> . domains ii and iii are involved in receptor recognition in the insect midgut  <cit> .

the insertion of the toxin into lipid membranes has been studied using artificial phospholipid vesicles, lipid bilayers  <cit> , modified protein toxins in artificial membranes  <cit> , and artificial peptides resembling structural motifs of the protein  <cit> . the protection of δ-endotoxins against proteinase k  digestion in the presence of brush border membrane vesicles  has been used to study the insertion process of the toxin into systems resembling the midgut environment  <cit> .

site-directed spin-labeling  in combination with electron paramagnetic resonance  spectroscopy is a powerful technique for analyzing the dynamic and structural properties of membrane proteins  <cit> . to use this technique, specific amino acid residues are mutated into cysteine residues, and then labeled with paramagnetic reagents using the introduced cysteine as the reactive site  <cit> . for the present study we have used site-directed mutagenesis to introduce single cysteine residues at three positions in the α-helix  <dig> of bt cry1ab . mutant toxins l157c , s170c  and s176c  were studied by sdsl, voltage clamping  and circular dichroism  spectroscopy, among other techniques. our results indicate that only the c-terminally-located spin-label has an effect in the ion transport activity of the toxin in manduca sexta  larvae, without any effect on the structure or the structural stability of the toxin, while the central hydrophobic face of the α-helix becomes inserted in the membrane or another hydrophobic environment that decreases the mobility of the spin-label.

RESULTS
expression of proteins in e. coli, purification and bioassays
each of the mutations produced protoxins, as determined by sds -page . tryptic digestion of the protoxins resulted in an active toxic fragment with a size identical to that from wild type cry1ab . toxicity assays indicate that the toxicity level of s170c  is almost identical to cry1ab wild type  with overlapping confidence limits . mutant toxins l157c and s176c exhibit decreased toxicities by a factor of 2- and  <dig> -fold, respectively. the confidence limits for all three toxins overlapped, however, indicating that there were no significant changes in toxicity as determined by this assay. these results, which showed similar toxicities when the confidence limits were considered, did not agree with the results obtained by vc, as shown in table  <dig>  the correlation between toxicity and the location of the residue in the α-helix  <dig> was more interesting when the bioassays were performed with the cysteine residue blocked with the mts spin-label. in this case, s170r <dig>  and l157r <dig>  showed no difference from the non-labeled mutant protein. the toxicity of the s176r <dig>  mutant decreased by more than two-fold compared to the non-labeled mutant toxin, indicating that the spin-label at c <dig> affected the toxicity of the protein.

a: 50% lethal doses concentration, numbers in parenthesis represent 95% confidence limits.

b: slope: was obtained by fitting the straight portion of the curve to a linear equation.

c: t <dig>  defined as the insertion time. this was calculated with equation .

d: cry1ab wild type toxin in the presence of mts spin-label.

voltage clamping
voltage clamping analysis was performed to determine whether the introduced mutations affected the ion transport activity of the toxin, which in turn is directly correlated with toxicity . the lc <dig> values for l157c and s170c have similar values to l157r <dig> and s170r <dig>  respectively, as shown above. similar results were seen when the vc experiments were performed with spin-labeled toxins, indicating that the labeling of these two residues does not affect their toxic activity . when mutant toxin s176c was assayed without the mts-sl, it showed a decrease in the insertion time  compared to the wild-type cry1ab , and the ion transport activity was slower , in accordance with a two-fold decrease in toxicity. when the toxicity produced by this protein was assayed with the spin-label attached to the protein, the insertion time was significantly longer  and the ion transport was even slower , compared with the wild-type toxin  and the non-labeled s176c mutant toxin .

the changes seen in the insertion time and in the ion transport activity are likely to occur as a result of capping the cysteine residue with the spin-label since such changes were not found in the other two mutant proteins. the mutant toxin s170c showed the same ion transport activity either with or without capping of the cysteine residue , and these parameters  are similar to those of the wild type toxin . on the other hand, mutant toxin l157c showed a small decrease in ion transport that reflects the decrease observed in lc <dig> with no observable change in the insertion time . the parameters obtained for l157c mutant protein suggest that this toxin has a reduced ability to transport ions . the results obtained from the voltage clamp experiments are in agreement with the relative toxicities calculated from the toxicity assays . these results suggest that the change in slope and insertion time  observed for s176c is due to the particular location of the s <dig> residue, which is therefore critical for ion transport or for partitioning of the toxin in the membrane.

circular dichroism spectroscopy and thermal analysis
to determine whether structural and stability changes were introduced into the secondary structure of the toxin, either by the mutation or the spin-label, thermal and the cd spectral analyses of s176c were performed . it can be seen that the secondary structures of s176c and s176r <dig> are identical to the secondary structure of the wild-type toxin, with characteristic absorbance peaks at λ =  <dig> and  <dig> nm, indicating that neither the mutation, nor the spin-label introduced any observable changes in the secondary structure of the toxins. the thermal stability analysis  shows a typical unfolding curve for cry toxins, with a very stable native population that starts showing signs of unfolding above 65°c and reaches a fully unfolded population at approximately 90°c, with a tm ≈ 76°c.

epr spectroscopy in solution and in bbmv
the epr spectrum of a spin-label is sensitive to the environment surrounding the nitroxide  <cit> . for this reason, a spin-labeled protein in solution is expected to display a different epr signal than one in a hydrophobic environment, either in a biological membrane or a protein core, assuming that the conditions surrounding the nitroxide change from one environment to the other. in the present work we analyzed the epr spectra of the mutant toxins in solution and in brush border membrane vesicles prepared from m. sexta midgut tissue. spectra of each spin-labeled protein in solution were taken at room temperature in a flat cell. each sample was then transferred to a  <dig>  ml vial containing  <dig>  mg of bbmv in  <dig> μl binding buffer, where the mixture was incubated for  <dig> min at room temperature and transferred back into the cell. the new spectrum was recorded and compared with the data acquired in solution. the epr spectra for l157r <dig>  s170r <dig> and s176r <dig> are shown in figure  <dig>  the spectra for l157r <dig> and s170r <dig> reflect an environment of low mobility, both in the membrane and in solution. the shapes of these spectra agree with the location of the corresponding amino acids in the protein . the spectrum for s176r <dig> displays a more mobile spin-label, which is also in agreement with the location of the spin-label in the external end of domain i. the spectra of the labeled toxins in the membrane show that only the s170r <dig> mutant has changed to a less mobile state in the membrane-bound configuration, although almost no change is observed in the toxicity parameters or the ion transport abilities of the toxin. the insertion of the spin-labeled toxin in the membrane was confirmed by performing bioassay and vc experiments with spin-labeled toxins. the epr spectra of the spin-labeled proteins in solution and in the membrane-bound state were analyzed. the results are shown in figure  <dig>  it is seen that the spectra of l157r <dig> and s176r <dig> in solution are identical to those in the membrane, indicating that there were no changes in the environment of the nitroxide . in other words the nitroxide environment was transferred intact from the solution into the membrane. in contrast, the epr spectrum for s170r <dig> indicates that the nitroxide is less mobile when the toxin is inserted into the membrane .

continuous wave  power saturation was used to examine whether the s176r <dig> protein was able to penetrate the membrane, as was suggested by the ion transport properties of the mutant. the results, shown in figure  <dig>  indicate that in the membrane-bound state  spin exchange between the oxygen and the nitroxide is larger than the exchange with niedda, suggesting that the spin-labeled residue becomes inserted in the membrane. this is in contrast with solution conditions, where exchange with niedda is larger than with oxygen , suggesting exposure of the nitroxide to the aqueous environment in agreement with the solution structure of the protein. the information presented above suggests that serine  <dig> is involved in the ion transport capabilities of the toxin, although the exact location of this residue with respect to the resulting pores has not yet been determined. based on the calibration curve published by oh et al.  <cit>  our data suggest that the depth of the spin-label from the membrane surface is between  <dig>  and  <dig>  Å. these results, however, are not conclusive due to the presence of membrane proteins, carbohydrates and a great variety of phospholipids in the bbmv. thus a calibration curve to determine distances in bbmv should be constructed if the scanning of additional spin-labeled proteins is intended.

discussion
studies on the mode of action of the bt δ-endotoxins have shown that this is a rather complex mechanism that involves the identification of the target tissue by the activated toxin, followed by association to membrane receptors and internalization into the membrane. the regions of the toxin responsible for membrane internalization and ion transport, and the active conformation of the toxin in the membrane, have not yet been determined. in the present work, we used a combination of site-directed spin-labeling and voltage clamping to address these issues.

three amino acid residues located in the postulated ion-transport region were individually mutated to cysteine. each resulting toxin was tested for structural stability and biological activity. amino acid residue l <dig> is located at the n-terminal end of the centrally-located α-helix  <dig>  s <dig> is located at the middle, and s <dig> at the c-terminal end of the helix . the three mutated proteins produced stable protoxins with the same size as the wild type toxin ; after tryptic digestion, each protoxin released the stable toxin of the same size as the wild type cry1ab . the biological effect of each introduced mutation was first analyzed by bioassays on m. sexta larva. results show that s170c has the same toxicity as the wild type toxin while l157c and s176c show a small reduction . although the lc50values for l157c and s176c clearly show that these two proteins are less toxic than the wild type, the overlapping confidence limits indicate that these bioassays are not accurate enough to determine toxicity differences within such a close range.

to determine more accurately the effects of the mutations on the toxicity, we analyzed the ion transport activity of the toxins by voltage clamping. our results showed that mutation s170c had no effect at all in ion transport, while mutations l157c and s176c decreased the ion transport activity of the toxins . calculated values from the voltage clamping curves are shown in the table. the toxins were compared by analyzing their slopes and insertion times  <cit> . both the slope and the insertion time for s170c were almost identical to those of the wild type, while these parameters indicated a reduction in ion transport and insertion time for l157c and s176c. the accuracy of the voltage clamp was reflected in the correlation between the lc <dig> values and ion transport, as shown in the insert on figure 3a, in which a plot of lc <dig> vs. slope shows a linear correlation.

to assess the effects of the spin-label on the biological properties of the toxins, each mutant toxin was reacted with mts-sl, non-attached mts was removed, and the bioassay and voltage clamping experiments were carried out. the s170r <dig> mutant toxin showed no change either in toxicity or ion transport. the l157r <dig> mutant toxin showed a slight decrease in toxicity, which correlates with extent of loss of ion transport activity. on the other hand, the s176r <dig> mutant showed a large decrease in both the toxicity and the ion transport that are statistically significant. one possible reason why this mutant was less active when the cysteine residue was modified with the spin-label could have been the introduction of large conformational changes due to the bulky side chain. the longer insertion time of the s176r <dig> mutant could also be due to steric limitations introduced by the modified side chain. once the protein has been inserted, the ion transport should resemble the activity of s176c provided that the amino acid is not involved in this function. however, the slope of a plot of isc vs. time, obtained from voltage clamp experiments, became even less steep suggesting that the amino acid residue at position  <dig> was involved in ion transport.

cd was used to analyze structural changes in toxin structure. the cd spectra showed that there were no changes in any of the structures, with or without the spin-label. the particular situation of s176r <dig>  which showed a considerable decrease in ion transport, indicated that neither the mutation, nor the presence of the spin-label had any effect on the secondary structure . cd thermal melting was used to determine whether the spin-label had introduced any structural instability in the protein. as shown in figure  <dig>  the thermal melting curve of the s176r <dig> mutant overlaps with the thermal melting curve of the s176c mutant, with a tm = 76°c, the same as the wild-type toxin.

by analyzing the conformation of the protein in solution, as shown in figure  <dig>  it is clear that some conformational changes must accompany the transfer of the protein from solution into the lipid moiety, so the s <dig> residue becomes located in a more viscous environment that restricts the tumbling seen in solution. one possible explanation, in agreement with two previous publications in which α-helix  <dig> is proposed to anchor to the membrane moiety  <cit> , would be that, after α-helix  <dig> is cut out of the structure  <cit> , α-helices  <dig> and  <dig> open up exposing the hydrophobic face of α-helix  <dig> to the hydrophobic moiety of the membrane. this would explain why the motion of the modified  <dig> residue becomes more restricted in the membrane-bound state. it is also possible, however, that location of the spin-label in a hydrophobic environment dominated by hydrophobic amino acids would produce similar observations.

it is clear that the combination of site-directed spin-labeling and voltage clamping allows the determination of functional amino acid residues involved in ion transport activity of the bt δ-endotoxins, and gives information about the membrane-bound conformation of these important insecticidal toxins. two very important aspects of this combination of methodologies are, first, that voltage clamping allows for experiments on the midgut tissue containing functional receptors in their native environment and, second, that epr gives information on the spin-labeled proteins inserted in bbmv. this is in contrast to results obtained from artificial phospholipid vesicles in which the receptors and the structure of the membrane are not necessarily the same as in the biological organism. along with these advantages, the epr experiments can also be carried out in artificial phospholipid vesicles. these experiments would allow one to determine the effects of membrane proteins on the epr spectrum of the spin-labeled toxin.

CONCLUSIONS
it has long been debated whether the different α-helices in domain i of bt δ-endotoxins undergo conformational changes which allow them to accommodate to the hydrophobic environment of the insect midgut. the data presented here support this hypothesis, and suggest that α-helix  <dig> spans the membrane with the terminal end-located residues  facing either the water side of the pore or the aqueous environment outside the membrane, and the mid region residue  facing a hydrophobic environment that restricts the mobility of the spin-label. since this helix is in the middle of the α-helical bundle, to account for this change in spin-label mobility, this conformational change requires that the whole domain re-accommodates upon protein translocation into the midgut membrane. a possible model for the membrane-bound state of α-helix  <dig> is shown in figure  <dig> 

