BACKGROUND
adaptation is essential to the survival of any biological organism and requires appropriate transcriptional regulation to modulate gene expression profiles. in prokaryotes, rna polymerase  is responsible for the transcription of all genes. however, promoter recognition is effected by an interchangeable sigma  factor that associates to rnap, directs the newly formed holoenzyme to a promoter and contributes to transcription initiation  <cit> . transcription levels can be further modified by additional regulators  that affect the recruitment or the activity of rnap holoenzymes at various promoters  <cit> . a common feature of σ factors and transcriptional regulators is their ability to recognize specific dna patterns in order to modulate gene expression. it is presumed that, as a result of evolutionary pressure, these regulatory sequences were selected upstream of some genes or operons and excluded from the rest of the genome.

bacterial genomes usually encode many σ factors. of these, the principal σ factor would be responsible for the expression of housekeeping function genes. the remaining σ factors are thought to direct the expression of genes required for specialized functions such as stress responses or sporulation  <cit> . σ factors can also be classified according to their structural homology to either σ <dig> or σ <dig> of escherichia coli. σ70-related factors, which constitute the vast majority of known σ factors, are composed of two major dna-binding domains capable of sensing a certain spacing range when associated to rnap  <cit> . these σ factors usually recognize two dna boxes  of approximately six base pairs  located roughly at  <dig> and  <dig> bp upstream of the transcription start site . spacing between these two boxes generally ranges from  <dig> to  <dig> bp  <cit> . σ factors similar to σ <dig> also recognize two dna boxes in the promoter region. however these elements are located approximately  <dig> and  <dig> bp upstream of the tss. other major differences between σ <dig> and σ <dig> family members are the ability of σ <dig> to bind dna in absence of rnap and the requirement of an isomerization step by an activator to render σ54-containing holoenzymes processive.

σ factors can tolerate a variety of mismatches from their consensus sequence. for example, a typical e. coli σ <dig> promoter sequence contains two mismatches within both the - <dig> and - <dig> hexanucleotide elements  <cit> . however, there is generally a direct relationship between promoter strength and the similarity to the corresponding consensus sequence  <cit> . variations over three orders of magnitude have been reported in σ70-dependent promoter strength in e. coli  <cit> . in some cases, an extended - <dig> promoter box may be observed and may substitute for the absence of a clear - <dig> element. extended - <dig> promoter boxes were reported to be present in 20% of promoter sequences in e. coli  <cit>  and 45% in bacillus subtilis  <cit> .

a variety of techniques have been used to identify tss and to characterize σ factor-dna interactions. however, the formal identification of promoters by molecular methods can be tedious and is currently not amenable to genome-wide applications. consequently, it is important to develop algorithms that can rapidly and accurately evaluate the presence of promoters, without the need for extensive biochemical studies. current algorithms for promoter detection, typically developed for a specific bacterium, exploit different characteristics of promoter sequences. some approaches are based on sequence representation or statistical overrepresentation. other methodologies have also been described for the detection of dna motifs in sets of regulatory sequences  <cit>  or by comparing the upstream regions of orthologous genes from different species  <cit> . a method based on the weaker stability of the dna double-helix in promoter regions was also recently used to identify promoter regions  <cit> . however, most of these procedures are not suitable for the identification of precise prokaryotic promoters because of the inherent variability in promoter sequences and because they do not allow variable spacers between two dna motifs.

sequence representation strategies designed for promoter identification are usually based on a prior knowledge of some characterized sequences. these algorithms are thus trained to recognize sequences that are similar to a previously defined representation of a promoter. this approach was first used by galas et al.  <cit> . as reported by stormo, numerous false positives  are however obtained with this strategy  <cit> . for example, allowing two mismatches in the σ <dig> consensus - <dig> hexanucleotide produces roughly one hit per  <dig> nucleotides  in the complete genome of e. coli. a more accurate representation of dna-binding motifs consists of position-specific weight matrices   <cit> , and online tools such as virtual footprint  <cit>  are available to facilitate their analysis in the context of bacterial gene expression. nonetheless, searching for full e. coli σ <dig> consensus promoter sequences using more flexible mismatch restrictions offered by pswm also generates a vast amount of hits  <cit> . more recently, huerta and collado-vides used a pswm-derived methodology and detected approximately  <dig> putative promoters/ <dig> nt in irs  <cit> 

by adding several constraints such as grouping sequences and filtering with the distance from the start codon, they achieved a sensitivity of 86% with an average of  <dig>  putative promoters/ <dig> nt. several groups have also used general neural networks but no significant improvements have been achieved over the pswm  <cit> . hidden markov models  have also been trained to identify promoter sequences recognized by the principal σ factor in b. subtilis  <cit>  and campylobacter jejuni  <cit> . a learning approach based on a support vector machine  employing a variant of the mismatch string kernel was also recently described  <cit> . importantly, all above-mentioned approaches depend on a previously established or trained description of promoters, and were not designed to function with organisms for which promoter information is insufficient.

statistical overrepresentation approaches can identify short dna sequences that are present more frequently in a subset of sequences than what would be expected by chance according to the background distribution. using such a procedure, vanet et al. have proposed a description of the promoter sequences recognized by the principal σ factor of helicobacter pylori from different sets of irs  <cit> . more recently, the mitra algorithm, which also evaluates the spacing between promoter boxes and the positional bias from the start codon, was applied to  <dig> bacterial genomes. four of these genomes generated statistically strong signals possibly corresponding to principal σ factor-dependent promoter sequences, including the ones from h. pylori and b. subtilis  <cit> . using a different approach, the principal σ factor consensus sequence was identified among over-represented motifs in b. subtilis, although the methodology was not designed especially for that purpose  <cit> . the latter study was based on the method of li et al., designed to identify regulatory protein binding sites in e. coli  <cit> . it has been noticed that the e. coli σ <dig> consensus sequence was not identified by this or other approaches, a failure that was attributed to the greater variability of promoter sequences within this organism  <cit> . a similar method was also unable to distinguish a motif related to the principal σ factor promoters in the complete genome of streptomyces coelicolor  <cit> . in general, although some statistical approaches had limited success, these methods do not seem appropriate in their current form for the identification of promoter sequences in a variety of organisms.

in this paper, we describe a novel approach based on matrices representing the genomic distribution of hexanucleotide pairs, and designed to predict precise promoter sequences using any annotated prokaryotic genome. this approach can be applied to organisms for which almost no transcriptional data is available, without the need for extensive biochemical characterization. the strategy is based on the observation that, although promoter sequences can vary for every σ factor and according to the gc content of each genome  <cit> , promoters are over-represented in irs relative to the whole genome. since this bias appears to be conserved throughout evolution, the characteristic distribution of promoter sequences is thus used to identify promoters in a variety of prokaryotic organisms. briefly, a score is calculated based on the similarity between a matrix representing the genomic distribution of most promoter sequences reported in the literature and a matrix representing the genomic distribution of a putative promoter sequence. a z-score is next calculated according to the background. to assess the validity of our method, over  <dig> characterized promoter sequences from ten genomes were gathered from databases and from the literature, and tested using various statistical indicators. experimental validations of promoter prediction also supported our approach.

RESULTS
genomic distribution of regulatory sequences is biased and conserved
transcription initiation is an important step in the regulation of most bacterial cell processes  <cit> . for this reason, it is thought that transcription factor binding sites have been evolutionary selected in some irs, and generally excluded from the rest of prokaryotic genomes in order to avoid aberrant gene expression. since regulatory sequences can often tolerate a variety of mismatches with respect to the corresponding dna motif consensus sequence and still be efficiently bound by their cognate dna binding protein, these degenerated sequences are also believed to be subjected to a similar selective pressure. therefore, the genomic distribution of transcription factor consensus dna binding sequences and close derivatives is expected to be biased towards irs possibly involved in transcription initiation relative to the whole genome. to test this latter hypothesis, we have analyzed the genomic distribution of consensus sequences representing, respectively, the recognized sequences of a principal σ factor, an alternative σ factor and a transcriptional regulator of three bacterial species . the global distribution of these dna sequences is reported in "distribution matrices", which consists of tables of dimension  <dig> ×  <dig> where lines and columns correspond respectively to the number of mismatches in the proximal and distal boxes of a particular dna sequence. for every matrix cells, the proportion of hits in putative promoter-containing irs  relative to the whole genome  was calculated, with respect to a defined spacing range between the two hexanucleotide boxes forming the evaluated sequences. light colored cells correspond to low p/g ratios while darker cells represent higher frequencies. for example, the genome-derived distribution matrix of the e. coli σ <dig> consensus promoter sequence shows that 65% of genome sequences bearing one mismatch in the - <dig> element  but a perfect - <dig>  box are localized in p regions relative to the whole genome. at three mismatches in each box , about 16% of the hits are found in p regions, which roughly corresponds to the proportion of irs in the genome. such sequences are thus considered randomly distributed in the genome. results presented in figure  <dig> thus demonstrate that transcription factor consensus dna binding sites and related mismatch-containing derivatives tend to be preferentially localized inside irs. moreover, the genomic distribution of these sequences shows related patterns in all tested bacterial species .

principal σ factor promoter sequences
because principal σ factor promoter sequences are readily available and relatively abundant in many bacterial species, we decided to further explore their genomic distribution. figure  <dig>  shows genome-derived distribution matrices of experimentally identified promoter sequences from e. coli, b. subtilis and m. tuberculosis. as expected, these matrices contain patterns similar to those observed with the corresponding principal σ factor consensus sequences . importantly, the genomic distribution of sequences from the coding region of the rpob genes from the same bacterial species did not show any enrichment inside of p regions . these results suggest that transcription factor dna binding sites from various bacterial species have a genomic distribution significantly different from that of non-regulatory sequences.

synthetic matrices
from these observations, we hypothesized that a particular genome-derived distribution matrix may appropriately represent several promoters. hence, it could be possible to calculate a score reflecting the similarity between the distribution matrix of a typical promoter and the genome-derived distribution matrix of any hexanucleotide pair from the same organism. a high score would indicate a strong probability that the tested sequence is also a promoter. however, the best reference matrix should not necessarily be obtained from an existing promoter sequence. in fact, an interpolated matrix could indeed offer more flexibility and be much more effective. we therefore decided to synthetically generate distribution matrices according to the values observed in each cell of the genome-derived distribution matrices for all available experimentally identified principal σ factor-dependent promoter sequences . a range of ratios was next determined for each cell, resulting in over  <dig> million different synthetic matrices . synthetic matrices are thus not affiliated to any hexanucleotide pairs, but are rather produced from the genome-derived distribution matrices of experimentally identified promoters. moreover, it could be possible to identify synthetic matrices suitable to detect promoter sequences for a specific organism , and perhaps for all bacteria .

using distribution matrices to detect promoters
to measure the ability of synthetic matrices to correctly identify promoter sequences, we tested them on  <dig> characterized principal σ factor dependent promoter sequences from ten bacterial species . complete irs containing these promoters were extracted from their respective genomes along with  <dig> nt on each side. these "enlarged irs" were next scanned using two hexanucleotide windows with respect to the allowed spacing ranges. for each hexanucleotide pair, a genome-derived distribution matrix was generated and used to calculate a score based on its similarity to the synthetic matrix under evaluation . different metrics have been tested and the selected one provided the best outcome . since the - <dig> box has a more important role in transcription  <cit> , the mean of scores sharing the same - <dig> box was calculated. this latter averaged score had to be greater than the threshold to consider the corresponding sequence as a candidate promoter. furthermore, since the distance between the tss and the proximal hexanucleotide box can slightly vary , signals located at ±  <dig> nt of an experimentally identified proximal hexanucleotide box were considered as true positives . indicators such as sensitivity, specificity, precision, and performance were calculated for each synthetic matrix  <cit> . we chose to present the fp rate per  <dig> nt rather than the precision indicator to facilitate comparison since the precision indicator does not take into account the length of analyzed regions . in contrast with other studies  <cit> , the analyzed regions were not limited to a maximum length, longer regions producing more fps.

for each organism, the gc content, the number of gathered characterized promoter sequences, the number of distinct irs containing these promoters, the total number of nt in these irs, and the allowed spacing between hexanucleotide pairs are indicated. the sensitivity and fp rate obtained with the best synthetic matrix  and the general matrix are also shown.

"organism-specialized" synthetic matrices  gave interesting results for each tested organism . for instance, the synthetic matrix # <dig> identified almost 60% of promoters among the set of  <dig> characterized promoter sequences from b. subtilis with approximately one fp/ <dig> nt. overall, the sensitivity of the best matrix for each organism ranges from  <dig> % to  <dig> % with  <dig>  to  <dig>  fp/ <dig> nt . amongst the fp, some could be uncharacterized real promoter sequences. performance, precision and specificity indicators ranged respectively between  <dig> – <dig> %,  <dig> %- <dig> % and  <dig> – <dig> % . cross-validation tests were also conducted with e. coli and b. subtilis promoter datasets and matrices very similar to the organism-specialized synthetic matrices were identified. moreover, the sensitivity and fp rate of these cross-validation matrices were comparable to the organism-specialized matrices obtained using complete datasets, demonstrating the robustness of the approach and suggesting that the various organism-specialized matrices are appropriate .

interestingly, several synthetic matrices identified a significant fraction of promoter sequences in all tested genomes. we thus undertook to find a matrix that would be the best compromise for promoter detection in all bacteria. this was achieved by summing up the relative performance indicator of each matrix on all genomes. the best "general" synthetic matrix   usually showed a slight decrease in sensitivity relative to organism-specialized synthetic matrices . nonetheless, the sensitivity of this general synthetic matrix ranged from  <dig> % to  <dig> % with  <dig>  to  <dig>  fp/ <dig> nt , which is comparable to other approaches for an equivalent fp rate . furthermore, we have replaced our scoring function by a function based on pswm. the results obtained with e. coli and b. subtilis normalized pswm promoter datasets, showed a significantly decreased sensitivity and a lower fp rate in our design, suggesting that the genomic distribution of promoter sequences is more flexible, and hence more portable between species than current promoter sequence models .

the scores of all possible hexanucleotide pairs for a specific enlarged ir can be presented in a graph. as an example, figure  <dig> shows graphs obtained using the enlarged irs containing the characterized promoter sequences presented in figure  <dig> for e. coli , b. subtilis  and m. tuberculosis . the rpob scanning is also presented for e. coli since identical results were obtained using the b. subtilis and m. tuberculosis sequences . interestingly, figure 3c  shows one of many examples where a - <dig> promoter box  is coupled to a ribosome binding site .

to assess the significance of our results, the analyses were repeated on two types of shuffled genome sequences. while retaining all the original genome information, the shuffling destroys its structure, which is used by our methodology to identify promoter sequences. the first shuffling procedure was accomplished by repositioning mononucleotides one region  at a time, thus keeping the at bias intact in each ir  <cit> . the second shuffling was performed independently of gene annotations, thus dispersing the gc content uniformly through a genome. we surmised that most regulatory sequences, and by extension their genomic distribution, would be affected differently by these procedures. the overall sensitivity obtained with shuffled genomes should thus be decreased. indeed, genome-derived distribution matrices were completely different if calculated from the real genome or from shuffled genomes . as expected, the second shuffling was much more detrimental to the observed sensitivity. for instance, the calculated sensitivity with the general synthetic matrix dropped respectively from 31%  to 14% and  <dig> %  for e. coli, and from 50% to, respectively 17% and  <dig> % for b. subtilis. the same trend has been observed for other genomes . shuffling performed with longer nucleotides blocks than mononucleotide gave intermediate results .

coupling sequence information to genome distribution
for some bacteria, consensus promoter sequences representing the sequences recognized by principal σ factors are well characterized. for example, the consensus promoter sequence for b. subtilis and e. coli is ttgaca < >tataat  <cit> . we have thus examined the possibility of decreasing the occurrence of fps by introducing a very simple sequence-dependent filter. approximately half fps were eliminated by allowing up to three mismatches in the - <dig>  box and up to two mismatches in the - <dig>  box . for instance, a sensitivity of 49% with  <dig>  fp/ <dig> nt for the specialized matrix and 44% with  <dig>  fp/ <dig> nt for the general synthetic matrix was obtained for b. subtilis. since fewer fps were observed, the threshold could be lowered, which can improve the sensitivity of the algorithm. for example, the reduction of the ir specific threshold  from three to two standard deviations upon sequence filtering gave a sensitivity of 58% with  <dig>  fp/ <dig> nt in b. subtilis using the general synthetic matrix. figure  <dig> illustrates how the application of a filter may allow the identification of an otherwise missed promoter.

prediction and biochemical validation of promoters
in addition to the irs used to evaluate synthetic matrices, we have applied our promoter detection algorithm on the remaining irs from the ten genomes mentioned in table  <dig>  some predicted promoters from b. subtilis, e. coli and m. tuberculosis were chosen for further investigation using a biochemical approach. rna was extracted from exponentially growing cultures and tss were determined by primer extension analyses. the seven candidate promoters for which a transcription signal was observed matched the predicted sequence . the distance between the observed tss and the potential - <dig> box was in all cases either  <dig> or  <dig> nt. these results demonstrate that our algorithm represent a valuable tool for the identification of prokaryotic promoter sequences. complete prediction lists for these three organisms, and others, are available upon request.

bacterial species, gene names, predicted promoter sequences , experimentally identified transcriptional start sites  and the corresponding z-scores are shown for all tested irs where a primer extension signal was detected.

discussion
in this work, we present evidences suggesting that regulatory sequences and their close derivatives have a biased distribution pattern for irs that may support transcription initiation. furthermore, our data support the idea that the preferential location of regulatory sequences is shared between bacterial species. in order to clearly demonstrate the potential of genomic distribution as an indicator of dna motif function, we have developed an algorithm that can identify a significant fraction of principal σ factor-dependent promoters in any prokaryotic organism, using only a genome annotation and a synthetic matrix . promoter predictions were also made and experimentally verified, thus highlighting the potential of our approach for promoter identification in various prokaryotic organisms. overall, our strategy yielded results similar to those from other studies considering an equivalent amount of fp/ <dig> nt . however, our algorithm took advantage of a yet unexploited concept, can be used in a wide variety of organisms, required almost no previous knowledge of promoter sequences to be effective, and can be combined with other methodologies. the fact that our general matrix allowed the detection of more promoters in all tested genomes relative to the e. coli and b. subtilis principal σ factor normalized pswm  also supports the idea that genomic distribution of promoter sequences is easier to transfer across organisms with regards to current promoter sequence models.

although our approach is based on the genomic distribution of hexanucleotide pairs rather than a direct sequence evaluation, it is still important to know the approximate spacing range that is tolerated by a σ factor to efficiently detect the corresponding promoter boxes . however, this distance appears to be very similar in most bacteria. the spacing range limitation restrains putative promoter signal contamination by irrelevant hexanucleotide pairs.

an important assumption in our method is that all promoter sequences share a related genomic distribution pattern. however, it is possible that some promoters fall in distinct biological categories or slightly differ between bacterial species. as a consequence, specific matrices could be more adapted to different promoter types. for example, a matrix could be more suitable for promoters containing an extended - <dig> promoter box. similarly, very weak promoter sequences could bear an altered distribution pattern when compared to strong promoters.

another important consideration in our study is the relatively small size of prokaryotic genomes. since many of these contain only a few million bp, some hexanucleotide pairs are particularly absent from irs and/or from the whole genome. therefore, blanks  in mismatch containing cells can be found in some genome-derived distribution matrices, thus strongly altering the resemblance with the synthetic matrix. nonetheless, a few promoter sequences containing a blank cell are identified by our approach , although most of them are not . since the score is calculated from the mean of hexanucleotide pairs sharing the same proximal box, a blank occurring only at a particular spacing may not be too detrimental to the overall score of a sequence.

an additional possibility to explain our inability to identify some promoters is that, although present in the genome, some mismatch combinations may be relatively rare, and a small variation in absolute numbers may have a significant impact on p/g ratios. in addition, some promoter sequences contain nt triplets corresponding to codons frequently used in translation, which may flatten their distribution bias for irs. for instance, 19% of the tp and 44% of the fn hexanucleotide pairs of e. coli evaluated with the organism-specialized matrix  include a triplet which is used as a codon more frequently than average. thus, almost half of the fn in e. coli seem to have an impaired distribution profile because of the inclusion of at least one frequent codon.

in spite of the fact that our algorithm was designed for fully sequenced and annotated genomes, preliminary tests suggest that a genomic distribution calculated from a closely related organism can be used as a reference with similar results . similarly, errors in genomes annotation could theoretically have an impact on the results, albeit we have not observed any significant deterioration of predictions using older versions of the e. coli and b. subtilis genome annotations .

we have shown that combining different detection strategies by applying a very simple sequence-dependent filter to our promoter predictions significantly decreases the fp rate. since accuracy is a trade-off between sensitivity and the fp rate, this procedure could allow the reduction of the threshold, thus leading to the detection of more tp and increasing the sensitivity. the integration of a more sophisticated sequence-dependent method to our strategy could be used to further reduce the fp rate. distance filters were also successfully used by other groups to decrease the number of fps  <cit> . however, this can hardly be justified in biological terms as underlined by huerta and collado-vides  <cit> . moreover, such filters may not be suitable for alternative σ factor-dependent promoters or other transcription regulators. we have thus decided not to exploit distance constraints, although it remains possible for an eventual user to determine if a putative promoter is located at an appropriate distance from a gene of interest.

CONCLUSIONS
a simple and intuitive concept about the preferential location of regulatory sequences has allowed the identification of principal σ factor dependent-promoter sequences in the genome of various bacteria. minimal information about the structure of the searched pattern was only required for our algorithm to detect these promoters. moreover, it could be possible to predict promoters in species for which little transcriptional information is available using the proposed general matrix. since a biased distribution pattern also appear to be conserved for alternative σ factors and other regulatory proteins in a variety of prokaryotes, it should be possible to design distribution matrices to identify their corresponding dna binding sites.

