BACKGROUND
in the 1680s, anton van leeuwenhoek used homemade microscopes to provide the first description of faecal bacteria. faecal specimens contain one of the densest microbial communities known, they have been shown to contain similar microbial community than the colon  <cit>  and do not require an invasive collection protocol. therefore they continue to be the samples most widely used for studying the intestinal microbiome, a collection of microbial genomes. in the last ten years, the greatest insights into the human intestinal microbiome have come about as a result of the application of metagenomics approaches to faecal samples, as attested by more than  <dig> scientific publications found under the terms “human faecal microbiome” and “human fecal microbiome ” in pubmed.

metagenomics approaches in biomedicine seek to provide a comprehensive picture of the diversity and abundance of dominant and subdominant microbial species in health  <cit>  and in diseased states such as inflammatory bowel disorders , irritable bowel syndrome  and other functional bowel disorders   <cit> . during the course of these diseases, stool consistency is altered, varying from very hard  to entirely liquid , as determined by the bristol stool scale  <cit> .

diarrhoea is defined as an abnormally frequent discharge of semi-solid or fluid faecal matter from the bowel. as such, it usually implies a large percentage of water. a normal stool sample is considered to have a water content of about 75%, while that of a diarrhoeic stool is > 85%  <cit> . the freezing of specimens containing water causes the formation of ice crystals, which damage the microbial cell wall. consequently, there is an increased release of cellular components such as dnase and rnase, which in turn may degrade nucleic acids at the beginning of the dna extraction procedure. in intestinal disorders, such as ibd, ibs, and infectious diseases, the sampling of diarrhoeic stools is common  <cit> . however, how the water content of these samples affects the integrity of microbial dna, and therefore the analysis of microbial composition, is unclear.

steps such as stool homogenisation during collection or mechanical cell wall breaking during dna extraction may affect the analysis of the microbial community. to date, no study on stool homogenisation or mechanical cell wall breaking using high-throughput sequencing technique has been reported. an appropriate collection protocol, together with a better understanding of the characteristics of a stool, is critical for downstream microbial community analysis.

here we tested various factors that may affect microbial community analysis during stool sample collection and dna extraction steps using gel electrophoresis and pyrosequencing of the 16s rrna gene. in this regard, we examined the effect of homogenising the stool before freezing, the addition of a physiological solution to the stools to simulate a diarrhoeic condition before freezing, and the use of beads to breakdown the microbial cell wall during dna extraction.

RESULTS
experimental design
faecal samples were collected from healthy volunteers  who had not taken antibiotics during the previous three months. fresh samples were aliquoted as described below.

to test whether different layers of a stool sample unequally represent the microbiome, we compared the microbial composition of each faecal sample in three conditions: fully homogenised during sample collection, non-homogenised outer layers, and non-homogenised inner layers. for this comparison, two aliquots from each volunteer  and for each condition were used. thus, a total of  <dig> samples were prepared for microbial composition analysis.

to evaluate the effect of stool water content and the bead-beating technique on the integrity of microbial dna and, therefore, on microbial composition analysis, fresh stool samples were homogenised with an increasing proportion of phosphate-buffered saline , as indicated in table  <dig>  assuming that a normal stool contains 75%  of water, the dilutions tested corresponded to 75%, 80%,  <dig> %,  <dig> %,  <dig> % and  <dig> % of water content, respectively, which reflect the range of typical diarrhoeic samples  <cit> . similar amounts of each diluted sample were then disrupted with and without a bead-beating step. this procedure was carried out for four of the eight volunteers cited above . thus, a total of  <dig> samples were collected for microbiome analysis.

# indicates the identification number for each subject.

l# = stands for layer in the homogenisation study.

dl# = the “d” stands for diarrhoea in the water content study; the “l” refers to samples that have been also used in the homogenisation study, that contained pbs and underwent a bead-beating step.

dl#b = samples that did not contain pbs but underwent a bead-beating step.

dl#p = samples that contained pbs but did not undergo a bead-beating step.

dl#c = samples that did not contain pbs and did not undergo a bead-beating step.

effect of stool homogenisation during collection
usually, participants are instructed to homogenise their stool samples during collection. however, given the laborious and unpleasant nature of this task, it is possible that they might not have fully complied with this procedure. to evaluate the impact of homogenisation on the composition of the microbial community, we analysed the  <dig> samples as specified in the experimental design cited above  by means of pyrosequencing the 16s rrna gene at a normalised depth of  <dig> sequences of  <dig> bp per sample. the microbial profile at the species level was quite similar between a portion of the stool collected in the outer area, in the inner area and after homogenisation, except for sample lo <dig> , which showed a similar diversity but distinct abundance of operational taxonomic units  . this observation was confirmed by an unweighted pair group method with arithmetic mean  clustering analysis based on unweighted and weighted unifrac distances . sample lo <dig>  from subject # <dig> was the only one that clustered far from the other samples from the same stool when both microbial composition and abundance were considered .

effect of stool water content
to evaluate how stool water content affects the microbial community, we analysed the  <dig> samples from four out of the eight participants, as described in the experimental design section above.

after the extraction procedure, genomic dna was loaded in an agilent  <dig> bioanalyzer chip in order to evaluate integrity. a comparison of the dna extracted from dl <dig> samples  with those of dl1b’s  showed that the addition of pbs caused greater genomic dna degradation . this finding was confirmed by a decrease in dna size to lower than  <dig> mbp with 125 mg of stool  and 50% pbs. in contrast, in the absence of pbs this degradation was also observed but only when the stool weighed  <dig>  mg . interestingly, we observed a double effect of stool water content and bead-beating when dealing with a small amount of stool matter.

although the presence of pbs could increase the degradation of genomic dna, the microbial community profile was not affected at the species level . this observation could be explained by the fact that the microbial analysis was based on the pcr amplification of the v <dig> region of the 16s rrna gene, which is around 300 bp, whereas the degraded genomic dna fragments were larger than 3000 bp. moreover, this size may be sufficient for shotgun sequencing as dna would be cut into fragments of between  <dig> and 800 bp. however, further sequencing experiments are required to confirm that the gene content analysis is not biased.

effect of bead-beating during dna extraction
a bead-beating step during dna extraction is required to break down the cell wall of gram-positive bacteria  <cit> . to evaluate the effect of bead-beating on the microbial community of diarrhoeic samples, we compared conditions with and without a bead-beating step, and with and without an increasing volume of pbs . although the disruption step caused degradation of genomic dna, in an increased volume of pbs, it did not greatly modify the microbial community profile . moreover, samples containing a different volume of pbs  clustered together , as shown by an upgma-unifrac analysis, and presented a similar alpha diversity, as measured by phylogenetic diversity  metric . however, in the absence of bead-beating during the extraction procedure, genomic dna did not show any sign of degradation at any volume of pbs tested, but the dna yields were lower than with bead-beating . the microbial profile of these samples also differed completely to that of those subjected to bead-beating . as expected, the absence of bead-beating significantly decreased the detection of gram-positive bacteria such as firmicutes and actinobacteria phyla . at the genus level, proportions of blautia and bifidobacterium were decreased by at least 5- and 14-fold, respectively  .

the upgma clustering analysis based on the unweighted unifrac method, which takes into account the microbial composition, did not show separation of the samples with or without a bead-beating step . however, when the analysis was based on a weighted unifrac method, which considers both microbial composition and abundance, samples from one of the four subjects clustered separately . here we show that the inclusion of this procedure dramatically changed both the migration profile of the genomic dna and the taxonomic profile of stool samples.

CONCLUSIONS
microbial community studies involve a variety of procedures, ranging from sample collection to sequence data interpretations. given the increasing relevance of metagenomics for research into intestinal disorders, it is crucial that the data generated in each study be optimally comparable across all those already underway. however, strong biases can be introduced into stool research, in particular during stool collection and storage and during dna extraction. we previously recommended that stool samples be kept at room temperature and be brought to the laboratory within 24 h after collection or alternatively be stored immediately at -20°c by the volunteer in a home freezer, to be later transported in a freezer-pack to the laboratory, where all samples are stored at -80°c before further treatment  <cit> .

our findings from the present study indicate that homogenisation of the stool during collection is recommendable but not indispensable. indeed, samples collected from the inner and outer layers of stool samples showed a similar microbial composition and abundance. moreover, we show that the percentage of water typically found in diarrhoeic samples does not affect the clustering of samples from the same subjects. to validate our results, analysis of diarrhoeic samples could be compared with non-diarrhoeic ones from the same individual; however, the collection of these two types of samples from the same healthy subjects would be complicated for ethical reasons. moreover, since other next generation sequencing platforms will allow a greater sequencing depth, this may allow a deeper characterization of the microbial community and could reveal additional differences in the microbial community composition for the various conditions measured in this study.

finally, our study also reveals that microbial disruption by bead-beating allows greater detection of gram-positive bacteria such as blautia  and bifidobacterium , commonly detected in human stools. in conclusion, the hydration of faecal samples and their degree of homogenisation do not significantly alter their microbial community composition and structure. however, although the mechanical disruption of microbial cells causes genomic dna degradation in simulated diarrhoeic stool samples, our findings confirm that this step is necessary for the detection of gram-positive bacteria such as blautia and bifidobacterium.

