BACKGROUND
coevolution is one of the few paramount forces acting on all levels of biological organization from bioms to nucleotides. observations of the complementary adaptations in two or more species caused by mutual selection pressures have started from darwin's  work on orchids and their pollinators and resulted in theoretical generalizations such as 'red queen hypothesis'  <cit> . more recently concepts and methodologies developed for the study of species coevolution were applied to the growing wealth of molecular data, in particular for detection of coevolution between and within proteins  <cit> . identifying coevolving positions in proteins allows better understanding of their structure and function and paves the road to engineering proteins with desired properties. several computational methods have been proposed to detect coevolving residues from multiple sequence alignments . best approaches strive to disentangle patterns created by coevolution and those due to shared ancestry  and stochasticity . based on recent comparative evaluation of the state-of-art techniques to detect coevolution  <cit> , here we use one of the top performing approaches implemented in comap  <cit>  to study the coevolution of residues in a key photosynthetic enzyme rubisco.

rubisco  is the key enzyme of the calvin cycle, catalyzing the fixation of inorganic carbon dioxide to organic sugars. rubisco is a gateway for inorganic carbon, which is present in all light-dependent ecosystems. however, due to the poor turnover rate and competition between o <dig> and co <dig> at the active site, rubisco is often the rate-limiting step of the photosynthesis  <cit> . these properties of rubisco coupled with its high concentration in photosynthesizing organs make it the most abundant enzyme on earth  <cit> . both biospheric importance and intracellular abundance of rubisco stimulated plenitude of molecular studies using rubisco as a model system , but despite significant progress our understanding of rubisco functioning and evolution is still far from complete  <cit> .

land plants and green algae have type ib rubisco, which is a hexadecamer consisting of eight large, plastid encoded, and eight small, nuclear encoded, subunits. large subunits which possess the active site of rubisco are encoded by the chloroplast gene rbcl, which over three decades ago was among the first fully sequenced genes  <cit>  and since that time became one of the most often sequenced genes thanks to its wide use in phylogenetics of plants and algae . plant systematists have mainly used rbcl paying little attention to its function. however, recently positive selection acting on rbcl was found in the most lineages of land plants  <cit> . the mapping of the positively selected residues on rubisco tertiary structure revealed that they are located in regions important for dimer-dimer, intradimer, large subunit-small subunit and rubisco-rubisco activase interactions, and that some of the positively selected residues are close to the active site  <cit> . positive selection on rubisco is in concert with well-known variation in rubisco kinetics found in different species  and its correlation with environmental parameters . positive selection has been shown as a driving force for kinetic differences in rubiscos of c <dig> and c <dig> plants  <cit> .

coevolutionary studies have been applied to a few important proteins and provided new information about protein-protein interactions, ligand-receptor bindings, and the 3d protein structure  <cit> . here we study the coevolution and positive selection on rubisco large subunit using  <dig> data sets of the rbcl gene representing the main lineages of land plants . our aim is to provide a better insight into the patterns of groups of non-independent sites and positively selected sites as well as to find their amino acid composition, pairing preference, and spatial distribution.

RESULTS
about half of rubisco residues coevolve
in total  <dig> groups of residues were detected as coevolving for different amino acid properties:  <dig> groups for charge,  <dig> for the grantham distance,  <dig> for polarity, and  <dig> for volume. no groups with compensatory changes were detected. the identified coevolving residues clustered in groups of  <dig> -  <dig> residues, and were widely distributed across the sequence. around 50%  of the large subunit residues were involved in coevolution. most of them were involved in the subtle changes of the biochemical properties of its surrounding structure, whereas there were  <dig> residues located within the structurally and/or functionally important sites . the proportions of the coevolving residues among sites involved in structural and/or functional interactions and among the rest of sites were  <dig> % and  <dig> %, respectively, and did not differ significantly. among these  <dig> coevolving sites,  <dig> were involved in the dimerization of the two large subunits,  <dig> residues were important for the dimer-dimer associations and  <dig> of them were found to be important for the interaction between the large and small subunits .

the residue number is according to the spinach rubisco sequence ; * positively selected site; ** most often positively selected site; underlined residues coevolve with sites under positive selection; interactions are after knight et.al. .

to test whether amino acid composition of coevolving sites is different from the whole sequence of the large subunit  of rubisco, we performed the χ2-test for independence on the counts of amino acids in the two groups of sites. this test was highly significant for all four types  of coevolving groups . we further calculated the correlation of amino acid frequencies at coevolving sites as compared with frequencies found in the whole sequence. there were  <dig> , <dig> residues in all data sets and  <dig>  residues were shown to be coevolving for one or several biochemical properties. among coevolving positions  <dig>  residues were detected to be coevolving for charge,  <dig>  residues for polarity,  <dig>  residues for volume, and  <dig>  residues were coevolving to conserve grantham distance. the correlation coefficients r between the amino acid composition in the whole data set and the residues coevolving for charge, polarity, volume, grantham and total  were  <dig> ,  <dig> ,  <dig> ,  <dig> , and  <dig> , respectively. thus, the residue composition of the sites coevolving for charge was the most different from the other regions of the protein, with the correlation of r =  <dig> , which was lower than a threshold of  <dig>  estimated in  <cit> . meanwhile, for sites coevolving for other properties the residue composition was more similar to the composition of the whole protein , and also similar to the correlation between the composition of protein-protein interface residues and the composition of the whole protein  <cit> .

presumably, sites coevolving for certain biochemical properties  may have different amino acid composition preferences. thus, we studied how amino acid frequency was different in residues that coevolve compared to the whole sequences. all coevolving sites had higher proportion of a, c, e, f, k, v, t compared with whole sequences . among these residues, a, c, f, v are hydrophobic and e, k, t are hydrophilic. amino acids w, q, m and i were underrepresented in all coevolving sites. proportion of a, d, k, l, t and v were significantly higher in coevolving sites detected by polarity . proportion of d, f, h, k, p were significantly higher in coevolving sites detected by grantham . proportion of k, d and g were significantly higher in coevolving sites detected by charge  compared with whole sequences. frequencies of d, f, k, l v, y were significantly higher in sites coevolving for volume . thus, our results demonstrate that frequencies of certain amino acids at coevolving sites are significantly different from the amino acid composition found in the whole sequence.

next, we estimated the residue-residue preference for inferred coevolving pairs: for each combination of  <dig> existing amino acids we counted how often a particular pair of amino acids i and j was inferred as coevolving in rbcl. for coevolving groups of more than two residues, all the pair-wise combinations were considered. the numbers of coevolving residue pairs are shown in the  <dig> ×  <dig> symmetric matrices with respect to the four different amino acid properties and all the coevolving pairs . the most frequent entries of the matrices show which amino acid pairs most frequently coevolve. we observed that for coevolving sites, the residue-residue paring preference was different for each property , probably due to specific biochemical constrains or interactions for each property type. for example, the residues with opposite charge, such as r-e, r-d, k-d and k-e, are often inferred as coevolving . while pairs contenting the same charge are not very common, besides the pair k-k, which has extremely high frequency. additionally, the charged residues also prefer to associate with small residues, such as t, g. polar residues prefer to coevolve with other polar residues . nonpolar residues on the other hand are more likely to coevolve with nonpolar residues  . it seems that residues with similar volume tend to coevolve together more frequently , such as l-l, f-f, i-i and v-l.

of all the coevolving residue pairs, the hydrophobic pairs are most frequent compared with hydrophilic residues, such as a-a, a-l, i-i, l-l, l-v, f-f and v-v . this result is consistent with the previous study  <cit> . nineteen of the coevolving residue pairs  appear to be responsible for more than 50% of the cases of coevolution. one possibility is that the evolutionary forces tend to be more similar for the similar amino acids, and when they evolve together, it makes it easier to keep the structure/environment stable.

the amino acid composition of sites under positive selection is different from that of other sites
two types of models  were used to detect sites under positive selection at the protein-coding level . from the total  <dig> residues of the rbcl sequence, we detected  <dig> residues under positive selection using paml, and  <dig> residues using fitmodel . the correlation coefficients between the amino acid composition at positively selected sites and the whole sequences were  <dig> ,  <dig> ,  <dig>  for residues detected with paml, fitmodel and with both, respectively . all the correlation coefficients were <  <dig> , implying that the amino acid composition of sites under positive selection was quite different from that observed in the whole sequences of rubisco's large subunit . it appeared that preferred amino acids under positive selection were, either neutral hydrophobic, such as a, i, m and v or neutral polar, such as s and q. while none of the hydrophilic residues were favored, such as w, k, g, the paml results show that, the polar amino acids such as d, e, h, n were preferably located at the positive selected sites . interestingly the sites inferred to be under positive selection were not the same for paml and fitmodel. this may be explained by the differences in the formulations of the models used in each implementation. paml analyses were conducted with site models that detect strong selective pressure affecting all lineages at specific sites. in contrast, the fitmodel analyses were conducted with the model allowing switches between selective regimes through time, which therefore may detect sites under positive selection only at short time episodes . for paml analyses, the residues preferred to be under positive selection were a, d, e, h, i, m, n, q, s, v . for fitmodel analyses, the residues preferred to be under positive selection were a, i, l, m, q, s, v . for sites detected with both paml and fitmodel, we observed a significant preference for amino acids a, i, m, q, s, v . it appears that the positive selection favored amino acids are either hydrophobic, such as a, i, m, v or polar, such as s, q, but they are all neutral. while none of the hydrophilic residues are favored, such as w, k, g, the paml results show that, the polar amino acids are preferably located on the positive selected sites, such as d, e, h, n.

the  <dig> residues most often inferred under positive selection were in accordance with the previous selection study of rubisco  <cit> . even though these residues are not directly located on the functional or structural important sites, they may be in contact with the active sites through dimer-dimer interaction, large subunits dimerization, and large and small subunit associations . we studied whether any of the  <dig> most often positively selected residues were also involved in coevolution with other residues under positive selection. from table  <dig> it can be seen that indeed some of sites under positive selection also coevolve with other sites under positive selection .

 <dig> the residue number is according to the spinach rubisco sequence 

 <dig> number of groups with detected positively selected residues in fitmodel

 <dig> number of groups with detected positively selected residues in paml

 <dig> *positively selected site; ** most often positively selected site; underlined residues are both within  <dig> Å and coevolve

the coevolving and positively selected sites are preferably located in helices
the protein secondary structure elements helix, strand and coil have different physical and chemical properties, thus play distinct roles in the protein tertiary structure and function. so the evolutionary force may vary among different secondary structures. in drosophila proteins the coil regions are more likely to be under positive selection than expected, while the helices and strands undergo less positive selection  <cit> .

the secondary structure of the large subunits of rubisco is conserved throughout land plants, despite the variation in primary sequences  <cit> . the helix parts are usually amphipathic with one side hydrophobic and the other side hydrophilic, thus the structured regions can occur anywhere in the protein and involve the largest proportion of residues in rubisco large subunit. the strands often contain hydrophobic residues and could form a well-structured parallel or anti-parallel beta sheet. the active site of rubisco is located at the carboxy-terminal end of the beta strand  <cit> . the coil is the most flexible element without ordered structure and assists the conformational change of the protein. loop  <dig> of rubisco large subunit is conserved in land plants and green algae. it is crucial for the catalytic process because it controls the opened or closed state of the enzyme, which influences the association of the substrate  <cit> . it was shown that residues in mobile regions of the protein tend to evolve in highly correlated fashion, participating in physical and functional contacts during their motion  <cit> .

the study of the locations of coevolving residues of rubisco with respect to the secondary structure could unravel the pattern of the coevolution at the structure level and explain how the different secondary structure elements may undergo different evolutionary forces. in plant rubisco, the helix parts of the structure contain  <dig> % coevolving residues , which is significantly higher compared to  <dig> % in the whole sequence. moreover, helixes are enriched with sites coevolving with respect to all amino acid properties . the coevolving residues in strands are fewer than in the whole sequence . in coils the total coevolving residues are slightly less numerous than in the whole sequence , but this trend changes for different properties. in coils the proportion of the sites coevolving for grantham distance  and charge  are slightly higher compared to the whole sequence . in light of widespread positive selection in plant rubisco, the distribution of the positively selected sites in the secondary structure of rubisco could suggest which parts of the structure are more sensitive to the selective forces. interestingly,  <dig> % of sites under positive selection were located in helices, which was significantly higher than compared to  <dig> % among all sites . the enrichment of helices with sites under positive selection was observed irrespectively to whether the sites were inferred with paml or fitmodel. other parts of rubisco structure contained fewer residues under positive selection compared to the whole sequence: in the strand regions  <dig> % of sites were under positive selection compared to  <dig> % overall, and in the coils  <dig> % of sites were under positive selection compared to  <dig> % overall.

overall, this shows that evolutionary forces are unevenly distributed on the large subunit of rubisco, with the helical parts of the structure more frequently affected by coevolution and positive selection compared to other parts. interestingly, our results differ from ones obtained for drosophila proteins where less than expected selection was found in helices  <cit> .

coevolving residues are closer in 3d structure
in order to compare the distribution of physical distances between the coevolving residues and all the residues in the lsu of rubisco, we used four known 3d structures of spinach and tobacco from pdb both in activated and non-activated states. for each pdb record, distances between the center masses of any two residues in the protein 3d structure were calculated. the coevolving residues were mapped onto the pdb structures, and all the pair-wise combinations of the coevolving sites within a group were listed. the corresponding distances of all the coevolving pairs were collected. the minimum pair-wise distances between residues for both the activated and unactivated state of each species were calculated and the smallest value was chosen for further comparisons. it is said that two residues are in physical contact, if the distance between them is under a certain threshold. in some studies, they use the distance between two beta carbons  or two alpha carbons  of the corresponding residues, with the direct contact threshold of 8Å  <cit> . however, this method only considers one point of the residue, so that the possible position conformations of the other part of the molecule are neglected. in this study, distances between the center mass of the residues were calculated, thus the residue molecule was considered as a whole.

the minimum physical distance between two coevolving sites in lsu varied from  <dig> Å to 70Å, with a mean value of  <dig> Å. the one-sample z-test was applied to the data set and showed that the average pair-wise distance between coevolving sites was significantly shorter than the average distance of the total pair-wise distance in one 3d protein chain  . although some of the non-independent residues may be physically far from each other, long-term interactions through conformational changes and occurrence by chance  <cit>  could indirectly lead to physical contact, such as, non-specific hydrophobic interaction. for coevolving residues we observed a clear shift to the left of the pairwise distance distribution compared to the distribution for the whole sequence . this suggests that on average pairs of coevolving sites in lsu are found closer in the 3d structure compared to the background.

*the mean difference between the values of the 3d distance with the corresponding distance.

# p-values as calculated from one sample z-test and, in parentheses, from the wilcoxon rank sum rank test.

next we analyzed physical proximity of the  <dig> residues most frequently found under positive selection in the lsu. interestingly, these positively selected sites showed an opposite trend, as they were significantly further from each other than the background , again showing different pattern from the drosophila proteins  <cit> . the distances between active sites and sites under positive selection tended to be shorter compared with the background, although not significantly .

CONCLUSIONS
the functionally and structurally important sites in the protein are usually more conserved than other sites. but in some cases, one mutation at a crucial site may be compensated by mutations at other sites, so to maintain vital interactions and functions  <cit> . our study shows that the coevolving and positively selected sites tend to be located within the functionally and structurally important regions of rubisco. substitutions have to be compatible with the protein function and be structurally stable. therefore, the amino acid composition and the residues pairing preference of the sites under coevolution and positive selection can provide a better insight in terms of protein evolution. our molecular evolutionary analysis reveals that different evolutionary forces may have distinct amino acid composition and pairing preferences. the coevolving residue composition may not be too different from that of the background because they are wide spread across the sequence, while the positive selection is quite different. moreover, the groups of non-independent residues have their pairing preference. based on the amino acid pairing frequency matrix with different biochemical properties, the distinct patterns of coevolving pairs could provide a hint for the further analysis about the mutual information.

our study indicates that coevolving sites are in closer proximity in the tertiary structure of the rubisco large subunit. predicting protein tertiary structure from the primary sequence is a crucial problem in computational biology. the physical interactions between coevolving residues could help to build a residue contact map in protein tertiary structure analysis. moreover, many residues which coevolve or under positive selection are found in the functionally or structurally important locations, such as dimer-dimer, intradimer, active site and small subunit interactions. our results appear to be in agreement with the study of yeang and haussler  <cit> , who proposed that in large protein families coevolving positions are spatially coupled and many of the coevolving positions are located at the functionally or structurally important positions. furthermore, we find that many sites are both under positive selection and coevolution, suggesting that selection towards a new optimum may require more than one substitution. indeed, multiple neutral changes along the mutational landscape of a protein may precede mutations with high advantageous fitness effect  <cit> .

because of the importance of rubisco, it has been the target of genetic engineering for a long time. aspects including structure, function and evolution of this enzyme have been studied with the aim to improve its kinetics. nowadays, the experimental way of random mutagenesis and bioselection could be used to identify mutations that influence important properties of rubisco  <cit> , but the vast amount of candidates and the repetitive lab work make the process slow, unpredictable and tedious. knowledge of location of coevolving or positively selected residues may be used to design future mutagenesis experiments and accelerate efforts to engineer better rubisco, which would potentially increase the yield of agriculturally important crops.

