BACKGROUND
the need to analyze genetic variation within populations of various organisms has engendered a wide variety of techniques designed to identify genetic differences between related genomes  <cit> . the vast majority of methods currently available for detecting single or polynucleotide polymorphisms, as well as insertions and deletions of varying size, were originally developed for genotyping individual organisms within populations. by sampling and genotyping numerous separate individuals, the relative frequency of a given variant within a population can be estimated. however, the number of samples analyzed rapidly becomes a limiting factor, in terms of both time and cost considerations. as a consequence, a new generation of techniques is being developed that will allow more than one specific allele to be distinguished and quantified simultaneously  <cit>  in a single sample containing nucleic acids pooled from several individuals  <cit> . the most successful techniques described so far have various advantages and drawbacks. on the one hand, techniques based on microarrays  <cit>  or on mass spectrometry  <cit> , although very efficient at sorting numerous variants within a single sample, require access to specialized equipment and are thus difficult and expensive to develop and implement. on the other hand, more amenable techniques based on real-time pcr or primer extension  <cit>  often require multiplexing adjustments.

for pathogenic microorganisms, such as fungi, bacteria and especially viruses, populations infecting an individual host are often highly variable, intensifying the difficulties involved in distinguishing and accurately quantifying numerous alleles or variants co-existing in a single nucleic acid sample. this is best illustrated by considering the properties of viral populations, which exist as a swarm of related mutants commonly designated as a quasispecies  <cit> . one remarkable property of viral quasispecies is that the relative frequency and distribution of specific variants can vary at different phases of the virus life cycle  <cit> . in this situation, the ability to simultaneously monitor those specific variants can become critical in understanding the biology and evolution of the virus  <cit> . similarly, monitoring changes in allele frequency is essential to the understanding of the evolution of viruses or other pathogens, as these changes reflect forces such as selection during adaptation  <cit>  and genetic drift in phases of the life cycle where the effective population size is low  <cit> .

we faced exactly this challenge when evaluating the effective population size of cauliflower mosaic virus  during systemic invasion of plant host tissues . for this purpose, and because of concerns related to the available genotyping techniques mentioned above, we developed a novel analysis method based on classical detection of genetic variants by dideoxy fingerprinting  <cit> . this method, named quantitative single-letter sequencing , allowed the simultaneous and accurate monitoring of six engineered allelic camv variants over time, determining in a single nucleic acid sample and in a single reaction process both the presence/absence and the relative frequency of each allele in the viral genome population.

here, we describe the qss method and its application to samples consisting of mixtures of purified plasmids or viral genomes extracted from a multiply infected host plant. we test the accuracy, reproducibility, robustness and limits of this method, and discuss its potential application to other biological systems in any standard laboratory setting. since qss applies to known sequences only, it will be useful for monitoring experimental populations, as well as natural populations where the different variants at the targeted locus have been previously identified.

RESULTS
single-letter sequencing distinguishes several markers in mixed plasmid solutions
genetic markers were engineered into the camv genomes at exactly the same position. thus, examining single letter  sequence traces from a mixed population should, in theory, reveal some common peaks at positions where more than one marker harbours a a, and discriminating peaks at positions where only one marker does so. figure 1a shows an alignment of the marker sequences, highlighting the theoretically discriminating a-positions in green. between one and three discriminating a-positions are expected for each of the  <dig> markers used in this study.

the actual observed positions of a-peaks from the amplified and single-letter-sequenced pcavit1- <dig> plasmids showed slight differences from their theoretical positions relative to a co-electrophoresed labeled dna ladder . sequencing of each individual camv vit clone was repeated three times, and the observed position of the a-peaks proved to be highly reproducible, with the position of each peak always occurring in the same place to within ±  <dig>  bp . therefore, we defined an experimental list of discriminating a-positions, using the actual observed peak positions rather than their original theoretically predicted positions, as explained and highlighted in red in figure 1b.

this experimental list of discriminating a-positions was validated when all six markers co-existed in the dna sample and were analyzed together. a mix of equal amounts of all pcavit1- <dig> plasmids was used as a template for pcr and subsequent single-letter sequencing. all experimentally-confirmed discriminating a-peaks were easily distinguished at their specific position on the electropherogram , demonstrating that pooling plasmids in a single analysis did not lead to interference between the different markers. hence, for each pca-vit plasmid, from one to three discriminating peaks can be reliably detected on the electropherogram and indicate the presence/absence of the corresponding marker, determining the qualitative composition of the dna sample.

in all subsequent experiments, only those peaks that perfectly matched their expected position  were considered reliable and included in the analysis.

standard curves for quantification from single-letter sequence traces
we used the last peak common to all sequences before the polymorphic region  – called the normalizing-peak – to normalize the recorded data. the height of the normalizing-peak is contributed to by all the dna molecules in the mixed solution, and is thus generated by 100% of the sequences in the analyzed sample. in contrast, the discriminating peaks are generated only by those sequences containing an a at the corresponding position. each arrested dna molecule produced by the sequencing process contains one single fluorochrome linked to the sequencing primer; hence the height of a discriminating-peak is proportional to the relative frequency of the corresponding marker in the dna solution.

in order to prepare standard curves for the quantification of peak heights, we first prepared a series of mixed plasmid solutions containing pca-vit <dig> at a relative frequency of  <dig>   <dig>   <dig>   <dig>   <dig>   <dig> and 100%, maintaining equal amounts of the other five pca-vit plasmids in all but the 100% pca-vit solution. similar mixed solutions were prepared for pca-vit <dig>  pca-vit <dig>  pca-vit <dig>  pca-vit <dig> and pca-vit <dig> and processed for pcr amplification and single-letter sequencing as described in methods.

to extract information from the electropherograms on the relative frequency of each marker present in a mixed solution, we assigned an intensity value  to each discriminating-peak, corresponding to its height relative to that of the normalizing-peak. for each given discriminating-peak, a standard curve was constructed by plotting the known frequencies of the corresponding marker against the observed i values . one standard curve for each discriminating-peak was established from  <dig> replicates at 100%,  <dig> replicates at  <dig>   <dig> and 25%, and  <dig> replicates at 15% of the corresponding marker in the mixed plasmid solution. in these replicate runs, the i values were highly reproducible and showed very limited variation . however, i values obtained at 10% and 5% were more variable and were not used in establishing the standard curves .

the polynomial regression function corresponding to each standard curve was calculated using excel . the r <dig> values obtained for all standard curves were remarkably high, and two examples  are shown in figure  <dig> 

accuracy of quantification of genetic markers within mixed dna populations
the standard curves shown in figure  <dig> were used to directly transform the observed i values into the frequency of the corresponding marker in test dna solutions. parallel estimates were possible when more than one discriminating-peak was available for a given marker. in such cases, the frequency was taken as the mean of the parallel estimates.

the accuracy of the quantification was assessed by comparing the measured frequencies to their expected values on plasmid mixes prepared from the reference stocks. several mixes were tested . whether the mixes contained only  <dig> or all  <dig> markers, qss yielded estimates remarkably close to the expected values for all markers tested . surprisingly, when the estimates for each marker present in a given solution were summed up, the total often deviated from 100%, ranging from about  <dig> to 120% . this phenomenon was attributed to fluctuations in the baseline of sequence traces and was corrected by proportionally adjusting all marker frequencies to give a total of 100% . this final correction yielded estimates even closer to the true marker frequencies . the overall accuracy of the method is illustrated in figure  <dig>  which shows the linear regression function correlating expected values to the estimates. the r <dig> correlation coefficient was excellent for all vit markers, being between  <dig>  and  <dig> .

different mixes containing some or all pca-vit plasmids in the proportions indicated.

marker frequency quantification, obtained from the standard curves shown in figure  <dig>  the sum of frequencies in each mix is shown on the right.

frequency values after proportional correction to give a total of 100% in each mix.

the name quantitative single-letter sequencing  is used to describe the overall process of identifying discriminating peaks, recording their normalized height, and converting them into frequencies of genetic markers in a mixed dna population.

reproducibility of qss in repeated analyses of plasmids and virus mixes
we performed five independent pcr-amplifications of plasmid mix n° <dig> , containing equal amounts of all six markers, and further performed qss analyses. in all five independent repeats, the estimated frequency of each marker , ranging from  <dig>  to  <dig> %, was very close to the expected value of  <dig> %. the standard deviation among repeats was very small  for all markers considered , confirming the high reproducibility of the process.

reproducibility of qss as evaluated by the standard deviation  on  <dig> replications of the analysis of mix n° <dig>  proportional correction of the frequency of all markers was applied to give a total of 100% in each mix.

a similar reproducibility evaluation was also performed on a more realistic biological sample. a mixed population of viral dna genomes was extracted from a single infected plant, originally inoculated with the camv mix6vit virus suspension as described in methods. the extracted viral dna was used in  <dig> independent pcr amplifications followed by qss analysis . several conclusions can be drawn from the results of this experiment. i) qss can be applied to "natural" samples, e.g. viral dna solutions extracted from infected plants. ii) qss is highly reproducible if genetic variants are sufficiently frequent in the population , as the standard deviation among numerous repeats was very small. iii) the fact that the  <dig> markers were present in widely varying amounts allowed evaluation of the minimum frequency that can be reliably measured by qss. when considering the standard deviation calculated for each marker among the  <dig> repetitions, it is clear that the method can efficiently detect and reliably quantify genetic variants present in the population at a frequency above 5% . this 5% frequency appears as the threshold for qss reliability, both because corresponding variance between repeated measures proved too high when establishing the standard curves , and because rarer markers  yielded discriminating-peaks close to the sequencing baseline and could not be exploited unequivocally. iv) finally, any variation observed for a given marker among the repeated experiments was only slightly affected by the quality of sequence traces , an observation indicating the "robustness" of the method as specifically evaluated in the next section.

viral dna was extracted from a plant infected with the camv mix6vit, and processed independently  <dig> times for pcr amplification and qss analysis. average final estimates  and standard deviation  among repeats are shown on the right.

peaks yielded by low-frequency markers vit  <dig> and vit <dig>  when identified, emerged just above the base line of the sequence traces. as indicated in the text, the corresponding frequency estimates reported in this table fall below the threshold of qss accuracy, as confirmed by the high sd associated with vit <dig> and vit <dig>  and by numerous repeats where estimates could not be obtained , because the corresponding peaks were not clearly distinguishable on the electropherogram.

robustness of qss on samples of sub-optimal quality
in the analysis of viral samples from the camv mix6vit-infected plant , repetitions 1– <dig> and 12– <dig> were performed using  <dig> ng and  <dig> ng of viral dna matrix, respectively, at the initial pcr amplification step. presumably due to differences in the efficiency of the pcr, or for other unknown reasons, these two subsets yielded final trace sequences of different quality . higher baselines in the former subset seemingly resulted in biased sums of marker frequency, which totalled between  <dig> and 137% before final correction , whereas such biases were smaller in the latter subset, with total frequencies ranging from  <dig> to 117%. however, the final corrected estimates from both data subsets showed only very small differences in the mean frequency of markers, as well as in the standard deviation observed between repeats within subsets . we thus conclude that, even on samples yielding trace sequences of sub-optimal quality, qss still provides accurate and reproducible information on the genetic composition of a dna population.

the sum of the frequency estimates of all markers before final correction is given here as an indicator of the quality of the sequence traces. two subsets of differing quality can be distinguished : replicates 1– <dig> , replicates 12– <dig> .

mean frequency estimates and sd for all markers within the two subsets shown in table  <dig> 

discussion
this report describes the development of a novel technique – quantitative single-letter sequencing  – allowing simultaneous quantification of the frequencies of numerous individual allelic genetic markers in a mixed dna population without the need for multiplexing adjustments. although several techniques for the simultaneous detection and quantification of multiple variants at a single locus have been described previously  <cit> , the qss method has several advantages making it an interesting alternative. implementation of qss requires no specialized equipment, and it involves only a single pcr step and one sequencing reaction, allowing high throughput analysis. two sequencing plates  were sufficient to establish all the standard curves in this study, and we were able to subsequently process hundreds of individual biological samples within a week. due to these practical advantages, our method competes very well with easily accessible techniques based on real-time pcr  <cit> , primer extension  <cit> , quantitative sequencing  <cit> , or rflp analysis  <cit> . indeed, the simultaneous monitoring of up to  <dig> camv variants afforded by qss represents a significant progress, as other techniques require complex multiplexing setups that have thus far precluded efficient monitoring of more than  <dig> or  <dig> allelic variants in a single reaction tube. a concomitant study, recently published by another research group, used complex  sequence electropherogram and statistical modeling to extract qualitative and quantitative information from bacterial dna samples containing several allelic variants  <cit> . remarkably, this study and qss together confirm that methods based on quantitative sequencing can be applied to a wide variety of microorganisms. the two methods however have essential differences. qss uses simple single-letter sequence traces, allowing the direct quantification of variants, exclusively from discriminating peaks, with no statistical modeling. moreover, the use of fluorescent sequencing primer in qss theoretically allows multiplexing in future development of the method. for instance, when two distinct polymorphic regions are present in the dna sample, the use of two sequencing primers labeled with different fluorochromes can be envisaged, each targeting a specific locus. such multiplexing, with two distinct unlabeled sequencing primers is not even theoretically possible with the use of dye-terminators , as the deciphering of overlapping sequences from the two distinct loci would be impossible.

the remarkable accuracy of the estimates obtained  and the very small standard deviation  between repeats, make qss equally, if not more, reliable than other techniques for which we could extract similar parameters from the literature . we also tested the method on dna samples of different quality  and used variable amounts of initial template for pcr, and found that even in sub-optimal conditions yielding sequence traces with relatively high background or baseline, estimates of the genetic composition of the population were only slightly affected.

a reproducibility is evaluated by the median of standard deviations  among repeats on different variants, and is expressed as a frequency in %. for qss, the overall msd is  <dig> %; the values shown here,  <dig>  and  <dig> % are calculated from table  <dig>  and table  <dig> , respectively.

b accuracy is estimated i) by the median deviation , being the median of all differences between observed and expected allele frequencies, and ii) by the correlation coefficient between observed and expected frequencies .

nd: not-determined

 these values refer to standard deviation , because the data available in the literature do not allow calculation of the msd.

during development of the qss method, we observed an intriguing phenomenon . when summing up the estimated relative frequency of all variants within a dna sample, a value different from 100% was most often observed. we attribute this phenomenon, at least partly, to the fact that in most cases the baseline of the sequence traces is not exactly zero . normalization of the height of the discriminating peaks to that of a peak common to all sequences  was intended to correct for this kind of fluctuation, but obviously did not completely do so when the baseline deviated significantly from zero. moreover, attempts at normalizing discriminating peaks to any other common peak, positioned before or after the marker region, or even with an averaged height of several of these common peaks, did not significantly ameliorate this phenomenon . one explanation could be that the baseline is the same for both the normalizing peak and the discriminating peaks. since the former is contributed to by all sequences within the population and the latter solely by a fraction thereof, the proportion of the total height of different peaks attributable to the baseline will be different. we believe that this leads to a slight overestimation of the discriminating peak, yielding sums above 100% when the baseline is above zero, with a possible distortion inversely correlated to the relative frequency of the genetic variant within the population. although it may be possible to correct this undesirable artifact by further development of the qss method, we show here that a simple proportional adjustment of all values to give a total of 100% is sufficient to provide an excellent approximation of true marker frequencies.

CONCLUSIONS
qss is very well suited to monitoring allele frequency changes in populations of pathogens such as viruses, and probably fungi or bacteria, in either single host extracts or pooled extracts from numerous hosts, provided that the polymorphism at the locus under surveillance is previously identified. it could also be applied to estimation of homo- or heterozygosity in di- or polyploid organisms, as well as to pools of dna genomes extracted from numerous individuals to determine the relative frequency of variants within populations.

the genetic markers introduced into the camv genome in this study were not designed specifically for the development of qss, and this has two theoretical implications. on the one hand, it suggests that designing markers specifically for qss  would likely avoid partially overlapping peaks  and thus allow monitoring of even more co-existing variants in a population. on the other hand, it shows that qss can be applied to any non-specifically designed sequence variation, such as natural variants, again with the requirement that polymorphism at the corresponding locus is previously known. the method proved very efficient even with marker vit <dig>  where only one discriminating peak was available. thus, the polymorphic region can either be very diverse, or bear only minimal sequence changes generating only a single discriminating peak.

