BACKGROUND
tree-thinking, the explanation of evolutionary events in the context of a tree, has inspired many philosophers and evolutionists  <cit> . some tree-thinkers classically employed this pattern, labelling it the "organismal tree," and arguing that it depicts the dividing pattern of cells, the path of the envelope division of living beings through time  <cit>  . other authors, even if they have retained this drawing to describe evolution, have redefined the meaning of the tree as a "prevailing trend in the evolution of genome-scale gene sets rather than as a complete picture of evolution"  <cit> . in any case, the reconstruction of the vertical history is decisive and relies on defining sets of congruent characters  <cit> . at the morphological level, such comparable characters are hardly identifiable. in prokaryotes, it is only with the advance of molecular phylogenetics that classification has experienced a hopeful yet limited rebound  <cit> . for a tree-thinker, the use of orthologue genes could unite practical and conceptual advantages. they allow us to describe the organism from the molecules, because they fit perfectly within the traditional approach of molecular phylogenetics for which the history of genes tells the history of species. they provide a vast quantity of comparable characters, and since they have been inherited from ancestor to descendants, they should likely be congruent, retracing the history of species diversification  <cit> . such ideal markers are needed to reconstruct a convincing phylogenetic tree, if the tree is the right model for representing evolution.

in practice, the identification of congruent genes is mostly based on exclusion of potentially incongruent markers . only broadly distributed orthologues are generally retained, if their individual phylogenies do not support apparently odd relationships  <cit> . the set of candidate congruent markers is sometimes further tested. genes are concatenated to maximise the phylogenetic signal they contain, and a best tree is inferred from this large dataset. statistical approaches are then used to test whether individual markers reject this best tree. if they fail to reject it, genes are claimed to be congruent with it. if some genes reject it, they are secondarily excluded from the core. this process is repeated until the dataset stabilizes.

generally, these successive conditions allow the retention of a small minority of the genes present in an initial set of genomes  <cit> . the quantity of molecular information in these genes might thus be critical in resolving ancient phylogenetic relationships. in this context, simultaneous analyses are seen as the logical solution to produce a robust tree:supertrees  <cit>  or a posteriori consensus approaches  <cit>  can be employed. supertree methods assemble an input set of separate phylogenetic trees with shared taxa into a larger tree  <cit>  . by fitting variously supported clades together, they allow large phylogenies based on different characters to be constructed rapidly and have been applied to a broad range of species  <cit> . consensus approaches, such as sequences concatenation  <cit>  or by averaging over a large number of genes  <cit>  produce resolved phylogenies by overwhelming noise with signal that is presumed to be systematically congruent and historically true, though weak.

these approaches, aiming to produce a tree-like pattern whether the tree is the right model for representing evolution or not, are derived from a tree-thinking perspective. this could, however, be flawed, and deserves criticism on conceptual and statistical grounds. first, some genes have been shown not to follow a simple model of inheritance. for instance, lateral transfers of genetic material are common in nature. all living systems from viruses  <cit>  to eukaryotes  <cit>  can participate in the transfer of genetic material. they occur within domains of life, but also across domains, for different markers. there is now broad general agreement that lateral gene transfer  is a major force in the evolution of prokaryotes  <cit> . additional evidence suggests that gene transfer might also be an important evolutionary mechanism in protist evolution. andersson et al.  <cit>  recently reported that alanyl-trna synthetase had been transferred from nanoarchaeota to diplomonads and parabasalids. the same authors  <cit>  showed that lgt has affected both eukaryotes and prokaryotes with respect to glutamate dehydrogenase. recombination is also an issue for tree-reconstruction. software such as splitstree  <cit>  or t-rex  <cit>  were developed to acknowledge this. a tree-thinker may choose to ignore conflicting signal as if it was noise, even if legitimate evolutionary events underlie it  <cit> . however, if this "noise" is in fact bona fide phylogenetic signal, then maybe tree-thinking is inappropriate.

the failure of individual markers to reject a concatenation-tree  <cit>  is not a real test that genes are congruent. there are many reasons why a single gene can fail to reject a tree issued from a concatenation, many of which do not imply that these genes are effectively in favour of this single history  <cit> . briefly, the best tree of a concatenation, being an average of the weak signals and noise in many genes can be a central tendency with very low discriminative power. the fact that every gene "agrees" with such a tree does not mean the concatenation tree is true, just that it reflects a part of the signal/noise of every gene. importantly, this apparent "agreement" is also expected if individual markers contain very little phylogenetic signal. a weak marker would fail to reject most of the test trees, not only the concatenation tree.

the relative weakness of individual markers can be tested statistically when considering not only the concatenation tree but also many different trees. if several different topologies cannot be rejected by a given gene, then, unfortunately, its phylogeny does not tell us much about its actual history. for this reason, some analyses of congruence use multiple alternative test topologies  <cit> . such analyses describe each gene by a list of likelihood or p-values associated with a set of given topologies. these lists are summarized in a large matrix of genes and topologies, which is subsequently treated by clustering methods. for instance, in principal component analyses , each gene is represented as a point in a two-dimensional projection of its position in n-dimensional space, the coordinates for each gene in that space being related to its degree of support for each of the n tree topologies tested. thus, genes supporting and rejecting the same sets of trees should group together, constituting a cloud, while genes with atypical support/rejection patterns of topologies should be displayed elsewhere on the pca  <cit> . most of the time, pcas produce a central cloud containing most of the markers. from this, authors generally conclude that the markers in a cloud are congruent  <cit> . however, again, a cloud of genes in a pca may have various explanations, which differ from each gene in a cloud supporting the same history. genes can still be lacking signal. the set of topologies might be too restricted or biased to allow discrimination between genes: if the vast majority of the topologies are very unlikely, none of them will ever be favoured, and differential clustering is unexpected. yet, in no case would common rejection of unlikely topologies assess that the markers are congruent. finally, even genes with different robust signal  might cluster together on a pca, if the set of test-topologies does not allow us to identify this relationship.

interestingly, these features can be investigated more explicitly by an alternative statistical approach: the heat map  <cit> . we have thus decided to re-explore the congruence in some datasets of orthologues with this method. briefly, heat maps  generate graphs through hierarchical or partitional clustering. they allow the simultaneous display and clustering of all combinations of genes and test conditions together  <cit> . thus genes that have the most similar responses to topologies, and topologies that are the most similar in terms of the responses they evoke from genes, can be independently identified. more precisely, when applied to phylogenetics, "responses" are p-values for each set of genes, given those topologies. clustering of genes allows identification of one or more set of genes that might share a common evolutionary history. clustering of topologies allows us to identify which trees are equally or nearly equally supported, and thus to assess how many distinct "best trees" there might be for a dataset of genes.

in this paper, we investigate the phylogenetic signal of four datasets in order to address a simple question: do the phylogenies of orthologs really favour tree-thinking and thus justify attempts of tree-reconstruction? can we be reasonably confident that their history is free of lgt? we observe that no unique common history can be established for these genes. in all cases, genes fail to favour a single tree. we also observe that some of these genes support incongruent histories. consequently, the tree-thinking on which gene concatenations rest does not proceed from phylogenetic conclusions, nor is it a priori a safe phylogenetic practice. we argue that using only the robustly resolved parts of individual phylogenies without necessarily expecting a tree as a result is likely more appropriate.

RESULTS
testing the phylogenetic information of datasets of orthologues
we used heat map analyses to investigate both the congruence and the absence of lgt in four selections of orthologues, two features that would be in favour of the reconstruction of an organismal tree, recently challenged by multiple analyses of comparative genomics. indeed, it was showed that gene gains and gene losses contributed to the evolution of a substantial majority of orthologous sets of prokaryotic proteins  <cit> . such results suggested that the simple notion of a single tree of life that would accurately and definitively depict the evolution of all life forms was gone forever  <cit> . wolf et al.  <cit>  concluded that the concept of a tree could only be rescued by weakening its meaning, and considering it only as "a central trend in the rich patchwork of evolutionary history, replete with gene loss and horizontal transfer events".

to test whether the reconstruction of any organismal tree was then phylogenetically justified when simultaneously using multiple orthologues, our heat maps contain two kinds of markers: artificial ones, with up to three simulated lgt events, and actual ones. a red rectangle at the left of the heat map identifies the actual markers, while a blue rectangle indicates the artificial markers . for each dataset, a set of plausible topologies was selected from the study of the phylogenetic signal of the markers. these plausible topologies correspond to the trees supported by a large majority of the markers. the support was estimated as the p-values from the au test. this support is displayed in the heat map through a colour code. lighter colours indicate a higher probability of the data given the tree  while greener colours indicate lower probabilities . heat maps were also double-clustered to group genes with similar pattern of support/rejection along columns, and to group topologies receiving similar support/rejection along rows. these hierarchical clusters are represented by a tree of genes and a tree of topologies along the heat map. hence, to know which and how many topologies a given gene supports, one simply needs to look along its corresponding column in the heat map. if a gene is very discriminatory and favours only a few topologies, the column will be mostly green. in contrast, a gene with a weak phylogenetic signal is unable to decide between multiple topologies and its column is mostly light-coloured.

we feel that our heat maps challenge the use of a tree-like pattern to describe molecular evolution. there was always more than one plausible topology retained . archaeal and eukaryotic markers favoured  <dig> and  <dig> topologies, respectively , and alpha-proteobacterial markers  favoured  <dig> different trees. among those best topologies, none are supported by all the genes. instead, a given topology is accepted by some markers and rejected by others, leading to multiple multicolour lines in mosaic heat maps. the absence of an entirely light line means that genes fail to agree on a single topology, even though they reject many of them and thus do contain some phylogenetic signal. this seems compatible with the redefined "weak" view of the tree. by contrast, the bacterial markers were apparently more discriminating and retained two plausible trees only , one of which was supported by most of the actual markers. furthermore, these two topologies are compatible. could these results support an organismal tree? in fact, these trees consist of two star-phylogenies, which differ only in their ability to recover the monophyly of proteobacteria, and do not resolve any deep relationships between accepted monophyletic groups otherwise. the absence of basal resolution leaves all possibilities concerning the process of molecular evolution in bacteria open. such a star-tree can be explained either by multiple ancient lgt events, a radiation, or the lack of ancient phylogenetic signal.

interestingly, even though many positive controls for lgt are easily identified by the heat map by their propensity to reject the plausible topologies, the discrimination between actual markers and artificial ones is far from absolute. some artificial genes cannot be distinguished from groups of actual markers . in all the heat maps, a significant proportion of weakly discriminating genes is present. we do not know how vertical their phylogenetic history is, because not only do they agree with many different trees, but sometimes they also cluster with artificial markers. moreover, some actual genes behave as groups of markers with transfers  and constitute common clusters of markers rejecting most of the plausible topologies. it is tempting to suggest that these genes may have undergone lgt. this would be the case for instance for rpl37ae, rpl15e in archaea  or fmt in bacteria .

finally, independently of the positive controls, actual markers with a strong phylogenetic signal do not necessarily agree. we indicated by pink arrows some instances where conflicting patterns of colour are observed. every heat map presents several such cases. these disagreements between orthologues and also sometimes the rejection of all plausible trees cannot be taken as evidence that there is a unique true tree for all these genes. we will investivage these cases further in the near future. the message of these heat map analyses is rather that we do not know if orthologues of these datasets share a unique history or not, and there is reason to suspect that they might not.

attempted departure from tree-thinking
let's then forget the tree-pattern and briefly consider one instance of what a different but cautious phylogenetic method could teach us. we further explored the dataset of alpha-proteobacteria, for which we had concluded that the presence of lgt could not be rejected nor could the existence of a unique history be proven. we freed ourselves from a priori tree-drawing constraints and, with the simple goal of summarizing the safe phylogenetic information of each marker, we obtained a graph that is not a tree. in this synthesis ,  <dig> vertical branches are visible as well as  <dig> lateral branches. the comparison of the total support for the horizontal and vertical branches indicates that the vertical signal is about  <dig> times more important than the horizontal signal. a large majority of the genes in this dataset  does not seem to have been laterally transferred, and many parts of the inferred vertical backbone are relatively robust. however, only node 3a, the clade of rickettsiales, is supported by all the  <dig> gene trees. in all the other cases, we would not be right to claim that the vertical backbone corresponds to the common history for all or even most of the markers. for instance,  <dig> genes do not tell anything about node 2a. why should we then assume that these  <dig> markers were subjected to this pattern of vertical inheritance? certainly, phylogeny alone does not tell us that, and the synthesis shows us clearly that we simply do not know what the history of most genes is, for most of the nodes. finally, there are still  <dig> genes  that have likely undergone lgt. lgt between these species occurred only once, thus no generality can be inferred from them, except that 75% of them correspond to local rearrangements of the concatenation tree. more precisely, rps <dig> was transmitted from ehrlichia to neorickettsia, rpl <dig> was transmitted from mesorhizobium to agrobacterium and rps <dig> of rhodobacter apparently comes laterally from a species not studied in this dataset. the origin of the rpob of rhizobiales is, however, more complex and it cannot be mapped directly onto the reference tree, since multiple donors are possible.

CONCLUSIONS
heat map analyses are powerful statistical methods to investigate correlations in multiple markers. certainly, any conclusion deduced from their study depends on the set of topologies, genes and p-values investigated. however, this cannot be seen as a rebuttal in itself to reject this approach. in fact, the same issue arises for any phylogenetic and statistical analyses comparing trees. importantly, some propositions could be extrapolated from these heat maps applied to the three domains of life. first, we observed several cases where it was impossible to separate markers with an extremely atypical phylogenetic signal from actual markers. more than a weakness of the method , this might be explained by a relative weakness of the phylogenetic signal contained in many markers. what we report then is simple and sadly not surprising: the genes of eukaryotes and alpha-proteobacteria, for instance, cannot really discriminate between several different topologies. this absence of convergence on a single topology is obviously not evidence for lgt in itself. it is, however, a major issue, since it indicates that with phylogenetic analyses and statistical tools only, we often cannot decide if lgt is present in datasets of orthologues. the broad bacterial and archaeal datasets seem principally free from such extreme recent events. indeed, in their heat maps, the majority of genes with transfer can be separated from actual markers. there are, however, some instances of lgt in these heatmaps too, since they present clusters of genes with lgt rejecting all the plausible topologies in which some actual markers are also found. hence, overall, there is no strong phylogenetic evidence that any of these datasets are really comprised of congruent genes.

this could be problematic because phylogeneticists, raised as classical tree-thinkers, often desire a tree or a supertree. we feel that they might be prone to forget/accept the fundamental weaknesses of the markers they use to reconstruct the past. it could matter because if these analyses mix together markers with arguably different histories, the phylogenetic tree of life will be simply a phenetic tree, a "trend of life," averaging noise, signal, and different histories of markers to fit an a priori pattern. in other words, a phylogeneticist who would assume that he had reconstructed the organismal tree from orthologues and produced a genealogy of organisms instead of a central tendency might be a victim of an extreme version of tree-thinking. yet, no phylogeneticist has to be an extreme tree-thinker anymore, because there is no phylogenetic evidence for that. consequently, we see the present conclusion as a positive one. in fact, this work should encourage attempts to explore more accurately the phylogeny of organisms. we propose that a safer, more punctual use of the phylogenetic signal of orthologues could be envisioned. on one hand, "whereof one cannot speak thereof one must be silent" applies  <cit> , while on the other hand we cautiously and resolutely report all the phylogenetic information that we can. acknowledging that a strong version of tree-thinking has still to be proven and should not be assumed a priori, and that a weak version could be refined, we could reduce the risk of building a hazardous evolutionary history from the largely unknown phylogenetic signal of orthologues. this acknowledgement would also allow us to maximise the number of genes available for phylogenetic analysis, instead of limiting cautious simultaneous analyses to a few congruent markers. it may not produce a tree in the end, but would surely be more grounded.

