BACKGROUND
cellular interactomes often consist of large numbers of proteins with even larger numbers of connections between them. typically in protein-protein interaction  network nodes represent proteins and the links represent relationships between them. this network representation enables the study and visualization of the reconstructed cellular systems.

data-driven studies on the dynamics of reconstructed ppi networks facilitate investigation and identification of proteins important for a particular process and reduces time and costs of experimental verification  <cit> . modeling the dynamics of very large ppi networks is computationally very costly. to circumvent this problem, one needs to identify relevant core components of networks without losing vital information. a ppi network constituting most of the relevant core of a cellular system is sufficient to study its dynamic properties  <cit> .

many methods have been developed to reduce complex directed and undirected networks to their core components. some of the methods include topological centrality techniques  <cit> , synthetic biology approaches of the minimal gene set of a cell  <cit> , complex systems coarse-graining  <cit> , and filtering approaches  <cit> . in the centrality methods, topological centrality of nodes is used to identify the non-redundant links and to delete the redundant ones  <cit> . minimal gene set approaches aim to identify genes that are crucial for life sustenance and cannot be inactivated under specific optimal growth conditions. these approaches do not take into account interactions between essential gene products  <cit> . the coarse-graining approaches identify specific motifs in a network, and collapse and replace them by a single node  <cit> . this process is repeated until there are no more motifs. the final network is less complex but does not consider the structural heterogeneity and broad weight distribution, i.e. the multi-scale nature, of cellular networks.

network filtering approaches have also been used to reduce network complexity  <cit> . those that preserve the inherent multiscale structure of natural complex networks have been shown to be better in revealing most of the important components of networks  <cit> . these approaches score the nodes or links, and enable the deletion of those that do not deviate significantly from a null model.

in this study, we identified the network of proteins relevant in t cells by filtering the immunome interactome using the result from global statistical significance   <cit>  algorithm and a constraint of connectivity of the t cell receptor  signaling pathway. we compiled genes for the major immune processes and used them to reconstruct the immunome interactome, i.e., all the ppis of the immunome. we then integrated gene expression profiles for the corresponding genes across several experiments. jackknife correlation for gene expression was then used to weigh links between the proteins encoded by the genes. to maintain the multiscale structure of the network during filtering, we used the gloss algorithm. this algorithm utilizes a global null model of the link weight and the degree distribution of the network. it computes the statistical significance for each link. for the null model, gloss assigns weights from the weight distribution of the network, independently and randomly, without changing its topology. we filtered the network by deleting links based on their p-values  in descending order. to determine the endpoint of the filtering, we imposed as a constraint, the existence of a single path between the components of the nf-κb and tcr complexes.

because we investigated the global and aggregate characteristics of the system and integrated t cell gene expressions, we can assume that the filtered network contains most of the components central for t cell signaling  <cit> . this was supported by gene ontology  and essential genes enrichment analysis.

RESULTS
protein-protein interaction network
we used altogether  <dig> proteins for the network filtering . eight hundred and eighty five human immunome genes were obtained from the immunome knowledge base   <cit> . as ikb contains only the most essential immunome genes and does not necessarily contain full pathways, it was supplemented with proteins for key immune system pathways derived from the kegg pathway database  <cit>  .

the protein products of the genes that take part in these pathways were used to supplement the protein data from the ikb database. the combined protein data represent the immune response protein dataset.

the ppi network was reconstructed for the immunome proteins . ppi data were retrieved from irefindex database  which compiles ppis from the major repositories  <cit> . ppitrim  was used for general filtering according to stojmirovic et al.  <cit> . only experimentally verified and binary ppis were retained. moreover, multiple binary ppis encoded by the same gene pair were collapsed into a single ppi. finally, binary interactions to proteins outside the immunome were eliminated. a total of  <dig> ppis between  <dig> immunome proteins were available after these pre-processing steps .

gene expression correlation
t cell gene expression datasets were obtained from ncbi geo  <cit>  and ebi arrayexpress  <cit>  databases. altogether  <dig> time series datasets  containing  <dig> samples derived from  <dig> platforms fulfilled the set criteria. after pre-processing, batch effect analysis was performed. further, exploratory principal component analysis  was done to examine the effect and performance of the batch effect analysis . the samples cluster according to experiment and platform before batch effect analysis. however, after batch effect correction, samples performed on all three platforms overlap with each other. the batch effect-corrected expression data were integrated or merged together. of the genes encoding the  <dig> immunome proteins,  <dig> were expressed in at least 80% of the samples in the merged dataset and were thus included in the analysis.

next, the mean of the jackknife pearson product-moment correlation coefficient was calculated for the pre-processed and merged expression values for all gene pair combinations. in total,  <dig> genes representing  <dig> gene pairs encoding interacting proteins in the immunome interactome were used for further analysis.

the distribution of the integrated jackknife correlation values is shown in figure  <dig>  the maximum gene expression correlation is  <dig> , between itga2b  and itgb <dig> . the encoded proteins form an integrin receptor complex  <cit>  and are thus co-expressed. their functions include cell adhesion, cell-cell interaction, receptor for several molecules and platelet activation  <cit> . the minimum correlation of - <dig>  was observed between lck, coding for lymphocyte-specific protein tyrosine kinase, and pak <dig>  p <dig> protein -activated kinase  <dig>  lck is an important signaling protein in many cellular processes, especially in t cell receptor  activation and t cell development  <cit> . pak <dig> is a member of the pak proteins  targeted by small gtp proteins, cdc <dig> and rac <dig>  <cit> . they take part in several signaling pathways, including the tcr signaling network. albeit association of increased pak <dig> activity in cells that overexpress src kinases, pak <dig> and lck have not been shown to directly interact with each other  <cit> . the mean of the correlation values for all gene pairs is  <dig>  and most of the correlation coefficients lie between - <dig>  and  <dig> .

t cell-specific ppi network
we reconstructed the immunome ppi network as a weighted and undirected graph. the nodes, links, and link weights of the graph represent, respectively, the immunome protein coding genes, the ppis and the absolute value of the mean jackknife expression correlation between the connected immunome protein coding genes.

the topology and weight distribution of naturally occurring complex weighted networks are heterogeneous and tightly connected. this makes the identification of the relevant structure that maintains the multiscale nature of the network nontrivial. thus, we used the gloss algorithm  <cit>  to compute a p-value, for each link. gloss identifies the relevant backbone of a weighted graph while retaining the multiscale coupling of its weight distribution and topological characteristics. it uses a global null model that describes both the structure of the network and its weight distribution. the p-values computed by gloss were used to filter the network by deleting links based on their p-values, in descending order. we monitored the filtering process to make sure that the central networks between tcr, and nf-κb and nfat signaling pathways remained intact. these pathways have been shown to be crucial for t cell signaling  <cit>  and therefore cannot be disconnected without destroying essential cellular processes.

we followed changes of structural and biological features in the ppi network during the filtering process with network parameters. the diameter of the network represents the longest minimum distance between the nodes. we used as measures the changes in diameter, the relative size of the largest connected component and the average size of the isolated components  <cit> . these network topology scores show how connectivity, integrity and robustness of the network are changed when links are removed during the filtering process . all the panels in figure  <dig> indicate that at the cutoff point most of the remaining network’s connectivity and integrity is still maintained. we call the remaining network the t cell ppi network, tppin . tppin consists of  <dig> nodes,  <dig> links in  <dig> connected components .

a component represents a set of nodes that are all connected to each other, either directly or indirectly. components with two nodes are not included in the table.

correlation distribution before and after filtering
threshold algorithms filter a network by removing edges whose weights are below an arbitrary cutoff. such a network loses its multiscale and, thus, its core structure. we probed the distribution of the gene expression correlation coefficient to establish whether the multiscale structure of the immunome interactome is retained in the filtered t cell ppi network . the filtering process succeeds in maintaining not just the links with large weights but also links with lower weights. thus, the filtering process maintains the multi-scale structure of the network and retains edges that are crucial for the t cell ppi network.

effect of noise on the filtering procedure
to test the sensitivity of our filtering procedure to noise we introduced randomness to the immunome interactome, before performing filtering, by randomizing fractions of the link weights while preserving the topology of the network. we refer to these networks as the link weight-randomized networks . nine such networks were created based on the fraction of weights randomized. thirty iterations were conducted for each lwrn. each iteration consists of choosing randomly a fraction of links, reassigning their weights randomly, conducting the filtering procedure, and calculating network topology statistics. the topology features calculated for each iteration include node degree, average path length, betweenness centrality of both the nodes and the links, clustering coefficient of the network, and the intersection between the tppin and the lwrn. these measures indicate the local and global connectivity of a network. we retained the average of the above quantities.

figure  <dig> shows the similarity or dissimilarity between tppin and lwrns. figure  <dig> a-e, shows that as more of the link weights are randomized, the topology of the lwrns diverges significantly from tppin. moreover, as figure  <dig> f shows, there is very little overlap of links between the lwrns and tppin.

gene ontology over-representation and semantic similarity analysis
go term over-representation analysis was performed for the tppin proteins and shows that, at level two details, most of the biological process terms are relevant for t cell function . for example, the term positive regulation of lymphocyte activation pathway , regulation of immune response , and intracellular protein kinase cascade  terms are among the most significantly enriched after adjusting for multiple comparisons. in addition to significant immune response-related terms, there are also those for general cellular processes.
biological process 
term enrichment for tppin

the “universe” is the immunome protein data and the enrichment is for the filtered immunome interactome, the t cell ppi network .

to better investigate the similarity or difference between the immunome interactome and the tppin network, we explored semantic similarity of the networks using the gosemsim package available from r/bioconductor. the semantic similarity ranges between  <dig> and  <dig>  the similarity between the immunome interactome and tppin proteins in the biological process and molecular function terms were very high, i.e.,  <dig>  and  <dig> , respectively, indicating that the tppin is very representative of the immunome interactome.

essential genes over-representation analysis
essential genes are indispensable to the survival of a cell or organism. to account for how essential the genes are, we performed an over-representation analysis to identify the proportion of the essential tppin genes. we conducted a hypergeometric test on the human orthologs of the mouse lethality genes from the mouse genome informatics resource  <cit> . the results show a highly significant enrichment of essential genes in the tppin .

a
the t cell ppi network is the resulting network after filtering the immunome interactome. mgia is the mouse genome informatics database.

interconnection of t cell-specific pathways
the tppin proteins were mapped onto the tcr, jak-stat and mapk signaling pathways that are central for t cell functions  <cit>  . albeit containing just a third of the proteins in the initial network, the tppin includes almost all the main components for the remaining pathways. except for cd3γ and cd3δ, all the cd <dig> proteins of the tcr complex are present in the tppin. further, most proteins important for early t cell activation, nfat, ap <dig>  nf-κb, t cell co-inhibitory and co-stimulatory signal transduction are present. overall, most of the proteins in the important pathways for t cell signaling are present in the tppin. this indicates that the filtering procedure was able to, first of all, identify central pathways and, secondly, to keep their connectivity. as a novel feature the tppin indicates the interconnection of the central pathways.

discussion and 
CONCLUSIONS
in this study, we identified the network of proteins relevant for t cells by filtering the multiscale immunome interactome using the gloss filtering algorithm  <cit> . we compiled the genes for the major immune processes and reconstructed the immunome interactome. then we integrated gene expression profiles across several gene expression experiments. the jackknife correlation for gene expression was used to weigh links between the proteins encoded by the genes. next, we used the output from gloss to filter the network. the filtered network contains most of the relevant t cell functional components and was designated tppin. this was confirmed by the overrepresentation analysis conducted with go terms and essential genes.

many important components of the tcr-dependent signaling pathways are present in the tppin. except for cd3γ and cd3δ, other components of the tcr complex which are included in the microarrays used in this study, are present . the co-receptors cd <dig> and cd <dig> are both present, as well as, all the proteins that make up the immunological synapse. with the exception of lat, gads and itk, most proteins that are central in the immediate tcr receptor-associated intracellular signaling after the formation of the immunological synapse and tcr activation are present in the tppin, including lck, fyn, cd <dig>  zap <dig>  slp- <dig> and plc-γ.

after its activation, plc-γ cleaves pip <dig> into the second messenger ip <dig> and dag  <cit> . this event sets off the activation of three important signaling pathways in t cells that end up with transcriptional activation of nfat, nf-κb and ap- <dig>  <cit> . dag activates pkc-θ, which in turn activates nf-κb  <cit> . ip <dig> activates can through the calcium signaling, and can subsequently activates nfat  <cit> . dag activates rasgrp  <cit> , which in turn initiates the activation of the map kinase cascade  <cit> , culminating in the activation of fos  <cit> . key proteins in the nf-κb pathway including pkc-θ, ikk-β and iκb  <cit>  are present in the tppin. with the exception of rasgrp, mek1/ <dig> and elk co-complexes, the other vital proteins in the map kinase signaling cascade  <cit>  and the jak-stat pathway  <cit>  are captured by the tppin. these results show how the tppin represents relevant t cell-related parts of the immunome interactome.

during the filtering step the central networks connecting the tcr complex to the nf-κb and nfat signaling pathways were kept intact. although the nfat and nf-κb pathways are present in many different cell-types, they are central for t cell survival and functions. the connectivity of these components was used to determine the end point for the filtering process. the filtering was continued until there was a minimum number of links, i.e., one, between the tcr, and nf-κb and nfat components.

go term enrichment analysis confirms that several of the tppin proteins have important t cell functions. as an example of biological process term enrichment, the positive regulation of lymphocyte activation pathway , regulation of immune response , and intracellular protein kinase cascade  terms are significantly enriched. to further probe the similarity between the immunome interactome and the tppin proteins we calculated their semantic similarity with respect to biological process and molecular function go terms. the networks were semantically very similar in both types of go terms. because essential genes are indispensable for the survival of a cell, their enrichment in the cellular network would indicate that the network is crucial to the cell. thus, we investigated the enrichment of essential genes in the tppin. the analysis showed a highly significant enrichment of essential genes in the tppin. these independent lines of evidence support the applicability of the network filtering routine.

due to the scarcity of time course microarray experiments with uniform design, gene expression datasets with different designs were used. integrated analysis was carried out to identify and exclude biased datasets  <cit> . the normalization and batch effect analysis steps served to considerably minimize the effect of bias for correlation calculation from the experimental studies.

global and aggregate cellular interactions are more plausible between proteins encoded by co-expressed genes than between gene products whose expression patterns are uncorrelated  <cit> . since we investigated the global and aggregated characteristics of the immune response in t cells by integrating gene expression experiments conducted for t cell lines, the correlation coefficients represent the aggregate strength of the t cell-specific relationship between the genes and their interacting protein products  <cit> .

to explore the changes in the network during the filtering process we investigated changes in the diameter, relative size of the largest component and the average size of the connected components of the network. these network measures have been shown to indicate the connectivity status of a network and its robustness against link removal or loss  <cit> . the changes in network statistics during the filtering process showed that tppin maintains most of the integrity and connectivity of the immunome interactome.

certain aspects of t cell function have been previously modeled  <cit> . most of these studies are related to gene regulatory networks and modeling of small signaling networks involving transcription factors and their targets, selected to include genes or proteins well-known in the modeled system. in these studies, the typical number of genes or proteins is in a few tens, whereas we started with the entire immunome interactome of  <dig> proteins and  <dig> links, and ended up with a core network that contains  <dig> proteins and  <dig> links. the number of nodes and links in the tppin makes it amenable to tailored cellular systems modeling and experimental studies. our approach is unsupervised and does not utilize any preconceptions, yet, it reveals the central proteins and their networks.

the filtering process carried out in this study has some potential limitations. it needs several time course expression datasets for the cell-type or tissue of interest and each experiment should consist of at least  <dig> samples. a set of proteins is needed to track the connectivity of the vital pathways and a stop criterion when key pathways are broken. however, these limitations are not of great practical importance in the present era of high throughput studies.

the reported filtering routine can capture the core cell-type-specific ppi network for any cell-type from time series gene expression datasets, and is not limited to well-known systems. the approach opens ways for modeling protein interaction networks of cellular systems, even when pathways are not previously well characterized.

