BACKGROUND
subtype iis enzymes are a growing group of atypical reases that recognize a specific dna sequence and cleave outside it at a defined distance, up to  <dig> nt, within any sequence  <cit> . since their discovery, they have attracted considerable attention as objects of basic research in the field of protein-dna interactions and as advanced tools for genetic engineering. one of the most intensively studied reases is foki, specific to 5'-ggatg-3' sites, where asymmetry of the recognition site apparently imposes an unusual type of interaction with dna: the large protein, monomeric in solution, transiently forms dimers and binds two recognition sites while the dna loop is being generated  <cit> . another subtype iis rease - mmei - not only cleaves dna at 20/ <dig> nt - one of the sites furthest removed from the recognition site - but also represents a model of a minimal restriction-modification system, where only one  strand of the recognition site is methylated  <cit> . molecular applications of subtype iis enzymes, especially foki, have been developed since the 1980s, including universal rease, cleaving dna at a pre-programmed site  <cit> , achilles' heel cleavage  <cit> , gene amplification  <cit> , gene fusion  <cit> , unidirectional dna trimming  <cit> , locating methylated bases in dna  <cit> , gene mutagenesis using excision linkers  <cit> , and others  <cit> . chandrasegaran et al. have developed a series of genetically engineered fusions of a non-specific c-terminal nuclease domain of foki and specific dna binding proteins, such as zinc-finger  <cit> , ubx homeodomain  <cit>  or structure-specific z-dna nuclease  <cit> . such artificial constructs have been used to rearrange mammalian genomes  <cit> . a recently discovered family of enzymes from thermus sp.  <cit>  belongs not only to subtype iis, but also to subtypes iic and iig. these enzymes are bifunctional, with rease and mtase activities within a single polypeptide  and their cleavage is affected by sam . the experimentally characterized members of this family include tspgwi , tspdti , and the tsoi  as well as tth111ii/tthhb27i isoschizomer pair . the family shares several functional aspects, including a large molecular size of approximately  <dig> kda , similarity of amino acid sequences despite distinct specificities , an identical cleavage distance of 11/ <dig> nt, an acidic isoelectric point around  <dig> , a domain structure related to simplified type i reases, rease activity affected by sam, and an origin from within the same genus thermus, suggesting that they have evolved from one or a few common ancestors  <cit> . we recently reported for tspgwi enzyme a new type of substrate specificity change, induced by the replacement of sam with its analogue - sinefungin   <cit> . the chemically- induced recognition site relaxation changes the cleavage frequency of the rease from 5-bp to 3-bp. such a molecular tool may be useful for generating quasi-random genomic libraries, as it is the second  most frequently cleaving rease  <cit> . in this paper we describe the cloning, expression and characterization of tspdti, followed by a bioinformatics analysis of a subfamily of closely related enzymes , which appears to be distinct from the more remotely related sub-family that includes tspgwi and taqii reases  <cit> .

RESULTS
sequencing, cloning and expression of the tspdtirm gene
in the course of studying the new thermus sp. family of enzymes, we cloned the genes coding for taqii, tthhb27i, tsoi  and tspgwi  <cit> . initial data referring to tspdti sequence we have previously deposited in genbank . in this work the sequencing data were confirmed and the tspdti coding gene was de novo cloned into different expression system to improve protein yield. in our attempts to clone the tspdtirm gene we experienced serious difficulties. neither the biochemical selection for the methylation phenotype approach nor the 'white-blue' screen for dna damage/modification resulted in the isolation of recombinant clones, which was also the case with tspgwirm gene cloning  <cit> . apparently, low enzymatic turnover of the enzymes of the thermus sp. family, greatly reduced activity at 37°c and the incomplete cleavage of the plasmid dna precluded positive results with the classic methods listed above, even though complete cleavage is not required for dna damage detection in the 'white-blue' method. we therefore used a modification of the previously established, successful tspgwirm cloning protocol . the protocol includes two stages:  a gene nucleotide sequence prediction starting from n-terminal and internal amino acid sequences of rease proteolytic fragments followed by pcr using degenerated and non-degenerated primers, and  direct in-frame insertion of an amplified tspdtirm gene into a strictly temperature-regulated escherichia coli  pacyc184-derived expression vector, containing a pr bacteriophage lambda promoter and overexpressing the bacteriophage lambda thermolabile ci repressor. the system makes use of low temperature cultivation under permissive conditions , both of which prevent rease expression and suppress the activity of any leaking thermophilic rease.

the tspdtirm gene nucleotide sequence was determined using an approach similar to that of tspgwi  <cit> ; however, there are substantial differences in the execution of the method. the native tspgwi n-terminus could not be sequenced, so we had to initiate sequencing starting from internal proteolytic peptides and perform the pcr/sequencing divergently with degenerated primers, followed by non-degenerated ones. in contrast, native tspdti n-terminus sequencing was not problematic. the sequencing of intact protein resulted in a long 35- amino acid stretch with a relatively good signal - mspsreevvahyadrlhqvlqktiaqnpneaefrr. in addition short internal 18-, and 12- amino acid sequences - lgapvfsalaaadggtlq  and reprepefygimdig  - were obtained from proteolytic fragments . based on the amino acid sequences, the primers were designed in most part arbitrarily, being founded on a back-translated amino acid sequence using codons, which were assumed to exist with the highest probability, as concluded from codon usage data from orfs of thermus sp. genes available in genbank. the high gc content of thermus genes  was also considered in codon selection, whenever applicable. sets of combined primers were used to complete entire tspdtirm orf as well as short stretches of flanking regions .

the verified tspdtirm orf was cloned into a pr promoter vector and subjected to e. coli  expression optimization experiments . recombinant tspdti protein was purified using a 6-step procedure, with the protein expression optimized in e. coli . interestingly, in spite of the cloning being under the control of a strong pr promoter, the protein becomes detectable in the induced cells after only  <dig> h of growth under non-permissive conditions, and keeps accumulating until the late stationary phase, even after  <dig> h cultivation at 42°c. this is probably due to the combination of the following factors:  the gc rich orf sequence distant from e. coli optimum codon usage,  the slow transcription of the gc-rich tspdtirm gene,  the presence of numerous hairpin structures within the gene, and  the very large size of the protein to be translated. nevertheless, optimization of expression culture growth/induction conditions yielded adequate amounts of tspdti .

properties of the tspdtirm gene
the tspdtirm gene orf coding for the rease-mtase bifunctional protein is  <dig> bp in length coding for the  <dig> amino acid polypeptide . the calculated molecular weight of the tspdti is  <dig>  <dig> da, atypically large for a prokaryotic protein. the sizes of the thermus sp. family enzymes were compared and shown to match the estimation from the sds/page  and molecular sieving of the native protein  <cit> , indicating its monomeric organization, just like other thermus sp. family members . the calculated isoelectric point is  <dig> , indicating that tspdti is a slightly acidic protein. typically, reases and other dna-interacting proteins are rather basic proteins. the low pi is associated with  <dig> out of  <dig> thermus sp. family enzymes: tspdti, tth111ii, tthhb27i, taqii and tspgwi. only tsoi is moderately basic, with a calculated pi of  <dig>  . no sequence similarity of tspdti to any mtase or dna-binding protein was found in the flanking regions of the tspdti orf. the orf begins with the atg start codon and contains  <dig> putative upstream rbss: - <dig> ag, - <dig> agaaa and - <dig> gga . the orf is gc rich ; however, it is markedly lower than the tspgwirm gene   and taqii   and other thermus genes  <cit> , suggesting that tspdtirm might have been acquired/evolved differently, at least diverging at a later stage, which may have included horizontal gene transfer from a non-related bacteria.

* domain organization: r, rease catalytic domain; mh, mtase helical domain; mc, mtase catalytic domain; s, putative specific dna recognition domain

** b, determined by bioinformatics analysis; e, experimentally determined by site-directed mutagenesis.

bioinformatics analyses of tspdti: prediction of domains and functional motifs
isolation and sequencing of the tspdtirm gene revealed the predicted amino acid sequence of the encoded protein. searches of rease sequences deposited in rebase exhibited an overall similarity to a number of genuine and putative type iic enzymes, including the previously characterized nucleases tthhb27i and tth111ii . despite very high sequence similarity, these two enzymes exhibit different sequence specificity   <cit>  than tspdti. interestingly, two other type iic enzymes from thermus, i.e. tspgwi  and taqii , showed very low sequence similarity to tspdti in pairwise comparisons  and were thus excluded from the alignment .

further bioinformatics analyses, in particular the comparison of sequence profiles, which is more sensitive to pairwise sequence comparisons , showed that the central and c-terminal regions of tspdti  exhibit significant similarity to dna:m6a mtase m.taqi, whose structure is known . m.taqi belongs to the γ-class of dna:m6a mtases, which is characterized by the following primary structure: the n-terminal catalytic rossmann-fold mtase  domain with the order of motifs: x-i-ii-iii-iv-v-vi-vii-viii, followed by the dna binding domain, the so-called 'target recognition domain'  in the c-terminus  <cit> . the alignment between tspdti and m.taqi spanned both rfm and trd domains. the n-terminal region of the tspdti sequence, which extends beyond the region of homology to m.taqi, exhibited a limited sequence similarity  only to the hsdr_n family, which belongs to the pd-xk superfamily of nucleases . further, a multiple sequence alignment of tspdti homologues revealed the presence of a candidate pd-xk motif , resembling the active site of many reases and other nucleases  <cit> . thus, tspdti appears to comprise domains homologous to known nuclease and dna:m6a mtase catalytic domains, and to the 'trd' domain characteristic of γ-class dna:m6a mtases.

to confirm the sequence-based predictions, we carried out a protein fold-recognition  analysis  with the aim of predicting the structures of individual domains in tspdti. since the fr method is designed to identify remote homology and predict structure for domain-size sequence fragments , the tspdti sequence was split into a series of overlapping segments and submitted to the genesilico metaserver  <cit> . fr analysis of the tspdti sequence confirmed the existence of enzymatic and dna-recognizing domains predicted by sequence analysis, albeit with low scores for the n-terminal and c-terminal domains . structure prediction also revealed the presence of a helical linker between the pd-xk and rfm domains. the sequence of this region alone displayed no significant similarity to any known protein domain. when this region was analysed together with the neighbouring rfm domain, some of the fold-recognition methods proposed type i enzyme structures as templates, with the alignment spanning both the rfm domain , and the helical domain characteristic only of type i enzymes, which is involved in mediating protein-protein interactions  <cit> . however, the alignment of the helical linker regions of tspdti and type i mtases was too poor to establish with confidence whether they have similar tertiary structures.

combined sequence analysis and structure prediction  enable us to propose the key functional residues of tspdti. in the pd-xk domain, the putative catalytic residues are d <dig>  e <dig>  and e <dig>  thus, the nuclease domain of tspdti exhibits an atypical d-exe pattern, which has been observed previously, e.g. in the r.bamhi enzyme  <cit> . interestingly, the same pattern is present in the nuclease active sites of tthhb27i, tth111ii and tsoi , while other homologues of tspdti  exhibit the typical d-exk pattern . in the rfm domain, the sam-binding site includes the carboxylate residues d <dig>  d <dig>  and d <dig> , while the target adenine-binding site includes the nppw <dig> tetrapeptide  and f <dig> . at this stage of the analysis, the details of sequence-specific dna recognition by tspdti cannot be predicted. however, based on the identification of homologous loops in the sequence of tspdti and in the protein-dna complex of m.taqi, we suggest that the following regions may harbour specificity determinants of tspdti: wtrlak <dig>  pqet <dig> and ksmgs <dig>  in accordance with this prediction, while the corresponding regions in tthhb27i and tth111ii  possess significantly different amino acid residues, they show greater similarity to tspdti in surrounding regions that are not expected to make direct contact with the dna. the testing of these predictions, however, is beyond the scope of this article.

summarizing, the results of the bioinformatics analyses suggest that tspdti is a fusion protein comprising a tandem arrangement of the following domains: a pd-xk nuclease domain, a helical domain, an rfm mtase domain and a trd substrate-binding domain . this domain organization resembles the structure of the recently analysed type iic enzymes tspgwi  <cit>  and mmei  <cit> ), to which tspdti exhibits only very limited sequence similarity, restricted primarily to the central rfm domain . the presence of related domains in a common linear arrangement suggests that all these enzymes evolved from a common ancestor, but that they diverged greatly in all regions except the rfm domain. this analysis indicates a low sequence similarity between tspdti and tspgwi, dividing the thermus sp. family group into two subfamilies: tspdti, tsoi  and tth111ii/tthhb27i  as opposed to tspgwi and taqii reases   <cit> . in spite of the remote sequence similarities between reases, certain structural analogies are emerging. particularly, based on the crystal structure of a type iig bifunctional enzyme bpusi, an alpha-helical domain that connects the endonuclease and mtase domains has been suggested to regulate and physically couple their relative conformations and activities and that it may establish the cleavage distance from the enzyme's target site  <cit> . the helical domain in tspdti and its relatives is likely to fulfil a similar role as its counterpart in bpusi.

enzymatic properties of tspdti
native and recombinant tspdti proteins were purified to homogeneity  and used to study the biochemical features and reaction conditions of dna cleavage and methylation activity of the enzyme. the apparent molecular mass of the native protein under denaturing conditions was found to be  <dig>  kda  <cit> , corresponding to the molecular mass of cloned tspdti isolated from e. coli dh11s  . a comparative assay of recognition specificity, cleavage distance and reaction buffer requirements of both enzymes revealed no difference . controlled purification from e. coli , devoid of prz-tspdti, did not show any dna cleaving activity . the molecular mass was evidently very similar between three members  of the 'tspdti subfamily', as only prolonged sds/page showed a slight differentiation between the enzymes . recombinant tspdti was also subjected to analytical gel filtration in a buffer with a composition close to the physiological, containing  <dig> mm mgcl <dig> , using conditions described previously  <cit> . the experiment showed that the recombinant rease behaved like a monomer, just as the native tspdti .

we showed previously that the temperature activity range extended from 42°c to 85°c , with the maximum observed at 65-75°c, while a  <dig> min incubation at 89°c deactivated the enzyme. incubation at 37°c resulted in approx. 5% activity. the optimal ionic strength is in tris-hcl buffered  mgcl <dig> solution, without any added salt  <cit> . as expected, tspdti maintains the absolute requirement for mg2+ for cleavage activity. remarkably, the effect of ca2+ ions differs from that of tspgwi  <cit> . tspgwi mtase activity is strongly stimulated by ca2+ and sam, whereas restriction activity is not supported  <cit> . compared with the effect of mg2+ ions, tspdti restriction activity is stimulated by ca2+ ions, but to a lesser extent and there is no difference in the digestion patterns in the presence and absence of sam .

essentially the same tspdti digestion patterns were observed, regardless of whether the substrate dna was incubated with enzyme and ca2+ ions in the mtase buffer only or subjected to subsequent cleavage with tspdti in the presence of mg2+, following previous incubation with the enzyme and ca2+ ions . these results indicate that after the incubation of tspdti and substrate dna in the mtase buffer with ca2+ ions, the tspdti cannot further cleave such dna, even though the ca2+/tspdti-treated dna is carefully purified and subjected to subsequent incubation with an excess of tspdti in the optimal tspdti rease buffer supplemented with mg2+ ions . the observed predominance of 'resistant' dna indicates that ca2+ ions:  do not inhibit mtase activity, while stimulating rease only marginally, or else  stimulate both enzyme activities, with a bias towards methylation activity. hence, it is possible that after the incubation both the restriction and methylation processes are completed, leaving the substrate dna either cleaved or methylated. the observed effect could also be explained by the existence of methylation-independent , rease resistant sites. such possibility, however, is rather remote, as in comparison to the ca2+/tspdti-treated dna  the previously non-incubated substrate dna, subjected to cleavage in the presence of mg2+ ions, is cut to a greater extent .

these results corroborate those of enzymology investigations into the mode of action of another subclass iig/iic bifunctional enzyme eco57i . this may reflect differences in the structure of the catalytic sites. in the standard restriction buffer with mg2+ ions tspdti restriction activity is not stimulated by s-adenosylhomocysteine  and atp , but is stimulated equally by both sam and its analogue - sin, which is not a methyl group donor . this leads to the conclusion that both restriction and methylation activities are sam-stimulated. nevertheless, it is important to note that the enzymes of the thermus sp. family exhibit a spectrum of responses to sam, which makes this group interesting. tspgwi restriction activity is actually slightly inhibited by sam  <cit> . the observed negative response suggests that the enzyme is still capable of binding sam. but then, conformational allosteric stimulation of tspgwi is somehow anti-functional. alternatively, the effect described above may be associated with two competing reactions: dna restriction and methylation. the addition of sam may shift the equilibrium of the reactions in favour of dna methylation. on the other hand, the inhibition of rease activity by sam may play a role in the regulation of tspgwi rease versus mtase activities in vivo. two analogues of sam - sin with charge distribution reversed compared to sam and sah - exert a very different influence on tspdti . sin stimulates rease activity, which also suggests that the thermus sp. family enzymes may have two physically separate binding sites for sam: one for allosteric stimulation of the rease activity and another one for typical sam binding/methylation. alternatively, binding to a single sam-specific protein region may induce a conformational change in this large protein, also affecting the distant rease catalytic domain, so that cleavage activity is enhanced several times. another possibility is that sin, being an analogue mimicking an 'unreacted' methyl group donor , causes the enzyme to maintain a conformation different from that maintained in the presence of the mtase reaction product - sah. these results also suggest a mixed type of mutual dependence of rease and mtase activities: while autonomous enough to perform functions independently, some sort of intertwined communication still occurs between functional domains. we managed to separate rease and mtase activities using site-directed mutagenesis of the genes encoding tspgwi and taqii enzymes . since the recombinant tspdtirm gene alone was cloned into e. coli without an additional mtase  and stably maintained at 28°c, it is possible that built-in mtase activity is sufficient to protect the recombinant host dna from autorestriction. moreover, a much reduced restriction activity < 5% at low temperature and the presence of cellular sam appear to favour methylation in vivo.

further research is needed to evaluate the existence of a separate mtase, contributing to the overall tspdti modification activity and sam influence. the gene encoding such an mtase may be located at a greater distance than the flanking regions of the tspdtirm gene sequenced so far.

CONCLUSIONS
 the modified protocol for cloning thermophilic reases was applied.

 the tspdtirm gene coding for  <dig>  kda tspdti was sequenced and cloned.

 active bifunctional rease-mtase protein was expressed in e. coli and purified to homogeneity.

 bioinformatics studies predicted rease and mtase binding/catalytic motifs: the atypical d-exe pattern as opposed to the tspgwi/taqii pd-xk pattern, dpacgsg and nppw, and showed a modular structure of tspdti.

 the tspdti/tsoi/tth111ii/tthhb27i subfamily was differentiated using a bioinformatics comparison with the tspgwi-taqii subfamily.

