BACKGROUND
due to the importance of ribosomes in protein synthesis, cellular growth, and organismal development, ribosomal genes are highly transcribed; with ribosomal rna accounting for nearly half of all cellular transcription and 80% of the rna content of growing cells . to achieve these high levels of ribosome production, eukaryotes have multiple copies of ribosomal dna, arranged in tandem in the nucleolus organizer regions  of one or more chromosomes. in addition, eukaryotes sustain high levels of transcription per rdna copy  <cit> .

the structure of the ribosomal intergenic spacer  appears to be important for achieving these high transcription levels. igs varies in length from about  <dig> kb in yeast to  <dig> kb in mammals, and is also highly variable among and even within individuals of the same species . these length polymorphisms are mostly due to variation in the numbers of different internal subrepeats present in the igs . in eukaryotes, some of these repetitive regions contain duplications of the core promoter . these promoter duplications have been shown to enhance rdna transcription. for example, in drosophila melanogaster, activity of the rdna promoter is directly correlated with the number of igs subrepeats that contain a promoter duplication  <cit> . selection studies also support the idea that igs structure is important for rdna transcription and consequently for growth rate. cluster et al.  <cit>  found a relationship between igs length and development time in d. melanogaster, where lines selected for fast development had on average, longer igs variants  than lines selected for slow development. similarly, under selection for rapid growth rate, average igs length increased in daphnia pulex  <cit> , and after selection for high yield, the frequency of long spacers increased in maize  <cit> . furthermore, longer spacers are associated with higher growth rates in several species of daphnia  <cit> . although these studies suggest that igs length may have significant effects on life history traits, the evolutionary significance of igs length remains a mystery. an initial step to understanding the evolutionary role of igs length is to characterize its variation across a group of related taxa that could then be used to test hypotheses about the adaptive significance of igs length using the comparative method. the main goal of the present paper is to characterize igs length variation across a wide range of drosophila species  and determine the amount of variation observed across different evolutionary time scales.

studies of igs length variation have commonly relied on southern blot hybridization  for inference of igs length. however, more recently, several studies have used pcr to determine igs length  <cit> . each of these methods has advantages and disadvantages. the main disadvantage of pcr is that certain fragments  may be selectively amplified, and that it may not amplify large  fragments. thus, the amplified products may not represent the actual size frequency distribution of the igs. the main disadvantage of sb is that it requires more dna to begin with. both methods require previous knowledge about the dna sequence; either for the design of primers for pcr or for the selection of restriction digestion enzymes for southern blot hybridization. the secondary goal of this study is to compare the usefulness of each method in estimating igs length across a group of related taxa when knowledge about sequence of igs and flanking regions is restricted to a small subset of the taxa under examination. therefore, design of pcr primers and selection of restriction enzymes is based on this limited number of sequences.

RESULTS
we examined igs length variation based on southern blot hybridization sb and/or pcr in  <dig> species of the drosophilinae representing  <dig> species groups in the genus drosophila and four other genera . of these, only  <dig> yielded pcr product. therefore, for the remaining  <dig> species we were able to infer igs length based only on sb. of the  <dig> species for which we obtained pcr product,  <dig>  had a single restriction site near one of the ends. this was the restriction digestion pattern we expected based on the d. melanogaster map . from the remaining  <dig> species, nine did not have a restriction site within the pcr fragment; thus sb-based inferences of igs length in these nine species would have overestimated the true igs length. in contrast, the remaining  <dig> species had more than one restriction site within the pcr fragment. therefore, sb-based inferences of igs length in these  <dig> species would have underestimated the true igs length.

repeated sb of the same dna extracts revealed very similar patterns of igs length variation. similarly, repeated pcr amplifications of the same dna extracts revealed similar patterns. however, in some cases, examination of different numbers of individuals or dna amounts of the same species resulted in slightly different patterns of igs length variation. nevertheless, the size index for each species was very similar across different numbers of individuals and different dna amounts .

comparison of methods
we compared igs size index based on sb and pcr for the  <dig> species for which presence of one restriction site was confirmed . average igs length  ranged from  <dig>  kb in d. pseudoobscura to  <dig>  kb in d. paulistorum . it is unlikely that the large fragments resulted from incomplete digestion because use of different amounts of restriction enzyme and of dna resulted in similar patterns . in most cases, the size index based on pcr was smaller than the one inferred from sb , although in a few cases they were almost equal and in three cases , the pcr-based estimates were actually larger. the difference between the size index based on sb and the one based on pcr ranged from zero in d. pseudoobscura to  <dig> kb in d. paulistorum.

to compare the results from both methods for the  <dig> species for which presence of the expected single restriction site was confirmed, we performed least squares regression analysis as implemented in jmp  <cit>  of the following variables:  pcr-based igs index on sb-based igs index ;  the igs size difference between the two methods  on sb-based igs index . our results suggest that although in most cases pcr-based sizes were smaller than sb-based sizes , no relationship exists between the igs size index inferred from sb and that inferred from pcr . in other words, the difference between the two methods is not consistent across taxa. the differences observed between the two methods can be attributed to:  the possibility that the hae iii site no. <dig> , which occurs upstream of the forward primer , was lost and therefore the igs size based on sb was overestimated;  measurement error;  differences in the length of the sequences adjacent to the igs that are targeted by each method ; or  the tendency of the pcr to amplify smaller fragments. given the highly conserved nature of the region where hae iii site no. <dig> is found, we do not expect this site to have been lost often within drosophila. however, loss of this restriction site is a concern in the case of d. paulistorum due to the large difference between pcr and sb results. although, we lack an estimate of measurement error, our results based on multiple igs-length estimates of the same taxon with a single method never differed by more than  <dig> kb . similarly, based on the known sequence of the regions adjacent to igs in several drosophila species, the expected difference between the pcr and sb estimates should not exceed ~ <dig> bp. thus, we adopt the criterion that the difference between the two methods should be greater than  <dig> kb  for it to be regarded as a true difference due to the method used. based on this criterion, in about half of the comparisons the pcr-based estimates were smaller than sb-based estimates; most of which had a sb-based estimate of  <dig> kb or more. this is further illustrated by the observation that the size difference between the two methods increased as the size based on sb increased , suggesting that the larger the igs fragment, the greater the degree of underestimation based on pcr. this relationship is still significant after removing the results from d. paulistorum . an alternative, explanation is that the pcr-based results were accurate and thus the degree of overestimation by the sb method increases as the true igs size decreases. this is unlikely however, because in d. melanogaster for example, the true length of the most common variant is known based on sequence data, and pcr-inferred igs lengths of this species were always smaller.

igs length variation across the genus drosophila
unless otherwise noted, we discuss igs length variation in drosophila based only on the  <dig> species for which presence of hae iii site no. <dig> could be confirmed and for which no evidence of additional restriction sites within the igs was observed . we observed broad variation in igs length across the genus drosophila. the igs size index ranged from  <dig>  kb in d. pseudoobscura to  <dig>  kb in d. paulistorum . even if we exclude d. paulistorum from our interpretation , the igs size index range is still broad, with d. pachea  representing the species with the largest igs index.

within species groups
igs size index variation within species groups based on sb was lower than across the subfamily . for example, among the eight species examined from the melanogaster species group the largest difference between species was  <dig>  kb . similarly, among the four species from the virilis species group, the largest difference was  <dig> kb . the largest difference among five species in the obscura group was even smaller;  <dig>  kb between d. pseudoobscura and d. affinis. the largest difference was observed in the willistoni species group;  <dig>  kb between d. willistoni and d. paulistorum, but with the caveat that the result for d. paulistorum may be an overestimation . the difference between d. nannoptera and d. pachea  also was relatively large;  <dig>  kb.

comparisons between more closely related species suggest that they tend to have very similar igs indices: d. parvula  vs. d. kanapiae ; d. novamexicana  vs. d lummei ; and d. persimilis  vs. d. pseudoobscura . the only exception was the comparison between d. paulistorum  and d. equinoxialis , but as mentioned above, the value for d. paulistorum may be an overestimation.

within species variation
based on sb, all of the species except one  had more than one igs length variant . in most cases, the length difference between the shortest and longest igs length variant was at least  <dig> kb. however, for species in which more than one individual was used, we cannot distinguish between intra- and inter-individual variation. nevertheless, we found differences among species in the number of fragments present in species where we examined single individuals; drosophila robusta and d. melanogaster had the highest number of bands per individual , whereas d. grimshawi had only two bands and d. putrida had only one .

results based on pcr only
igs sizes based on pcr were generally smaller than igs sizes based on sb . nevertheless, it is interesting to point out patterns of igs size variation in the species for which sb could not be used due to the absence of one or both of the hae iii restrictions sites or to the presence of additional restriction sites in the igs region. for the subset of species that were examined only by pcr, the size index ranged from  <dig>  kb in d. seguyi and d. birchii, to  <dig>  kb in d. mettleri . very close relatives or sister species tended to have similar lengths. for example, d. ananassae  vs. d. pallidosa ; d. greeni  vs. d. seguyi ; and d. arizonae  vs. d. mojavensis . although these pcr-based values may not represent the true igs size index , they may provide a minimum estimate for igs size.

results based on sb only
for the remaining  <dig> species, we only report igs sizes based on sb because we were unable to obtain pcr product. however, these results should be considered with caution because the presence of hae iii site no.  <dig> or of additional restriction sites could not be assessed. there are several possible explanations for our inability of obtain pcr product in these species. first, it is possible that igs fragments were not amplified because they were too large . it is important to note that amplification of the igs region in drosophila is not trivial because of the length , and the high degree of secondary structure present in this region  <cit> . second, the priming sites could have diverged, although our pcr primers target highly conserved regions of the 28s and 18s ribosomal genes. finally, despite having tried a large variety of amplification conditions, we may not have found the appropriate ones for that particular species.

based on the sb results, the largest igs size index observed was  <dig>  kb in d. acanthoptera. one of its relatives in the nannoptera group, d. wassermani, also had a large igs size index,  <dig>  kb. although it is possible that these results based on sb are an overestimation of igs size , it is interesting to note that d. pachea, another member of the nannoptera group , also had a relatively large igs size of  <dig> kb. interestingly, the most basal member of this group, d. nannoptera, had a much smaller igs index of  <dig>  kb. these sb-based results also suggest broad variation in the melanogaster species group, with d. bicornuta having the largest igs index of  <dig>  kb.

discussion
our study showed that in about half of the taxa examined igs length estimates based on pcr were smaller than those estimated with sb, particularly when igs sizes exceeded  <dig> kb, suggesting that pcr tends to underestimate the true igs length because of selective amplification of smaller fragments. a comparison with results from previous studies suggests this. for example, studies of igs length variation in d. melanogaster based on sb show that this species has many fragments larger than  <dig> kb  <cit> . in contrast, the studies that used pcr to infer igs length in this species found that amplified fragments were always smaller than  <dig> kb  <cit> . therefore, sb seems to be the most appropriate method for igs length inference. however, knowledge about the sequence is required, or at least the presence of the appropriate restriction sites on the ends of the fragment of interest should be confirmed. for example, in the present study, we were able to confirm the presence of one of these restriction sites , by pcr amplification of igs, followed by restriction digestion of pcr products. nevertheless, the pcr fragment ideally should span the region that contains both restriction sites, because in at least one case , we suspect the other restriction site may have been lost. unfortunately, we were unable to obtain amplification with pcr primers that spanned the region that contained both restriction sites.

igs size variation
our study revealed that igs size index variation among species of the subfamily drosophilinae is broader than previously reported  <cit> : from  <dig>  kb in d. pseudoobscura to  <dig> kb in d. pachea and possibly  <dig>  kb in d. paulistorum. considering that d. pseudoobscura diverged from d. pachea, 40– <dig> million years ago, and from d. paulistorum 35– <dig> million years ago , the large igs length differences are not surprising; particularly in light of the observation that average igs length has been demonstrated to change rapidly after artificial selection in d. melanogaster .

despite the speed at which igs has been shown to evolve under selection, comparisons between very closely related taxa, including sister species pairs, suggest that they tend to have very similar igs indices. for example, the close relatives, d. parvula and d. kanapiae differ from each other by  <dig>  kb; and d. novamexicana and d. lummei  differ by  <dig> bp. an even more closely related species pair , d. persimilis and d. pseudoobscura, differ only by  <dig> bp. the only exception was the comparison between d. paulistorum and d. equinoxialis, who differ by  <dig>  kb, but as mentioned above, the value for d. paulistorum may be an overestimation. although the pcr-based results should be interpreted with caution, they may offer additional insight regarding patterns of igs length across closely related taxa. for example, d. ananassae differs from its close relative d. pallidosa by  <dig> bp; d. greeni differs from d. seguyi by  <dig> bp; and d. lini differs from d. kikkawai  by  <dig> bp. finally, the igs index of d. arizonae is within the range of values reported for two populations of its sister species d. mojavensis, from which it diverged approximately 1– <dig>  million years ago  <cit> .

comparisons of more distantly related taxa, even within the same species group show less clear patterns. for example, the four members of the montium subgroup of the melanogaster species group examined in this study  differ from each other by a maximum of  <dig>  kb. on the other hand, based on our results and the ones of coen et al.  <cit> , igs size index ranges from  <dig>  to  <dig> kb among eight members of the melanogaster subgroup  another subgroup within the melanogaster species group. similarly, based on our results and the ones from rae et al.  <cit> , igs size index ranges from  <dig>  to  <dig>  kb across nine members of the virilis species group; thus, the largest igs index observed in this group almost doubles the smallest one. a large difference  is also observed between d. pachea and d. nannoptera . nevertheless, despite being members of the same species group, these two taxa may be up to  <dig> million years divergent  <cit> , providing a long period for the accumulation of such differences. unfortunately, similar comparisons of igs length and divergence time are not possible for many of the taxa examined in this study because we lack divergence time estimates.

the observation that close relatives tend to have similar igs indices, whereas more distant relatives may not, is consistent with the observation that closely related taxa exhibit a high degree of dna sequence homology of the igs region , whereas more distantly related taxa exhibit no dna sequence homology , despite showing similarities in structure such as promoter duplications.

the ecological and evolutionary implications of the broad variation in igs size observed across members of the drosophilinae are largely unknown. however, several evolutionary mechanisms appear to play a role in the evolution of igs variation. first, as a member of the ribosomal dna multigene family, igs is subject to concerted evolution  <cit> . the pattern of concerted evolution appears to be the result of unequal crossing over taking place both, at the level of the subrepeat arrays within the intergenic spacers, and at the level of the complete rdna units   <cit> . the former would create new igs length variants while the latter would spread a particular variant across the chromosome. in addition, the high within-species specificity of the rna polymerase i complex  <cit>  suggests that igs coevolves with components of transcriptional machinery. finally, individual igs variants may be adaptive, particularly with regard to developmental rate, as suggested by studies of two unrelated taxa, drosophila melanogaster  <cit>  and daphnia pulex  <cit> . this observation has led to the suggestion that igs length alone makes a considerable contribution to growth rate differences and hence life history evolution among related species  <cit> . although in long evolutionary time scales, igs length is highly variable across drosophila, it does not appear vary broadly in shorter time scales. however, examination of other species may reveal additional variation in shorter time scales that may provide the necessary variation for testing this hypothesis. nevertheless, tests of this hypothesis will only be informative if igs length is accurately measured. furthermore, even if igs length is found to be adaptive, the crucial assumption that igs length represents the number of promoter copies should ultimately be tested by dna sequencing.

CONCLUSIONS
broad variation in average igs length occurs across large evolutionary scales in members of the subfamily drosophilinae. however, despite the potential for rapid changes in igs length shown by artificial selection studies, closely related taxa tend to have similar igs sizes. our comparison of methods suggests that pcr-based estimations tend to underestimate the true igs size when the igs size is greater than  <dig> kb and thus, in the absence of dna sequence information for all the taxa under examination, both methods should be used.

