BACKGROUND
isoprenoids constitute the largest family of natural compounds both at a structural and functional level  <cit> . they are found in all the three domains of life . despite their diversity in structures and functions, all isoprenoids derive from the common five-carbon precursors isopentenyl diphosphate  and its isomer dimethylallyl diphosphate . ipp can be synthesized through two independent metabolic pathways, the mevalonate  pathway, or the more recently elucidated methylerythritol 4-phosphate  pathway  <cit>  . in most eubacteria, isoprenoids are synthesized through the mep pathway, while a few species use the mva pathway, both pathways, or none, the latter obtaining their isoprenoids from host cells  <cit> . previous analysis suggested that eukaryotes have inherited mep and mva pathways genes from eubacteria and archaebacteria, respectively, as reflected by their phylogenetic distribution  <cit> . in plants, plastidial ipp and dmapp are synthesized through the mep pathway, whereas cytosolic and mitochondrial isoprenoids are synthesized through the mva pathway  <cit> . non-photosynthetic simpler plastid-bearing organisms, such as the apicomplexan protists, solely use the mep pathway  <cit> . in contrast, in yeast and animals, all isoprenoids are synthesized through the mva pathway  <cit> . the lack of mep pathway enzymes in non-plastid bearing eukaryotes suggests that these genes were acquired through gene transfer to the nucleus from the eubacterial endosymbiotic ancestors that gave rise to plastids  <cit> .

isoprenoids are essential in all eubacteria in which they have been studied, playing key roles in several core cellular functions e.g. ubiquinones and menaquinones, which act as electron carriers of the aerobic and anaerobic respiratory chains respectively, and dolichols, which are required for cell wall peptidoglycan synthesis  <cit> . because of the essential role of the mep pathway in most eubacteria and its absence from animals, it has been proposed as a promising new target for the development of novel antibiotics  <cit> . besides that, many isoprenoids also have substantial industrial, pharmacological, and nutritional interest  <cit> . therefore, understanding the biochemical and genetic plasticity of isoprenoid biosynthesis in bacteria is crucial to attempt its pharmacological block or to be used in biofactories for the production of isoprenoids of human interest.

the occurrence of alternative enzymes for isoprenoid biosynthesis in specific bacterial lineages has been previously reported  <cit> . the enzyme 3-hydroxy-3-methyl-glutaryl-coa reductase , which catalyzes the rate-limiting step of the mva pathway, is structurally distant from its archaebacterial and eukaryotic homologs in most eubacteria  <cit> . similarly, two different classes of isopentenyl diphosphate isomerase , the enzyme catalyzing the isomerization of ipp to produce dmapp, have been identified in bacteria: type i idi  and type ii idi, acquired from archaebacteria and apparently unrelated to the latter  <cit> . although idi activity is only essential in organisms dependent on the mva pathway for ipp and isoprenoid biosynthesis, both types of idi have been identified in bacterial strains dependent on the mep pathway  <cit> .

we recently reported the occurrence of a group of bacteria harbouring the entire set of enzymes of the mep pathway with the exception of 1-deoxy-d-xylulose 5-phosphate  reductoisomerase , the enzyme catalyzing the nadph-dependent production of mep from dxp in the first committed step of the pathway. in these species, a novel family of previously uncharacterized oxidoreductases related to homoserine dehydrogenases  involved in the common pathway  of amino acid biosynthesis , was found to perform the dxr biochemical reaction  <cit> . this alternative enzyme, referred to as dxr-like  or dxr type ii  to distinguish it from the canonical dxr , displayed a markedly discontinuous distribution. dxr-ii was found forming single or multigene families in bacterial strains from diverse taxonomic groups, independent of the presence or absence of a dxr-i sequence in their genome  <cit> .

different evolutionary scenarios might explain dxr-ii emergence and evolutionary diversification. in this study we examined how the dxr-ii family emerged through functional divergence from related oxidoreductase families and identified amino acid changes critical for the acquisition of its specific biochemical function. furthermore, we assess the contrasting roles of horizontal gene transfer  and massive gene loss, major forces in microbial genome evolution known to affect other genes involved in ipp and isoprenoid biosynthesis  <cit> , in the discontinuous distribution of dxr-ii across eubacteria.

RESULTS
dxr-iis cluster into a single clade closely related to two uncharacterized oxidoreductase families
the complete proteomes of  <dig> eubacterial strains were screened for the occurrence of dxr-ii sequences using the protein sequence from brucella melitensis biovar abortus  <dig> dxr-ii  as a query  <cit> . to reduce false positives caused by hits corresponding to distantly related sequences, we applied a best reciprocal hit criterion i.e. orthology was assumed only if two genes in each different genome are each other’s best hit  <cit> . indeed, eight sequences were not confirmed as reciprocal best hits, including two identified in a previous survey conducted following a unidirectional blast search approach  <cit> , and these were consequently discarded from further analyses.  <dig> sequence hits were identified in as many bacterial strains , belonging to a wide variety of the main bacterial taxonomic groups . among these, two bacterial strains  had been previously shown to code for additional functional dxr-ii paralogs  <cit>  that were not identified by our analysis, specifically designed to identify co-orthologs in genome wide scans, but were added to the final dataset .

uid  unique identifier.

using the amino acid sequence alignment of the resulting full dataset of  <dig> hits , a maximum likelihood  phylogenetic analysis was performed . alternative methods of phylogenetic inference  were also implemented, resulting in trees with almost identical topologies . three main clades were consistently retrieved with high support values . a clade grouping  <dig> sequences, including  <dig> encoding for functional dxr-ii as shown in complementation assays in  <cit>  and additional file  <dig>  was designated as the dxr-ii family and likely corresponds to actual dxr-ii sequences . the remaining  <dig> sequences cluster into two additional clades and might not be true functional dxr-ii sequences . as such, these were tentatively designated dlo <dig> and dlo <dig>  for dxr-ii-like  <dig> and  <dig> oxidoreductases. indeed, four representative sequences belonging to the dlo <dig> and  <dig> families had also been previously tested for dxr-ii activity, failing to complement the dxr defective mutant   <cit> .

dxr-ii and dlo sequences showed similarity to nad-dependent oxidoreductases, and particularly to hd enzymes, at a sequence  <cit>  and structural level  <cit> . correspondingly, searches for interpro functional domains identified the nad-binding domain with a core rossmann-type fold at the n-terminal region of every single protein sequence . up to five additional domains could also be found in dxr-ii and dlo proteins. to examine whether these protein domains were differentially distributed across the dxr-ii, dlo <dig>  and dlo <dig> families, we mapped the architecture of protein domains onto the corresponding tree . most sequences from the dxr-ii family shared nad-binding  and saf  domains, while a significant fraction also included n-terminal nad/nadp-binding domains of aspartate/homoserine dehydrogenase . however, no common domain architecture was shared among proteins within families dlo <dig> and dlo <dig> 

the dxr-ii family emerged through functional divergence
phylogenetic analysis revealed the shared ancestry of all functional dxr-ii, supporting their common evolutionary origin, and suggested the functional divergence of this family from related oxidoreductases through the acquisition of dxr-ii specific biochemical activity. to examine the role of specific amino acid substitutions in functional specialization of dxr-ii protein sequences, two different statistical approaches under a ml framework were followed. the first one permits the detection of amino acid sites subjected to different evolutionary rates between families under examination, i.e., highly conserved in a family but variable in the other   <cit> . the second approach relies on site-specific shifts of amino acid physiochemical properties in positions otherwise highly conserved in each family   <cit> .

given the ml tree topology , the ml estimates of the theta  coefficients for type-i functional divergence between the dxr-ii family and families dlo <dig> and dlo <dig> were statistically significant in both cases . this implies that structural and/or functional selective constraints at some sites have shifted significantly after the divergence of dxr-ii from both dlo families. in contrast, the corresponding tests did not support type-ii functional divergence . moreover,  <dig> and  <dig> specific amino acid residues, including  <dig> and  <dig> with high posterior probabilities, were predicted as responsible for type-i functional divergence of dxr-ii from dlo families  <dig> and  <dig>  respectively . interestingly, seven sites detected as key for functional divergence were shared in analyses between the dxr-ii family and both the dlo <dig> and dlo <dig> families.

p = posterior probability values; se standard error. lrt and resulting p-values are shown in parentheses. critical amino acid sites detected as related to functional divergence with qk > 70%  are listed. seven sites predicted as related to functional divergence of dxr-ii from both families dlo <dig> and dlo <dig> are indicated in bold. numbering refers to brucella melitensis biovar abortus  <dig> dxr-ii protein sequence.

these sites were mapped onto the corresponding amino acid sequence alignment . at many of these sites, amino acid residues are highly conserved in dxr-ii sequences, but are variable in the dlo <dig> , the dlo <dig> , or both the dlo <dig> and the dlo <dig>  families, likely reflecting a change in their functional roles. some apparently represented minor changes, as they involved amino acids with similar physicochemical features . some others involved radical amino acid changes, such as position  <dig>  occupied by the highly conserved gly in dxr-ii proteins, but also by the unrelated ala and ser amino acids in dlo <dig> and dlo <dig> proteins. another example is position  <dig>  filled by the absolutely conserved polar amino acid thr in dxr-ii proteins, but replaced by the highly hydrophobic leu, ile and val amino acids in dlo <dig> or the physicochemically unrelated pro, ser and ala residues in dlo <dig>  likewise, position  <dig>  with a basic polar his found in all but four dxr-ii proteins was replaced by different hydrophobic amino acids, and finally position  <dig>  with a conserved val in most dxr-ii proteins was substituted by different physicochemically unrelated amino acids in dlo <dig> and dlo <dig> proteins.

to gain further insights into their putative functional impact, the amino acid changes detected as related to functional divergence of dxr-ii were mapped onto the three-dimensional structure of b. melitensis biovar abortus  <dig> dxr-ii in its apo form and in complex with the competitive inhibitor fosmidomycin   <cit> . predicted sites were mostly distributed through the middle catalytic domain, but some were also found in the cooh-terminal and nh2-terminal nadp-binding domains . two predicted sites corresponded to the conserved residues  <dig> and  <dig>  identified as important for dxr-ii activity  <cit> . thr <dig>  together with lys <dig> and lys <dig>  serve to anchor fosmidomycin, presumably participating in the proper binding of the substrate . arg <dig> is located in a cavity at the dimer interface and, together with positions glu <dig>  phe <dig> and tyr <dig>  may be involved in interactions between the two subunits of the dxr-ii dimer .

dxr-iis show a discontinuous taxonomic, metabolic and phenotypic distribution among eubacteria
the markedly scattered distribution of sequences belonging to the dxr-ii family across higher order eubacterial taxonomic groups was previously observed  <cit> . in this up-to-date survey, dxr-iis were found as encoded by the genomes of free-living eubacteria strains mostly from alphaproteobacteria  and firmicutes . however, genes coding for functional dxr-ii representatives were also found in the genomes of three additional distantly related bacterial taxonomic lineages i.e. the chloroflexi, betaproteobacteria and fusobacteria . within the dxr-ii family, alphaproteobacteria, firmicutes and chloroflexi sequences clustered into separate subclades, while the single betaproteobacteria and fusobacteria representatives grouped within the alphaproteobacteria and firmicutes subclades, respectively .

we examined the distribution of functional dxr-ii at lower taxonomical levels. for example, the occurrence of discontinuities was evident when we mapped dxr-ii onto a tree depicting the evolutionary relationships of  <dig> alphaproteobacterial species   <cit> . dxr-ii genes could only be found in the genomes of  <dig> strains among the  <dig> with fully sequenced genomes represented in the tree. they mainly belong to the order rhizobiales, although significant hits were also retrieved from other taxonomic ranks, such as rhodospirillales or rhodobacteraceae. within these alphaproteobacterial groups, strains whose genomes contained genes both encoding and not encoding dxr-ii and/or dxr-i could be found. discontinuities in dxr-ii distribution could be appreciated with, e.g., the closely related pairs of rhodospirillales species magnetospirillum magneticum amb-1/rhodospirillum rubrum atcc  <dig> and acidiphilium cryptum jf-5/gluconobacter oxydans 621h. more strikingly, we have retrieved a dxr-ii sequence only in one out of the five examined genomes of strains from rhodopseudomonas palustris , a feature perhaps related to the metabolical versatility attributed to this species  <cit>  . a similar patchy distribution of dxr-ii was observed when dxr-ii and dxr-i were mapped onto a phylogeny of firmicutes   <cit> .

searches for enzymes of the mep and mva pathways of ipp and isoprenoid biosynthesis were also performed . the  <dig> dxr-ii-containing eubacterial strains were classified according to the distribution of enzymes of these pathways, revealing the occurrence of multiple patterns . the majority of surveyed eubacterial genomes contained genes coding for enzymes of the mep pathway, but a significant number of them had lost one or more of these enzymes. dxr-i would have been preferentially lost among alphaproteobacterial strains, but some losses were also found in firmicutes and chloroflexi . these species would then exclusively rely on dxr-ii for ipp biosynthesis through the mep pathway. a group, mainly composed of firmicutes strains showed genes encoding both dxr-ii and dxr-i . a significant number of genomes also encoded for enzymes of the mva pathway. some of these strains would then use solely the mva pathway for isoprenoid biosynthesis, such as the two chloroflexi representatives . dxr-ii activity has been experimentally shown from one of these strains, chloroflexus auranticus j-10-fl, by complementation assays . most of them also have a complete and functional mep pathway, such as listeria monocytogenes   <cit> . finally, in the genomes of two firmicutes strains  no genes encoding enzymes from the mep  or the mva pathways could be found . interestingly however, dxr-ii activity had been confirmed experimentally for the latter  <cit> .

similarly, the distribution of dxr-ii was compared to that of enzymes of the cp pathway of amino acid biosynthesis. the cp represents three enzymatic steps. the first is the phosporylation of aspartate, carried out by ak leading to β-aspartyl-phosphate, which in turn is oxidized by an asdh to aspartate semialdehyde. subsequently, hd catalyses the reduction of aspartate beta-semialdehyde into homoserine, in the third and last step of the cp pathway . the evolutionary diversification of enzymes of the cp in bacteria is known to have been shaped by gene duplication and fusion events, resulting in bifunctional ak_hd proteins  <cit> . most genomes of the  <dig> dxr-ii-containing strains encoded ak and hd. the genomes of five strains also showed bifunctional ak_hd genes, while the genomes of only three alphaproteobacteria strains encoded for asdh and were believed to have functional cp  . however, none of the genomes of dxr-ii-containing strains encoded the complete set of enzymes of the cp .

we next examined the distribution of biological properties across dxr-ii-containing bacterial strains. for this purpose, we projected the data contained in the ncbi’s microbial organism information page onto the original set of  <dig> bacterial strains, after correcting for ambiguities and redundancies. the database, available for download at http://ftp.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/genomes/genomeprj_archive/, included categories related to the ecological requirements of the organism , morphological features  and additional phenotypic traits . the distribution of properties across dxr-ii- and non dxr-ii-containing eubacterial strains is shown in table  <dig>  to test whether any of these biological properties were differentially represented in the subset of  <dig> eubacterial strains containing dxr-ii regarding the remaining non-dxr-ii harbouring strains, we performed fishers’ exact tests. according to these tests, none of the categories related to the ecological requirements of the organism showed a biased representation among dxr-ii-containing strains, suggesting that these organisms may not live in shared habitats. a similar unbiased pattern of distribution was found for additional morphological and phenotypic features . only the category “pathogenic in animals” showed a significant overrepresentation among dxr-ii-containing strains . similarly, for quantitative properties, such as genome size, gc content and optimal growth temperature, a student’s t test was performed to assess significance of the differences between means. again, none of the tests were significant .

p-values resulting from fisher’s exact tests are shown for categories represented in at least  <dig> bacterial strains. test significant at p <  <dig>  is shown in bold type. a, for these quantitative properties, the average value  and p-values resulting from student’s t tests performed to assess significance of the differences between means are shown.

comparative sequence-based analysis of hgt in dxr-ii evolution
the markedly discontinuous phylogenetic distribution shown by dxr-ii might be explained by recurrent events of hgt occurring between unrelated bacterial strains. so long as the dxr-ii sequence retains sequence features of the donor strain significantly distinct from that of the genome of the recipient strain, they could be inferred as being acquired by hgt. consequently, comparative nucleotide sequences analyses of dxr-ii against their host genomes could yield clues about their origin and the putative role of hgt in the distribution of dxr-ii across eubacteria.

several methods and criteria were applied to identify signatures of hgt . firstly, gc content at the three codon positions, as well as the total, was estimated. as previously observed  <cit> , gc content was relatively constant among genes of a particular species’ genomes, although displaying wide variation among species . this was particularly evident at the third codon position, as the majority of these sites are synonymous and, consequently, differences due to mutational biases are higher. in contrast, the first and second codon positions appear to be more conserved between genomes and are, consequently, less informative . the gc contents of all dxr-ii coding sequences were compared to the mean for all genes encoded by the corresponding genomes. dxr-ii from both chloroflexi representatives and the single fusobacteria representative sebaldella termitidis atcc  <dig> showed significantly lower gct and gc <dig> content regarding the respective mean for all genes in the genome . a fourth bacterial strain, rhizobium ngr <dig>  showed higher gct and gc <dig> content .

secondly, we examined for biases in dinucleotide relative frequencies, a remarkably stable property of the dna of an organism claimed to constitute a ‘genomic signature’ that can discriminate sequences from different organisms  <cit> . we focused on the dinucleotide biases at third and first  codon positions, which are less sensitive to selective constrains  <cit> . consequently, the 3: <dig> dinucleotide frequencies were calculated for all dxr-ii coding sequences and for the entire set of genes in the corresponding genomes. they both showed significant variation across organisms, and therefore could be used as such genomic signatures. significance of the differences between dxr-ii genes and their genomes were examined by calculating the dinucleotide relative abundance difference or σ difference   <cit> . pairwise co-variation was further assessed through the spearman and kendall rank tests . in all but one example, both spearman’s ρ and kendall’s τ correlation coefficients indicated strong positive correlation. an exception was provided by halanaerobium hydrogeniformans, which showed negative correlation. all tests revealed significant covariation of 3: <dig> dinucleotide frequencies of dxr-ii with the frequencies of the corresponding genomes, contrary to the expectations of hgt.

next, we estimated relative synonymous codon usages  values, which provide with a simple effective measure of synonymous codon usage bias. differences in rscu between dxr-ii genes and all other genes in each corresponding genome were assessed by means of χ <dig> tests   <cit> . chloroflexi strains and s. termitidis atcc  <dig> showed the higher χ <dig> statistic values, revealing higher variation. however, none of the tests was significant, indicating that dxr-ii genes have a codon usage patterns consistent with that of their corresponding genomes, and therefore unlikely to reflect hgt.

finally, we examined the degree of bias in codon usage of dxr-ii genes towards the codon usage of the most expressed genes by comparing codon adaptation index  values. a significant deviation from the average cai of the genome was found in strains of chloroflexi and s. termitidis atcc  <dig> .

discussion and 
CONCLUSIONS
the structural and functional diversity of isoprenoids correlates with the existence of a wide biochemical and genetic plasticity for their biosynthesis  <cit> . in eubacteria, this is commonly achieved through the use of alternative metabolic pathways and enzymatic steps in specific lineages. interesting examples are provided by hmgr and idi, which are encoded by at least two distinct gene families in bacteria. in this paper we focus in dxr-ii, recently characterized as an alternative family to dxr-i in performing the second step of the mep pathway of isoprenoid biosynthesis in a selected group of eubacteria  <cit> .

apart from the nad-binding domain with a core rossmann-type fold found at the n-terminal region of all oxidoreductases, no significant similarity at the sequence level was observed between dxr-i and dxr-ii to infer homology  <cit> . correspondingly, the recent determination of the dxr-ii crystal structure showed only slight structural relationship with dxr-i proteins and revealed a unique arrangement of the active site  <cit> . examples of enzymes catalyzing identical reactions through the same catalytic mechanisms but showing structurally unrelated active sites are known outside the isoprenoid field  <cit> . in some of these though, key catalytic residues may be conserved between functionally redundant enzymes, as also reported for dxr-i and dxr-ii  <cit> . dxr-i and dxr-ii likely represent analogous genes that evolved redundant biochemical functions through mechanistic convergence.

our results support the emergence of the dxr-ii family through type i, but not type ii, functional divergence from dlo <dig> and dlo <dig> families of previously uncharacterized oxidoreductases. these data suggest that dxr-ii acquired additional structural and/or functional constraints rather than shifted constraints in amino acids that were already ancestrally constrained. amino acid changes critical for functional divergence and acquisition of dxr-ii biochemical activity were predicted, many of them corresponding to positions highly conserved in dxr-ii, but otherwise variable in dlo <dig> and/or dlo <dig>  interestingly, two of these predicted amino acids, thr <dig> and arg <dig>  had been previously identified for their role in fosmidomycin/substrate binding and in dimerization, respectively  <cit> , suggesting that functional shifts in a limited number of amino acid positions could be at the origin of the acquisition of dxr-ii biochemical activity.

it could be assumed that the mep pathway is the ancestral route for ipp and isoprenoid biosynthesis in eubacteria, including the membrane-associated hopanoids, which are among the oldest known biomolecules  <cit> . the entire set of genes encoding for enzymes involved in the mep pathway, including dxr-i, has been found widespread in all eubacterial taxonomic groups  <cit> . in a significant number of dxr-ii-containing eubacterial genomes , including those from closely related strains, dxr-i has been lost. this raises the question of how dxr-ii evolved in dxr-i containing strains, as acquisition of redundant biochemical activities should not be favoured by evolution. the dxr-ii family could have emerged under an ecological context that conferred a selective advantage to the emergence and maintenance of a functionally redundant enzyme, e.g. when gene dosage is selectively advantageous. due to the wide and diverse functions played by isoprenoids and their essential role for cell viability, critical situations in which their biosynthesis was absolutely required may have occurred multiple times throughout eubacterial evolution. emergence of the dxr-ii family should have occurred at an early time in evolution, as supported by the scattered distribution of dxr-ii and related oxidoreductases from dlo <dig> and dlo <dig> families in distantly related lineages of eubacteria. after relaxation of that burst in selective constraints for isoprenoid biosynthesis, some strains could then have lost one redundant enzyme, commonly dxr-ii, which shows less catalytic activity in vitro  <cit> . in addition, maintenance of dxr-ii, which shows less sensitivity to inhibition by fosmidomycin than dxr-i  <cit> , might have provided a selective advantage in bacterial strains sharing the same ecological niches as those naturally producing the antibiotic .

the taxonomic distribution of dxr-ii across eubacteria showed a marked discontinuity, which was also verified at the metabolic and phenotypic level. although most genes encoding dxr-ii were found in eubacteria with the mep pathway, their occurrence was not linked to a unique pattern of distribution of enzymes of the mep or mva pathways. similarly, hd, the oxidoreductase family that showed the highest level of similarity with dxr-ii, was found in most dxr-ii-containing bacterial strains, but not all. in addition, examination of the distribution of biological properties across dxr-ii-containing strains showed maintenance of dxr-ii in the genomes was not linked to a unique pattern of ecological or phenotypic traits. the only exception was ‘pathogenic in animals’, significantly enriched among dxr-ii-containing strains, reflecting the occurrence of dxr-ii among pathogenic strains of brucella, bartonella, listeria and clostridium <cit> .

the outstanding phylogenetic discontinuity in dxr-ii distribution across eubacteria could be explained through two alternative, though not mutually exclusive, evolutionary mechanisms, i.e., gene gain through hgt or gene loss. hgt is known to have shaped the evolution of multiple metabolic pathways, including ipp and isoprenoid biosynthesis  <cit> . however, a unique event of hgt cannot properly explain dxr-ii phylogeny. according to our phylogenetic analysis, such hgt events should instead have occurred at different time points throughout eubacterial evolution, e.g. between the alphaproteobacteria and firmicutes phyla, between the alphaproteobacteria and betaproteobacteria classes within the proteobacteria phylum, between firmicutes and specific chloroflexi strains or between firmicutes and specific fusobacteria. more recently, hgt should also have occurred between closely related alphaproteobacteria or firmicute strains. if this was the case, hgt events should have left a signature of atypical sequence features in dxr-ii genes, provided they were recent enough and occurring between distantly taxonomically related donor and acceptor bacterial strains  <cit> . weak signatures of hgt were found only in chloroflexi and the fusobacterium s. termitidis atcc  <dig> at the level of gc content and cai values. however, no biases in dinucleotide frequencies or codon usage were observed in any strain comparison. these results suggested that hgt events were not at the origin of all discontinuities, or were so ancient that dxr-ii genes ameliorated their sequence to specific base composition and codon usage of the host genome, making them indistinguishable from ancestral sequences  <cit> .

consequently, although old episodic events of hgt cannot be excluded, the alternative hypothesis of recurrent dxr-ii  gene loss is more likely to explain dxr-ii phylogeny. this mechanism has been traditionally considered less parsimonious, as it involves a complex ancestor and gene loss events occurring independently at multiple evolutionary lineages. however, recent works suggests that, on average, gene loss might be a more likely event than gene gain through hgt  <cit> .

the dxr-i/dxr-ii model constitutes an exceptional natural model to experimentally test the emergence and maintenance of redundant gene function between non-homologous genes as a result of convergent evolution, as opposed to their emergence from intragenomic duplicates, or paralogs. furthermore, our results highlight the importance of the functional characterization of evolutionary shortcuts in isoprenoid biosynthesis for screening specific antibacterial drugs and for regulating the production of isoprenoids of human interest.

