BACKGROUND
short-term castration attenuates the vagal component of baroreflex sensitivity in sexually mature male rats  <cit> . factors influencing baroreflex sensitivity include gender, age, baseline mean arterial pressure and heart rate, anesthesia, and the method of drug administration  <cit> . however, these factors cannot account for the difference in baroreflex sensitivity between intact and castrated rats in reported studies  <cit> .

el-mas et al.  <cit>  have shown that testosterone replacement restores baroreflex-mediated bradycardia in short-term castrated rats. further, we and others  <cit>  have demonstrated that 17β-estradiol enhances baroreflex sensitivity. notably, 17β-estradiol is a product of testosterone aromatization by the aromatase enzyme  <cit> , which raises its possible contribution to testosterone effects on baroreflex sensitivity. this latter possibility has not been investigated. further, ando et al.  <cit>  demonstrated a reflex increase in circulating testosterone of adrenocortical origin subsequent to long-term  castration. the impact of such an increase in serum testosterone on baroreflex sensitivity is not known. hence, the main objective of this study was to test the hypotheses that  17β-estradiol, contributes to testosterone restoration of the vagal component of baroreflex sensitivity in short-term  castrated rats, and  the spontaneous increase in serum testosterone, or androstenedione, reported by others  <cit>  in long-term  castrated rats results in proportionate increase in baroreflex sensitivity. this goal was achieved by determining whether a) testosterone replacement  restores the attenuated baroreflex sensitivity in short-term castrated rats, b) serum 17β-estradiol increases in testosterone-treated rats, and c) an increase in baroreflex sensitivity occurs in long-term castrated rats along with an increase in serum testosterone or androstenedione. these studies were undertaken in conscious unrestrained rats to avoid the confounding effects of anesthetics on the measured variables  <cit> .

RESULTS
effect of testosterone replacement on baroreceptor reflex control of heart rate
baseline mean arterial pressure values, measured on the day of the experiment, were similar between the orchiectomized/testosterone and orchiectomized/vehicle rats . however, the orchiectomized/testosterone rats exhibited a significantly  lower baseline heart rate compared with the orchiectomized/vehicle rats . phenylephrine elicited similar rises in mean arterial pressure in all groups . however, the similar increments in mean arterial pressure were accompanied by greater reflex bradycardic responses in the orchiectomized/testosterone compared with the orchiectomized/vehicle rats . therefore, baroreflex-mediated bradycardia was significantly enhanced in orchiectomized/testosterone compared with the orchiectomized/vehicle rats . in addition, serum testosterone increased to within physiological levels in orchiectomized/testosterone rats . there was no change in serum 17β-estradiol in orchiectomized/testosterone compared with orchiectomized/vehicle rats .

effect of long-term castration on baroreceptor reflex control of heart rate
baseline mean arterial pressure and heart rate values, measured on the day of the experiment, were similar between the sham-operated and long-term castrated groups of rats . phenylephrine elicited similar rises in mean arterial pressure in all groups . in addition, at any given rise in blood pressure, the reflex bradycardic response was similar in long-term castrated rats to that of the sham-operated rats . therefore, baroreflex-mediated bradycardia was restored compared with the sham-operated rats . finally, the restoration of baroreflex sensitivity subsequent to long-term castration occurred in the presence of significantly  lower circulating levels of testosterone and androstenedione compared with the sham-operated rats . comparison of the data obtained from short-term vs. long-term castrated rats revealed that the baroreflex-mediated bradycardia underwent a phase of inhibition at the 3rd week, but such inhibition was no longer evident by the 6th week after castration . notably, serum testosterone depletion, observed  <dig> weeks after castration, continued to be evident  <dig> weeks after castration . therefore, no correlation was observed between baroreflex sensitivity and serum testosterone .

discussion
the current study presents  <dig> new findings. first, testosterone replacement  restores baroreflex sensitivity  to control level, but 17β-estradiol does not contribute to this action in short-term  castrated rats. second, baroreflex-mediated bradycardia spontaneously recovers to sham-operation level subsequent to long-term  castration, which suggests that the restoration of baroreflex-mediated bradycardia is time-dependent. third, the spontaneous recovery of baroreflex sensitivity occurs in spite of significantly suppressed circulating levels of testosterone and androstenedione. this suggests that the long-term modulation of baroreflex sensitivity occurs independent of androgens, or the baroreflex mechanism may become adapted to low levels of circulating androgen.

in the present study we investigated the possibility that 17β-estradiol derived by the aromatization of testosterone  <cit>  contributed to the testosterone-mediated increase in baroreflex-mediated bradycardia recently reported by el-mas et al.  <cit> . because saleh and connell  <cit>  have shown that 17β-estradiol enhances the baroreflex-mediated bradycardia of male rats, we reasoned that testosterone enhancement of baroreflex sensitivity in castrated rats, might be secondary to the conversion of testosterone to 17β-estradiol. as previously shown  <cit>  we demonstrated that testosterone replacement, which resulted in physiological levels of plasma testosterone, increased baroreflex-mediated bradycardia. results of the present study showed that serum 17β-estradiol level did not change in testosterone-treated rats, which suggests that 17β-estradiol does not contribute to the action of testosterone on baroreflex control of heart rate following testosterone replacement. hence, testosterone or another androgenic metabolite seems to mediate the enhanced baroreflex response in short-term castrated rats. this notion is consistent with our preliminary finding that demonstrates the importance of the androgen receptor in the enhancement of baroreflex sensitivity in male rats  <cit> .

the enhanced baroreflex-mediated bradycardia by testosterone replacement observed in this study and by others  <cit>  together with the compensatory reflex increase in serum testosterone by the adrenal cortex, subsequent to long-term  castration  <cit> , raised the interesting possibility that such an increase in endogenous testosterone may result in a proportionate increase in baroreflex-mediated bradycardia. indeed, baroreflex-mediated bradycardia spontaneously recovered after long-term  castration to the sham-operation level. this finding supported our hypothesis and suggests that the restoration of baroreflex sensitivity after castration is time-dependent.

contrary to our expectation and in disagreement with reported findings in a similar animal model  <cit> , serum testosterone remained significantly suppressed in our animals. the discrepancy between both studies may be attributed to the antibody used by ando et al.  <cit>  to measure serum testosterone, which exhibited 40% cross-reactivity with dihydrotestosterone  vs. 4% in our study. nonetheless, the spontaneous and complete recovery of baroreflex-mediated bradycardia in the presence of significantly suppressed serum testosterone raised the following possibilities. androgens other than testosterone  may have enhanced baroreflex-mediated bradycardia subsequent to long-term castration , because  serum androstenedione increased to pre-castration levels  <dig> weeks after castration  <cit> , and  labrie et al.  <cit>  demonstrated that flutamide, a competitive nonsteroidal antiandrogen, which attenuated baroreflex-mediated bradycardia in our preliminary study  <cit> , antagonized the effect of androstenedione at the androgen receptor. since we observed no change in serum androstenedione subsequent to long-term castration, which again disagrees with reported findings  <cit> , the present findings suggest that androstenedione, like testosterone, may not play a role in the spontaneous recovery of baroreflex-mediated bradycardia. the discrepancy between both studies may be attributed to a lower recovery rate  for androstenedione by ando et al.  <cit>  vs. a higher recovery rate  in this study.

an alternate explanation for the spontaneous recovery of baroreflex sensitivity in the presence of suppressed testosterone and androstenedione is that the baroreceptor reflex mechanism may have become adapted to the low level of circulating androgens. this would suggest an association between long-term castration, and the activation of compensatory mechanisms possibly involving an increase in androgen receptor density and/or signaling. yu and mcginnis  <cit>  reported a decrease in androgen receptor density in the nucleus ambiguus   <cit>  at  <dig> weeks castration, a period that coincides with a significant attenuation of baroreflex sensitivity observed in the present study and by others  <cit> . whether an upregulation of androgen receptors in the brainstem occurs  <dig> weeks after castration remains to be investigated.

CONCLUSIONS
testosterone contributes to the maintenance of baroreflex-mediated bradycardia in adult rats. such a physiological role for testosterone seems to manifest only on a short-term basis because:  short-term  castration caused a significant reduction in baroreflex-mediated bradycardia, a deficit corrected by testosterone replacement.  spontaneous recovery of baroreflex-mediated bradycardia occurred following long-term  castration in spite of the continued suppressed testosterone and androstenedione levels, which may argue against a long-term effect of testosterone or androstenedione on baroreflex-mediated bradycardia. circulating androgens other than testosterone and androstenedione may contribute to the restoration of baroreflex-mediated bradycardia subsequent to long-term castration. an alternate possibility, that remains to be investigated, is that the baroreceptor reflex mechanism may have become adapted to the low level of circulating androgens.

