BACKGROUND
fusion expression is a common strategy in the production of recombinant proteins. various fusion tags are used to enhance the total and soluble expression yield in e. coli. fusion tags show differing efficiency in enhancing the expression, solubility and stability of recombinant proteins  <cit> . the stable or conserved structure of the fusion tag is speculated as a determinant of its fusion properties  <cit> .

ubiquitin  and sumo are stable, highly conserved small proteins expressed in all eukaryotic cells. they are frequently used as tags to enhance the fusion expression by increasing the solubility and stability of the expressed peptides and protecting the peptides from proteolytic degradation in prokaryotic host  <cit> . moad and this, components of prokaryotic sulfur transfer systems, are also highly conserved small proteins found in prokaryotic cells. they display a high degree of structural similarity although sharing limited sequence similarities to ub, and interact with correlating enzymes in similar ways as ub  <cit> . they are ub-like proteins  and have been suggested as prokaryotic antecedents of ub. prokaryotic this was also tried as a fusion tag in expression of heterologous proteins in e. coli <cit> . it was able to induce aggregation of fusion proteins due to a slowdown of refolding, and enhance the expression of some targets more significantly than its eukaryotic counterpart ub. but it promoted the degradation of unstable target fusion.

in this report, we observed the effect of fusion of moad, a small prokaryotic ubl containing  <dig> amino acid residues, on the expression of several targets in e. coli. moad showed the similar properties to prokaryotic ubl this in enhancing the recombinant expression and promoting the aggregation of fusion proteins through slowdown of target folding. contrary to this fusion, moad fusion conferred a complete protection of the murine ribonuclease inhibitor  from intracellular degradation.

RESULTS
moad fusion enhances the expression of egfp
the gene encoding egfp was fused in frame to the gene of moad either at upstream or at downstream, and was cloned into prokaryotic expression vector pqe <dig>  similar constructs via this fusion were used as the controls. all these moad-fused egfp were expressed more abundantly than egfp alone in e. coli tg <dig> at 37°c .

the fluorescence of cells expressing egfp with or without fusions was measured after iptg induction. the intensity of fluorescence increased steadily at 37°c. the fluorescence was normalized to the measured od <dig>  since a slight but significant difference in od <dig> was noticed among the cells, although they grew at the similar rate . the normalized intensity of fluorescence thus was in direct proportion to the emitted fluorescence of single cell in average. the fluorescence of the cells bearing egfp alone reached to a plateau after 1 h induction at 37°c . n-terminal moad fusion gave a continued increase in normalized fluorescence which was much higher than egfp alone after 2 h induction at 37°c. n-terminal this fusion emitted much lower fluorescence. the cells bearing c-terminal fusion of moad had significantly lower fluorescence than cells bearing egfp alone. c-terminal fusion of this also caused significantly lower fluorescence than egfp alone, consisting to the previous report  <cit> .

since the accumulation of non-native egfps in inclusion bodies could have reduced the measured fluorescence, we did similar experiments with lower concentration of inducer and under lower cultured temperature in expecting to improve the soluble expression and reduce the inclusion body formation. indeed, higher fluorescence was reached for all the recombinants . nevertheless, much less fluorescence had been observed in both n-terminal moad fusion and n-terminal this fusion than egfp alone. interestingly, even less fluorescence was observed in the c-terminal moad fusion under the same conditions. whereas the c-terminal this fusion produced an identical fluorescence as did egfp alone at room temperature. the discrepancy in growing fluorescence may reflect the difference in relative amount of soluble active proteins and insoluble fluorescent folding intermediates, as previously identified  <cit> .

moad fusion promotes the aggregation of egfp
to verify whether the difference in fluorescence growing patterns could be attributed to the differential soluble expression of the fusions, cells were analyzed for their expression in native form in soluble portion and non-native one in aggregation by sds-page. we found that egfps with or without fusions were expressed in inclusion bodies at 37°c . similarly, we analysed the whole cell lysates from milder induction at lower cultured temperature by sds-page without boiling denaturation, which separated the native egfp proteins in soluble form from their non-native molecules in inclusion bodies  <cit> . the egfp without tag was predominantly expressed in native form at room temperature . major parts of n-terminal and c-terminal fused egfp with moad were expressed in non-native form as compared to egfp without tag. c-terminal fusion of moad had even much less native active fluorescent protein compared to that of egfp alone and this fusion, which was consistent to the observation that much less in vivo fluorescence of c-terminal moad fusion was induced at room temperature .

to further elucidate the difference in soluble expression of c-terminal fusion of moad from that of this fusion and egfp alone, we analysed the fluorescence distribution within cells by confocal microscopy. as shown in figure  <dig>  the inclusion bodies were present within all the cells even under leaky expression conditions. the fluorescence was evenly distributed in the cells expressing egfp alone or with this fusion. the fluorescence in cells with c-terminal moad fusion was chiefly segregated in the inclusion bodies . this was consistent with the observation illustrated in figure 2d.

these results suggest that fusion of egfp with moad at either n- or c-terminus enhances the expression of the fusion protein which presents mostly as aggregated inclusion bodies in a similar way as fusions with this.

moad fusion retards the refolding of egfp
the enhanced aggregation of egfp by c-terminal this fusion was previously attributed to the reduced refolding rate of egfp  <cit> . hence, we evaluated the foldability of n-terminal fusion of egfp with moad or this. purified fluorescent egfp with fusions was denatured and renatured in vitro. upon dilution, both fused proteins refolded gradually with an increase in fluorescence, the same as egfp alone . moad-fused egfp had the same final recovery of fluorescence as did egfp alone, whereas this-fused egfp had a slightly lower final recovery of fluorescence. both moad- and this-fused egfp refolded at a significantly slower rate either in fast or slow refolding phases . the soluble fluorescent c-terminal moad fused egfp was subjected to rapid in vitro fragmentation after purification , hence its foldability was not identified.

moad is inefficient in enhancing the expression of insulin a and b chains
since this fusion enhanced the expression of insulin chain a and b  <cit> , we also fused the gene of moad to the gene encoding insulin chain a or b at their upstream and cloned into prokaryotic expression vector pet28a. the fusion proteins were expressed in much less amount in e. coli bl <dig>  plyss by iptg induction, in comparison to the this fusions as control . anti-his-tag immunoblot  of the proteins revealed that moad fusions had relatively more proportion in soluble form in comparison to this fusions.

moad fusion protects murine ribonuclease inhibitor from degradation
as fusion of this enhanced the degradation of the unstable protein mri when expressed in e. coli <cit> , we tried to observe the effect of fusion of moad on the stability of mri. it was shown in sds-page  that moad-fused mri was expressed at expected molecular weight in inclusion bodies, both in strain tg <dig> and in the lon protease deficient e. coli strain bl <dig>  plyss. no degraded fragments of moad fusion were noticed in western blots, indicating a complete protection of mri from degradation by moad fusion, in contrast to the enhanced degradation by fusion of this.

it seemed that breakdown occurred more frequently at c-terminus of mri  <cit> . a mutated mri, with a merely single mutation which changed glu <dig> to a stop coden at c-terminal part in mri, was fused to moad or this. the prematurely stopped and thus slightly shortened products of both fusions were efficiently overexpressed in full length in tg <dig> and bl <dig>  plyss. only faintly stained smaller fragments were observed for this fusion , which was different from that of native mri in figure 6a and b. it suggested that target itself determined its degradability in vivo when fused to this. the moad fusion product remained intact without any degradation. this proved again that moad fusion protected the target from degradation.

discussion
a variety of fusion tags are used to increase expression yields and change solubility and native folding  <cit> . however, it is still not clear how fusion tags enhance protein expression. ub was reported to exert chaperoning effects on fusion proteins, thus increase expression of proteins in e. coli and yeast  <cit> . indeed, ub has a highly stable structure and is the fastest folding protein known  <cit> . thus, it may serve to stabilize and promote proper folding of the fusion target. sumo, structurally similar to ub, also promotes folding and structural stability of fusion proteins, and leads to their enhanced expression  <cit> .

prokaryotic moad and this share the structure of ub-like domain with their eukaryotic counterparts ub and sumo. our current results indicate that moad confers the enhanced expression of egfp, either in n-terminal fusion or in c-terminal fusion. in contrast to eukaryotic counterparts ub and sumo, moad fusion at both n- and c-terminus reduces the soluble protein expression rather than enhances the solubility. this is the same case for this fusion. instead of promoting its proper folding in refolding experiments, moad hinders the native egfp folding, in a similar way to this. this was not expected because they are stable small proteins with a similar conserved structure as ub or sumo. the slowdown of folding, rather than the fast expression of fusion protein, should be a primary factor to drive the expressed fusion protein to inclusion bodies. this was proved by the fact that the most of egfp with moad fusion at c-terminus are aggregated in inclusion bodies as detected by confocal microscopy. actually, the fast expression of fusion protein should not occur under the leaky expression condition.

enhancing the production of inclusion bodies is one of the fusion strategies although fewer tags are reported for this purpose  <cit> . inclusion bodies protect the products from proteolyses, and usually lead to a higher expression yield. in this study, moad did not drive the satisfied overexpression of insulin a and b chains in comparison to the this fusions because of a decreased ability of moad in driving the protein aggregation of insulin chains.

different fusion systems have given variable results of expression  <cit> , and no single fusion tag is ideal for every protein target. on the expression of unstable mri, moad fusion affords complete protection of the product from intracellular degradation. ub- and sumo-fusion of mri, although leading expression products to inclusion bodies, show a moderate intracellular degradation of products  <cit> . this difference may be attributed to the rapid aggregation of moad fusion product to inclusion bodies that afford protection from proteolytic degradation. on the other hand, this fusion, expected to enhance the rapid aggregation due to the sluggish of folding in a similar way as moad fusion, led to the significant degradation of mri. an active this-directed degradation was anticipated for this unusual observation  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
this work shows that moad, as a fusion tag, is able to promote expression of some target proteins as expected from its structural similarity to ub and sumo. while unexpectedly, moad enhances the aggregation of fusion proteins due to a slowdown of refolding, the same as the typical prokaryotic ubl this. furthermore, moad fusion provides an advantage over this in protecting the unstable target from degradation. hence, in addition to this, moad enriches the arsenal of fusion tags in the category of insoluble expression. expression in inclusion bodies may be required specifically in cases where protein production is toxic to the host cell. it is feasible for the practical use of moad as a fusion tag in the expression of some target proteins.

