BACKGROUND
electrical kindling of limbic structures in rodents is a widely used model for complex partial seizures with secondary generalization  <cit> . this model requires implantation of intracranial electrodes and subsequent brain stimulation for several weeks. the majority of previous studies have employed this model in rats, using anchoring screws and dental acrylic to secure the implanted electrodes  <cit> . recent studies have increasingly applied the kindling model in mice largely due to the availability of transgenic mouse strains  <cit> .

in general, it is a technical challenge to firmly mount intracranial electrodes in mice with the anchoring screw/dental acrylic approach, since the mouse’s thin skull may not be strong enough to accommodate the anchoring screws. as an alternative approach, we have previously developed a screw-free, glue-based method for implanting intracranial electrodes in mice  <cit> . using this method, we have carried out chronic intracranial electroencephalographic  recordings in several mouse models  <cit> . in these studies, a pre-assembled electrode array was used. while the glue-based method can be used for implanting bipolar stimulating electrodes in the mouse brain  <cit> , its validity for the chronic brain stimulation in mice that is required for kindling has not been vigorously assessed. the aim of our present study is to address this issue. we thus further modified the glue-based implantation method and conducted hippocampal electrical kindling in adult mice. eeg discharges and behavioral seizures were consistently observed in kindled mice. importantly, no animal encountered infection in the implanted area or a loss of implanted electrodes after 4–6 months of repetitive stimulation/recording. we thus suggest that the glue-based method is reliable for chronic brain stimulation and high-quality eeg recording in mouse models.

RESULTS
long-term stability of implanted electrodes and animal behavioral outcomes
 <dig> adult male mice  underwent implantation of bipolar electrodes in bilateral hippocampal ca <dig> . these electrodes were secured onto the skull with a modified version of the screw-free and glue-based method  <cit> . electrode construction, assembly and mounting are schematically illustrated in figure 1a. the surgical procedure for electrode implantation is detailed in the methods. of the  <dig> animals implanted, we observed no evident behavioral abnormalities or spontaneous seizures in the absence of kindling stimulations. importantly, no animal encountered local infection in the implanted area or a loss of implanted electrodes after 4–6 months of repetitive stimulation and recordings.

the locations of implanted electrodes were initially verified by in vivo electrographic activities and later, histological assessments. in response to a single stimulation of the unilateral ca <dig> area, synaptic field potentials were reliably recorded from the contralateral ca <dig> area . the amplitudes of these field potentials increased with strong stimuli and reached a near plateau level at the stimulation intensity of ≥100 μa . no animals showed epileptic responses  following a single stimulation. in addition, the animals exhibited hippocampal “physiological” activities similar to those we and others have previously observed in mice  <cit> . specifically, ca <dig> recordings revealed rhythmic activities in the theta band  while the animals moved/explored local environments and irregular activities in the delta band  during immobility or sleep . the peak frequencies of hippocampal theta and delta activities were not significantly changed in kindled animals . as bilateral hippocampi are strongly interconnected via ventral and dorsal hippocampal fissures and the ca <dig> area is critical for the generation of hippocampal eeg rhythms and epileptiform activities  <cit> , the above data provide electrographic evidence for accurately implanted ca <dig> electrodes.

the locations of implanted ca <dig> electrodes were histologically confirmed in  <dig> animals. the tracks of implanted electrodes were recognizable in brain sections that corresponded to the desired stereotaxic coordinates . there was no evident loss of hippocampal neurons in the areas near the implanted electrodes or in adjacent brain sections . taken together these observations with the electrographic data above, we suggest that the screw-free and glue-based method is suitable for reliable implantations of bipolar stimulating/recording electrodes in adult mice.

seizure activities induced by hippocampal kindling
we used a standard kindling protocol in the present experiments  <cit> . the animals were considered fully kindled if they exhibited stage  <dig> behavioral seizures on  <dig> consecutive days. of  <dig> animals tested,  <dig> animals were fully kindled between  <dig> and  <dig> stimulations . two of the remaining  <dig> animals failed to reach a fully kindled state due to contamination of implanted electrodes  and the other two died spontaneously with underlying causes presently unknown.

in addition to consistent expression of the stage  <dig> behavioral seizures, the kindled animals showed significant changes in hippocampal electrographic activities. first, the evoked field potentials were greatly enhanced in the kindled animals as compared to their own baselines . such enhancements were recognizable at all stimulation intensities examined , suggesting an overall increase of hippocampal synaptic strength induced by the kindling process. secondly, the afterdischarges  were greatly increased in amplitude and duration in the kindled animals . finally, interictal-like hippocampal spikes, similar to those previously described  <cit> , were frequently observed in the kindled animals but were either absent or barely detectable in the same animals during baseline monitoring .

the behavioral seizures and ads observed from the kindled animals were sensitive to inhibition by midazolam, a fast acting benzodiazepine analogue recommended for the treatment of status epilepticus in clinical practice  <cit> . midazolam was administered via intra-peritoneal injections at a dose of 2 mg/kg, 15 minutes prior to the hippocampal stimulation. in the  <dig> kindled animals tested, ads and behavioral seizures were significantly attenuated following midazolam injections compared to those observed following the saline injections . together, the above observations suggest that a robust epileptic process is established in the kindled mice.

discussion
using a modified version of the screw-free and glue-based method, we implanted bipolar electrodes in bilateral hippocampal ca <dig> areas. in our experiments, no animal had adverse health-related events, spontaneous seizures, or abnormal behavior in the absence of electrical stimulation. there was no local infection in the implanted area and no loss of implanted electrodes after repetitive stimulations and recordings for 4–6 months. the kindled animals exhibited consistent stage  <dig> behavioral seizures, robust ads , and frequent interictal-like spikes . the ad and behavioral seizures were sensitive to suppression by midazolam . we thus suggest that the modified glue method is reliable for intracranial electrode implantation, chronic brain stimulation and high-quality eeg recordings in mice. specific technical issues of the modified method are discussed below.

in our previous studies  <cit> , we used a pre-constructed electrode array with a plastic base and applied glue between the plastic base and skull surface. because the glue bonds the plastic base strongly to the skull, the electrode array can be firmly mounted onto the skull without using anchoring screws. this method is convenient for implanting the electrode array with 2– <dig> monopolar electrodes, and allows stable intracranial eeg recordings in mouse models  <cit> . this method, however, is limited for implanting bipolar electrodes that are aimed to stimulate and/or record from spatially separated brain structures, since these electrodes are difficult to assemble in a compact array. in addition, due to the curvature of the skull, these electrodes need to be individually inserted into the brain for accurate positioning.

we thus used a modified approach in the present experiments. we first glued a plastic base onto the skull surface and drilled small holes through the plastic base and underneath skull. we then individually positioned bipolar electrodes in the brain and overlaid dental acrylic onto the plastic base covering the implanted electrodes. when hardened, the dental acrylic and the plastic base beneath the acrylic were strongly bonded; this secured the implanted electrodes . this modified approach is successful because dental acrylic denatures the plastic base before hardening and then bonds to the plastic base after hardened. the implanted electrodes are secured onto the skull when the dental acrylic has hardened. experience is needed, however, to promptly overlay the dental acrylic onto the plastic base, and to carefully cover the implanted electrode bases, before the acrylic hardens. we used a dental acrylic with hardening time of 6–9 minutes in the present experiments to have sufficient time to apply the dental acrylic.

in the present experiments, the pins used to connect electrodes were detached from standard ic sockets . we chose these pins because the ic sockets are widely available from commercial sources at a low cost. in addition, these pins are relatively strong and offer good contacts when connected. thus, although animals frequently push or press these pins against their cages or metal food racks, the implanted electrodes maintain integrity for chronic stimulation and/or recordings. care should be taken, however, when detaching these pins from wire sockets, to preserve a gasket-like piece in the female end of individual pins.

we implanted bipolar electrodes in bilateral hippocampal ca <dig> areas in the present experiments. this experimental design was used to test the possibility of stimulating two brain regions, and/or to increase the probability of electrical kindling in individual animals in the event that one bipolar electrode fails. the latter case was encountered in our initial experiments, likely due to electrode contamination that occurred during and/or after implantation. such a problem did not occur in our later experiments, by visual inspection of electrode tips under a microscope and measurements of electrode conductivity before implantation. therefore, a careful examination of the constructed electrodes prior to surgical implantation may greatly increase the success rate of chronic brain stimulation or recording.

several previous studies have used cyanoacrylate-type glue alone or together with dental acrylic to secure eeg recording as well as stimulating electrodes in mouse models  <cit> . however, the underlying procedures were not detailed. it is possible that the electrode implantation methods used in these previous studies and our present experiments may share some common features. by detailing the glue-based implantation method, our present study may support the previous studies and provide complementary technical aspects for further employment of this approach in mouse models.

CONCLUSIONS
we suggest that the glue-based and screw-free implantation method is reliable for chronic brain stimulation and high-quality eeg recordings in mice. the method may also be used, with some modifications, to implant other probes or infusion tubes in the mouse brain.

