BACKGROUND
the antineoplastic efficacy of treatment regimens with cisplatin  is hampered by its severe neurotoxic side-effects  <cit> , which frequently limit the continuation of treatment cycles. patients complain of distal paresthesis, loss of joint position resulting in sensory ataxia  <cit> . sural nerve biopsies showed degeneration of large myelinated axons with signs of segmental demyelinization and remyelinization  <cit> . electrophysiological findings revealed decreased sensory nerve conduction velocity and sap-amplitudes  <cit> .

the anti-tumor activity as well as the toxicity in physiological cells are mediated by the formation of specific cisplatin-dna adducts with guanine-guanine intrastrand cross-links 2d, representing the majority  of the dna platination products. accumulation and persistence of these dna lesions can interfere with replication or transcription and trigger apoptotic processes  <cit> . to counteract the deleterious effects of dna damage, mammalian cells are equipped with various dna repair mechanisms. the most efficient pathway to remove pt-gg adducts is nucleotide excision repair   <cit> .

in a mouse model of cisplatin-induced neurotoxicity we have recently shown that pt-gg adducts are not completely eliminated from the nuclear dna of distinct neuronal cell types  <cit> . repeated application of cisplatin resulted in an accumulation of persisting dna cross-links in drg neurons in parallel to decreased sensory nerve conduction velocities and their corresponding amplitudes. these effects were significantly accelerated in mice with a functional defect in ner  <cit> .

neuroprotective strategies might aim either at a reduced accumulation of drug-induced dna adducts or at improved survival or function of critical cells despite of their actual damage burden. there is increasing evidence for the protective properties of erythropoietin  in neuronal tissues  <cit> . such effects have been demonstrated both for intrinsic epo as well as for pharmacological application of rhepo  <cit> . erythropoietin is a pleiotropic cytokine mediating its hematopoietic effects via homodimeric erythropoietin receptors , which are expressed also in various neuronal tissues  <cit> . in the peripheral nervous system epo and epor were proven to be present in drg neurons, axons and schwann cells  <cit> . peripheral nerve injury led to augmented levels of both molecules  <cit>  and to the activation of an "axono-protective" pathway via epor ligation in neurons  <cit> .

by employing behavioral, electrophysiological and micro morphological techniques, we have investigated in our mouse model the potency of rhepo to inhibit the peripheral neuropathy during exposure to cisplatin. to further elucidate the underlying mechanism, we have analyzed, in particular, whether co-application of this cytokine interfered with the accumulation of cisplatin-dna adducts in drg neurons.

RESULTS
recombinant human erythropoietin extenuates cisplatin-induced neuropathy
repetitive applications of cisplatin  for  <dig> weeks resulted in a highly significant decrease of sensory nerve conduction velocity  by ~40% compared to control . in our experiment rhepo had a partial but highly significant protective effect despite values being different from controls . the corresponding h-amplitude was decelerated by ~60% compared to controls . in accordance with earlier findings  <cit>  the nerve conduction velocities for the motor function  were only slightly decelerated after a cumulated dose of  <dig> mg cisplatin/kg, however the corresponding m-amplitude was again significantly reduced compared to controls .

no renal damage following cisplatin treatment
as nephrotoxicity is a common side effect of cisplatin chemotherapy all mice were given i.p. injections of  <dig>  ml saline after each single dose of cisplatin. to further exclude that renal failure might modulate the nerve conductivity we determined parameters for kidney function in animals from all groups. significant differences were observed neither for the serum creatinine status nor for the creatinine clearance . this finding was confirmed by histopathological examinations of the kidneys showing no signs of renal damage and a normal morphology of glomerulae, microvillus and tubulus epithelium cells in all tissue samples examined.

mechanical sensitivity is improved by rhepo
in addition to decreased nerve conduction velocity and sensory loss, the peripheral neuropathy can paradoxically also be associated with allodynia as observed in patients and in animal systems  <cit> . to analyze whether the co-application of rhepo also modulates the somatic hypersensitivity we measured the withdrawal threshold after mechanical stimulation of the hind paw.

mice treated with a cumulative dose of  <dig> mg/kg cisplatin showed clear signs of somatic hypersensitivity, resulting in a significant reduction in withdrawal threshold as compared to controls . concomitant treatment with rhepo lacked statistical significance . mice treated with rhepo alone were not tested to minimize the amount of experimental animals since electrophysiological alterations were not observed.

accumulation of cisplatin-dna adducts in drg cells
the formation of drug-induced dna adducts is assumed to initially trigger apoptotic processes in drg cells finally resulting in sensory neuropathy  <cit> . employing a recently established monoclonal antibody-based immunoassay coupled with quantitative image analysis enabled us to measure structurally defined dna platination products in individual cell nuclei  <cit> . the method was previously shown to provide dose-dependent results in cisplatin-exposed cells as well as in various tissue sections from treated mice. the accumulation of unrepaired pt-gg lesions in drg neurons during repetitive exposure to cisplatin coincided with the onset of pnp in mice  <cit> . here we investigated the role of rhepo in modulating the rates of formation or repair of dna lesions and measured the adduct concentration in the nuclei of drg cells . after a cumulative dose of  <dig> mg cisplatin/kg the mean values of pt-gg levels in drg neurons did not exhibit significant differences  between mice treated with cisplatin alone or in combination with rhepo .

histopathological alterations
to examine whether the functional impairment of the sensory nerve system after repetitive treatment with cisplatin is associated with morphological alterations or sub-cellular damage in the pertaining tissues, we analyzed sections of the sciatic nerve by electron microscopy. various degenerative alterations were found in tissue sections from mice of the cisplatin group with abnormalities in myelinated fibers to be most prominent . the layers of myelin sheaths were split up. additionally, the diameter of mitochondria was increased in those axons and edema or lysis of christae was obvious . in both groups treated with rhepo the splitting of myelin sheaths was not observed . remarkably, in both groups treated with rhepo a significant increase of intact mitochondria was observed in the axoplasm compared to cisplatin- and control-group . in summary, i) morphologically damaged mitochondria were observed solely in neuronal cells of the cisplatin group and were absent in rhepo treated group and ii) in both groups treated with rhepo a significant increase of intact mitochondria was observed.

discussion and 
CONCLUSIONS
in the current study we found that rhepo ameliorated cisplatin-induced neuropathy in mice. as previously shown, we found no effect on electrophysiological parameters by rhepo alone  <cit> . the compound improved electrophysiological and morphological parameters, but did not interfere with the accumulation of pt-dna adducts in critical neuronal cells. our findings suggest that the neuroprotective effects are mediated by improving the cell resistance to side effects of cisplatin rather than by influencing the formation or repair rates of cisplatin-induced cross-links in the nuclear dna of drg cells.

the primary target structures in the nervous system are the drg cells and loss of function or cell apoptosis in drg cells are hallmarks of sensory neuropathy  <cit> . spectroscopic post mortem analysis of various neuronal tissues from patients treated with cisplatin revealed high concentrations of platinum in the drg  <cit> . more recent studies confirmed this by demonstrating augmented levels of platination products in the nuclear dna of drg neurons and satellite cells of cisplatin-exposed mice  <cit> . by analyzing two syngenic mouse strains  <cit>  either proficient or deficient for nucleotide excision repair , we showed that the severity of cisplatin-induced neuropathy was significantly correlated with the amount of persisting pt-dna adducts in drg cells. our findings suggest a possible relationship between the extent of dna platination and the degree of sensory impairment.

as the ner mechanism does not only take care of the integrity of the bulk nuclear dna but is even more efficient in removing damage from actively transcribed genes, it is still unclear whether persisting cisplatin adducts in that sub-fraction of the genome play a particular role in triggering functional loss or demise of drg cells. due to the excessive energy consumption of neuronal cells and the observed structural damage in mitochondria, drug-induced damage in the mitochondrial dna  has been suggested to cause the functional impairment. however, as the ner system efficiently protects mice from cisplatin-induced neuropathy by not acting on the mitochondrial genome  <cit> , it is very unlikely that accumulated platination products in mtdna play a major role in this process.

until now, the direct molecular link by which persisting intrastrand cross links in nuclear dna trigger the loss of mitochondrial integrity and the functional impairment in cisplatin-exposed neuronal cells is unclear. experiments with explanted, cisplatin-exposed drg neurons demonstrated the translocation of cytosolic bax protein to the mitochondrial membrane with consecutive release of cytochrome c from this organelle and the activation of caspase  <dig>  <cit> . in this model the initial sensor for dna platination products remains obscure as well as the putative mechanism by which epo exerts its protective effects.

another attractive model encompasses the mutual antagonistic regulation of apoptosis and autophagy in mammalian cells  <cit> . the balance between both mechanisms is determined amongst others by the minor cytosolic fraction of the high-mobility group  <dig> protein  which is a structurally conserved nuclear protein acting as an architectural chromatin binding factor. as hmgb <dig> has been shown to strongly bind to cisplatin-adducted nuclear dna  <cit> , it can be hypothesized that the level of free hmgb <dig> in the cytoplasm is diminished by such a "nuclear trapping" process and, thereby, autophagy is repressed, mitochondrial integrity is lost and apoptotic mechanisms are activated.

in our mouse model we have demonstrated that the sciatic nerve revealed severe structural damage of the myelin sheaths and the mitochondria in cisplatin treated mice. likewise, in streptozotocin-induced rats retinal neuronal cells show similar morphological changes in mitochondria that are diminished by rhepo  <cit> . parallel to mitochondrial protection rhepo saved the myelin sheaths from structural damage . a similar axon protective effect of rhepo had been suggested previously  <cit> . schwann cells were shown to abundantly express epo receptors and ligand binding led to the phosphorylation of the janus kinase- <dig>   <cit> , which is associated with anti-apoptotic processes. in a spinal nerve crush model rhepo protected drg neurons against neuronal apoptosis by enhanced jak <dig> phosphorylation  <cit> . proteins of the bcl- <dig> family, extracellular signal-regulated kinases and the phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase/akt seemed to be involved in epo-activated anti-apoptotic pathways as well  <cit> . binding of erythropoietin to its receptor leads to an activation of the phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase/akt pathway and nf-kb pathway via phosphorylation resulting in an up regulation of antiapoptotic proteins including xiap and c-iap <dig>  subsequently blocking the activation of specific cell-death proteases leading to apoptosis  <cit> . erythropoietin mediates its neuroprotective properties via cross-talk between jak <dig> and the nuclear factor-kb   <cit> . more recently, it was shown for neurons in the central nervous system that erythropoietin mediates regeneration via jak <dig> and the phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase/akt pathway  <cit> .

in summary, our study clearly demonstrated the high neuroprotective efficacy of rhepo in the peripheral nervous system with respect to neurophysiological functions and for the morphological integrity. additionally the somatic hypersensitivity showed tendency to improvement. the effect of rhepo is not mediated by attenuated dna adduct formation or accelerated repair. the mitochondrial protection and significantly increased frequency of the mitochondria might contribute to the neuroprotective property of rhepo. further clinical trials of erythropoietin in patients with peripheral neuropathy seem to be warranted in the future.

