BACKGROUND
biological networks are complex and may consist of hundreds of reactions that directly and indirectly affect each other. in order to understand the relationship between these reactions in detail, it is necessary to view the network as a whole  <cit> . computational models of metabolic networks have been developed in order to provide an overview of the biosynthetic processes involved in multiple pathways  <cit> . using such models, changes in the concentration of each metabolite corresponding to those that occur during normal and perturbed conditions can be simulated and used to determine how such changes may contribute to the entire biosynthetic process. the use of computational models of this type gives researchers an in-depth view of the problems that need to be solved and points to new strategies and alternatives.

various approaches can be taken to building and simulating a biological pathway model  <cit> . the most popular way of describing the behaviour of such a model is the ordinary differential equations  approach  <cit> . odes are typically derived from the michaelis-menten equation. they are then embedded into the model through script writing using programs such as simbiology in matlab  <cit>  and gepasi  <cit>  that were developed for building and editing such models. however, choosing the right approach to building a particular biological model relies on the type of biological pathway it is to represent. typically, there are three categories of biological pathways: gene regulatory networks  <cit> , metabolic pathways  <cit>  and signalling pathways  <cit> . the model presented here, which describes the biosynthesis of terpenoids via two independent pathways, one involving mevalonate  and one involving methylerythritol phosphate , falls into the metabolic pathways category.

we chose to model the terpenoid biosynthetic network using hybrid functional petri net with extension . this method allows easy modelling of complex biological information using a graphical approach and also allows various types of entities to be modelled together. the technique is derived from the traditional petri net theory that was first described by carl adam petri in his  <dig> phd dissertation  <cit> . hfpne is an extension of the hfpn architecture with extended features resulting from fusion of three extended petri net techniques, namely hybrid petri net , dynamic petri net  and functional petri net   <cit> . this technique is suitable for our modelling purposes for several reasons:  it is capable of utilising primitive types ;  it is able to treat more than one value in an entity; and  it is capable of treating object type for complicated bioprocesses. finally, hfpne introduces the new notion of a generic entity, as well as processing and enhancing simulation processes for this notion  <cit> .

hfpne-based biological models are built based on three basic entities called places, transitions and arcs; these are shown in figure  <dig> <cit> . in addition to possessing the ability to model continuous and discrete entities  concurrently as described in hdns, hfpne introduces generic entities that can hold values in the form of both real number and boolean strings. this feature enables on/off switches and parameter modulators to be created, which can then function as regulatory components in the model. these hfpne entities form a network and each is assigned with specific parameters that describe its behaviour, making this technique distinct from other petri net techniques  <cit> . the assignment of specific parameters to the hfpne entities allows more options to be customised in order to control the behaviour of the model. the parameters of the entities and the topology of their network are generated from biological facts that can be obtained through experimental procedures and by literature and database searches  <cit> . hfpne and other types of petri net techniques allow an intuitive approach to modelling; their ability to provide a visual modelling framework for development and simulation  <cit>  motivated us to use this technique in our modelling. hfpne architecture has been successfully applied to the modelling of processes such as vulval development  <cit>  and the operation of microrna regulatory networks  <cit>  in caenorhabditis elegans.

the biosynthesis of the universal precursors isopentenyl diphosphate  and dimethylallyl diphosphate  occurs by two independent pathways, the mevalonate  pathway and the methylerythritol phosphate  pathway. these two pathways are distinct in terms of organism, cellular localisation and products as well as in the metabolites and precursors involved. the classical pathway, the mev pathway, was thought to be the only pathway involved in terpenoid biosynthesis until the mep pathway was discovered in the early 90s  <cit> . the mev pathway usually operates in the cytoplasm of eukaryotic organisms such as gallus gallus and rattus norvegicus, whereas the mep pathway takes place in the plastids of eubacteria such as escherichia coli and streptomyces cerevisiae, as well as in the chloroplasts of plants  <cit> . the mep pathway is not found in animals or fungi, making it attractive for drug design studies because the enzymes in this pathway are using a specific substrate or generate a specific product and their function cannot be compensated for by another enzyme  <cit> . however, both pathways are operational in higher-level plants such as arabidopsis thaliana and helianthus annuus, as well as in selected eubacteria such as streptomyces sp.  <cit> .

the several classes of terpenoids  are organised according to the number of isoprene units in their backbone. isoprene units are five-carbon compounds that act as the building block for terpenoids. isoprenes  consist of one isoprene unit, monoterpenes  consist of two isoprene units, sesquiterpenes  consist of three isoprene units, diterpenes  consist of four isoprene units and the addition of more units will make up bigger terpene classes. the type of terpene produced also depends on the route of biosynthesis. the mev pathway is more likely to produce sesqui- and triterpenes, whereas the mep pathway produces mono- and diterpenes  <cit> .

the topological network of the pathways in the model was constructed based on reaction stoichiometry and enzymatic mechanisms of known enzymatic reactions in the terpene biosynthetic pathway. underlying biological information, including production and consumption rates, was used to generate the parameters of each hfpne element that govern the behaviour of the model during simulations. simulation and validation processes were then performed iteratively to produce an optimum system.

in this study, the possibility of discovering new alternatives for amplifying the production of terpenoids was the major goal. therefore, a complete understanding of how the compounds are synthesised is vital.

RESULTS
model overview
this model consists of two subnetworks, the mev and mep subnetworks, which represent the respective terpene biosynthetic pathways. the study focuses on the synthesis of two classes of terpenes, sesquiterpenoids  and monoterpenoids . these two pathways are placed in different compartments in the model to reflect their different subcellular locations . all of the metabolites involved in the pathways are represented using hfpne elements and are interconnected to each other based on their reaction stoichiometry and enzymatic mechanisms. the network consists of  <dig> continuous transitions representing various reactions and production/degradation processes;  <dig> places representing  <dig> metabolites; three on/off switches; and two parameter modulators. all metabolites were represented using continuous places, whereas generic places were used to create the regulatory components . all metabolites were represented using continuous places whereas generic places were used to create the regulatory components  .

the mev subnetwork consists of ten main enzymatic reactions and two feedback loops, whereas the mep subnetwork consists of nine main enzymatic reactions and a crosstalk mechanism that also involves the mev subnetwork. the  <dig> main enzymatic reactions participating in both subnetworks are shown in tables  <dig> and  <dig> and figure  <dig>  the behaviour of each reaction in the pathway is described using hfpne element parameters such as speed of transition formulae, initial place values and threshold arc values  <cit> . to simulate the behaviour of the model in normal and/or perturbed conditions, the entities representing on/off switches are adjusted. the initial values of these entities can be manipulated to create different conditions during the simulation, leading to a better understanding of the pathway and pointing to reactions to be further manipulated. all simulations carried out in this study are based on known information retrieved from literature and database searches.

a order of occurrence in the mev pathway

b main product that serves as the substrate for the next reaction in the mev pathway

a order of occurrence in the mep pathway

b main product that serves as the substrate for the next reaction in the mep pathway

based on the introduction of inhibitors and increments of metabolite concentration in both pathways, together with the regulation of the three switch entities, we here summarise five simulation conditions:

1) normal production of sesquiterpenes through the mev subnetwork, with the mep subnetwork and all inhibitory processes deactivated;

2) normal production of monoterpenes through the mep subnetwork, with the mev subnetwork and all inhibitory processes deactivated;

3) overexpression of atp in the fifth reaction of the mev subnetwork, with the mep subnetwork and other inhibitory processes deactivated;

4) overproduction of fpp in the ninth reaction of the mev subnetwork, with the mep subnetwork and other inhibitory processes deactivated;

5) establishment of a crosstalk mechanism with the mep subnetwork activated but with the mev subnetwork as well as other inhibitory processes deactivated.

simulation and validation
the simulation and validation processes, as well as the developmental stages of the model performed in this study, were carried out using cell illustrator https://cionline.hgc.jp. the model was validated against known data and information obtained from extensive literature and database searches. simulation results are returned as concentrations  versus petri net time  graphs. here, we discuss three of the five simulated conditions carried out in the study.

a. overproduction of atp
in the fifth reaction of the mev pathway, phosphomevalonate kinase  catalyses the production of mevalonate diphosphate  and adp from mevalonate-5-phosphate  and atp   <cit> . this reaction acts in a bi bi  sequential enzymatic mechanism with respect to the two substrates; mevp first binds to the free enzyme, followed by atp; the enzyme then releases the main product and finally adp  <cit> . studies have shown that high concentration of atp halts the production of mevpp and thus blocks the entire pathway from continuing to synthesise other intermediates. atp acts as a competitive inhibitor, binding to both sites of the free enzyme and forming a dead-end complex. this obstructs the binding of mevp to the enzyme and impedes the downstream reactions in the pathway. however, it was also shown that by increasing the concentration of mevp, the inhibitory effects of atp could be reversed. higher concentrations of mevp inhibit the synthesis of atp, lowering the concentration of atp to a manageable level. this allows the synthesis of mevpp, as well as downstream reactions, to resume   <cit> .

to simulate this mutually antagonist inhibitory feedback loop, the 'mev_switch' component is set to 'true' and the other two switches are set to 'false.' the parameter that controls the production of atp is adjusted to a higher value of  <dig> unit/pt from  <dig> unit/pt, resulting in overproduction of atp by 3-fold and activates the inhibitory arc. the threshold value for the inhibitory arc that suppresses the production of atp is set to  <dig> units to allow the inhibitory effect to take place.

b. overproduction of fpp
the second feedback loop identified in the mev pathway is a positive feedback mechanism. it is initiated when fpp levels become high enough to inhibit the catalytic activity of mevalonate kinase . mk catalyses the fourth reaction in the mev pathway, phosphorylation of mevalonate to produce mevalonate-5-phosphate  . the inhibitory activity of fpp halts the phosphorylation of mevalonate, thus slowing the downstream processes, including the production of fpp itself  <cit> . this will return fpp concentration to its normal level, releasing its inhibitory effect on mk .

to simulate this behaviour, the 'mev_switch' component is set to 'true' and the two other switches are set to 'false.' no other inhibitory processes except the inhibitory arc connecting fpp to the catalytic activity of mk are activated. the threshold value of the arc is set to  <dig> units from a higher value of  <dig> units to allow the inhibitory effect to take place. the simulation result shows an oscillatory behaviour of the concentrations of sesquiterpene, fpp and mevpp over time .

c. crosstalk
a crosstalk mechanism between the mep and mev subnetworks is established with the introduction of the inhibitor fosmidomycin. this inhibitor suppresses the catalytic activity of deoxyxylulose-5-phosphate reductoisomerase . suppression of dxr activity reduces the rates of the downstream reactions in the mep pathway, affecting the production of monoterpenes . however, the inhibition also triggers a flux of precursors  from the mep pathway to the mev pathway, resulting in increased sesquiterpene concentration despite the inactivation of the mev pathway   <cit> . this event is described in the model by assigning function values to the transition elements of the components that are involved in this mechanism. these functions are then regulated by a switch component called 'crossswitch.'

to simulate the crosstalk mechanism, the 'mev_switch' component is set to 'false.' the 'mep_switch' component is set to 'true' while the 'crossswitch' component is given a script value. the script value enables the activation of the 'fosmidomycin' component after  <dig> pt, thereby establishing the crosstalk mechanism. the simulation result successfully described oscillatory changes in the concentrations of the metabolites involved over time.

CONCLUSIONS
the simulation and validation processes performed using the model are consistent with known biological information and data. the intuitive approach introduced by the hfpne technique enables intricate modelling tasks to be viewed and solved in a graphical perspective. the model serves as a tool for better understanding the reactions involved in both pathways and how they affect each other. perturbations performed on the model provide insight into the effects of manipulation of a single reaction on the whole network and thus should facilitate both industrial and biomedical terpenoid bioengineering.

