BACKGROUND
amino acid substitution rates vary considerably among different proteins. although rapid progress has been made in determining the most important factors that shape protein evolution, the challenge remains to assess the relative importance of various variables, such as gene expression level, essentiality  and protein interactions  <cit> . one early study  <cit>  proposed a negative correlation between the severity of gene knockout effects and coding sequence evolution, which was dependent upon the notion that purifying selection should be more efficient for essential genes than those that are non-essential. a link has been discovered between protein expression levels and evolutionary rates  in both unicellular and multicellular organisms  <cit> .

in general, genes that are highly expressed preferentially use optimal codons to improve translational efficiency. the codon adaptation index , a measure of synonymous codon usage bias, has been widely used as a proxy for gene expression levels  <cit> . when cai values were used as a substitute for actual expression levels in yeast  <cit>  and bacteria  <cit> , only a small proportion of rate variation in protein evolution can be explained by ess. after replacing cai values with experimental data and controlling for gene expression levels, ess still had significant effects on protein ers, but did not appear to be a major determinant of protein evolution  <cit> . cai, expression level, and protein abundance can account for most of the variation in yeast protein ers  <cit> . keeping proteins from misfolding or misinteraction result in the slow evolution of highly expressed genes, and impose a general constraint on coding sequence evolution  <cit> . however, by using noiseless variables, protein interactions have explained more er variation than transcriptional abundance  <cit> . results from another study suggest that the molecular evolution of protein-coding genes is affected by both the context of extrinsic translational expression rates and intrinsic structural-functional constraints  <cit> .

despite the large number of studies evaluating the effects of various mechanisms during protein evolution, the relative importance of these factors compared with transcriptional abundance remains to be elucidated. in this study, we investigated the effects of various biological features on protein-coding sequence ers for  <dig> bacterial species. the following genomic variables: cai; experiment-based expression level ; ess; number of protein-protein associations ; mrna folding strength ; hydropathicity score ; aromaticity score ; protein length ; replication strand bias ; number of transmembrane helices ; and subcellular localization  have been summarized .

RESULTS
genomic feature correlates of protein er
in this study, potential correlation between er and  <dig> features  for  <dig> bacterial species  was investigated. we observed strong correlations among cai, el, ppa, slc, and er; and less strong but significant correlations among ess, slm, tmh, as and er. however, weak relationships were found among mfs, slp, slo, sle, slw, hs, len, rsb and er.

transcriptional abundance
a single variable linked to transcriptional abundance  was found to explain the dominance of observed variation in yeast ers  <cit> . cai and el are related to transcriptional abundance, while protein abundance is a result of the combined consequences of transcription and translation. recent studies observed that mfs was strong for more abundant proteins, resulting in stronger evolutionary constraints of more highly expressed proteins  <cit> . we used three variables  to highlight the impact of transcriptional abundance on er.

we used rnafold  to predict the secondary structure of rna and to compute the strength of mrna folding. a recent study reported that rnafold predicted mfs is moderately correlated with experimentally determined mfs  <cit> . furthermore, it was also shown that the correlation of the computationally predicted mfs and er was much weaker than that of the experimentally determined mfs and er. similarly, we also observed a low correlation between mfs predicted by rnafold and er in bacteria. however, in our study we found that cai and el were significantly linked to ers for most bacteria, depending on rank correlation coefficients . the top absolute coefficients were dominated  by cai-er or el-er correlations. the cai-er coefficient in escherichia coli was - <dig>  , which is greater than other coefficients. of these bacteria, helicobacter pylori showed no cai-er correlation ; this species was not subject to periods of competitive exponential growth  <cit> . as a result, there was a lack of translational selection related to codon usage. in an early study, codon selection for translation was observed to strongly correlate with growth rates  <cit> . we investigated the effects of growth on cai-er correlations, and found that weak correlations could be partially attributed to long-term bacterial generation times .

to further investigate the impact of translational selection on cai-er correlation, codon usage separation  was used to measure the strength of codon bias. a greater cus value indicated a stronger codon bias mediated by translational selection. we confirmed a correlation between cus and the cai-er coefficient . significantly different codon usage  was found between ribosomal proteins and other proteins in the e. coli genome ; however, this was not observed in the h. pylori genome . the degree to which transcriptional abundance influences ers correlated with the strength of translational selection.

it has been previously demonstrated that translational selection across species is also strongly affected by genomic gc content  <cit> . we found that cai-er coefficients significantly correlated with gc content . cai-er coefficients of gc-rich bacteria are significantly greater than those for at-rich bacteria, as translational selection is often absent in at-rich organisms  <cit> . it is also known that mrnas have a stronger secondary structure if there are more gc-rich codons  <cit> . moreover, there is stronger selection to improve translation efficiency for weak folding at translation-initiation sites of a gene in gc-rich hosts  <cit> . these gc-rich organisms preferentially use gc-rich optimal codons  <cit> . gc-rich genomes therefore show stronger translational selection compared with at-rich genomes. accordingly, we found that transcriptional abundance does not always influence ers as gc content varies across species.

a recent study found that cai, microarray-based el or sequencing-based el approaches for measuring transcriptional abundance affected the assessment of the importance of transcriptional abundance to er  <cit> . we found that bacteria, whose el-er correlation was weaker than the cai-er correlation, demonstrated greater cus . for those species strongly mediated by translational selection, cai as opposed to el likely better explains the variation of er. although rna sequencing  data could be more accurate than microarray data, there is currently little rna-seq data available for most bacterial species. in this study, we derived el from rna-seq data for e. coli, and used microarray data for other bacterial species. although the sequencing-based el-er correlation is weaker than the cai-er correlation in e. coli, it is stronger than other correlations. with the development of rna-seq experiments, we believe that the assessment of el-er correlations could be more accurate, and the impact of el on er could be stronger in certain bacterial species. to compensate for the inadequacy of each single variable to represent expression levels, we used cai, el and mfs to describe the impact of transcriptional abundance on ers.

functional importance
in an earlier study, it was proposed that ess and protein interactions were negatively correlated with coding sequence ers because of the constraints of important physical functions  <cit> . we used many types of protein associations , not only physical protein interactions , which were directly extracted from the string database. as expected, significant correlations between ppa/ess and ers were found for almost all the bacteria we investigated in our study. the strength of ppa-er correlations was even greater than that of cai-er/el-er correlations in six organisms: acinetobacter adp1; francisella novicida; h. pylori; mycoplasma genitalium; mycoplasma pulmonis; and streptococcus sanguinis. in f. novicida, the ess-er correlation was also larger than that for cai/el-er. the function of a gene is indeed an important driving force in bacterial protein evolution.

variation in subcellular localization
most cellular activities, including many metabolic pathways and processes, occur within the slc. in this study, we observed significant negative correlations between slc and er. for example, the correlation coefficient for caulobacter crescentus was - <dig>  . the slm surrounds the cytoplasm of living cells, and positive correlations between slm and er were also observed in our study. the cell membrane functions as a selective filter, allowing molecules either to be pumped across the membrane by transmembrane transporters, or to be diffused through protein channels. these transmembrane proteins are usually specific; as a consequence, slm proteins are fast-evolving and well adapted. we also found, as expected, that tmh positively correlated with bacterial protein ers. the positive correlations are relatively weak between other subcellular localizations  and the ers of proteins. secreted proteins located in slo/sle for proteobacteria and slw/sle for firmicutes were found to rapidly evolve  <cit> . this could be a potential explanation of why slw, slo and sle rapidly evolve.

limitations of aromatic amino acids
to manufacture proteins, microorganisms must synthesize their aromatic amino acids via the shikimate pathway. these amino acids have a limited source that impacts upon the rate at which translation errors can be corrected, and the maintenance of translation efficiency and accuracy. therefore, the adoption of aromatic amino acids in functional or abundant proteins is not encouraged. in this study, we found that slowly evolving proteins tend to avoid adopting aromatic amino acids. in most of the investigated bacteria, as positively and significantly correlated with er .

head-on conflict
in many bacteria, genes tend to be encoded on the leading strand. the likelihood of a gene being found on the leading strand was weakly, but significantly, associated with er in most of the studied bacteria. as an example, rsb of bacillus subtilis, whose genome contains over 70% leading proteins, was significantly and positively correlated with er . transcription and replication occur simultaneously in bacterial cells  <cit> . replication progresses much faster than transcription, and inevitable conflicts occur between dna and rna polymerases when they bind to the same template. co-directional collisions occur when the leading strand is the template for transcription, resulting in head-on collisions taking place when the lagging strand is the template. head-on collisions have particularly deleterious effects, as replication forks may be arrested and transcription slowed. over the course of evolution, transcripts are more likely to be retained if they are on the leading strand, which explains why bacterial genes on the leading strand evolve more slowly than those on the lagging strand.

multiple factors cooperatively dominate er
in both e. coli and b. subtilis, cai has been identified as the most important driving force constraining ers, through the use of partial correlation and multivariate regression analyses  <cit> . drummond et al. first used principal component regression  analysis, and explained the dominant proportion of variation in yeast protein ers by transcriptional abundance  <cit> . this analysis circumvents the problems of partial correlation and multivariate regression, as all principal components are orthogonal and independent. therefore, it was useful to determine the independent contributions  of biological features to yeast ers  <cit> . in contrast to the situation reported for yeast, e. coli and b. subtilis <cit> , our pcr results suggest that the contributions of multiple factors are comparable for the determination of bacterial protein evolution . we found that staphylococcus aureus was strongly influenced by codon bias , with ess, cai, el, ppa, slm, tmh and hs representing  <dig> ,  <dig> ,  <dig> ,  <dig> ,  <dig> ,  <dig>  and  <dig> % of the total rate variation, respectively. these variables are comparable and account for  <dig> % of the total variation. in other words, cai and el lose their dominance in explaining bacterial protein evolution, even in bacterial genomes with strong codon bias. of these investigated factors, ess, cai, el, ppa, slm, thm and hs each represent over 8% of the total variation in  <dig> ,  <dig> ,  <dig> ,  <dig> ,  <dig> ,  <dig>  and  <dig> , respectively, of bacterial genomes.

based on correspondence analysis  results, we observed the universal rule that functional factors  and transcriptional abundance  were roughly grouped together, opposing the ers in the second principal component  . evolutionary constraints on highly transcribed proteins might prevent misfolding  <cit>  or misinteraction  <cit> . this can hamper functionality and even potentially produce a large quantity of toxic proteins. in contrast, constraints on essential or high connectivity genes possibly operate to avoid the abrogation of important physiological functions. the need for translational accuracy and robustness can help explain the selection exerted on ess, ppa, cai, and el. in a principal component plot obtained for yeast, ess and ppi were distant from cai and el  <cit> . this suggests a close link between functional factors and transcriptional abundance in some bacteria that is probably dependent on er in some way.

in all the bacterial species we investigated, slm, tmh and hs were found to cooperatively affect er . these three factors have been grouped in principal component plots . membrane protein transport takes place via helix-dependent protein channels embedded in cell membranes, because of their hydrophobic structure. the need to maintain transmembrane protein function may help explain the relationship among slm, tmh, and hs.

different forces drive er in different species
according to pcr analysis, factors associated with transcriptional abundance , important functionality  and transmembrane protein function  were the main contributors  to protein er variation in over 50% of bacterial species we studied. transcriptional abundance is the most dominant factor in yeast  <cit> , but not in mice  <cit>  or bacteria . the extent to which transcriptional abundance affects ers correlates with the strength of codon bias. our pcr analysis indicated multiple factors contribute to the rate of protein evolution in bacteria. we also found that ppa was a common important contributor to bacterial evolution, with greater effects than cai/el. our results were basically identical to those presented by plotkin and fraser  <cit> -ppi appears to be responsible for most of the er variation in yeast. the deleterious effects of protein misinteractions can affect the optimal protein concentrations and shape functional interaction networks  <cit> . therefore there is a need to maintain proper interactions among high connectivity proteins as it constrains their evolution. although ess does not contribute strongly to yeast ers, it is still an important factor in determining bacterial protein evolution. our findings suggest that various forces drive protein sequence evolution in different species.

CONCLUSIONS
we have uncovered new relationships among ers in bacterial genomes related to protein subcellular localization, transmembrane helices, hydropathicity, aromaticity, and replication strand localization. er had a significant negative correlation with slc, but a significant positive correlation with slm. because of the effects of tmh and hs on slm, these two variables were also found to positively, although relatively weakly, correlate with bacterial protein ers. the impact of bacterial slm/tmh/hs and slc on er is independent of functional importance and transcriptional abundance. this is consistent with results from a recent study in mammalian proteins  <cit> . we also found that proteins that evolved slowly in bacterial genomes tended to avoid adopting aromatic amino acids. additionally, bacterial genes on the leading strand evolved more slowly than those with genes on the lagging strand. we investigated the independent contributions of biological features to er, and found that the dominant effect of transcriptional abundance on er is absent in bacteria. factors that retain important functionality , maintain cell membrane function  and avoid a build-up of toxic molecules caused by misfolding or misinteraction  influence the ers of bacterial proteins. if more rna-seq data are available in the future, the correlation of el-er could be found to be stronger in certain bacterial species than reported here. however, the influences of ppa, ess, slm, tmh, and hs on er are comparable with the impact of transcriptional abundance on er in most bacteria.

