BACKGROUND
the catfish order siluriformes is a very diverse natural group that occurs primarily in freshwater. catfishes are widespread and their distribution encompasses all continents, even antarctica, as evidenced by eocene-oligocene fossils  <cit> . the order includes  <dig> extant families and over  <dig> valid species plus an estimated ~ <dig> undescribed species  <cit> . several morphological and molecular studies have addressed the relationships among catfish families  and recent evidence indicates that large basal clades are restricted to particular continental masses, suggesting a long history of intercontinental isolation  <cit> . thus, catfishes offer an exceptional opportunity for studying evolutionary and biogeographic trends. the fossil record of siluriformes is relatively well represented and includes material from every continent  <cit> . although the earliest fossils date back to the late campanian-early maastrichtian , molecular clocks predict a much older origin for siluriformes .

while most catfishes inhabit freshwater, only two families are well represented in marine environments: the plotosidae from the indo-west pacific and the ariidae. the ariidae, or sea catfishes, is the only siluriform group with a global distribution that includes over  <dig> species occurring in warm-temperate to tropical regions. although most members of the family live in brackish and marine waters, several species occur in freshwater as well. sea catfish distributions include the continental margins of the eastern pacific and the western atlantic , the eastern atlantic , and the indo-west pacific . ariids play an important role in tropical fisheries, with many species having high economic value due to their large size, local abundance, and flesh quality. some species have been recently listed as vulnerable on the iucn red list  <cit> .

members of the ariidae exhibit a specialized reproductive mode: male mouthbrooding of eggs and embryos. this condition is absent in nearly all other catfishes, the sole exception being the biparental mouthbrooding claroteid phyllonemus typus  <cit> . oral incubation means ariids have limited dispersal capabilities and subsequent high level of species endemism, which has ultimately resulted in continentally restricted distributions. in fact, ariids are absent from the pacific plate  <cit> , the nonmarginal portion of the antilles, and other oceanic islands of recent volcanic origin  <cit> . restriction of most species to the continental shelves make ariids an exceptional marine fish group to infer historical biogeography scenarios . such studies require a conceptual framework derived from robust phylogenetic hypotheses.

recent interfamilial phylogenies based on morphological  <cit>  and molecular  <cit>  data have placed the malagasy family anchariidae as sister to the ariidae and both families are ascribed in the superfamily arioidea within the suborder siluroidei  <cit> . the monophyly of the ariidae has not been seriously questioned and is strongly supported on both molecular and morphological grounds  <cit> . the group is divided into two subfamilies, the monogeneric galeichthyinae  and the ariinae   <cit> . although the basal arioid clades are well defined, much controversy has arisen regarding the phylogeny and classification of ariid taxa, particularly within the diverse ariinae.

recent studies that have attempted to elucidate relationships among ariids have mostly focused on taxa from restricted geographic areas and comprehensive phylogenies are still missing. using anatomical data, kailola  <cit>  inferred relationships for  <dig> old world and eight new world species  and provided a revised classification accepting  <dig> genera. based on combined evidence from mitochondrial and nuclear sequence data in addition to morphological characters , betancur-r. et al.  <cit>  hypothesized relationships for  <dig> new world and three old world species  and provided a revised classification for new world taxa only, validating eight genera. although the studies by kailola and betancur-r. et al. dealt with different taxon-sampling schemes, their resulting topologies are highly incongruent regarding the position of galeichthys and the indo-pacific ketengus typus and cryptarius truncatus . in his unpublished doctoral dissertation, a. p. marceniuk inferred phylogenetic relationships for  <dig> ariid species from different biogeographic provinces using morphological characters  <cit> . following the results derived from this work, marceniuk and menezes  <cit>  presented the most inclusive taxonomy for the ariidae to date, recognizing  <dig> genera. more recently, betancur-r. and armbruster  <cit>  inferred molecular phylogenies for the four species of galeichthyines showing that the eastern pacific species  is nested within a clade comprising the remaining three african species, and that the timing of intercontinental divergence occurred from mid to late miocene, likely implying transoceanic dispersal. as will be discussed below, not only the molecular and the anatomical hypotheses differ markedly, but also the two morphological classifications show considerable disagreement.

this study expands previous molecular phylogenies on new world ariids and galeichthyines using mitochondrial sequences  and a nuclear marker  to cover a wide spectrum of taxa from different biogeographic provinces. in addition to the  <dig> ariid species examined previously  <cit> , new molecular data was obtained for  <dig> other species. these data were utilized for three main purposes:  hypothesize ariid relationships via maximum parsimony , maximum likelihood , and bayesian inference  reconstruction criteria;  discuss morphological phylogenies and current classifications in the light of molecular phylogenies; and  infer historical biogeography scenarios for the ariinae using cladistic and chronological methods. this study provides the most inclusive phylogeny of ariid taxa to date and a resource for future classifications and other comparative studies in the family.

RESULTS
dataset attributes
all sequences obtained during this and previous studies  <cit>  are available from genbank under accession numbers listed in additional file  <dig>  the final alignment of the mitochondrial protein coding genes included  <dig> bp for partial cyt b and  <dig> bp for atpase 8/ <dig> . indels were only observed in atpase  <dig>  where cinetodus carinatus, ten species of notarius , and 'sciades'sagor lacked a codon  <dig>   <dig>  and  <dig> bases downstream of the start codon, respectively. for atpase  <dig>  three initiation codons were observed: uug in s. sagor and the species of the subgenus cathorops, gug in notarius planiceps, notarius aff. planiceps, and n. lentiginosus, and the typical aug in the remaining taxa. likewise, n. lentiginosus presented uug instead of aug in atpase  <dig>  the start codons gug and uug have been shown to be less efficient variants of aug in some genes  <cit> . in addition to the differences observed in notarius lentiginosus and s. sagor at the amino acid level, both species revealed the highest variation in substitution rates of mtdna among ariid taxa . it is noteworthy that no ambiguous chromatogram readings, stop codons or frameshifts were observed in these two species, suggesting that these sequences are likely not pseudogenes.

partial ribosomal 12s and 16s sequences ranged in size from  <dig> to  <dig> bp and  <dig> to  <dig> bp, with final alignment lengths of  <dig> and  <dig> bp, respectively. in the final alignments,  <dig> sites of 12s and  <dig> sites of 16s were excluded due to ambiguous positional homology. the mitochondrial dataset assembled included  <dig> terminal taxa  and  <dig> sites. the dataset had missing data for notarius luniscutis in atpase 8/ <dig>  and for cathorops manglarensis  and n. lentiginosus  in 16s . many other taxa also had missing data on sequence ends due to noisy chromatogram reads. considering only arioid taxa, the mitochondrial alignment contained  <dig>  variable sites and  <dig>  parsimony-informative sites, respectively.

the nuclear rag <dig> gene has been shown to have low variability within the ariidae  <cit> , thus nuclear sequences were obtained only from major lineages  representing all biogeographic provinces and sampled genera . due to amplicon-length variation from different primer combinations or noisy chromatogram endings, in the nuclear rag <dig> alignment not all ingroup taxa had the same sequence length, varying from  <dig> to  <dig> bp; outgroups had  <dig> bp . no insertions or deletions were observed in the rag <dig> dataset. the number of variable and parsimony-informative sites for the ingroup in the rag <dig> dataset were  <dig>  and  <dig> , respectively. in addition to the mitochondrial and nuclear partitions, a combined dataset including  <dig> common taxa was assembled .

phylogenetic inference
optimality results obtained under different analyses and model testing on the three data partitions are summarized in table  <dig>  among the four reconstruction methods conducted  on the mitochondrial dataset, bi analysis resulted in the least resolved tree. the bi consensus is shown in figure 3; congruent nodes recovered under other methods are indicated by thicker lines. as found in previous molecular studies  <cit> , the superfamily arioidea sensu sullivan et al. was recovered as monophyletic, with the anchariidae sister to the ariidae . the subfamilial divisions within the ariidae  were fully congruent among different methods and well supported. the relationships within the galeichthyinae and among new world ariine genera are basically identical to those reported in previous molecular studies  <cit>  . the new finding is that the genus genidens from the western atlantic  was monophyletic and sister to the monotypic occidentarius from the eastern pacific .

ra, random addition

*genthreshfortopoterm command

**rapid bootstrapping algorithm via automatic termination

delimitations of new world genera  were congruent with the mitochondrial topologies; however, seven old word genera  were found to be non-monophyletic . in general, the relationships among basal ariine taxa were poorly resolved or supported, with short internodes . while new world taxa were not monophyletic in any of the analyses, old world ariines were grouped into a well-supported clade . the basal nodes linking some new world genera  to the old world clade were often incongruent among different reconstruction criteria and poorly supported . within the old world clade, taxa were generally grouped into well-defined biogeographic assemblages . overall inshore species conform to major gondwanan provinces . delimitations and nodal supports for such groups were high, except for the india-se asia assemblage that was often recovered as non-monophyletic with the madagascar species  nested within. offshore taxa found widely distributed along indo-west pacific shelves fell into three categories: the genera netuma  and plicofollis , and brustiarius proximus . resolution among old world biogeographic clades was poor, except for the sister-relationship between australia-new guinea and plicofollis , which was fully congruent and well supported.

the india-se group comprised two well-supported basal clades, with one including 'sciades' sagor, cephalocassis melanochir, and hemiarius stormii  and other grouping the remaining taxa . the latter clade was largely unresolved. the relationships within netuma, carlarius, and plicofollis were entirely resolved with high nodal support. there was poor resolution within the australia-new guinea assemblage , except for the following well supported-clades: brustiarius proximus + amissidens hainesi ; neoarius ; node r : node s  + node t )); pachyula crassilabris + doiichthys novaeguineae + nedystoma dayi ; and cochlefelis .

the congruences between methods and data partitions  are summarized in additional file  <dig>  there was strong phylogenetic signal in the mitochondrial dataset, often yielding well-resolved and well-supported nodes. the weak signal and the small number of characters in the nuclear rag <dig> dataset  resulted in the greatest number of incongruent nodes . although using a more reduced taxon-sampling scheme, the combined partition yielded highly congruent topologies as compared to the mitochondrial topologies. the major difference is that the combined scheme recovered the india-se asia group as monophyletic in all topologies , but failed to place the madagascar species sister to the india-se asia clade. incongruence between mitochondrial and nuclear datasets may be alternatively due to gene-tree/species-tree conflicts  <cit> . thus, given this situation, further exploration of ariid phylogeny should emphasize the inclusion of additional, independent nuclear markers.

the lack of resolution and short internodes evidenced among basal ariine lineages is consistent with the reconstructions conducted on the mitochondrial, nuclear, and combined partitions. given that mitochondrial and nuclear markers contain different levels of signal  <cit> , this pattern may be the result of rapid ariine radiations; however, further analyses are required to test this hypothesis .

morphological hypotheses, classifications, and alpha taxonomy
the morphological phylogeny hypothesized by kailola  differs substantially from molecular topologies . of the  <dig> possible nodes common to both datasets , only eight clades are congruent . further mp and ml reconstructions constraining kailola's topology into the mitochondrial dataset yielded scores significantly worse than those obtained under unconstrained searches . some of the most striking differences between the two hypotheses are the nested position of galeichthys, the basal position and non-monophyly of old world taxa, and the polyphyly of genidens in kailola's cladogram. thus, kailola's topology does not support the galeichthyinae and ariinae as basal subfamilial divisions. remarkably, unlike the molecular topologies, there are no distinguishable biogeographic patterns in the morphological hypothesis as ariine taxa from different regions appear randomly scattered across the tree. based on hennig's  <cit>  principle of reciprocal illumination, congruence between biogeography and phylogeny provides a logical framework to favor the molecular over the morphological hypothesis.

results obtained with templeton and shimodaira-hasegawa  tests of topology congruence between trees constrained under the morphological hypotheses and unconstrained trees . hypothesis testing was performed on kailola's phylogeny  <cit>   and those genera defined by kailola  <cit>  and marceniuk and menezes  <cit>  that were recovered as non-monophyletic . for generic comparisons, only one node was constrained. taxa in constrained clade include common species only; however, for some comparisons the number of taxa with enforced monophyly is greater than the number of taxa assigned to a particular genus in previous studies due to the greater number of species recognized here .

*in  <dig> out of  <dig> comparisons p value <  <dig> 

conflicts in phylogenetic hypotheses also have profound implications on the classification. despite their economic importance, the taxonomy of the ariidae has for a long time remained in a chaotic state and is probably the most unresolved among catfish families  <cit> . this has caused a vast nomenclatural instability with species commonly jumping from one genus to another. even the three recent studies that have addressed the classification of ariids reveal considerable disagreement  <cit> . the results presented here also differ from previous classifications in several aspects.

despite the more restricted taxon sampling, the previous classification of new world taxa based on combined molecular and morphological characters  <cit>  is fully congruent with current topologies. this study also validates the status and confirms monophyly of the new world genus genidens . the major conflicts concern the morphology-based taxonomies as ten genera recognized by kailola  <cit>  and nine by marceniuk and menezes  <cit>   were not monophyletic in any of the reconstructions conducted on the mitochondrial partition . furthermore, templeton and sh tests constraining each non-monophyletic genus into the mitochondrial dataset identified strong departures from congruence in  <dig>  out of the  <dig> comparisons . similar results were also obtained on reconstructions performed on single-gene partitions .

the definition and delimitation of most conflicting genera not only differ markedly among the two anatomical studies, but also have no logical biogeographical circumscriptions. for instance, the genera ariopsis, aspistor, and hemiarius sensu kailola and sciades sensu marceniuk and menezes are ubiquitous and comprise numerous unrelated species/clades . likewise, hexanematichthys and nemapteryx sensu kailola both include species that belong either in the india-se asia or the australia-new guinea clades. interestingly, hexanematichthys sensu kailola provides a remarkable example of morphological convergence . as defined by kailola, hexanematichthys includes two species  and is diagnosed by the presence of a broad and depressed head, a short and broad supraoccipital process, a large butterfly-shaped nuchal plate, and a dark peritoneum, among other features  <cit>  . while there is an extraordinary similarity between the neurocrania  of s. sagor and s. mastersi  and the morphological phylogeny places the two species as sister taxa , the monophyly of hexanematichthys is not supported by the molecular data . cephalocassis  and cinetodus  are additional examples of genera that are reasonably well established morphologically , but incongruent on a molecular basis . noteworthy, cephalocassis melanochir and c. borneensis are two of the eight purely freshwater species found in se asia. both species share several features, including a fenestra between the supraoccipital, the pterotic, and the sphenotic, unique among ariids . their morphological similarity may be the result of convergence associated with the transitions between marine and freshwaters.

the genus arius has been one of the major problems concerning ariid systematics. as traditionally recognized, arius is the largest and most widespread genus in the family . all recent studies  <cit>  concur that the genus includes considerably fewer species than was previously accepted  and, unlike prior classifications, no new world species are currently placed in arius. although arius sensu kailola was not recovered as monophyletic, it is restricted to the india-se asia province and the topology with enforced monophyly was not rejected by the mitochondrial data. similarly, the monophyly of arius sensu marceniuk and menezes is not rejected by the topological tests, but only if the malagasy species  is excluded . from a phylogenetic standpoint, the present results also suggest that the genera netuma and sciades sensu kailola and brustiarius, cochlefelis, neoarius, and potamosilurus sensu marceniuk and menezes each include only a few species incorrectly assigned to them.

in the light of the classification adopted for this study , notarius , cathorops, arius, and plicofollis are among the most species-rich genera in the family. delimitation of the neotropical notarius sensu marceniuk and menezes is similar to that of betancur-r. et al., except that marceniuk and menezes placed n. rugispinis and n. phrygiatus in their new genus amphiarius, and n. luniscutis and n. quadriscutis in aspistor. validating amphiarius and aspistor would render notarius paraphyletic . aspistor was also recognized by kailola but with a different circumscription, including seven species of notarius sensu betancur-r. plus hemiarius hardenbergi  and occidentarius platypogon. the monophyly of notarius sensu marceniuk and aspistor sensu kailola are not supported by the molecular evidence . a consensus solution for notarius would be providing subgeneric assignments.

molecular evidence also brings new perspectives at the alpha taxonomy level. while recent taxonomic check lists estimate that the number of valid ariid species range from  <dig> to  <dig> , there are  <dig> species designated as inquirendae in the family , the greatest number within the order siluriformes  <cit> . the major difficulties in undertaking a comprehensive taxonomic study of the ariidae are the overall similarity in external morphology, the widespread distribution of the group coupled with the high degree of species endemism, and the poor representation of species diversity in museums . although estimating the total number of valid species is a challenging task, examination of wide variety of taxa on both mitochondrial and/or morphological grounds enabled identification of  <dig> putative undescribed/unrecognized species . the alpha taxonomy of the ariidae is in need of revision.

despite the recent efforts to clarify ariid taxonomy  <cit> , these results show that it is still far from settled. this instability prevents an adequate management of the fisheries, making ariids a difficult group for conservational purposes. a total evidence approach based on combined morphological and molecular data would provide a suitable framework to redefine genera and to reassess the classification of the ariidae. this issue will be addressed elsewhere.

historical biogeography of the ariinae
-the evolutionary history of ariines from a topological perspective
presently, ariid distribution encompasses the new world, africa, madagascar, india-se asia, and the sahul continent ; however, as evidenced by the fossil record, the group also ranged into europe until the late miocene. the current poor representation of catfishes in europe has been attributed to extinctions caused by pleistocene glaciations  <cit> . while galeichthyines are restricted to subtropical waters in southern africa and southwestern south america, sea catfishes owe their broad distribution to ariines. the disjunct biogeography of galeichthyines was recently addressed  <cit> , thus this section focuses on ariines only.

the presence of ariines on major landmasses of the southern hemisphere suggests  a gondwanan vicariance . to further test this hypothesis, the biogeography of the ariinae was approached under topological and chronological frameworks. area cladograms for gondwana  and ariine taxa , and general area cladograms derived from various fish groups are shown in figure  <dig>  different reconstruction methods yielded different topologies , thus ariine area cladograms were derived from mp  and ml  trees . the reconstructions indicate that new world ariines are basal and paraphyletic while old world taxa form a nested clade further subdivided into groups endemic to major areas .

in addition to the marked biogeographic associations, the old world clade includes two subclades with widespread indo-west pacific distributions . likewise, although brustiarius proximus is nested within the australia-new guinea clade, its range extends into se asia . diva analyses indicate that the presence of b. proximus in se asia is most parsimoniously the result of dispersal from australia-new guinea. thus, for component analyses, b. proximus is treated as a sahul taxon. inferring the biogeographic history of the widespread netuma and plicofollis is less straightforward because of ambiguous relationships among major old world clades . according to diva optimizations on the mitochondrial dataset , the distribution of the common plicofollis ancestor was either india-se asia or the composite india-se asia/australia-new guinea, whereas the ancestral distribution of netuma was india-se asia/australia-new guinea.

overall, the major differences between ariine  and geological area cladograms  are the absence of ariine endemics from sulawesi and the seychelles and the lack of a close relationship between new world and african taxa. however, further analyses constraining the monophyly of the new world node g  plus the african genus carlarius, yielded scores similar to those obtained under unconstrained searches . similarly, while the placement of australia-new guinea, india-se asia, and madagascar is variable among different reconstructions  and the predicted area relationship based on the gondwanan model was not recovered , additional analyses enforcing the australia-new guinea +  topology are not statistically rejected by the data .

component analyses on both mp and ml topologies derived identical general area cladograms . the general fish area cladogram based on ariines, cichlids, aplocheiloid killifishes, and rainbowfishes  is largely congruent with sparks and smith's  <cit>  general area cladogram derived from the latter three groups only  and the geological area cladogram . the main difference is the truncated placement of australia-new guinea and india-se asia .

although ariines are predominantly marine and therefore potentially capable of dispersing along contiguous intercontinental shelves , the fact that most taxa with limited dispersal capabilities were grouped into major gondwanan clades and that relationships among these clades largely coincide  with the geological history of the super continent, suggest vicariance via continental drift. while restricted distributions are the generalized condition within the ariinae, widespread indo-west pacific taxa are derived from three independent acquisitions . if dispersal is historically the major force driving ariine biogeography, no provincial associations would be observed. as pointed out by sparks and smith  <cit>  for cichlids, a close relationship between african and malagasy taxa across the mozambique canal is expected under a dispersalist model. however, the reconstructions presented here offer no evidence for afro-malagasy clades . similarly, the sharp faunal division across wallace's line  of most  ariine taxa disfavors dispersal acting as a homogenizing force. the collision of the india subcontinent into asia  <dig> mya  <cit>  permitted faunal dispersal to se asia but not to the australia-new guinea plate due to deep oceanic barriers preventing faunal exchange across wallace's line . remarkably, with the exception being the basal node linking new and old world ariines , the topologies do not show any transpacific or transatlantic nested clades within the ariinae, supporting the idea that sea catfishes have limited transoceanic dispersal capability . as sparks and smith  <cit>  argued, not only freshwater fishes in the primary division but also continentally restricted marine groups may be of great value for inferring ancient land connections.

the presence of ariines in non-gondwanan areas such as mesoamerica/north america and europe  was probably the result of contiguous intercontinental marine dispersal from south america and perhaps africa, respectively. in support for this scenario, diva analyses derived from the mitochondrial dataset  indicates south america as center of origin for new world taxa. given that extant ariids are absent from europe  further morphological studies including european fossils are required to test dispersal into this continent.

-the timing of ariine diversification in the context of gondwanan vicariance
recent studies have shown a variety of floral and faunal taxa whose disjunct distributions in the southern hemisphere, previously associated with gondwanan vicariance, likely represent instances of transoceanic dispersal. particularly, molecular dating techniques have revealed divergence times that are too young to be explained by continental-drift vicariance. remarkable examples of recent transoceanic dispersal include geckos, monkeys, lemurs, carnivores, chameleons, frogs, insects, and several angiosperm families, among others . contemporary advocates of dispersal even argue that vicariance should be revaluated as the most likely a priori assumption in biogeography . accordingly, it seems appropriate to test the gondwanan hypothesis of ariine diversification in a chronological framework.

the final separation of south america and africa is dated to be as recent as  <dig> mya  <cit> , madagascar and india separated at about 95- <dig> mya  <cit> , and australia and antarctica initiated rifting  <dig> mya but remained connected until at least  <dig> mya  <cit> . while the temporal context for the separation of india-madagascar from the major gondwanan landmass is more controversial  <cit> , it has been suggested that the kerguelen plateau served as a corridor allowing exchange of terrestrial and freshwater faunas between india-madagascar and australia via antarctica until about  <dig> mya  <cit> . before the eocene, antarctica had a temperate climate and included fish fauna found at lower latitudes today  <cit> , such as catfishes reported from the eocene/oligocene boundary  <cit> . likewise, after the fragmentation of gondwana, shallow marine connections between major landmasses might have remained open until ~ <dig> mya  or later permitting exchange of continentally-restricted marine taxa such as ariines.

under the gondwanan model a mesozoic origin of major ariine clades is predicted. previous studies addressing the timing of catfish diversification provide no support for this scenario. lundberg et al.  <cit>  inferred nodal ages for siluriform families using nuclear rag <dig> and rag <dig> sequences and seven fossil calibration points via bayesian relaxed clocks  and penalized likelihood analyses. their divergence time estimation for arioids and ariines is ~ <dig> my and ~ <dig> my, respectively . it is remarkable, however, that lundberg et al. arbitrarily selected  <dig> my  as the maximum age constraint for the split of gymnotiforms and siluriforms. while addressing the timing of galeichthyine intercontinental disjunction, betancur-r. and armbruster  <cit>  inferred 94- <dig> my  for the arioid split and  <dig> my  for the ariine split based on mitochondrial sequences and three calibration points. instead of fixing the root of the tree to an arbitrary age, they used minimum and maximum age constraints on a terminal node based on the rising of the panama isthmus  <dig> - <dig>  mya. in order to provide more accurate estimates on the divergence time of basal nodes in the arioid tree, this study selected  <dig> calibration points on two deep osteichthyan nodes, six non-arioid catfish nodes, and five arioid nodes .

divergence times for selected nodes derived from uncorrelated lognormal  and brc analyses are shown in table  <dig>  both methods provided divergent estimations on the temporal context of ariine diversification. the brc analyses estimated much older  divergence times for most nodes than ucln model. for instance, according to brc analyses, the ariinae stem group originated  <dig> - <dig>  mya  and the split between new world and old world ariines occurred  <dig> - <dig>  mya ; the ucln model inferred  <dig> - <dig>  my  and  <dig> - <dig>  my , respectively . the dates obtained with ucln model, although most similar to those reported in previous studies  <cit> , offer little support for a gondwanan origin of ariines. conversely, the divergence times inferred using brc are within the range of those predicted under the vicariant model . similar discrepancies on the timing of cichlid divergence in the context of gondwanan vicariance are reported in recent molecular studies. based on molecular clock analyses, vences et al.  <cit>  inferred a cenozoic origin for cichlids  suggesting recent transatlantic dispersal from africa to south america. in contrast, azuma et al.  <cit>  inferred divergence times for cichlids that are consistent with a gondwanan origin during the cretaceous . while the latter hypothesis is more widely accepted , interestingly, different calibrations and methods have inferred ages for cichlids that are two- to three-fold different.

values in parenthesis indicate 95% credibility intervals for bayesian relaxed clock  and 95% highest posterior density limits for uncorrelated lognormal  model. complete dataset: cyt b, atpase 8/ <dig>  and rag <dig> . reduced dataset: excluding atpase  <dig> and third codon positions of cyt b and atpase  <dig> . nodes refer to clades in figure  <dig> 

while cross-validation procedures for the nine fossil-based nodes suggest no internal conflicts, several calibration points are outside the arioid tree and thus may not be much informative . it is also noteworthy that, following the recommendations outlined in lundberg et al.  <cit> , minimum age constraints based on fossils were applied one node below the pertinent taxon . although conservative, this procedure may have resulted in underestimated nodal ages . an alternative solution for improving accuracy on divergence time estimates of basal arioid nodes could come from assigning additional ariid fossils to particular subclades. however, such work requires an exhaustive morphological examination of both fossil and recent taxa. among catfish families, ariids include the oldest and most abundant elements in the fossil record. ariid fossils have been identified from bony  and otolith  remains  <cit>  and the fragments are widespread, including records from north and south america, europe, asia, and africa. the oldest ariid fossils date from the late campanian-early maastrichtian in north and south america. old world fossil remains also include maastrichtian otoliths assigned to the ariidae, but the oldest bony elements are from the lowermost eocene   <cit> . considering that the stratigraphic record indicates that by the early maastrichtian  ariids were already widely distributed , the origin of the group might be older, implying a failure of preservation and/or detection of ancient fossils. if that is the case, a precise assignment of the oldest known specimens to particular ariid subclades might provide more accurate molecular clock estimations in support of the vicariant scenario.

CONCLUSIONS
this study utilized mitochondrial, nuclear, and combined  sequence data to infer phylogenies for arioids based on the most comprehensive taxon sampling to date . while the reconstructions support the monophyly of basal groups , up to ten ariine genera  validated by previous morphological studies are incongruent with the molecular phylogenies. these results stress the need for re-assessment of ariid classification.

the topologies recovered new world ariines as paraphyletic and old world species were grouped into a well-supported clade. in further disagreement with morphological hypotheses that follow no biogeographic patterns, the molecular phylogenies group inshore ariine species into well-defined clades restricted to particular gondwanan provinces . the general area cladogram derived from the area cladograms of cichlids, aplocheiloid killifishes, rainbowfishes, and ariines is largely congruent with the temporal sequence of events during the fragmentation of gondwana. nonetheless, the results obtained using brc and ucln methods are too variable, which hinders drawing definitive conclusions on the timing of ariine diversification in the context of gondwanan vicariance. further examination of additional ariid fossils might provide better calibration points for more accurate molecular clock estimates.

