BACKGROUND
transmissible spongiform encephalopathies  are fatal neurodegenerative disorders characterized by accumulation of the pathological isoform of prion protein mainly in tissues of the central nervous system. formation of this pathological isoform is a posttranslational process and involves refolding  of the host-encoded prion protein  into a pathological isoform partially protease resistant prpsc  or prpres   <cit> . the molecular mechanisms involved in prpc to prpsc conversion are poorly understood, but polymorphisms in both prp isoforms have been shown to be of importance in both interspecies and intraspecies transmissibilities  <cit> . the formation of prpsc aggregates probably requires self-interactions of prpc molecules as well as with prpsc  <cit> . thus binding and conformational changes are essential events in this conversion process. cell-free conversion of prpc provides a valuable in vitro model in which relative amounts of produced prpres reflect important biological aspects of tses at the molecular level  <cit> . a recent and very sensitive in vitro conversion system is the protein misfolding cyclic amplification  assay  <cit> , which has been shown to amplify minute amounts of prpsc from a variety of sources including sheep scrapie  <cit> . the effects of single polymorphisms and species-barriers in prpc or prpsc on prp conversion can largely explain differences in susceptibility -and transmissibility in sheep scrapie  <cit> . even though these polymorphisms are involved in modulation of disease development they do not seem to affect the initial binding of prpc to prpsc  <cit>  and do not seem to directly modulate prpc-prpsc binding. furthermore, in a recent peptide-array mapping study of ovine prpc we concluded that these polymorphisms are not part of the identified prp binding domains likely to be involved in prp self-interaction  <cit> . however, this does not exclude these polymorphisms from posing indirect effects on binding behaviour of prpc to prpsc and other possible chaperoning molecules. in that peptide-array binding study we unequivocally demonstrated that ovine prp binds with prp derived  amino acid sequences  separate from the polymorphic scrapie susceptibility determinants  <cit> . it remains to be elucidated whether the determined amino acid sequences play a role prior or during conversion in the self-interaction of prpc molecules and/or in the interactions of prpc with prpsc. simultaneously, whether these amino acid sequences play a role in the processes underlying prp conversion needs to be elucidated. in the current study we selected several ovine prp sequence derived synthetic peptides to study not only their capacity to affect prp binding to a solid-phase  peptide-array but also their potential modulating effect on prpc to prpsc conversion.

RESULTS
previously we determined that recombinant ovine prp yielded a reproducible sequence specific binding pattern with amino acid sequences using a solid-phase array of overlapping 15-mer peptides encompassing the complete ovine -or bovine amino acid sequence . roughly this pattern breaks down into two high binding areas containing two-and three consensus domains respectively, combined with some lower binding domains . based on the interaction domains extrapolated from this binding pattern as well as properties reported in literature, the following six ovine prp regions were selected for peptide blocking studies. the sequences of these peptides represented structural properties of prp as explained hereafter : peptide ntg, spanning the amino acids  at the n-terminal part of the mature prpc, including the glycosaminoglycan  binding motif kkrpk  <cit>  and binding domain  <dig>  ; peptide or, spanning the octarepeat aa motif  of the n-terminal region gg  <cit> ), which is probably involved in a range of interactions  <cit>  of which metal-binding is the best characterized; peptide td <dig>  which overlaps the limiting region containing strain and species dependant variable sites for proteinase k trimming of prpsc  <cit>  and spanning binding domain  <dig>  of the first high binding area  <cit> ; peptide am, which includes the amyloidogenic motif  of prp that did not exhibit any binding in the peptide-array  <cit> ; peptide co, encompassing amino acids of the core region of prp spanning from the first β-sheet onto the first α-helix. the peptide includes binding domain  <dig>  and is immediately adjacent to binding domain 4a of the second high binding area  <cit> ; these domains are also important in prpsc conformation-specific immuno-precipitation  <cit> ; and peptide ct, spanning the c-terminal aa's covering part of the third helix, partially covering low binding domain  <dig>  and almost identical to a peptide capable of inhibiting cell-free conversion  <cit> .

 <dig> position of the amino acid sequence in mature ovine prpc

 <dig> effect of pre-incubation with peptide on binding of prp to the peptide-array



 <dig> minimal amount of molar excess of peptide needed to affect prp binding



prp peptide inhibition of prp self-binding to peptide-array
first these six peptides were tested for their capability to inhibit prp binding to the prp based peptide-array containing  <dig> peptides  overlapping each other by increments of  <dig> aa, covering the complete ovine prp amino acid sequence .

pre-incubation of prp with peptide co did not result in blocking of the binding pattern of prp on the peptide-array , whereas peptides ntg and am only moderately blocked the binding pattern of prp . peptide ntg seems to diminish binding throughout the binding pattern , whilst peptide am mainly affects binding with the peptides derived from the n-terminal part of mature prp . maximum blocking throughout the prp binding pattern occurred with peptides or , td <dig>  and ct , which all block equally throughout the prp binding pattern. however, in contrast to blocking studies performed with antibodies  <cit> , blocking was not absolute over the whole region of the prp peptide-array binding pattern. inhibition by the aforementioned peptides was dose-dependant, with maximum blocking only occurring when peptides were added at high molecular ratios to prp. pre-incubation of prp with   <dig> times molar excess of peptide or or   <dig> times molar excess of peptides td <dig> and ct was necessary to obtain maximum blocking of the prp binding pattern on the peptide-array.

the capability of the n-terminal peptide ntg to moderately block binding of prp to the peptide-array and also moderately modulated prpres formation in the supplemented -and pre-incubated pmca assay  necessitates re-evaluation of the previously determined consensus domain   <cit> . instead of this common consensus domain two binding domains seem present in the n-terminus. binding motifs determined by motif-grafted antibodies  <cit>  suggests that the domain of interest is , which encompasses most of the proposed glycosaminoglycan binding motif   <cit> .

these results confirm the importance of the previously mapped domains  <cit>  located within the first high binding area   and , as well as the importance of the c-terminal low binding domain  in prp self-interaction. to a lesser extent the involvement of the n-terminal glycosaminoglycan binding motif contained within domain  and amyloidogenic motif  in interaction is confirmed. interestingly peptide co, encompassing the previously mapped domain  did not influence binding of prp to the peptide-array.

prp peptides modulation of prpres formation in the pmca-assay
the peptides analyzed in the prion protein peptide-array were also studied for their modulating capacity in the sheep prp protein misfolding cyclic amplification  assay  <cit>  using sheep brain homogenates from confirmed scrapie-positive and scrapie-negative sheep in one round of sonication cycles. to test the influence of the peptides on conversion, peptides were either added after combining the scrapie positive -and negative brain homogenates  or alternatively peptide was added first to the scrapie-negative brain homogenate before addition of the scrapie-positive material . this allowed us to assess if the effect of the peptides on conversion was dependant on the first rapid interaction between prpc and prpsc  <cit>  or not. peptide was added in several molar ratios, relative to the calculated total amount of prpc present in the reaction. prpsc specific proteinase-k  resistant fragments were quantified by western blotting.

peptide supplemented pmca
addition of peptide after mixing scrapie positive -and negative brain homogenates resulted in a dose dependant increase of pk resistant prp  after sonication for four  of the six peptides tested . in general the amount of newly formed prpres roughly ranged between 2-fold  up to 8-fold as compared to the input amount of prpsc. addition of a large molar excess of peptide ntg  resulted in a significant increase in prpres formation in a dose dependant manner at molar excesses of  <dig>   and  <dig>  . addition of peptide or  resulted in the largest increase of prpres. however, in contrast to the other peptides the effect was inversely dose dependant and significant at molar excesses of  <dig>  and  <dig> p =  <dig> ). molar excesses below  <dig> of peptide or did not result in significant increase of prpres as with higher molar excess of this peptide. addition of peptide td <dig>  resulted in a slight to moderate increase in prpres formation. prpres increase was significant only at a molar excess of  <dig>  . addition of peptide am  resulted in a moderate and significant increase of prpres, but only when peptide was added at a molar excess of  <dig>  . addition of either peptide co  or ct  did not significantly influence prpres formation at the tested molar excesses. however it does seem that these peptides slightly inhibit prpres formation at molar excesses of  <dig> and  <dig> respectively.

peptide pre-incubated pmca
pre-incubating scrapie-negative brain homogenate with peptide before initiating conversion with scrapie-positive brain homogenate, surprisingly resulted in increased formation of proteinase-k resistant prp  after sonication for five  of the six peptides tested  generally in a dose dependant manner. however, compared to the peptide supplemented pmca assay results differed for several of the peptides. pre-incubation with peptide ntg  resulted in a slight but significant increase of prpres at the optimal molar excess of  <dig>  . in contrast to peptide supplemented pmca reactions, pre-incubation with peptide or  did not significantly affect prpres formation at any of the molar excesses tested. pre-incubation with peptide td <dig>  induced a moderate but significant increase of prpres at molar excesses  <dig>   and  <dig>  , with an apparent optimum at  <dig> . whereas peptide am induced amplification of prpres optimally at molar excess  <dig>  in the supplemented pmca assay, pre-incubation with this peptide  resulted in a slight but significant dose dependant increase in prpres at molar excesses  <dig>   and  <dig>  . pre-incubation peptide co  resulted in a significant moderate or slight increase in prpres at molar excesses  <dig>   and  <dig>  . however, increase of prpres at molar excess of  <dig>  was larger and unmistakably more significant than at the higher molar excess, suggesting an inverse dose dependant increase of peptide induced prpres formation. finally, pre-incubation of snh with peptide ct , also resulted in a significant inverse dose dependant increase of prpres at the molar excess of  <dig>  .

 <dig> amount of molar excess of peptide compared to prpc tested in the pmca assay

 <dig> numbers of independent measurements performed

 <dig> comparison of conversion ratios of the peptide supplemented -or pre-incubated pmca and their corresponding standards using the unpaired student's t-test . significantly different values are marked; p-values between  <dig>  and  <dig>  with *, p-values between  <dig>  and  <dig>  with ** and p-values ≤  <dig>  with ***. the p-value of a comparison that was not quite significantly different is marked with n.q.

§n.t. = not tested

pmca assay negative controls
even though each pmca assay setup revealed at least one prp specific peptide incapable of modulating prpres formation, additional negative controls were performed. to rule out the possibility that factors other than prp sequence specificity could be responsible for the observed results, the isoelectric point, net charge and average hydrophilicity were determined for each peptide . comparison revealed no clear correlation between these non-sequential features and the observed effects in the pmca assay. therefore the following additional negative controls were performed; in order to determine whether addition of just a random peptide is sufficient for modulating prpres formation an unrelated peptide  was used in both testing setups described above. addition of this peptide did not affect prpres formation in either of the two pmca assay setups  at various concentrations, indicating that the observed increases in prpres were a result of the specific prp derived peptide amino acid sequences added to the reactions. furthermore, pmca assays were also performed for each peptide without scrapie positive homogenate, to determine whether de novo prpres could be formed when the prp derived peptide was combined with prpc. peptide was added at the optimum  molar excess for peptide ntg , or  and am . while peptides td <dig>  co and ct were added at the highest molar excess  used in the in the pmca assays described above. no significant conversion induced by either of these peptides was detected after pk digestion , showing that only addition of scrapie-positive brain homogenate resulted in initiation of the conversion reaction.

discussion
in a previous study  <cit>  we showed that ovine prp binds to itself and mapped several domains using ovine  prion protein derived peptide-arrays, yielding a prp-specific binding pattern for soluble  prp that could be blocked by several prp-specific monoclonal antibodies. the current study shows that the different prp derived synthetic peptides exert different effects on binding in a peptide-array assay and on conversion of prpc to prpres in the pmca assay. in order to better interpret the pmca data, one needs to consider the effects of sonication in the pmca. it may be expected that after the first incubation cycle, sonication simply results in shearing the elongated prpsc which releases the peptide . this results in multiple seeds for the following incubation cycle so that after the first sonication cycle, conditions for both the pre-incubated and the supplemented pmca can be considered identical. this is however not in agreement with the obtained results . therefore we have devised a more intricate schematic  to better account for the observed differences between the pre-incubated  and supplemented pmca  for some of the peptides.

the conversion process is a succession of distinct steps, which most likely starts with the multimerisation of prpc. wille et al. used electron crystallography to characterize the structure of two infectious variants of the prion protein  <cit> . by comparing projection maps of these two variants a model featuring β-helices was devised. this model was further refined by studying  <dig> all-β-folds observed in globular proteins  <cit> . it was proposed that prpsc should adopt a β-sandwich, parallel β-helical architecture, or a parallel left-handed β-helical fold. this left-handed β-helical folded prp can readily form trimers, providing a natural template for a trimeric model of prpsc and another  β-helical model was proposed, which largely explained species and strain-specificity  <cit> . in both models oligomerisation/trimerisation of prpc precedes initiation of conversion as depicted in figure 7a, implying an important role for prpc self-interaction in the conversion processes. our data fits this multimerisation of prpc. additionally, study of the amyloid-forming pathway revealed a pre-amyloid state containing partially unfolded monomers and dimers   <cit> . whether prpi is just the partially unfolded state  of prpc or whether it is a pre-formed trimer before further structural rearrangement towards prpsc occurs  remains to be elucidated. conversion is initiated by recruitment of prp to prpsc , after which prp is  rearranged to adopt the tertiary structure of the prpsc seed . the elongated prpsc is in turn capable to recruit and convert further prp . taking these studies into account and their implications for conversion allows for a more detailed interpretation of the data presented in this study., herein the peptide-array data is indicative for the effects on soluble prp , whereas the pmca assay may be indicative for effects on prp interactions  as well as interactions with chaperoning or inhibiting molecules. all six prp-derived peptides tested affected conversion in either the supplemented and/or pre-incubated pmca assay, whereas binding to the peptide-array was only completely abolished by three peptides . taken together, this study shows that the previously determined self-interaction domains of prpc are of importance at several different phases in the conversion reaction.

ovine peptide-array analysis previously revealed two high binding areas within prp  <cit>  of which the first high binding area encompasses the octarepeats, more specifically the consensus domain pgg. this study showed that the octarepeat peptide  was capable of blocking the binding pattern of prp to the peptide-array, probably as a result of peptide-induced changes in the tertiary structure of the n-terminal tail and thus affecting prpc self-interaction. only in the supplemented pmca assay, a dose dependant and significant increase in prpres is observed. the octarepeats can modulate  <cit>  but are not a necessity for the molecular processes underlying conversion  <cit> . interaction between prpc and prpsc seems almost instantaneous  <cit> , which would leave the peptide free to interact with the prpc - prpsc complex as a whole or with co-factors present in the homogenates. because the octarepeat stabilizes the interaction of prpc with the lrp-lr receptor  <cit> , it seems that peptide or indirectly affects the conversion process, either by affecting prpi stability/formation  or by stabilizing prpi interaction with prpsc . furthermore, a di-peptide containing the octarepeat self-aggregates into nanometric fibrils  <cit>  and these may also be formed in the supplemented pmca assay. combined with our data, we propose that the flexible n-terminal tail containing the octarepeat region stabilizes prpc-prpsc interaction during conversion and that free peptide or forms nanometric fibrils mimicking and increasing prpc-prpsc stabilization, thus aiding subsequent conversion. also part of the peptide-array first high binding area is binding domain  <dig>  and the data presented here shows that pre-incubation of the peptide td <dig>  with prp abolished binding of prp to the peptide-array. this indicates the importance of this domain in prpc self-interaction . increased prpresproduction was observed in both the supplemented -and the pre-incubated pmca-assay. the mechanism by which the peptide stimulates prpres formation may simply be due to peptide enhanced interaction between separate prp molecules. alternatively, peptide td <dig> could aid unfolding and/or refolding of prpc during conversion; binding domain  <dig> , together with the amyloidogenic motif, is part of the region of prpc that is partially unfolded and refolded during oligomerization of prpc into a β-sheet-rich soluble isoform of prp  <cit> .

the second high binding area in the peptide-array contains the domain  . this study shows that the peptide co containing the domain  does not affect binding of prp to the peptide-array at all, thereby ruling out direct involvement in prpc self-interaction. several studies have established that polymorphisms at sheep prp amino acid position  <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> surrounding  are most relevant in differential tse susceptibility  <cit>  and that stability of this prp region is a crucial determinant in whether prpc is converted  <cit>  . therefore peptide co induced prpres formation in the pre-incubated pmca assay is either due to this core region peptide facilitating binding of prpc to prpsc or the peptide affects the stability of this region of prpc  thereby facilitating refolding of prp.

the n-terminal peptide ntg  only moderately affects binding of prpc throughout the peptide-array, suggesting that interaction of the peptide with prpc results either in slight changes in the tertiary structuring affecting solubility of prpc or in diminished availability of the previously determined domains  <cit>  for interaction with the peptide-array. intriguingly, peptide ntg induces prpres formation in both the supplemented  and pre-incubated  pmca assay. the glycosaminoglycan heparan sulphate proteoglycan  and pentosan polysulphate  stimulate prpres formation in vitro and suggests that free glycosaminoglycans acted as a contact-mediator allowing interaction of prpc and prpsc  <cit> . the n-terminal peptide ntg likely indirectly affects in vitro conversion either by mimicking glycosaminoglycan binding to domain  or by recruiting glycosaminoglycans onto prpc, facilitating conversion of prpc into new prpsc after seeding. these studies and our pmca assay data strongly implicate glycosaminoglycans as an important cofactor in the conversion process.

the ability of peptide am, which encompasses the amyloidogenic motif , to moderately block binding of prp to the peptide-array was somewhat surprising, since we previously showed that the amyloidogenic motif was not involved in prp self-interaction  <cit> . peptide am mainly inhibits binding of prp to the peptides covering the n-terminal part of the mature prp protein, suggesting that peptide am interacts with one  of the other previously determined binding domains. in contrast to earlier reports  <cit> , we observed that peptide am  slightly but significantly increased prpres formation in both the pre-incubated -and supplemented pmca. however, all these inhibiting peptides contained two or more additional amino acids of the putative aggregation sites  implicated in aggregation/oligomerisation  <cit> , suggesting inhibition by these peptides is due to interference with aggregation/oligomerization. additionally, differences between the used conversion systems  are likely to play a role as well. the peptide am used in this study specifically focuses only on the amyloidogenic motif. our data suggests that peptide am interacts with the n-terminal tail of prpc , probably altering its tertiary structure and facilitating the proposed stabilizing effect of the n-terminal tail. alternatively, peptides containing only the amyloidogenic motif are also capable of forming a β-sheet rich layer at the water-air interface when sonicated  <cit>  and peptide am may form a β-sheeted backbone that interacts with the prpc-prpsc complex, mimicking and/or complementing the proposed stabilizing effect of the n-terminal tail.

peptide ct overlaps most of the third alpha helix of prpc as well as the second glycosylation site and the second cysteine involved in the di-sulphide bridge formed in prpc. the capacity to completely block prp binding to the peptide-array suggests that the domain  is of importance in prpc self-interaction. this study shows a slight significant increase in prpres formation when peptide ct is pre-incubated with scrapie negative brain homogenate. this contradicts results using a similar peptide capable of inhibiting cell free conversion  <cit> . however, this inhibiting peptide is four amino acids larger than peptide ct, which may account for the difference in effects and/or it may just be due to the differences in experimental technique between the cell free conversion and the pmca assay. this seems to be corroborated by the observation that in the supplemented pmca  peptide ct seems to slightly inhibit prpres formation albeit not significantly. fibrillization of a human prp peptide fragment is hindered by disulfide bridge formation between two peptides  <cit>  or when an additional disulfide bridge is introduced  <cit> , which indicates that peptide ct  likely compromises the disulfide bridge, destabilizing prpc, which consequently promotes trimerisation or formation of a conversion intermediate  and thus facilitating conversion.

in the pmca-assay all peptides revealed an inducing effect on prpres formation in the supplemented -and/or pre-incubated pmca-assay. above possible explanations for these effects have been discussed for each peptide. however it can not be ruled out that the peptides may have had an opposite effect; instead of interacting with prp, peptide may have interacted with possible conversion inhibitory factors present in the homogenate, thus indirectly allowing conversion to take place more efficiently. identifying these possible 'natural' inhibitory factors may prove an alternative line of investigation towards the underlying mechanisms involved in prion replication and may provide additional targets for future prion therapy.

CONCLUSIONS
the binding domains found for ovine prpc using a prion protein peptide-array are primarily indicative of prion protein self-interaction. apparently several specific self-interactions between individual prp molecules occur, which include both prpc-prpc as well as prpc-prpsc interactions. the data presented here imply an influence of binding domain  on the stability of the region of prp previously determined to be involved in the species-barrier and/or susceptibility to scrapie. furthermore our data indicates a stabilizing function for the octarepeats region  in prpc-prpsc interaction and thus improving subsequent conversion. our data further suggests that the n-terminal glycosaminoglycan binding motif  affects the conversion process indirectly, and implicates glycosaminoglycans as an important cofactor in prion disease pathogenicity. peptide am containing the amyloidogenic motif indirectly affects conversion either by aiding and/or complementing the proposed stabilizing function of the n-terminal tail of prpc. finally, the data implicates direct involvement of the two binding domains  and  in self-interaction between prpc molecules preceding binding to prpsc and subsequent conversion. therefore these two domains may prove prime targets for development of new therapeutic strategies. our results emphasize the importance of the stability of the prpc-prpc and prpc-prpsc interactions in prp conversion, which is an essential determinant in the effects of disease associated mutations, as well as the species-barrier. focussing on the  self-interaction domains of prp and the subsequent conversion processes may lead to further therapeutic strategies with the possibility to leave the physiological function of the prion protein unaffected.

