BACKGROUND
bovine maternal colostrum  contains immune factors that provide a critical first line of defense against a variety of infectious pathogens to which calves become exposed after birth  <cit> . there is consensus in the literature that at least  <dig>  l of good-quality mc  should be administered to prevent failure of passive transfer  of immunity, a condition characterized by serum igg < 10 g/l ≥ 24 h post colostrum ingestion in calves  <cit> . failure of passive transfer of immunity is a well-recognized risk factor for increased preweaning calf morbidity and mortality  <cit> . the condition has also been associated with milk yield losses and decreased longevity in lactating adult cows  <cit> .

adequate intake of mc is critical for preventing fpt and its negative consequences on calf health and future production performance. several studies have confirmed the presence of bovine specific pathogens  in mc suggesting that feeding raw mc is an early means by which newborn calves can become exposed to such pathogens  <cit> . in addition, negative correlations have been reported between bacterial contamination levels in colostrum and post-feeding serum igg concentrations  <cit> . hence, feeding colostrum of inferior quality  can exacerbate the risk of fpt in calves and compromise preweaning performance  <cit> .

colostrum replacers derived from either spray-dried bovine plasma or spray-dried cow colostrum are formulated to provide ≥ 100 g of igg to calves when ingested at the replacer dose  <cit> . specific heat treatment must be utilized along with spray-dry processing of the plasma or colostrum to effectively destroy all pathogens present in mc  <cit> . therefore, cr products have the potential to limit calf exposure to bovine pathogens that may be shed or contaminate mc and are indicated for calves when quality or quantity  of raw mc may be compromised.

previous igg absorption studies on various cr products yielded conflicting results  <cit> . in addition, studies that report a positive association between bovine lacteal or serum based cr products and adequate transfer of immunity in calves rarely include an assessment of preweaning morbidity and performance  <cit> . in one minnesota study, 93% of calves fed a plasma-derived cr product  after birth experienced fpt compared with 28% of calves fed mc  <cit> . even so, preweaning morbidity and mortality risks did not differ between groups in this study  <cit> . several studies reported that feeding a higher igg mass  delivered using cr products resulted in greater igg absorption and lower fpt risks  <cit> . however, these studies did not evaluate post-administration performance in terms of preweaning morbidity and mortality risks, feed intake, and weight gain for calves fed larger masses of igg in the cr products evaluated.

we recently completed a study comparing igg and serum total protein  in calves fed pooled mc or lacteal-derived cr  <cit> . in that study, serum tp and igg concentrations at approximately 24 hours post-colostral intake were significantly lower for calves fed pooled mc  compared to calves fed cr . colostrum igg concentration and mass fed were significantly higher in the cr  compared with mc group . the apparent efficiency of igg absorption  was similar for calves fed mc  or cr . a significantly higher proportion of calves fed mc  suffered from fpt  compared with calves fed cr  . however, producers are often interested not only in passive transfer of immunity in calves, but also in preweaning health and growth rates. the objective of this randomized trial was to determine the effect of feeding a higher dose of a commercial lacteal-derived cr or pooled mc on preweaning morbidity, daily weight gain and mortality in holstein heifer calves.

RESULTS
descriptive data
in total,  <dig> newborn calves were enrolled in the study. of these,  <dig>  were fed pooled mc while  <dig>  were fed lacteal derived-cr. calves did not significantly differ in birth weight, precolostral serum igg or total protein between trial groups . in addition, calves fed mc or cr did not differ in time to separation from dam  and  <dig>  , respectively) and time to feeding colostrum  and  <dig>  hours , respectively).

preweaning health and mortality events and the mean birth and weaning weights are summarized in table  <dig>  the proportion of calves with diarrhea, and those treated with antibiotics were significantly higher for calves fed pooled mc compared with calves fed lacteal-derived cr. however, the proportions of calves with respiratory disease, omphalitis or those that died in the preweaning period were similar between groups . the preweaning mean daily weight gain was significantly higher  in calves fed lacteal-derived cr compared with calves fed pooled mc.

multivariable models
heifer calves fed lacteal-derived cr were significantly less likely to experience a preweaning event of diarrhea  . similarly, calves fed lacteal-derived cr were less likely to be treated with antibiotics during the preweaning period , compared with calves fed pooled mc. while calves fed 200 g igg in lacteal-derived cr  at birth experienced significantly higher preweaning mean daily weight gain by  <dig>  kg/d , the risk of respiratory disease and omphalitis was not dependent on the type of colostrum fed . in addition, the hazard rate ratio  estimated from the cox proportional hazard model showed that there was no significant effect of type of colostrum fed on the hazard for mortality .

* or is the ratio of the odds of outcome in calves fed lacteal-derived cr to the odds of outcome in calves fed pooled maternal colostrum.

** calves raised from birth to weaning without morbidity or treatment with antibiotics.

based on findings from this study, we estimate that routine feeding of 200 g of igg  instead of pooled-mc could eliminate approximately one-fifth of the cases of diarrhea  and approximately one-tenth of the number of antibiotic-treated calves  in this population .

discussion
as reported elsewhere  <cit> , a significantly higher proportion of calves fed pooled-mc  suffered from fpt  in comparison to calves fed lacteal-derived cr . failure of passive transfer of immunity is a well-recognized predictor for increased preweaning calf morbidity  <cit> . it is therefore not surprising that calves fed raw pooled mc in this study were more likely to be treated with antibiotics or experience preweaning event of diarrhea compared with calves fed lacteal-derived cr in the study herd.

bovine specific pathogens  are frequently shed in colostrum of infected fresh cows either during an epidemic or intermittently during the peripartum period  <cit> . it is possible that the higher proportion of diarrhea in preweaned calves fed pooled mc  was a consequence of direct ingestion of such pathogens in pooled mc. however, this theory could not be further investigated given that culture of the pooled mc samples for specific pathogens  was not performed in the current study.

our results indicate that only 21% of diarrhea cases and 12% of antibiotic-treated calves would be eliminated in this population if the pooled mc feeding program was replaced by 200 g igg/ calf delivered in a lacteal-derived cr product. this should not be surprising given that in replacement heifer rearing, improved preweaning health is a function of several factors including reducing calf exposure to risk factors . this can be accomplished through proper housing, ventilation, and general hygiene; increasing levels of specific and non-specific immunity through providing good quality colostrum, balanced nutrition, stress minimization; and boosting specific resistance through preventive vaccinations of either the dams or newborn calves against specific pathogens  <cit> . calves in the present study were housed in raised individual wooden hutches up to  <dig> d of age and maintained on preweaning diets of milk replacer, calf starter grain, and fresh water ad libitum. while a number of calf management practices were in place to reduce calf exposure to risk factors for disease in the current herd, it is possible that some yet unidentified factor  may have contributed to the additional risk of diarrhea  leading to increased antimicrobial use on this specific farm.

the overall finding that calves fed raw pooled mc  were more likely to be treated with antibiotics or experience preweaning diarrhea differed from a previous report  <cit> . swan et al. reported no difference in post-feeding morbidity risk observed between calves fed a plasma-derived cr compared with calves fed individual maternal colostrum   <cit> . in contrast, another study found significantly lower morbidity risk for calves fed mc  compared with calves fed a lacteal-derived cr   <cit> . although not statistically significant, priestley et al. reported that a greater proportion of calves fed a lacteal-derived cr experienced diarrhea  compared to calves fed mc   <cit> . although some studies have found no link between fpt and the risk of treatment for diarrhea in beef calves, a possible reason for the difference in findings could be the higher proportion of fpt in calves fed mc in the current study, and in calves fed a lacteal-derived cr  in the priestley et al. study  <cit> . the difference in fpt is likely to be due to better quality mc fed to calves in the aforementioned studies compared to the current study  <cit> . in a recent survey, 41% of individual colostrum samples met industry recommended colostrum quality benchmarks  compared with only 26% of pooled colostrum samples  <cit> . the mean igg mass in the pooled mc fed to the calves in this study was approximately 21 g/l compared with approximately  <dig>  g/l of igg reported for non-pooled colostrum in the recent survey of colostrum quality  <cit> .

while there were no differences in the proportion of preweaning respiratory disease, omphalitis or death in calves fed lacteal-derived cr compared to those fed pooled mc, mean daily weight gain was significantly higher in the former. this reflected perhaps a general benefit accruing from the improved preweaning health outcomes associated with feeding lacteal-derived cr rather than a direct role in enhancing daily weight gain in the study calves  <cit> . such a link between reduced morbidity and increased weight gain was also reported in a florida study, although unlike in the current study, the florida study reported reduced morbidity in calves fed mc compared to those fed a lacteal-derived cr  <cit> .

in the current study, type of colostrum fed  had no effect on mortality risk between birth and weaning in the study calves. these results are consistent with results from an earlier study in which feeding a plasma-derived cr  had no effect on preweaning mortality  <cit> ; however they differed from the florida study which found a significantly lower proportion of mortality in calves fed mc compared to calves fed a lacteal-derived cr  <cit> . these contradictions may reflect the fact that in concert with passive transfer of immunity, calf survival in the preweaning period is a function of several herd factors including housing and nutrition.

although a major strength of this study included its randomized assignment of treatment, the results presented here must be interpreted cautiously. it is possible that the ability to correctly assign a disease diagnosis  varied among the study personnel involved in the care of the calves during the follow-up period. this potential bias, if present, was likely to be non-differential because the study personnel were blinded to treatment group assignment . moreover, a veterinarian  cross-validated each recorded diagnosis and treatment with the herd veterinarian’s drug protocols. the extent to which this study’s results can be extrapolated to a wider population of dairy herds is limited by the use of a single herd to evaluate the current study objectives. while approximately 57% of large dairy operations in the us routinely feed pooled mc  <cit> , the current herd was not representative of this wider population with respect to fpt risk profiles and quality of pooled mc fed. recent findings  <cit>  suggest that approximately 23% of calves in us operations that fed pooled mc experienced fpt compared with 70% of calves fed the pooled mc in this study. in addition, the mean igg mass in the pooled mc fed to the calves in this study was 3-fold lower than similar estimates of igg concentration in nationally representative samples of pooled mc  <cit> . the lower quality of the pooled mc fed to calves in this study compared to comparable us herds likely biased the morbidity outcomes in a direction suggestive of a better efficacy for the lacteal-derived-cr for improving preweaning health in calves. hence, it is possible that the benefits of feeding lacteal-derived cr  on preweaning health may not be similar in dairy herds managed under a different husbandry system.

the findings reported here indicate that producers should adopt colostrum management strategies that improve colostrum quality. to achieve this, producers can begin by pooling only colostrum with acceptable immunoglobulin concentration . this can be achieved by testing individual cow colostrum samples prior to pooling and by properly identifying dams so that first milking colostrum is pooled separate from colostrum harvested from subsequent milkings. alternatively, pooling colostrum can be replaced by feeding a colostrum replacement product with a known immunoglobulin concentration. other recommendations identified from previous research should also be followed such as observing proper sanitation and hygiene during harvesting, processing, and storage of colostrum, feeding colostrum replacement products or heat-treated colostrum  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
in this study, calves fed cr had a significantly higher rate of daily weight gain and were less likely to be affected with diarrhea compared to calves fed mc. type of colostrum fed was not predictive of the preweaning risks for pneumonia and mortality in this particular herd. although a major strength of this study included its randomized design, the extent to which the current findings can be extrapolated to a wider population of dairy herds may be limited by the use of a single herd.

