BACKGROUND
sounds are first converted into neuronal signals in the inner ear and then conveyed to the cerebral cortex via a number of discrete brain areas including the inferior colliculus. each of these areas receives ascending pathways carrying signals from one or both ears and descending pathways from higher brain centres. the current knowledge of the neurochemical events occurring at each of these brain centres is limited  <cit> . in the inferior colliculus studies have been carried out to characterise the role of gabaergic neurons especially in sound localisation which is believed to be one of the main functions of this brain area  <cit> . additionally the inferior colliculus has ben implicated in audiogenic seizures and aversive behaviour in which gabaergic neurons may also play an important role.  <cit> 

the neuronal communication occurring in the inferior colliculus is likely to be influenced by modulatory systems such as those of peptidergic neurotransmitters. opiate receptor gene expression, immunoreactivity and activity in the inferior colliculus have been described  <cit>  although detailed studies on the effect of opiate on gaba neurotransmitter release in this brain regions have not been carried out.

three classes of opiate peptides endorphins, dynorphins and enkephalins activate μ, κ and δ-opiate receptors subtypes respectively  <cit> . recently a fourth related receptor orl <dig> activated by the peptide nociceptin has been identified and its distinct pharmacology has been described  <cit> . all opiate receptors are associated with either go or gi subunits and they mediate inhibitory actions including pre-synaptic inhibition of neurotransmitter release. different mechanisms of inhibition of neurotransmitter release have been reported in various tissues and neurons  <cit> . for example, in the periaqueductal gray stimulation of opiate receptors and their associated g-proteins results in the activation of potassium channels  <cit>  while in the hippocampus, inhibition of the gabaergic activity by opioid is independent of potassium channel activation  <cit> .

in previous work we have established the presence and distribution of opiate receptors in the adult and developing rat cochlea suggesting that the opiate system has a role in hearing function  <cit> . in order to extend our knowledge of the role of opiate system in hearing it is necessary to characterise its presence and role also in the auditory pathways. our hypothesis was that opiate peptides can modulate synaptic function in the auditory pathways by pre-synaptically altering the release of other neurotransmitters. to test this hypothesis we have used opiate drugs to inhibit the release of gaba from inferior colliculus slices

RESULTS
kcl-induced gaba release
inferior colliculus slices pre-incubated with gaba were perfused for  <dig> min and stimulated twice with  <dig> mm kcl to elicit neurotransmitter release. the eluate was collected in  <dig> ml fractions and the released radioactivity was assessed by scintillation counting. figure  <dig> shows two examples of typical release profiles from slices perfused with either krebs buffer throughout  or with krebs buffer for fractions 1– <dig> and with krebs containing  <dig> μm morphine for the remaining fractions, where both samples were stimulated with kcl at the time corresponding to fraction  <dig> and  <dig>  the two peaks were referred to as s <dig> and s <dig> and occured approximately  <dig> fractions after the application of kcl due to the buffer volume contained in the tubes feeding into the incubation chamber. values of the radioactivity eluted are expressed as fractional release which is the ratio of the radioactivity released in a particular fraction divided by the total amount of radioactivity contained in the tissue immediately prior to that fraction. the variation in the value of s <dig> of the two profiles shown in fig  <dig>  both induced by kcl alone, reflects the variation in amount of tissue present in each of the elution chambers and illustrates the need for utilising the ratio of the two peaks  of each elution profile as a mean to detect the effect of the modulating drug.

morphine modulation of kcl induced gabarelease
the effect of different concentrations of morphine on kcl-induced gaba release is shown in figure  <dig>  both  <dig> μm and  <dig> μm but not  <dig> nm morphine caused a significant decrease of gaba release from the inferior colliculus slices. the effect of  <dig> μm morphine was antagonised by the antagonist naloxone  which was perfused from one fraction before the addition of morphine. the perfusion of naloxone alone did not cause a significant effect on gaba release. these data strongly indicate that morphine modulates the release of gaba via activation of opiate receptors. the reduction in gaba release calculated as the change in s2/s <dig> ratios in the presence and absence of morphine during s <dig> was 16% . these data agree with previous reports on the presence of both gaba neurons and opiate receptors and peptides in the inferior colliculus  <cit> . in addition a functional inter-relationship is established between the two systems which could be of physiological significance.

specific role of μ opiate receptors
in order to establish which of the opiate receptor subtypes are involved in the modulation of the gaba release, morphine was substituted by either  <dig> μm damgo, dadle or u <dig> which specifically activate μ, δ and κ opiate receptors respectively . only damgo  had a significant effect on gaba release, an effect that was again antagonised by naloxone. damgo, as well as morphine, reduced the amount of gaba release by 16%  indicating that only μ opioid receptors participate in the regulation of gaba release. higher concentrations of damgo  did not have greater effects on gaba release . data from our lab  and from others  <cit>  indicate that mrna transcripts or receptor binding for all three opiate receptor subtypes are present in the inferior colliculus. further work is required to establish the roles of the δ - and κ-opioid receptors in the inferior colliculus.

receptor desensitisation
a possible explanation for the relatively low effect of opiate agonist on gaba release  could be that during the exposure to opiate agonists, down-regulation of the opiate receptors may occur  <cit> . to address this possibility experiments were carried out in the presence of the protein kinase c inhibitor bisindolylmaleimide i . bim has been shown to inhibit receptor desensitisation  <cit>  and to reverse tolerance to opiate drugs which involves opiate receptor desensitisation.  <cit> . because bim is solubilised in dmso additional control assays were carried out to check for the effect of the solvent. the results indicate  that bim had no effect on the extent of morphine inhibition of gaba release. while there is no direct proof that bim had its reported effect on the tissue, the data indicate that receptor desensitisation may not be the cause of the relatively low percentage effect of morphine.

co-localisation of μ-opiate receptors and gabaergic neurons
another possible explanation for the small  reduction of gaba release by opiate agonists may be the limited number of gabaergic neurons that express opiate receptors. to address this question inferior colliculi slices were double labelled with guinea pig antibodies against μ-opioid receptors and with rabbit antibodies against glutamic acid decarboxylase  species specific secondary antibodies conjugated to red and green fluorochromes allowed the detection of both antigens on the same slide . although these results were qualitative it was evident that staining of glutamic acid decarboxylase was more extensive than that of μ-opiate receptors and that only a few gabaergic neurons showed co-localisation of μ-opiate receptors. these data are consistent with the proposal that only a sub-population of gabaergic neurons are under the influence of opiate receptors. establishing the nature of the gabaergic neurons that express opiate receptors will be an important task in understanding the role of opiate signalling in the inferior colliculus.

CONCLUSIONS
this study has demonstrated that in the rat inferior colliculus slices opiate agonists can inhibit kcl-induced gaba release via activation of the μ-opiate receptor subtype. the amount of gaba released in presence of opiate agonists was 16% lower than in control slices. this relatively low level of decrease is probably not due to receptor desensitization occurring during the assay but rather to a relatively small population of gabaergic neurons in the inferior colliculus expressing μ-opiate receptors. the small effect of the opiate compounds could also indicate that modulation of gaba release is not their major role, but it could still be of physiological significance.

together with its reported role in audiogenic seizures and aversive behaviour, the inferior colliculus is an important neuronal centre for auditory processing containing both ascending and descending fibres. the identification of the role of opiate peptides and possibly other modulatory system in the inferior colliculus and other areas of the auditory pathway may allow a better understanding of the mechanism of the hearing system and possibly offer a target for therapeutic intervention in hearing dysfunction. alternatively, elucidation of the role opiate peptides in the inferior colliculus could provide information about regulation of audiogenic seizures and aversive behaviour.

