BACKGROUND
recent advances in sequencing technology have allowed experimentalists a global view of the relationship between chromatin structure and genomic activity during development. by combining chromatin immunoprecipitation  with high throughput sequencing or dna microarrays , it is possible to query the genomic localizations of specific transcription factors, histone modifications, and chromatin remodelling factors. chromatin state maps from chip-seq and chip-chip experiments along with data from genome-wide nuclease accessibility studies can be used to define molecular landscapes  on a genome-wide scale. implicit in this analysis is the assumption that a cell's chromatin signature, or its epigenome, will be highly diagnostic of function.

one metric of chromatin structure is accessibility of the dna in bulk chromatin. dna-modifying enzymes such as nucleases  <cit>  and methyltransferases  <cit>  have proven to be useful tools for defining susceptible regions. accessible dna may in some cases define regions of "open chromatin" that allow access to dna binding factors such as transcription factors. in contrast, less accessible dna may define regions of relatively compact chromatin and is often characterized by transcriptional inactivity.

cleavage of chromatin by micrococcal nuclease  has been a standard method for examining nucleosome positioning and regional accessibility, both in vitro and in situ  <cit> . despite the substantial information that can come from mnase studies, this enzyme is known to have specific sequence and structural preferences  <cit> , generating a well-recognized need for additional reagents and methods to independently survey genome accessibility. several alternative nuclease or other approaches have been used for localized studies of accessibility  <cit> , each has its own potential advantages and potential biases.

one limitation of available methods for genomewide analysis of chromatin structures in specific cell types has been the need to isolate the individual cell type of interest in considerable bulk. epigenome characterization methods using nucleases and other destructive probes have thus been applied only in the narrow range of biological systems where individual cell types can be isolated . for many of the most interesting biological questions, the cell groups of interest are surrounded by  other very different cell types, making uniform-cell-type preparations impossible on the scale currently needed for genome-wide analysis. as one means of addressing this challenge, transgene-driven expression can be used to produce a specific probe in a defined cell type. this type of approach requires a probe that can detectably modify chromatin or dna without killing or substantially disturbing the relevant cells.

dna adenine methyltransferase  catalyzes the addition of a methyl group to the adenine base in the sequence gatc  <cit> . dam activities are used by a number of bacterial phages and prokaryotes. in e. coli, dam is involved in a multitude of cellular processes, including dna replication, mismatch repair, control of gene expression, and restriction-modification immunity  <cit> .

dam from e. coli has been used to analyze chromatin structure in eukaryotic cells  <cit>  and there is good localized agreement between chromatin structure inferred using dam and other techniques, such as nuclease hypersensitivity mapping  <cit> . importantly, sensitivity to dam methylation correlates well with transcriptional activity  <cit> . these results support the use of susceptibility to dam methylation as a measure of chromatin structure. key advantages of using dam to probe eukaryotic chromatin structure are  the ability to assay accessibility in a living cell,  the ability to assay designated sets of cells or tissues in complex biological samples using transgenes with regulated promoters, and  the lack of any known background of dam activity in eukaryotes. the addition of 6-methyl adenosines at sites in eukaryotic genome is apparently well tolerated in a variety of tissues, as functional expression of dam methyltransferase in yeast, drosophila, and mammalian cells has not resulted in any apparent phenotypes  <cit> .

previous studies of chromatin structure using dam were limited to the investigation of only a few loci due to the low throughput nature of southern blotting experiments. in this article, we describe a method that couples dam methylation to high throughput sequencing. we termed our method dalec and applied it to investigate in vivo chromatin structure in three transgenic c. elegans strains, each expressing dam from a tissue-specific promoter. we provide evidence that genic regions remain in an accessible state that can be probed with dam activity even when not expressed, with features of chromatin structure inferred from dam accessibility concordant with nucleosome positioning and expression data derived from independent sources.

RESULTS
engineering e. coli dam methyltransferase for expression in c. elegans
we first adapted the e. coli dam gene coding region for expression in c. elegans. we've previously found that introns incorporated into the coding regions can improve expression of transgenes in c. elegans  <cit> . the dam gene was cloned by pcr from e. coli strain op <dig>  two introns were incorporated at blunt cutting restriction sites . two myo- <dig> promoter constructs driving dam were produced. in ppd <dig> , dam was designed to express as a fusion to gfp; while in ppd <dig> , a nuclear localization signal  from sv <dig> was included. each construct was then incorporated into transgenic strains using pha- <dig> as a selectable genetic marker in a pha- <dig> genetic background  <cit> . the two resulting transgenic lines were designated pd <dig>  and pd <dig> .

both transgenic lines exhibited slightly slower movement and growth than wildtype animals; these effects were subtle, confounding any determination of whether this was due to the rescued pha- <dig> genetic background and/or expression of the methyltransferase. to assess tissue specificity of dam expression, we examined pd <dig> under fluorescence microscopy . when the animal is oriented laterally as in figure 1a, the body wall muscles run along the animal's dorsal and ventral axes. a view from the animal's dorsal axis is shown in figure 1b. in addition to body wall muscles, myo- <dig> is also expressed in the vulval muscles  <cit> , easily identified as an "x" in the animal's ventral surface . within the body musculature, there is some degree of mosaicism in transgene expression in these animals. for example, notice in figure 1c that certain body wall muscle cells  lack gfp, possibly due to loss of expression or of the extra-chromosomal transgene array. we also note the presence of small gfp-positive granules in all these muscle cells . we do not know the identity of these punctate structures, but we do not think they are mitochondria, as there are far more mitochondria that take up targeted gfp in c. elegans body wall muscle cells than what is seen in these pictures  <cit> . since the dam-gfp fusion used in pd <dig> does not contain a characterized nls, we were initially unsure whether the fusion protein would have access to the nucleus. as is evident in figure 1d, not only did the methyltransferase have access to the nucleus, it appears to be predominantly found in the nucleus. hypodermis-specific dam-gfp expression from the rol- <dig> promoter  and gut-specific expression of dam-gfp from the vit- <dig> promoter  are also evident . together, these observations indicate that dam can be engineered to express in a tissue-specific manner and that its localization to the nucleus can apparently occur without a nls.

dam methyltransferase is active in c. elegans
to assess the patterns of dam methylation in transgenic animals, we used a combination of isoschizomer restriction enzymes that are differentially sensitive to gatc methylation. dpn i cuts only gatc sites methylated on both strands; while mbo i cuts only non-methylated gatc and sau3a i cuts both methylated and non-methylated sites. genomic dna samples from wildtype , pd <dig>  and pd <dig> transgenic animals were digested with each restriction enzyme and probed with an ≈ <dig> bp probe from the c. elegans 5s/sl <dig> rdna locus. the 5s/sl <dig> cluster consists of about  <dig> copies of a  <dig> kb repeat and generally has high transcriptional activity  <cit> . southern blot analyses showed that the methylation status of the two dam-expressing transgenic lines differed from that of the wildtype controls. the pd <dig> and pd <dig> lanes showed a strong smear that were nearly absent in n <dig>  indicating that methylated dna substrates were available for dpn i restriction . the smearing in the n <dig> lane in figure 2e was likely due to e. coli dna from the animals' digestive tracts. because the op <dig> strain of e. coli carries the wildtype dam gene, its dna is a substrate for dpn i restriction.

the difference between dam exposed and non-exposed dna was clear in the corresponding southern blots. distinct dpn i cleavage bands that were present in the pd <dig>  and pd <dig>  lanes were absent from the n <dig> lanes. an important feature of these gels is the appearance of bands indicative of incomplete digestion of individual fragments by dpn i. such bands were reproducibly observed in digestions of dna from dam-expressing lines , consistent with dam modification of a subset  gatc sites in any given chromosomal molecule.

restriction by mbo i likewise revealed differences between dam-exposed and wildtype dnas. on bulk ethidium staining, genomic dnas from pd <dig>  and pd <dig>  were left uncut by mbo i compared to n <dig> dna. the presence of considerable levels of digested dna  can be explained by the fact that the transgene arrays  are driven by a muscle promoter and expressed only in muscle cells; non-muscle tissues  would have been substrates for mbo i restriction. in the southern blots for mbo i digests, , wildtype dna was essentially completely digested while dna from transgenic animals were only partially digested. the unrestricted and partially restricted dna  would be expected to represent methylated dna from muscle tissue. the ability of sau3a i to cut gatc irrespective of dam methylation provided a control for dna quality and restrictability. as expected, identical sau3a i patterns were observed in wildtype and dam-expressing strains . in combination, the southern blot analysis demonstrates the ability of expressed dam to modify the c. elegans genome in an extensive but limited manner.

we next carried out a pilot mapping of dam methylation by conventional cloning and sequencing of dpn i products. each cloned fragment would have been expected to carry full methylation at both ends, with no methylation or hemi-methylation of intervening gatc sites which were not cleaved . as a control, the cloning protocol was performed in parallel on wild type c. elegans dna. only small numbers of clones were recovered in this case, all derived from bacteria sequences or lacking the characteristic dpn i-cleaved ends . by contrast, large numbers of clones could be obtained from pd <dig> and pd5122:  <dig> non-redundant dpn i fragments were characterized from these , of which  <dig> had termini derived from dpn i cleavage at methylated gatc sites . these sequences were distributed throughout the genome  and spanned exons, introns, exon-intron junctions, and non-annotated  regions . in addition to the genomic distribution, it was of interest to observe fragments from muscle-expressed and non-muscle expressed genes .

profiling genome-wide chromatin accessibility using direct asymmetric ligation end capture 
to obtain a genome-level view of chromatin susceptibility to dam methylation, we developed a method that captures sequences flanking methylated gatc sites for high throughput sequencing . genomic dna from transgenic animals expressing tissue-specific dam is digested with dpn i. the resulting blunt-ended dpn i product is captured by ligation to a branched linker  containing an asymmetric restriction site  adjacent to the site of ligation. mme i cleavage of these ligation products liberates a population of fragments containing ≈ <dig> bp of c. elegans dna with a two nucleotide 3" overhang . the mme i product is ligated to a second branched linker , consisting of a pool of  <dig> different species of molecules that differ only at the 3" two nucleotide overhang. the top strand  of the resulting doubly-linkered molecule is separated from the bottom strand  using denaturing polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis and amplified by pcr using solexa bridge amplification primers . to achieve quantitative results, we titrated the pcr reactions to ensure amplification in the linear range. in our experience, typically 11- <dig> cycles are sufficient. the appearance of a band migrating at or near  <dig> bp  is diagnostic of over-amplification. the pcr product is electrophoresced in a 3% low melting point agarose gel  and the  <dig> bp band excised and purified. the  <dig> bp amplicon is directly sequenceable on the illumina platform. .

we constructed and sequenced libraries from animals expressing myo-3::dam , rol-6::dam-gfp  and vit-2::dam-gfp , with a control library from n <dig> dna treated in vitro with dam methyltransferase. animals were staged to maximize the mass of the tissue expressing the dam protein . a combined total of  <dig>  million raw reads were obtained from two separate sequencing runs. linker sequences could be successfully parsed out from  <dig> , <dig> reads. we considered a parsing event successful if the resulting product had the structure 5'-n16-19ga-3'. parsed readouts were in turn converted to a  <dig> nucleotide format containing only the  <dig> nucleotides immediately upstream of the 3' ga. parsed tags were then mapped to a database containing all filtered dam tags in the c. elegans ws <dig> genome. a "hit" was considered only if there was a  <dig> nucleotide perfect match between the solexa readout and the in silico-generated tag. since each  <dig> nt tag in the database actually represented a molecule of the structure 5-16gatc-3', our criterion in actuality required a  <dig> nt perfect match. in total,  <dig> , <dig> reads could be aligned to the genome. after exclusion of repetitive and "proximal" tags , we obtained  <dig> , <dig> tags that aligned uniquely to the genome, representing an average of 9-fold coverage . these were used for all analyses described below.

relationship between expression and dam accessibility
the analysis of dam-dalec data for different tissues provides an opportunity to characterize the relationship between gene activity and dam accessibility. we first compared total numbers of dam "hits" between individual genes in pairs of samples from the analysis. raw tag numbers for each gene in any two data sets were used as x and y values to place a point on a graph, so that a neutral situation in which tags were equivalently distributed between samples would produce points along a straight line. a striking feature of this analysis was the remarkable concordance between samples in representation of tags for individual genes . despite the tissue-restricted expression of many genes in these individual tissues  <cit> , a significant deviation in overall dam accessibility was essentially limited to a two-fold range. as a control, we examined dna segments present in the transgene constructs  in the individual lines; this analysis showed the expected substantial differences in tag representation between samples . a similar comparison for functional partitions of the genome  is presented in additional file  <dig>  figure s <dig>  as with the gene-by-gene comparisons, we did not observe regions with a greater than two-fold deviation from the mean for the genome.

despite the lack of large deviations from a mean accessibility, we do observe genes and genomic segments with some significant deviation from the mean in their tag representation in individual samples. to determine potential relationships between variations in accessibility and expression, we compared accessibility indices as a function of gene representation in a filtered sage dataset . notably, the magnitudes of the differences are rather modest . nonetheless, this analysis shows a reproducible positive correlation between average dam accessibility and gene expression for all three transgenic lines.

a periodic dam accessibility profile that correlates with nucleosome positioning at promoters
to characterize chromatin structure and accessibility on a subgenic level, we compared dam methylation profile with previously published nucleosome position datasets for c. elegans. of particular interest are datasets of total nucleosome positioning  <cit>  and those in which a nucleosomal population was enriched for active chromatin by immunoprecipitation using antibodies to modified histones, in particular methylation on lysine  <dig> of histone h <dig>  <cit> . the h3k4me2/ <dig> nucleosome occurs at the 5' end of actively expressed genes and displays a high degree of constraint and phasing characteristics of its positioning, with bulk nucleosomes showing a much lower degree of reproducibility in positioning  <cit> . a prominent "peak" h3k4me2/ <dig> nucleosome can be readily detected at the 5' end of  <dig>  genes, the majority of which are house-keeping genes . to represent the relationship between nucleosome position and dam accessibility, we calculated n numbers of dam tags each position . a signal in this analysis depends on significant local positioning of nucleosomes, and not surprisingly we obtained little signal with the less-positioned bulk nucleosomes .

for the h3k <dig> methylated nucleosomes, we saw a distinctive pattern , with the overall dam methylation levels oscillating between a valley at a nucleosome dyad position and a peak at linker region. the concordance is especially strong for muscle  and gut . the somewhat low concordance for hypodermal  is most likely the result of low tag representation . the same analysis on the control in vitro modified genomic dna displayed a profile that was essentially flat. this result is consistent with the preference of linker dna over nucleosome core dna for dam methylation. as an independent probe, dam methylation confirms the nucleosome positioning near 5' end of genes that have been characterized by using micrococcal nuclease digestion.

regions that are upstream to the h3k4me2/ <dig> peak nucleosomes have been found to display a low level of observed nucleosome coverage. correspondingly, the overall dam methylation level is higher in regions upstream than in regions downstream to the h3k4me2/ <dig> peak nucleosome.

nucleosome coverage at ≈150bp upstream  to the dyad of the h3k4me2/ <dig> peak nucleosome has a lowest level. if dna in this region tends to be in an unprotected state, one would expect to observe a high level of dam accessibility. instead, there is a valley at this position for dam methylation profiles from all three tissues. this result suggests that dna in this region is protected by additional factors.

discussion
in this article, we presented our study of chromatin structure in differentiated c. elegans tissues by measuring dna accessibility in living animals. to examine a series of in vivo accessibility profiles, we expressed dam driven by three tissue-specific promoters  and analyzed the methylation profile of synchronized animal populations. such an analysis would be expected to identify both dramatic and subtle differences in in vivo accessibility. somewhat surprisingly given a number of models for developmental regulation that involve higher order inaccessibility of large regions of chromatin  <cit> , we observed no genes or regions which were completely inaccessible to dam modification in vivo. in particular, no region or gene showed a deviation in accessibility that was greater than from the genome-wide average. analysis of quantitative differences in dam accessibility does reveal correlations, particularly showing a relationship between accessibility and expression levels: with increasing sage representation numbers, we observe a corresponding increase in accessibility over many genes and in all samples and tissues analyzed. because sage measures expression by capturing the pool of mature mrnas, our results suggest that dam accessibility at least partially reflects average transcriptional activity.

although the data argue against "open/shut" accessibility versus inaccessibility of non-expressed chromosomal domains during development, there is certainly evidence for stable structures that protect specific sequences for extended time periods. these are evidenced by the capture of dpn i fragments with internal  gatc sites . these internal sites would have been protected from dam methylation for an extended period while dam was expressed in the relevant cells.

we observed very strong correlation between dam accessibility and nucleosome positioning, in agreement with previous work  <cit> . as shown in figure  <dig>  dam accessibility peaks at inter-nucleosomal regions, indicative of the accessibility of linker dna. as the nucleosomes become less uniform in position , the periodicity in dam methylation profile is decreased.

our results provide support for dam-dalec and nucleosome chip-seq  <cit>  as complementary technologies in establishing and validating detailed chromatin maps. certainly chip-seq provides the highest resolution maps for chromatin; at the same time this technique is limited by the need for extensive processing of samples after chromatin extraction. dam-dalec provides an in vivo picture of chromatin structure that is unaffected by concerns of specificity and rearrangement on extraction but is lower resolution in terms of the numbers of sites analyzed. certainly the combination of the two methods will be of value in defining both static architecture and developmental shifts.

CONCLUSIONS
we have developed an assay with the capacity to infer chromatin structure on a genome level in living organisms. we have shown its concordance to gene expression and positioned nucleosome data obtained from independent sources. thus, dam-dalec can provide independent high-confidence in vivo data, which even for a fraction of the genome can be used to refine, validate, or evaluate less sparse but potentially more 'invasive' nuclease-based assays. dalec could readily be adapted to any context in which expression of foreign coding regions  can be engineered. because eukaryotes do not possess an adenine methylation system, the enzyme would have a possibility of being "neutral" to the host cell and not subject to regulation. thus, dam-dalec could offer an advantage of capturing snapshots of chromatin structure in living animals at defined developmental stages and can be a powerful tool that complements existing genomics methods for investigating chromatin structure and dynamics on a whole genome level.

