BACKGROUND
host-plant specialisation is common and central to explanations for the enormous diversity of plant-feeding insects. phytophagous insects vary in the taxonomic breadth of their respective host-plant range, but most still tend to use only a fraction of the plants available to them in their environment  <cit> . generally, selection promoting both the broadening and reduction of host-plant resources must take place. host-plant conservatism is not universal and selection for generalised host associations is expected to be persistent because of characteristics such as resource abundance variability or environmental predictability  <cit> . colonisation of a new plant taxon signifies the broadening of a species host range, and specialisation on traits of the host show a narrowing of resource use. explaining mechanisms that cause expansions or contractions in host-ranges has been difficult especially for species rich interactions  <cit>  because the vagaries of time tend to obscure complex patterns of association  <cit> . here we investigate the timing of colonisation by a lineage that evolved diverse specialised modes of resource-use but remained relatively species depauperate.

the enormous diversity of phytophagous insects has been attributed to traits associated with the insect herbivore , the plants they parasitise , the interaction itself , ecological community interactions , or the environment . conventional hypotheses posit ‘reciprocal’ or ‘sequential’ bitrophic interactions between traits of diversifying clades that drive insect and plant radiations  <cit> . trade-offs in reproduction or diet, competition and predation, and tolerance to plant ‘defensive’ traits are central to these arguments  <cit> . alternative explanations argue host-plant conservatism can be driven by predictability  <cit> , climate  <cit> , life-history characteristics  <cit> , geographical contexts  <cit> , plasticity  <cit> , genetic predispositions or ecological compatibilities suited to the use of a resource  <cit> , and host-range ecology  <cit>  or genetics  <cit> . to distinguish among these causal mechanisms it is necessary to study evolutionary periods that are meaningful to the association of interest. transitions to specialisation on a novel host-plant resource are only meaningful for a finite period because a shift to a narrower set of resources can be transient or bidirectional  <cit> . determining the period that separates the origin of the insect group and the host-plants they feed on is essential to unraveling hypotheses explaining the origin or loss of narrow host ranges.

discerning between colonisation and becoming reproductively isolated on the novel resource requires understanding distinct processes. the first phase in the evolution of a conservative host-plant affiliation is colonisation. colonisation signifies a potential prelude to adaptation to a novel resource  <cit> . colonisation of a novel plant lineage is either a fundamental shift to a resource previously not utilised in the evolutionary past or a secondarily derived association with a lineage used in the past  <cit> . the phylogenetic distance and dispersion among terminal host taxa has been used to distinguish between these two possibilities  <cit> . furthermore, the relative time between the most recent common ancestor  of the host lineage and inferred colonisation is expected to be indicative of the extent of the distance in resource space between natal and novel host  <cit> . this measure is informative because it describes the extent of niche-expansion, differences between alternative niches, and provides a framework for identifying trade-offs between them. the most direct means of testing this distance is to determine whether the common ancestors of insect and plant clades are contemporaneous or not. the second phase following initial contact leads to reproductive isolation on the new host that is assumed to ensue via disruptive selection in sympatry, or by gene flow disruption and drift in allopatric or parapatric isolation.

acacia  mill.  is broadly distributed over australia with an estimated  <dig> species. a fossil-calibrated molecular study has placed the origin of the legume subfamily mimosoideae at approximately  <dig> mya  <cit> . the fossil record indicates that species of subfamily mimisoideae assignable to genera other than acacia   <cit>  were present in the eastern great australian bight approximately  <dig> mya during the oligocene. australian acacia is thus an immigrant taxon among a number of mimosoid genera and probably established in australia during the late oligocene–early miocene  <cit> . the evidence suggests acacia became a dominant part of sclerophyll communities in australia during the pliocene  <dig>  –  <dig>  mya.

thrips  that parasitise australian acacia are uncharacteristic of the other  <dig> estimated thysanopteran species that mostly exhibit generalist relationships with plants  <cit> . most of the tubulifera species  are fungivorous, some phytophagous, and fewer still are predators. approximately 15% of the  <dig> thrips species belonging to the tubulifera are able to induce galls. endemic northern tropical australian thrips include species belonging to genera present in southeast asian in the wet tropics  <cit>  suggesting thrips in australia had an ancestral origin in a tropical environment. thrips specialising on acacia comprise several distinct behavioural suites that exhibit variation in host-specificity and oviposition strategies  <cit> . acacia thrips, estimated to be in excess of  <dig> species  <cit> , feed almost exclusively on sections phyllodineae pedley, plurinerves benth., and juliflorae benth. . of the  <dig> acacia species, approximately  <dig> develop phyllodes, the expanded petiole believed to be necessary for the radiation of thrips on acacia. the most current molecular systematics of thysanoptera supports the monophyly of this group  <cit> . the domicile-building acacia thrips tie or glue phyllodes with silk to create a chamber. kleptoparasitic thrips species invade and kill gall-inducing or domicile-building thrips on acacia while opportunistic acacia thrips species utilise the abandoned domiciles, galls, or similar constructions of other insect orders.

here we construct the most comprehensive acacia  molecular phylogeny to date and compare it with the evolutionary history of acacia thrips. we expect one of three possible scenarios  explain the colonisation of acacia by thrips, each with a distinct timing pattern. phylogenetically contemporaneous common ancestors of insect and host plant are explained by insect lineages tracking the host with conserved host switching among related taxa. a pattern showing a considerably younger insect common ancestor compared to that of the host lineage is expected when a lineage that has not been used in its recent evolutionary past is colonised. an insect common ancestor that predates the host lineage requires invoking extinctions of insect lineages on other plant taxa or extinctions of distantly related ancestral host taxa. specifically, we test the hypotheses that: i) the mrca of acacia thrips was contemporaneous with the mrca of acacia ; ii) the mrca of acacia thrips postdates the origin of the mrca of acacia ; or iii) predates the mrca of acacia . we interpret the results in terms of distinguishing between colonisation of acacia, the evolution of host conservatism, and the evolution of ecological specialisation amongst thrips lineages with a focus on galling behaviour.

RESULTS
phylogenetic inference of acacia
we inferred phylogenies using parsimony-based and probabilistic approaches to evaluate uncertainty in topology, test deviations from taxonomic classifications, and generate a distribution of phylograms to be used in divergence time estimation . the reliability of the inferences between independent bayesian analyses was evaluated using the standard deviation of split frequencies that was below  <dig>  on all runs. the potential scale reduction factor  ranged from  <dig>  to  <dig>  for all parameters in the separate  <dig> ×  <dig> generations indicating consistent posterior parameters among runs. the bayesian consensus tree indicated several poorly supported deeper nodes, but otherwise resolved the section clades . our consensus tree showed good general agreement with section classifications  <cit> . the topologies of the parsimony, maximum likelihood, and bayesian inferences all indicated very similar polyphyletic groupings of species from all four sections . the sh-test for section monophyly indicated that  <dig> ml constraint trees generated using maximum liklehood were all significantly worse  than the topology of the bayesian consensus phylogeny.

considered together, species of sections phyllodineae and juliflorae cluster within the plurinerves as do plurinerves within the juliflorae. acacia colletioides  groups within a clade that is otherwise comprised of section botrycephalae. section botrycephalae is a derived clade of section phyllodineae. acacia elata and a. terminalis are paraphyletic with other botrycephalae in section phyllodineae. these topological associations are well supported in our bayesian inference  and all other inferences . acacia brachystachya  is well supported within section phyllodineae in all inferences. within juliflorae, a. stenophylla  is a well-supported sister-species of a. xiphophylla in all inferences. acacia heteroclita and a. confluens  also consistently grouped within the juliflorae. our inferences also show that section plurinerves comprises a. verniciflua, a. howittii, a. aspera, a. flexifolia, a. lineata, a. genistifolia, and a. montana, which have all been classified as phyllodineae species. these relationships were well-supported in the probabilistic inferences. acacia verticilata  grouped within the plurinerves clade. lineages that were not well resolved included a. cuthbersonii, a. coriacea, a. masliniana and a. havilandiorum, and the clade comprising a. floribunda, a. mucronata, a. longifolia, a. orites, and a. triptera.

phylogenetic inference of acacia thrips
inferences of acacia thrips phylogeny were undertaken using the same procedure as for acacia. the standard deviation of split frequencies was below  <dig>  on all runs. the potential scale reduction factor  was  <dig>  for all parameters in the  <dig> ×  <dig> generations runs. the bayesian consensus tree was largely concordant with that of previous work  <cit>  and with our parsimony and likelihood inferences . an important difference in our topology arises due to the uncertain placement of kladothrips antennatus in respect to the clade containing kladothrips zygus. previous phylogenetic inference  <cit>  also shows poor support for this relationship despite more thorough testing of topology.

acacia divergence timing models
we inferred divergence time estimates using bayesian and penalised likelihood  approaches. the null molecular clock hypothesis of equal evolutionary rates was rejected . the estimated sample size  performance criteria  indicated sufficient posterior parameter sampling. a total of n =  <dig> × 103acacia phylograms were filtered according to the topological constraint inferred with mrbayes. of these, n =  <dig> acacia pl chronograms were identical to the constraint. as this sample was not sufficient  to calculate confidence intervals, we used the geometric mean to summarise the ranges of node age estimates inferred using pl. the dates of the parallel divergence inferred from the bayesian approach and the geometric mean of the chronograms inferred using pl were  <dig>  and  <dig>  millions of years, respectively.

acacia thrips divergence timing models
we inferred timing estimates of acacia thrips to generate and test relative divergence timing hypotheses . the null molecular clock hypothesis was rejected . the ess performance criteria  indicated sufficient posterior parameter sampling. a total of n =  <dig> × 103acacia thrips phylograms were filtered according to a topological constraint inferred with mrbayes. of these n =  <dig> were identical to the constraint. after scaling node ages, the dates for the mrca of acacia thrips were  <dig>  mya under the bayesian consensus, and  <dig>  mya as the geometric mean calculated from the pl inferences.

testing between divergence timing models
the range of divergence timing estimates represented in our beast and r8s inferences were summarised as divergence timing models . the assumption of co-cladogenesis, contemporaneous mrca’s at  <dig> mya, and the maximal r8s estimate of approximately  <dig> million years for the mrca were also tested. bayes factor testing  between divergence timing models using stepping-stone sampling of the log marginal likelihoods among our three hypotheses for the mrca of acacia thrips were: ln = − <dig>  and ln = − <dig> ,  – ln) = ln =  <dig> ); ln = − <dig> ,  – ln) = ln =  <dig> ); and ln = − <dig> ,  – ln) = ln =  <dig> ). the path sampling approach produced comparable results: ln = − <dig>  and ln = − <dig> ,  – ln) = ln =  <dig> ); ln = − <dig> ,  – ln) = ln =  <dig> ); and ln = − <dig> ,  – ln) = ln =  <dig> ). both approaches indicate very strong support for the model where the mrca of acacia thrips occurred at approximately  <dig> mya . the harmonic mean estimator of the marginal likelihood is only decisive when the ln is >  <dig> . bayes factors below this threshold should be interpreted with caution. however, the strength of the model decreases with divergence estimates older than  <dig> mya under both approaches, indicating preference for the most recent estimate.

date priors for the common ancestor of acacia thrips and a parallel divergence event used to calibrate the thrips phylogeny. path and stepping-stone sampling were used to estimate marginal likelihoods of each the divergence timing model for bayes factor tests. a split in the thrips and acacia phylogenies was treated as fixed  <cit> .

path and stepping-stone sampling was used to estimate the marginal likelihoods of divergence models inferred with beast. bayes factor tests were made between the  <dig> mya origin of acacia thrips  and alternative timings based on penalised likelihood and bayesian inferences. a bf indicates the strength of support for the best over the worst  model.

discussion
our findings indicate that the common ancestor of acacia thrips postdates the common ancestor of acacia. putative absolute estimates of divergence timing indicate that thrips included acacia in their host range approximately  <dig> mya. we detected phylogenetic under-dispersion in host-species use that is consistent with i) cycles of oligophagy or polyphagy interspersed with repeated colonisations of acacia over protracted periods before the evolution of resource specialisation; and ii) colonisation of host phenotypes that favour resource use in one environment over the other. opportunistic and domicile-building thrips are polyphyletic groups whose common ancestors appeared between  <dig> and  <dig> mya. the galling genus kladothrips arose as recently as  <dig> mya and represents the least uncertain shift to more stringent host-specificity by thrips and specialisation solely on acacia. the common ancestors of the kleptoparasitic genus koptothrips, and the gallers on whom they specialise, arose at approximately the same time. the putative date for the origin of the galling clade is of particular interest because several hypotheses posited for adopting this life history strategy can now be contextualised with the evolution of the australian environment.

colonisation of acacia
by definition, colonisation and the change to include a new species implies a broadening of host range and a period of oligophagy. our ultrametric inference  for the transition between oligophagy  at colonisation and host conservatism on acacia, is explainable in several ways: i) oligophagy or polyphagy persisted for considerable evolutionary time after colonisation and before host conservatism on acacia and the evolution of specialised behaviour; ii) host conservatism on acacia evolved during or shortly after the colonisation of acacia and specialised behaviour considerably later; or iii) host-conservatism at macro-evolutionary scales has obscured patterns of recolonisations of acacia occurring at micro-evolutionary scales. given the estimate for the origin of acacia at  <dig> mya, our results  indicate that the earliest possible transition to host conservatism on acacia by thrips occurred at approximately  <dig> mya. uncertainty in our node estimates does not exclude earlier colonisation at  <dig>  mya.

thrips colonised acacia a considerable period after the host lineage radiated. recolonisations might be expected to occur after initial contact with acacia if there was an extended period before resource specialisation, and where host ranges include several plant taxa  <cit> . the ability to colonise a phylogenetically wider range of potential hosts is consistent with oligophagy and the relatively rapid colonisation of the juliflorae, plurinerves, and phyllodineae . ancestor lineages of these host sections existed before the mrca of the gallers. this suggests host switching among distantly related species was initially accompanied by high species-specificity . there appears to be a protracted period before specialised behaviour evolved between thrips lineages and with acacia. the  <dig> million year lag between the mrca of the gallers and their divergence from the other genera is a relatively deep split. primary and secondary associations with acacia appear to be derived. therefore, it is plausible that ancestors of extant species recolonised acacia numerous times subsequent to the evolution of host conservatism on acacia.

host conservatism in acacia thrips
conservative associations between an insect and host plant clade have been estimated at periods from  <dig> mya ,  <dig> mya ,  <dig> mya , to sometime since the cretaceous . the two former studies of parasitic associations reported delayed colonisation of the host. the latter two associations infer co-cladogenesis with rapid colonisation scenarios and involve pollination mutualisms. mutualisms are expected to select for more specific host conservatism due to the pollinator habit  <cit> . by comparison, parasitisms having relatively high species-specificity have been shown to involve switching between more distantly related plants  <cit> . generally, host-range limits vary between antagonistic associations compared to symbioses and mutualisms where narrower species-to-species dependencies are more common  <cit> . parasites of the galling habit exhibit wider host ranges than that of the prey species and evolve host-plant conservatism as a secondary association  <cit> . kleptoparasitic and opportunist thrips have evolved associations with acacia as secondary hosts presumably by targeting domiciles of other thrips species. ecological specialisation amongst acacia thrips characterized by primary and secondary associations predict forces selecting for host-plant conservatism will vary among the acacia thrips as do their host-plant ranges.

host conservatism is transitory as diet breadths of phytophagous insects fluctuate over time  <cit> . thrips with strict host plant associations are rare, exhibit a willingness to engage in feeding on a wide variety of plant families, and have similar feeding apparatus in all life stages  <cit> . this suggests plasticity in host plant tolerance is possibly linked to secondary associations with food resources that have been used in the evolutionary past  <cit>  and facilitated cycles of recolonisation. gall-inducing thrips, apart from those on acacia, are able to exploit multiple plant taxa  <cit> . this suggests host choice by thrips involves multiple evolutionarily labile traits. for example, galling by sawflies has arisen independently on multiple occasions across five plant families  <cit> . the nematine subfamily of sawflies that specialises on the genus salix also has several origins of galling, but on various parts of the plant  <cit> . therefore, trade-offs between plesiotypic trait compatibility among available plants  <cit>  and selection for traits resulting in host conservatism, should strongly favour thrips associations with acacia. in other words, a broad diet breadth facilitates colonisation of new plant lineages, but selection for host conservatism develops when genetic trade-offs in performance arise on the new host.

host conservatism and environment
shifting to a new host plant can result from trade-offs between alternative environments associated with natural enemies  <cit>  and larval or oviposition performance on alternative hosts  <cit> . thrips colonised acacia at a time when it presumably supported a similar diversity of insects as it does today  <cit> . as a result, thrips likely experienced fitness costs associated with predation or competition during colonisation. furthermore, host conservatism and ecological specialisation expressed by contemporary thrips species appears to have taken several millions of years to evolve as australia experienced pronounced environmental change and ecological disruption. our estimates suggest that the common ancestors of the thrips behavioural suites arose approximately at the beginning of the quaternary when australia’s climate was strongly linked to glacial/interglacial cycling  <cit> . before this period, australia experienced a more general transition from humid to seasonal climates. the development of arid environments resulted in profound structural changes to animal and plant communities  <cit>  including acacia <cit> . performance between host lineages has been shown to respond to such habitat gradients  <cit> . our timeline for the colonisation of acacia coincides with the first major step towards aridity during the mid-miocene and the development of a more acute dry season in central australia  <cit> . it is at this time that acacia replaced eucalyptus in the developing arid regions. acacia represented an expanding resource with geographical range changes that potentially influenced host resource suitability and predictability.

host conservatism evolved under transient abiotic and biotic conditions in a non-random manner during the diversification of acacia thrips. our inferences indicate that the phylogenetic distribution of acacia host-species compared to non-hosts is non-random. for example, one or several species of acacia in crown clades that support thrips have intermixed lineages that are absent of thrips parasitism. this form of phylogenetic under-dispersion, where host lineages are distantly related and intermixed among terminal branches, is characteristic of recolonisation episodes  <cit> . we suggest these patterns are robust to our incomplete sample. acacia thrips are a species poor group  compared to acacia . single species of acacia are known to support upto  <dig> thrips species, reducing the realised number of host species even further. similarly, at a very broad taxonomic scale, thrips radiations on several plant families have occurred with noticeable absences from others. thrips are associated with several angiosperm families including species of ficus , geijera parviflora , and casuarina  as well as genera specific to mosses, conifers, and cycads  <cit> . plant families with very few or no specific patterns of affiliation with thrips include myrtaceae, proteaceae, asteraceae, leguminosae, and poaceae. the latter two families have a remarkable diversity of thrips species attracted to flowers and leaves respectively, but with no perceivable pattern of affiliation. we propose that these phylogenetic patterns of under-dispersion are indicative of host conservatism driven by biotic and abiotic environmental compatibilities subsequent to delayed colonisation.

host conservatism and geographic distribution
thrips lineages associated with phylogenetically isolated host species suggests geographic range characteristics of non-host sister-taxa are not suited to supporting acacia thrips  <cit> . acacia have typical geographical range distributions with most species having small and intermediate range sizes and few with large distributions. the size of the host species geographic distribution appears independent of extant thrips associations, but might not be indicative of ancestral ranges during colonisation. for example, a. oswaldii is a broadly distributed arid-zone species inhabited by galling and kleptoparasitic thrips species. acacia oswaldii is phylogenetically distinct from sister-taxa that are not parasitised by thrips  suggesting this host has geographic range characteristics suited to the maintenance of acacia thrips populations while sister-species do not. acacia cuthbersonii, a. carneorum, and a. pickardii are also phylogenetically isolated, but these species have broad as well as very narrow geographic range distributions among them. phylogenetically isolated clades supporting thrips that include a. triptera, a. kempeana, a. aneura, a. citrinoviridis, and a. xiphophylla also have species with broad and narrow geographic distributions, suggesting historical factors are important to maintenance of acacia thrips populations. the acacia lineage possessing both species with phyllodes  as well as those with bipinnate leaves  are all presumably unsuitable for thrips inhabitation due to geographic range characteristics, biotic associations, or heritable traits. phyllodinous acacia are phylogenetically and chemically related to bipinnate forms  <cit> , providing some basis for the presence of heritable traits partly explaining thrips absence in this stem clade . we suggest these patterns are consistent with host conservatism among genetically similar and dissimilar hosts with heritable and non-heritable characteristics favouring host use.

ecological specialisation on acacia
host conservatism and host specialisation can be differentiated as the evolutionary conservative association of thrips and acacia, and the evolution of distinct phenotypes that emerge directly or indirectly as a result of host conservatism  <cit> . acacia thrips exhibit diverse phenotypes that characterise distinct forms of host specialisation that appear to have evolved in a cumulative manner on particular acacia-related traits. selection pressures and new ecological opportunities for specialisation arising during the course of climate transition should be dependent on stochastic and plesiotypic factors. our timeline for the origins of acacia thrips genera suggests the evolution of ecological specialisation was approximately contemporaneous, occurring midway between the common ancestor and the present. once the inclusion of a novel host-plant in the dietary range of an insect occurs, conservative interactions conceivably select for traits such as gall induction  <cit> . our findings show corresponding origins of domicile-building and kleptoparasitic thrips genera that are consistent with previous work  <cit> . it was suggested that gall-inducing was a selective response to kleptoparasitism. the observation that facultative kleptoparasitsm is present in some species of koptothrips suggests an intermediate stage of specialisation similar to opportunism that has responded to selection on habitat. these observations make it difficult to determine whether behavioural specialisation by kleptoparasitic lineages on the domicile-building and gall-inducing thrips evolved as a consequence of either biotic or abiotic pressures.

abiotic forces have a strong influence over trade-offs between heritable and non-heritable constraints on host use  <cit> . the physical environment and spatial context of hosts has been shown to structure insect communities  <cit> . for instance, the impetus for galling behaviour is believed to include non-mutually exclusive factors associated with avoidance of natural enemies  <cit> , minimising environmental stress  <cit> , or optimising nutritional choices  <cit> . galling arose in kladothrips near the miocene-quaternary boundary. pronounced ecological transitions during the quaternary would have changed the selective landscape in australia. evidence of non-random host associations such as phylogenetic under-dispersion is also indicative of specialised behaviour as a response to habitat and resource selection  <cit> . this type of host-plant conservatism suggests colonisation of phenotypes that favour host-use in one environment over the other . for instance, the evolution of galling is believed to be favoured in harsh xeric environments  <cit>  that became particularly pronounced in australia during the quaternary. however, acacia thrips are more species rich and occupy more diverse ecological roles outside the arid biome. at the other climatic extreme, acacia thrips are absent from hydric habitats in southeastern australia  <cit> . social behaviour in kladothrips arose with the evolution of a specialised defensive caste and is symptomatic of species distributed in non-arid areas. an alternative strategy exhibited by non-social kladothrips species is the adoption of physogastry and extreme fecundity. this ‘boom-or-bust’ lifestyle tends to characterise arid-distributed species. these hypotheses remain untested. behavioural differentiation between environments predicts that ecological specialisation under conditions alternating between xeric and mesic environments, was based on selection on behaviour and habitat specialisation.

CONCLUSIONS
a considerably younger acacia thrips common ancestor compared to that of acacia is consistent with colonisation of a lineage that has not been used as a host in its recent evolutionary past. presumably either oligophagous or polyphagous ancestral thrips populations were able to feed on and recognise acacia subsequent to the evolution of host conservatism. we propose that colonisation of acacia was initially characterised by either oligophagy or polyphagy and subsequent recolonisations by a number of ancestral lineages. colonisation of phenotypically and environmentally suitable lineages occurred over a protracted period that resulted in phylogenetically under-dispersed pattern of host conservatism. the evolution of host conservatism on suitable acacia lineages facilitated the evolution of ecological specialisation during a period that coincided with aridification and ecological disturbance in australia. our findings support the hypothesis that host conservatism is a process shaped by changing abiotic and biotic forces, and ecological specialisation an additive process imposed by changing selective pressures on habitat preference and behaviour.

