BACKGROUND
in various research fields, microarray analysis is frequently being used as a tool to analyze alterations of the transcriptome in response to different stimuli. however, this technology often has serious limitations related to its sensitivity, specificity and reproducibility  <cit> . a key step in the generation of reliable data involves the isolation and processing of the rna, since high quality rna is needed to obtain accurate results.

in the field of virology, microarrays are often used as a diagnostic tool to detect the presence of certain viruses within biological samples or to discover new viruses  <cit> . in addition, microarray analysis is regularly applied to identify host genes of which the expression is altered upon virus infection. whole-genome profiling of virus-infected cells, in combination with other large-scale, high-throughput technology, rapidly increases our knowledge of virus-host interactions and may eventually lead to the production of new antivirals  <cit> . often these screens are performed using cultured cells with high doses of virus in order to infect all the cells present. as most viruses replicate and transcribe their genome very efficiently, the resulting high levels of viral rna  may be expected to interfere with the microarray analysis. the potential interference of vrna with array procedures is of particular concern when the vrnas are polyadenylated, given that most microarray protocols involve mrna amplification using oligo primers, thereby hence also amplifying viral mrnas. this potential problem especially holds true for rna viruses, including coronaviruses , the replication of which has been shown to result in an exponential increase in vrna levels within hours after inoculation of the cells  <cit> .

covs are enveloped, positive-stranded rna viruses and are well-known pathogens in man and animals. their relevance has increased significantly with the current surfacing of new human covs , such as the severe acute respiratory syndrome -cov  <cit> , hcov-nl <dig>  <cit> , and hcov-hku <dig>  <cit> . covs replicate exclusively within the cytoplasm of their target cells, producing a nested set of subgenomic mrnas , which contain identical 5' and 3' terminal sequences  <cit> . these mrnas are transcribed by a discontinuous transcription mechanism; they acquire a 5' cap structure and become 3' polyadenylated, which makes them equivalent to host cellular mrnas  <cit> . gene expression profiling of coronavirus-infected cells has been performed in several microrarray studies in order to get more insight in the coronavirus-host interactions that contribute to pathogenesis  <cit> .

although large numbers of genes with altered expression have been identified in virus-infected cells, no report exists, which addresses to what extent the high levels of vrna affect microarray performance. therefore we investigated the potentially disturbing effect of vrna overrepresentation on array outcome by using the mouse hepatitis coronavirus  as a model and by employing two different microarray platforms. our observations indeed show that the presence of vrnas in the preparation interferes quite dramatically with the genechip assays. removal of vrnas from the total rna pool before the processing of the rna for subsequent array hybridization drastically decreased the number of false positive hits for one platform and increased overall sensitivity in both systems. we conclude that depleting vrnas from infected cell total rna extracts is beneficial for the microarray analysis not only of cornavirus infection but probably for many other virus infections as well. in addition, the approach is likely to be equally advantageous in other circumstances where 'contaminating'  rnas constitute a significant fraction of the target rna to be processed for microrarray analysis.

RESULTS
vrna interferes with microarray analysis
in order to investigate the potential interference of vrna during microarray procedures, we first analyzed in detail the synthesis of vrna during the course of an mhv infection and the subsequent effect of the presence of vrna on the mrna amplification plots. to this end, we infected lr <dig> cells with mhv-a <dig>  and determined the amount of vrna at different time-points p.i. using quantitative taqman rt-pcr. as is shown in fig. 2a, early in infection there is an exponential increase of the vrna levels. the  <dig> h and  <dig> h p.i. time-points, which differ approximately  <dig> fold in their amounts of vrna, were chosen for further analysis. total rna extracts obtained from mock- and mhv-infected cells were subjected to the mrna amplification protocol, after which the resulting crna was analyzed with the bioanalyzer. as previously mentioned, coronaviral rnas are polyadenylated, and should therefore also be amplified with the oligo primers. whereas amplification of mrna of mock- and mhv-infected cells at  <dig> h p.i. resulted in similar bioanalyzer profiles, aberrant peaks were observed after amplification of the mrna derived from mhv-infected cells at  <dig> h p.i. . the most abundant peak within the latter amplification plot corresponded in size with the most abundant subgenomic rna of mhv  <cit> , which encodes the n protein . determination of the peak surface area showed that at least 40% of the amplified mrna pool is of viral origin.

next, microarray experiments were performed to study the effect of these huge amounts of vrna present in the target crna samples. first, 70-mer oligonucleotide arrays, which are routinely used in the utrecht microarray facility, were used as proof of principle. as shown in the scatter plots in fig. 2c, expression of only few genes was upregulated at  <dig> h p.i., whereas there appeared to be a dramatic increase in the number of genes, the expression of which was upregulated at  <dig> h p.i. however, quantitative rt-pcr could not confirm the differential expression of several of these genes . for example, the very high level of expression of the usp <dig> gene in mhv-infected cells at  <dig> h p.i., according to the array analysis, could not be validated by quantitative rt-pcr. in addition, expression of several other genes, which were identified as highly upregulated by the array analysis, could not be detected by taqman rt-pcr both in infected and mock-infected cells. interestingly, when the nucleotide sequences of the oligonucleotides on the arrays, of these apparently false-positive hits, where compared to the n gene nucleotide sequence, small stretches  of identical sequences were observed , substantiating the suggestion of cross-hybridization of vrna to specific sequences on the arrays.

cross-hybridization of vrna to arrays
the cross-hybridization of vrnas to the arrays was further explored by performing a similar experiment as described above. only now, the mock- and mhv-infected cells were treated with actd, which blocks cellular transcription but not mhv replication  <cit> . by using this inhibitor of cellular transcription we were able to discriminate between genuine upregulation of gene expression and cross-hybridization. apparent upregulation of gene expression in the presence of actd, is most likely caused by cross-hybridization of vrnas to the arrays. amplification of the mrna obtained from the mhv-infected, actd-treated cells again resulted in the appearance of aberrant peaks, which were not observed in the amplification plots of the mock-infected cells . the subsequent microarray experiment  gave similar results to the one shown in fig. 2c. almost  <dig> genes were upregulated under both conditions, indicating that most genes identified by the array analysis are indeed the result of cross-hybridization and not of induction of gene expression . moreover,  <dig> genes were specifically identified in the experiment with actd. since viral mrna is efficiently replicated and transcribed in the presence of actd, while cellular transcription is blocked, the identification of these genes probably results from a relative increase in the amount of vrna within the target crna samples. indeed, comparison of the bioanalyzer profiles shown in fig. 3a and fig. 2b showed that the aberrant peak is higher after treatment with actd. interestingly, there is also a significant number of genes downregulated in the absence and presence of actd, indicating that a post-transcriptional mrna decay pathway is induced during mhv infection, a phenomenon which we described recently  <cit> .

extraction of vrna from total rna improves microarray analysis
since the vrnas appear to affect the array analysis significantly, we employed a technology to remove these rnas from the total rna pool before processing of the samples for microarray analysis . for this purpose, biotinylated oligonucleotides  complementary to three regions of the mhv-a <dig> genomic and subgenomic rnas  were designed . the same rna samples as described above were now subjected to the vrna removal protocol. in short, the rna samples were incubated with the mhv-specific oligo's under stringent hybridization conditions, after which the captured vrnas were bound to streptavidin-coated beads, and removed. quantitative rt-pcr targeting the viral n gene, which is present in all mhv-encoded rnas, demonstrated that approximately 90% of the vrnas were removed by this procedure . amplification of mrnas from the samples treated with the mhv-specific oligo's confirmed the removal of the vrnas from the total rna pool as judged from the almost complete absence of the aberrant peaks in the bioanalyzer profiles . importantly, the vrna capture procedure did not appear to affect the bioanalzyer mrna amplification plots of the mock-infected cells . next, the effect of the vrna-depletion on the microarray performance was studied. thus, microarray analysis was performed as described above except that the target samples, derived from both infected and mock-infected cells, were treated with the mhv-specific biotinylated oligo's. the results are shown in fig. 4b. as is evident from the scatter plot, the number of apparently upregulated transcripts was greatly reduced. increased expression of almost  <dig> genes was no longer detected after vrna depletion when compared to the standard approach . this result is consistent with the notion that vrnas can hybridize to specific sequences on the arrays. thus, removal of vrnas results in a significant reduction of the number of false positive hits.  <dig> genes were identified under both conditions. this set of genes is likely to contain several hits that are still the result of cross-hybridization, since vrna depletion was not 100%. for example, usp <dig> and figla, two highly upregulated genes, the differential expression of which could not be confirmed by quantitative rt-pcr, were still present within this collection of genes, although the transcriptional upregulation of these genes as judged from the microarray experiment was much less pronounced .  <dig> genes out of these  <dig> hits were not detected in the experiment with actd, indicating that these genes are specifically upregulated at the transcriptional level upon infection of cells with mhv. some of these genes were validated by quantitative rt-pcr  and have already been described elsewhere  <cit> . interestingly, transcriptional upregulation of  <dig> genes could only be detected with the microarray experiment after removal of the vrna. for some of these genes, we confirmed their differential expression by quantitative rt-pcr .

we also compared the number of downregulated transcripts in absence or presence of the vrna capture procedure. the majority of identified genes overlapped  between both procedures, and downregulation of several transcripts was confirmed by quantitative rt-pcr  <cit> . however, more downregulated transcripts were identified with the standard method  than with the vrna depletion approach,  <dig> versus  <dig> genes, respectively . downregulation of  <dig> transcripts was specifically detected with standard method, while  <dig> genes were exclusively detected with the new approach. the reduced number of downregulated transcripts after removal of the vrnas is likely caused by the normalization procedure, which relies on the assumption that the bulk of genes are not differentially expressed between samples  <cit> . thus, a large number of false-positive hits, caused by cross-hybridization of vrnas, will result in an overrepresentation of downregulated transcripts.

although we cannot completely exclude that the oligo capture procedure, besides vrnas, also extracts some cellular mrnas, it is obvious that this method improves the accuracy and sensitivity of the array analysis significantly. first, the number of false positive hits reduced dramatically, making follow-up analyses much easier to perform. secondly, the improved microarray approach allowed the additional detection of several differentially expressed genes, which are potentially important targets for further research.

vrna extraction improves affymetrix microarray performance
next we analyzed whether the removal of vrna also improves the performance using another array platform. to this end, we used the commonly used affymetrix genechips® mouse genome  <dig>  <dig>  arrays. the same rna samples, previously used for the experiments with the 70-mer oligonucleotide arrays, were now processed for analysis on the affymetrix arrays as described in the methods section. using genechips®, the standard method detected the upregulation of  <dig> transcripts upon mhv infection, whereas the vrna capture procedure resulted in the identification of  <dig> upregulated transcripts,  <dig> of which were only detected after vrna depletion . the differential expression of some of these genes, which could only be detected after vrna removal, was validated by quantitative rt-pcr . both with the standard as with the vrna depletion method,  <dig> downregulated transcripts were identified.  <dig> genes were excluded from detection by vrna depletion, whereas  <dig> genes were specifically downregulated by using this approach. although the problem of cross-hybridization  that was observed with the 70-mer oligonucleotide arrays did not become apparent with the affymetrix arrays, we could clearly observe an improved microarray performance with the affymetrix arrays. not only were more genes identified, the expression of which was induced upon infection, also the fold changes were found to be increased after vrna clearance. this phenomenon was also observed in the experiments with the 70-mer oligonucleotide arrays. thus, when the expression levels of the genes, identified by both array platforms using the vrna depletion method , were compared to the expression levels in the experiments without vrna depletion, a significant increase in the fold changes was observed on both array platforms . the differential expression of some of these genes was validated by using quantitative rt-pcr . note that this observation also holds true for most other upregulated transcripts that were detected with only one array platform . conclusively, these results show that the removal of abundant 'contaminating' vrnas in our cov system enhanced the ability to detect differential expression of host mrna using microarray technology.

discussion
since microarray technology at the present has progressed towards a point where technical variation, background noise, and a lack of accuracy have greatly improved, the critical step has moved towards the preparation of the rna sample. non-specific hybridization is one of the problems that can frequently occur, especially when there is partial degradation of the rna  <cit> . in addition, high amounts of 'contaminating' rna are likely to add to this problem and to interfere with microarray analysis. especially in rna samples derived from virus-infected cells where high amounts of a limited number of 'contaminating' rnas are to be expected. in the case of coronaviruses, replication and transcription results in the formation of a nested set of subgenomic mrnas that are 5' capped and 3' polyadenylated . in time, the amount of coronavirus vrna increases exponentially. most microarray protocols use mrna amplification, which also results in amplification of coronavirus rnas. indeed, at  <dig> h post infection, substantial aberrant peaks were observed, when the amplified mrnas were analyzed with the bioanalyzer.

the presence of high levels of mhv vrna affected the microarray analyses, depending on the microarray platform used. on the one hand, the high amounts of vrna were shown to result in a large number of false-positive hits probably as a result of mishybridization of vrnas with specific oligonucleotides of the 70-mer oligonucleotide arrays. indeed, small stretches  of homologous sequences were observed between vrnas and the oligonucleotides corresponding with the false-positive hits. on the other hand, the same high number of false positive hits was not observed with the affymetrix arrays, which contain multiple, much shorter, oligonucleotides per gene. long nucleotide probes, rather than short , demonstrate less non-specific binding, as is often observed when partially degraded rna samples are used, due to better hybridization and wash stringency  <cit> . more importantly, however, affymetrix genechips® expression values are calculated by analyzing at least  <dig> different probes that anneal to the 3' end of each target transcript. thus, cross-hybridization of vrna to only one of these probes may not result in an over-estimation of induced gene expression, and will be considered an outlier. however, also for the affymetrix arrays, the capture and removal of the 'contaminating' vrnas clearly increased the sensitivity and accuracy of the microarray experiments. removal of vrna lowered the threshold for the detection of differentially transcribed genes, thereby identifying potentially important genes for the understanding of virus-host interactions.

mhv-a <dig> vrnas were removed from the total rna samples using the globinclear kit  with the use of an alternative oligo capture mix, containing three 5' biotinylated oligo's that are complementary to either the 5' leader sequence, the n gene, or the 3' utr of the mhv-a <dig> genome. with each of the three oligo's we could target all vrnas produced in an mhv-infected cell , resulting in a 90% reduction of vrna present in the total rna sample. care was taken in the design of the oligos in order to minimize removal of cellular rnas. however, the procedure may be optimized further by using alternative capture oligos. this method proved to be better than a rnase h digestion protocol, in which we tried to remove the poly tail from the vrnas specifically by using the mhv-specific oligo targeting the 3'utr. rnase h would digest vrna bound to the dna oligo, thereby preventing subsequent vrna amplification during crna synthesis. although we could indeed see some improvement of the microarray performance after rnase h digestion , the improvement was less pronounced compared to direct vrna removal using the globinclear system.

the globinclear kit has been designed to remove globin mrnas from total blood rna samples. expression array data generated from whole blood total rna samples are commonly known to have reduced detection sensitivity compared to data from fractionated blood samples  <cit> . this is mainly caused by the fact that globin mrna constitutes a large fraction  of the total rna pool, since globin mrna is highly expressed in red blood cells and reticulocytes. microarray analysis has shown that the high amounts of globin mrna transcripts resulted in decreased sensitivity and increased variation. similarly, depletion of these abundant 'contaminating' transcripts from the whole blood total rna samples also resulted in increased sensitivity  <cit> . this observed increase in detection sensitivity after targeted rna depletion could well be a result of decreased competition between the abundant rna and cellular mrna for access to the amplification reagents. removal of these "contaminating" rnas will than lead to an increased labeling of host mrnas, which is detectable by microarray hybridizations. in our experiments, the quality assessment metrics of the affymetrix arrays indeed showed an increase in the number of detected probe sets after vrna depletion .

high levels of 'contaminating' vrnas, are not only expected in rna samples derived from coronavirus-infected cells, but also from cells infected with other rna viruses. for flaviviruses, the vrnas of which do not contain polyadenylated 3'utrs, mrna amplification with oligo primers should be sufficient to diminish the effect of vrnas on microarray performance. however, the mrnas synthesized by most other rna viruses contain poly tails. in case of picorna- or alphaviruses, infection results in the rapid production of high amounts of only  <dig> or  <dig> species of polyadenlyated vrnas  <cit> . therefore, only a limited set of oligo's is likely to be required to remove these transcripts from total rna samples by means of the oligo-capture procedure. for orthomyxoviruses, which contain segmented rna genomes from which different polyadenylated vrnas are produced  <cit> , a set of oligonucleotides will be required to eliminate all vrna species. it will be of interest to investigate whether microarray expression profiling studies performed with rna samples derived from cells infected with other viruses also benefit from the removal of vrnas.

CONCLUSIONS
in this study we show that the presence of abundant viral rnas interferes with microarray gene expression profiling, affecting both the accuracy and sensitivity of the procedure. targeted removal of vrna improved the microarray analyses significantly on different array platforms.

