BACKGROUND
a holistic understanding of cellular metabolism is central to systems biology and metabolic engineering: in order to amplify the flux through production pathways in industrial strains we have to understand how the metabolic network responds to our interventions.

several methods can suggest rational interventions that may lead to favourable industrial phenotypes . their goal is to optimize the distribution of metabolic fluxes towards the product of interest, either directly  or indirectly by coupling it to another characteristic  that facilitates further strain improvements via mutation and screening.

while these methods can predict a final flux distribution, they do not predict the range of genetic and metabolic responses of the organism after the targeted mutation. at the same time, it would be highly desirable to have tools that may predict these responses, since they can suggest ways to generate more stable strains, or accelerate the adaptation to an intended optimal flux. the challenge of the question is the need to understand why particular genetic responses make sense in an evolutionary setting. thus, the ultimate question is: which parallel pathways - that were not active previously - result in an adaptive advantage under the screening conditions?

pathway analysis has received increased attention due to the reconstruction of genome scale metabolic networks for many organisms. these methods can be divided into two categories: stoichiometric and path oriented . the first approach generates all pathways that conform to the pseudo-steady-state assumption for internal metabolites. however, it presents two problems: the number of predicted pathways is in the order of millions for genome scale models, making the approach totally intractable for the question at hand  <cit> . its second shortcoming is the constraint imposed by the pseudo-steady-state assumption for internal metabolites. this assumption may rule out feasible pathways or  result again in a combinatorial explosion of pathways. the alternative approach - path oriented pathway reconstructions - is advantageous since it usually generates a small  set of possible pathways. this is due to the choice of starting and ending metabolites and heuristics on the characteristics of the "optimal" pathway. however, the path-oriented approach may result in unrealistic pathways that consume internal metabolites not present in sufficient quantities inside the cell.

what is needed is an algorithm that reconstructs stoichiometrically balanced pathways in increasing order of complexity, with relaxed mass-balance constraints in comparison to the traditional pseudo-steady-state restriction.

a solution based on mixed-integer linear programming  has been suggested by de figueiredo et al.  <cit> , but it has not been used in an evolutionary context so far. here we describe the use of boolean satisfiability  for the reconstruction of alternative pathways in metabolic networks. given a set of basal metabolites  and a set of target metabolites , our sat method constructs the shortest pathway between the basal and target sets  of metabolites that is stoichiometrically balanced, while allowing the concentration of the intermediate metabolites to increase, if needed. the constraints are more relaxed than the ones for e.g. flux balance analysis, thus retaining the metabolically significant pathways. using the algorithm iteratively, we obtain a prioritized list of pathways, whose elements can be tested individually by common molecular biology techniques.

to demonstrate the power of this concept, we applied the spabbats algorithm to a complex physiological problem, which is a result of an evolutionary experiment. we have elucidated a novel pathway of glutamate degradation present in the metabolic network of b. subtilis that had been decryptified upon inactivation of the normal glutamate catabolic genes. by using our sat approach, we proposed four different new pathways that could be present in the mutant to utilize glutamate as single carbon source. these predictions were experimentally tested and revealed that one of these pathways was indeed active in the mutant strain and that this novel "suppressor" pathway is required and sufficient for glutamate utilization. this proves that the results of our approach correspond to valid metabolic alternatives for living cells.

RESULTS
isolation of a mutation that allows a bypass of the glutamate dehydrogenase for the utilization of glutamate
glutamate is the most abundant metabolite in a bacterial cell. although its exact concentration in b. subtilis is unknown, it is known to account for about 40% of the internal metabolite pool of an escherichia coli cell  <cit> . glutamate serves as an osmotic regulator  <cit> , as well as universal amino group donor in anabolism thus linking carbon and nitrogen metabolism  <cit> . in b. subtilis, at least  <dig> reactions make use of glutamate as cofactor for transamination  <cit> .

the key reactions of glutamate biosynthesis and degradation in b. subtilis are summarized in figure  <dig>  2-oxoglutarate, an intermediate of the citric acid cycle, is aminated by the glutamate synthase, encoded by the glta and gltb genes. glutamate degradation to 2-oxoglutarate requires the glutamate dehydrogenase rocg. additionally, the laboratory strain b. subtilis  <dig> harbours a cryptic gene, gudb, coding for an inactive glutamate dehydrogenase. this gene is readily decryptified in rocg mutants  <cit> . in addition, rocg controls the expression of the gltab operon and therefore prevents glutamate biosynthesis in the presence of arginine  <cit> .

inactivation of both the rocg and the gudb gene results in loss of any glutamate dehydrogenase activity and concomitant inability of the bacteria to utilize glutamate  <cit> . the rocg gudb double mutant strain gp <dig> grows poorly on sp medium  due to the accumulation of degradation products of arginine metabolism  <cit> . however, cultivation of gp <dig> on sp plates eventually resulted in the isolation of a mutant  that carries a mutation inactivating the gltb gene, encoding a subunit of the glutamate synthase  <cit> . this mutation leads to glutamate auxotrophy and might therefore prevent the accumulation of intermediates of arginine degradation. we have observed that toxic intermediates of arginine degradation result in poor growth of mutants lacking a functional glutamate dehydrogenase . if intrinsic glutamate synthesis is blocked by a mutation, such an accumulation of toxic intermediates might be reduced. a careful analysis of the mutant strain revealed that it had acquired the ability to utilize glutamate as the only source of carbon and energy. this might have resulted from a re-activation of the rocg or gudb genes or from the establishment of a novel pathway for glutamate utilization. we tested therefore the rocg and gudb alleles by pcr analysis. both the transposon insertion in rocg and the replacement of the gudb gene by a chloramphenicol resistance gene were identical to the parent strain gp <dig>  clearly, a new pathway of glutamate degradation was activated in this suppressor mutant that was not active in the wild type and rocg gudb mutant cells.

development of a pathway-finding algorithm
the most reasonable hypothesis to explain the suppression was that the mutation had activated a redundant pathway that is inactive in the wild type strain in a medium with glutamate as single carbon source. since glutamate is a highly abundant metabolite and is involved as a substrate in  <dig> reactions in b. subtilis, it was not obvious which mutation could have lead to glutamate utilization proficiency in b. subtilis gp <dig> 

to address this problem by use of the power of bioinformatics, we developed an approach that harnesses the strengths of boolean satisfiability  to find valid pathways . it is able to find short pathways between a basis and a target set  of metabolites that can operate in a sustained way. it is convenient for its focus on short pathways and the fact that it can calculate pathways that comply with the steady-state constraint. it also allows the relaxation of this constraint, by allowing some metabolites to accumulate if necessary.

the first four pathways suggested by our algorithm are presented in figure  <dig>  in each case, the first step is a transamination reaction that leads to the production of 2-oxoglutarate. the substrate for transamination is then replenished via the remaining reaction of the pathway. the first pathway  involves transamination to form alanine and subsequent oxidative deamination of alanine by the alanine dehydrogenase ald resulting in the net formation of 2-oxoglutarate. the next two pathways  are very similar and involve enzymes of branched amino acid metabolism. in the transamination step, both pathways use the transaminases ybge and ywaa. the branched chain amino acid dehydrogenase bcd is then used for the oxidative deamination of the transamination products valine or leucine. again, the net result of this pathway is the production of 2-oxoglutarate from glutamate. the last pathway  requires four steps,  the reaction of the aspartate aminotransferase aspb,  the deamination of asparate to fumarate by the aspartase ansb,  the fumarase reaction  of the citric acid cycle, and finally  the oxidation of malate by the malate dehydrogenase mdh. as described for the other pathways, this reaction sequence results in the net formation of 2-oxoglutarate from glutamate. since the original mutant gp <dig> did not grow with glutamate as the single carbon source, it is obviously not able to use any of these proposed pathways suggesting that they were activated by a suppressor mutation in gp <dig> 

experimental validation of the predictions
our experiments were performed in minimal medium suggesting that the activity of transaminases was not limiting. similarly, the two enzymes of the citric acid cycle  are constitutively expressed  <cit> . thus, the mutation may have affected the expression of one of the deaminases ald, bcd or ansb. this hypothesis was tested by reverse transcription-real-time quantitative pcr. as shown in figure  <dig>  the levels of ald and bcd mrna are comparable for the original mutant gp <dig> and the suppressor strain gp <dig>  in contrast, a strong increase of the expression of the ansab operon encoding the asparaginase and aspartase was observed for the suppressor mutant that was able to utilize glutamate. this observation suggests that it is the high-level expression of ansb that allows glutamate utilization in gp <dig> 

the involvement of the aspartase ansb in the novel glutamate utilization pathway was verified by analysing the effect of a deletion of the ansab operon. growth of the original strain gp <dig>  the suppressor mutant gp <dig> and its isogenic Δansab mutant derivative gp <dig> in minimal medium with glutamate or with glutamate and glucose was recorded. as shown in figure  <dig>  all three strains were able to grow with glutamate and glucose. in contrast, the deletion of the ansab operon reverted the capability of the suppressor strain of using glutamate as the single carbon source, and the Δansab mutant gp <dig> was unable to grow with glutamate as was the original strain gp <dig>  this finding strongly supports the idea that the activity of the aspartase ansb is the reason for the ability of the suppressor strain gp <dig> to utilize glutamate.

the ansab operon is induced in the presence of asparagine due to inactivation of the ansr repressor  <cit> . a comparative analysis of ansab expression revealed about 30-fold induction by asparagine in gp <dig>  whereas the expression levels were unaffected by the availability of asparagine in the suppressor mutant gp <dig> . the observed induction in the wild type strain is good agreement with previous reports. the loss of regulation in gp <dig> and the high expression of the operon as compared to gp <dig> suggest constitutive ansab expression that might be the result of an inactivation of the ansr repressor gene.

to test the hypothesis that inactivation of the ansr repressor allowed glutamate utilization by gp <dig>  we performed two tests: first, we deleted the ansr gene of the parental strain gp <dig> and tested the ability of the resulting strain gp <dig> to grow with glutamate as the single carbon source. unlike gp <dig>  this strain gp <dig>  grew in ce minimal medium. thus, inactivation of the ansr gene is sufficient to open a new pathway for glutamate catabolism. in a complementary approach, we complemented b. subtilis gp <dig> with a plasmid-borne copy of the ansr gene  and tested the ability of the transformants to use glutamate. while the control strain  grew well on ce medium, expression of ansr from the plasmid completely blocked growth in this medium, i. e. the utilization of glutamate. this result confirms that a mutation in the ansr gene must be present in gp <dig> and that it is this mutation, which confers the bacteria with the ability to utilize glutamate via the new aspartase pathway.

to identify the mutation in ansr, we sequenced the ansr alleles of the parental strain gp <dig> and the glutamate-utilizing suppressor mutant gp <dig>  while the wild type allele of ansr was present in gp <dig>  a c-to-a substitution at position  <dig> of the ansr open reading frame was found in gp <dig>  this mutation changes codon  <dig> from uca  to uaa  and results in premature translation termination and the formation of an incomplete and non-functional ansr repressor protein.

taken together, these experiments confirmed that the metabolic pathway predicted by the spabbats algorithm corresponds to a valid metabolic state of the rocg gudb ansr mutant strain gp <dig> 

discussion
comparison of spabbats with other methods for metabolic analysis
flux balance analysis  <cit>  and the majority of methods derived from it are based on constraining the admissible intracellular flux space to steady-state and choosing an adequate optimality criterion to calculate intracellular fluxes. commonly used optimization criteria are biomass production and the maximization of energy output.

although these methods predict the essentiality of genes with high accuracy  <cit> , they are less suited for the characterization of alternative metabolic pathways in viable mutants. on the one hand, by restricting the admissible intracellular flux to steady-state, they discard pathways where a by-product accumulates. nonetheless, the cell is still viable if this by-product is consumed by other pathways in the cell, not directly related to the process that is studied. spabbats solves this problem by allowing a larger flux-space, where intermediate products can accumulate, if necessary.

on the other hand, the optimality criterion can be artificial. for instance, maximizing cellular growth might lead to a theoretical maximum growth rate, or a flux distribution that is as close to the wild-type flux as possible, but it is hard to argue that the regulatory network of the strain is directed to the same target. the pathways discovered by spabbats are a structural property of the network and do not depend on an extrinsic optimality criterion . for this reason, the resulting pathways can be interpreted objectively.

other methods for structural decomposition  rely on the same steady-state restriction of fba related methods and for this reason share some of their disadvantages. moreover, spabbats does not require the calculation of all possible pathways. instead, it can be used iteratively to calculate pathways of increasing length, which results in a dramatic improvement in performance for finding relevant pathways in large networks.

an advantage over the method of de figueiredo et al.  <cit>  is that we do not make use of an optimization framework, but select for satisfiability instead. similar problems in other areas of computational biology  show a performance improvement of sat methods over traditional mixed-integer linear programming methods.

future perspectives
so far, our analysis of networks using sat has been restricted to metabolic networks. nonetheless, since sat is especially suited for problems that involve boolean constraints, it is possible to expand the analysis to regulatory networks. for b. subtilis, this implies the reconstruction of the metabolic network together with its regulatory complement. this reconstruction is in progress  <cit> .

in parallel, we envision the development of novel sat solvers that are optimized for the solution of metabolic constraints. this will result in the adoption of sat based methods for metabolic engineering as well as for the design of synthetic circuits that are able to perform computations in the same way as their silicon-made counterparts  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
in this contribution we have shown the use of sat techniques to discover alternative pathways that connect sets of starting and target species. in addition, we provided a proof of concept for the applicability of the algorithm. we started with a complex physiological problem in b. subtilis: the need to characterize a suppressor mutation that allowed growth on glutamate without glutamate dehydrogenases. spabbats predicted four potential pathways for glutamate utilization that were decisive to suggest target genes for experimentation. these experiments confirmed the validity of the spabbats' prediction, closing the cycle between modelling and wet lab experimentation.

spabbats relies on boolean satisfiability  to construct the metabolic pathways. sat has been used for the determination of haplotypes from sequenced genotypes  <cit> , the analysis of genome biology networks  <cit> , the understanding of myogenic differentiation  <cit> , and the characterization of steady states of regulatory circuits  <cit> . here we report the first application of sat techniques to metabolic problems.

the spabbats algorithm was applied here to a specific problem, the analysis of glutamate metabolism in b. subtilis. however, the solution strategies are applicable to a broad spectrum of metabolic problems. for instance, spabbats can be particularly useful in the characterization of suppressor mutants. moreover, spabbats can also be useful in synthetic biology. although used here to find pathways in a reconstruction of the metabolism of b. subtilis, it is also possible to use a database of enzymes as the starting model. in this way, it can be used to construct synthetic pathways that satisfy specific input-output and mass-balance requirements.

