BACKGROUND
the evolutionary pressures that have driven hepatitis b virus  variation remain incompletely understood. using whole hbv genotype sequencing, this variability can usefully be classified into at least eight families  with a characteristic geographic distribution . alternatively, hbv strains can be classified serologically on the basis of antibody to surface antigen . these two classifications broadly correlate, although some subtypes appear in more than one genotype. the extent of genetic diversity reflects the evolutionary history of the virus and the rate of genomic mutation, as well as gene specific selection forces. several models of hbv evolution have been proposed  but fundamental parameters, such as the rate of interspecies transmission or the rate of nucleotide mutation  remain unresolved  <cit> . nevertheless, it is generally assumed that the emergence of hbv families may reflect adaptation to the genotype of the prevalent human host population  <cit> .

the clinical course of hbv infection is very variable. acute infections in adults are usually effectively controlled, but occasionally lead to fulminant hepatitis and death. in a proportion of individuals however, infection leads to chronic viral replication, which can lead to severe liver damage or hepatocellular carcinoma. host factors including immune status clearly play a major role in determining clinical outcome. for example, perinatal transmission leads to up to 90% chronic carriership, while the figure is less than 10% for adults. however, pathogenicity has also been linked to virus genotype and several different mechanisms have been proposed for this observation  <cit> . sequence changes occurring during the course of infection  have also been extensively documented. one common example is the introduction of a stop codon in the precore region which results in downregulation of secretion of a soluble form of hbv core protein  whose function remains unclear  <cit> . interestingly, the downregulation of hbve secretion is often associated with the appearance of anti-hbve antibodies in serum, suggesting the protein itself may induce some form of immunological tolerance  <cit> .

the role of adaptive immunity both in determining the course of hbv infection and in driving hbv evolution is of special interest. although pre-existing antibody to hbv surface protein   clearly provides strong protection, antibody to this antigen in natural infection is a late event, usually subsequent to effective control for viremia. in contrast, antibody to hbv core , although this protein is internal to the virion, occurs early in infection in almost all infected individuals, irrespective of their ability to control viral replication  <cit> . t helper and cytotoxic responses to several proteins of hbv have also been detected, and the presence of a higher frequency of hbv specific ctl in liver is associated with the ability to control viremia  <cit> . as might be predicted ctl responses are not limited to structural proteins, but recognise several non-structural viral proteins. virus specific t cell immune responses are most readily detected in individuals who effectively control viral replication. in chronically infected individuals, these responses are often much more difficult to detect, suggesting that the chronic state is associated with the establishment of some form of immunological tolerance  <cit> .

hbvc antigen is a small protein, whose three-dimensional structure has been determined by x-ray crystallography  <cit> , and whose immunogenicity in terms of both antibody and t cell responses has been studied rather extensively in both mouse and man. it thus represents an ideal starting point for studies aimed at relating antigen structure to immune response. indeed longitudinal studies on small groups of hbv infected individuals have suggested that variation is more common in b cell and t helper cell epitopes, suggesting a possible immune driven escape mechanism  <cit> . as a basis for further functional exploration we have documented hbvc variation in detail. in this study we have collected several hundred protein sequences of hbvc from public databases, and have re-examined variation in relation to structure, immunogenicity and genotype.

RESULTS
 <dig> protein hbvc sequences were retrieved from the ncbi protein database after some manual curation of very short sequence fragments. the mature hbvc protein sequences 1– <dig>  were aligned and the number of polymorphisms found at each position  was determined . a plot of the number of variants at each position is shown in fig 1a and the major structural features, including the four alpha helices, the proline rich loop and the c-terminal arm  <cit>  of the protein are shown in fig 1b. over three quarters  of positions are completely invariant. variation clustered within certain regions of the protein, with  <dig> of the  <dig> variable amino acids found within positions 59- <dig> 

sequence variation in core protein may reflect the overall genotypic variation among hbv strains driven by drift or other unknown factors . alternatively, specific selection pressures may operate on hbvc driving diversity independently. in order to approach this question, the relationship between hbvc variation and hbv genotype was explored. using text querying of the data base, a subset of  <dig> sequences were selected which had been assigned genotype a-d  by analysis of whole genome sequence or sequences outside the core region. these  <dig> core protein amino acid sequences were aligned and compared to each other and to the overall consensus sequence using protdist, a phylip program using the jones-taylor-thornton model  <cit> . the distribution of distances between each sequence and the consensus was then plotted for each viral genotype as given in the database record . the distance distribution profiles of the different genotypes were largely overlapping, suggesting that there was no correlation between distance from consensus and genotype.

in an alternative approach, the relationship between all the different core sequences was determined using fitch-margoliash least squares analysis, and plotted as an unrooted tree . the different genotypes of each virus are colour coded. although some broad clustering of genotypes was evident, a significant amount of "mixing" can be observed. similar qualitative results were obtained when phylogeny was determined by neighbour joining analysis  or by parsimony .

this phenomenon was analysed in more detail in a subset of  <dig> full length core protein sequences selected from various sections of the tree illustrated in fig  <dig> . the phylogenetic relationship between these forty sequences was analysed again, using neighbour-joining  incorporating a  <dig> fold bootstrap replicate in order to validate the tree topology. the results of this analysis are shown in fig 4a. in this smaller subset, genotypes a and d are reasonably well resolved, but genotypes b and c are extensively jumbled. one instance of this is illustrated by two identical sequences  derived from genotypes b and c respectively. the dna sequences corresponding to each of these forty protein sequences were then obtained from genbank, and analysed using the same bootstrapped neighbour-joining procedure. the tree obtained is shown in fig 4b. as expected, the bootstrap values are in general higher for the dna tree . the dna sequences are somewhat more efficient at classifying b and c as separate grouping. in particular the two identical protein sequences  are well separated and correctly classified by the dna phylogeny. overall, however, significant misclassification remains, reflecting either incorrect genotyping, recombination between viral strains  <cit> , or simply insufficient discrimination based on these relatively short viral sequences.

taken together, this data suggested the forces driving the evolution of core were partially independent of the evolutionary forces driving diversification of overall genotype.

the evolutionary pressures on sequence diversity were analysed in more detail by analysing synonymous  /nonsynonymous  nucleotide variation within the  <dig> viral sequences shown in table  <dig>  the overall distribution pattern of synonymous /nonsynonymous mutation rates is shown in fig 5a. the protein shows evidence of strong purifying selection throughout the sequence, with dn/ds ratios  mostly below  <dig> , the apparent ds rate was not homogenous along the length of the gene. the sharp decrease in substitution rate from around position  <dig> most likely reflects the start of the overlapping open reading frame of the polymerase, and this area was therefore excluded from further analysis. the identification of site-specific positive or neutral selection operating within an area of overall purifying selection has received considerable attention  <cit> , and a number of methodologies have been adopted. we applied maximum-likelyhood analysis as implemented using bayes empirical bayes method in the software package paml  <cit>  and compared a number of models of site-specific selection distribution  <cit> . the best likelihood value was obtained using model  <dig>  which includes a positive selection subset. the posterior probabilities for the positive  classes are plotted in fig 5b. interestingly, only one position showed a probability of > <dig> of being positively selected, with two more approaching 50% probability. in contrast  <dig> out of  <dig> codons showed a probability of >90% of negative purifying selection. thus there appears to be only very limited amount of positive selection within the hbv core sequence.

the sequence information in additional file 1/fig  <dig> was rationalised on the three dimensional structure of the capsid obtained from the brookhaven data base. as evident in fig  <dig> the variation in sequence is concentrated on the spikes at the outer surface of the capsids. all the amino acids with three or more variants are found on the outer surface of the capsid  while the internal surface facing the capsid lumen are relatively conserved .

a detailed alanine mutagenesis study has been carried out mapping those amino acids critical to proper capsid formation, and/or required for envelopment and virion formation  <cit> . mutation of  <dig> amino acids was found to block capsid formation, virion formation or both. the position of these mutations on the 3d structure is shown in fig  <dig>  the position of this set of mutations is quite widely distributed over the structure, suggesting multiple essential interactions are absolutely required either for proper capsid assembly, or for envelope and virion assembly. however, interestingly, all but one of these  <dig> amino acids were found to be invariant in the data set analysed in this study. the only exception observed was at position  <dig>  where changing proline to alanine was found to block both capsid and virion formation. both glutamine and threonine are found in a proportion of virus sequences at this position, and further mutagenesis will be required to clarify the constraints imposed by the requirements of virion formation on the sequence at this particular position. thus the structural requirements of virion assembly seem to impose a significant restraint on hbvc diversity. however, several positions which were found to tolerate alanine mutagenesis in terms of capsid/virion assembly were nevertheless invariant in the set of sequences examined here. the overall high degree of conservation in hbvc therefore probably reflects the multiple functions required from this protein, including control of intracellular targeting  <cit> , pregenome/dna polymerase packaging, capsid disassembly and viral maturation.

pressure by the host immune system is one obvious candidate driving variation in the protein sequence of hbvc. cd <dig> cytotoxic cells are believed to play a key role in controlling virus replication during hbv infection  <cit> . several cd <dig> t cell epitopes have been characterised in detail  by the use of t cell clones and lines or by elution from hla  <cit> . some of the sequences are shown in fig  <dig>  together with the known variant sequences in the dataset analysed in this study. although several of the epitopes lie within the more conserved inner region of the capsid, two of the epitopes show substantial polymorphism . interestingly, a previous paper did not find any evidence for emergence of mutations within the major cd <dig> epitopes during chronic hbv infection  <cit> .

the evidence implicating cd <dig> t cells in hbv control remains much less clear. furthermore, although regions containing cd <dig> epitopes have been described, many of the epitopes are not very well characterised. one putative "immunodominant" cd <dig> t cell epitope  does contain a number of variable amino acids , and indeed changes in its sequence have been related directly to changes in t cell response in vivo  <cit> . a second epitope  identified as a major target in hladr <dig> individuals has also been examined in some detail  <cit> . interestingly this epitope also shows considerable variation  including a mutation at position  <dig> shown to be essential for t cell recognition. the epitope also spans the region of a two amino acid insertion which is found exclusively in viruses of genotype a. further detailed mapping of cd <dig> t cell recognition sites, in relation to natural sequence variation would be seem to be an area of great interest.

finally, considerable information has been accumulated on the interaction of antibodies to hbv capsids. as shown in fig 9b <cit>  the major defined antibody specificities lie on the outside of the capsid structure, particularly at the tip of the spikes and at the junctions between adjacent spikes. these regions do indeed contain the majority of the hbvc sequence variation, although the most variable amino acids themselves have not been identified as known antibody contacts  <cit> . however, the contribution of anti-hbvc antibody to protection remains unclear, particularly since the capsid in intact virions is presumably largely shielded from antibody by the hbv envelope.

CONCLUSIONS
this study makes use of the large number of hbvc sequences now available in public databases to characterise sequence variation in hbvc. one limitation of such an approach is that detailed clinical information associated with infection is not available, and in particular, it is not possible to examine variability in the context of the longitudinal course of an hbv infection. this is likely to be an important factor since mutations are often found to arise late in infection, associated with a variety of clinical outcomes . in addition few of the available sequences have been checked for their ability to make competent infectious virus, and some sequences may therefore represent non-functional proteins. however, despite these limitations, the data available does allow some general conclusions.

overall, hbvc contains a large proportion of invariant amino acids, and a strong over representation of synonymous versus non-synonymous mutations at almost every codon. both features suggest the presence of strong constraining forces on sequence diversity. virion assembly is likely to provide one major constraining force  <cit> . as reported previously  sequence diversity appears to be clustered, and mapped predominantly to the spike and external surface of the capsid. these positions may allow greater flexibility in terms of virion assembly.

one significant consequence of the strong purifying selection is that protein sequence is a poor predictor of genotype for this gene. dna sequence which reflects predominantly synonymous mutations, is a better discriminator, particularly in resolving genotypes b and c. longer sequence analysis, however, is clearly necessary to obtain reliable genotyping information.

the putative role of immune selection in driving hbv core diversity is much more unclear. direct evidence for positive selection, at least using the analysis presented here, identifies only a single amino acid  as showing evidence for positive selection of diversity. nevertheless, it is clear that several polymorphic positions lie within t or b cell epitopes. hence, while the overall effect of immune selection on hbv sequence diversity may be small, sequence diversity may have a significant effect on the immune response at an individual level. the data analysis given here will help inform further analysis of the hbv-specific immune response. the combination of t cell and antibody recognition studies with directed mutagenesis of hbvc should determine more precisely the relationship between structure, immunity and pathogenicity.

