BACKGROUND
until recently, evolutionary genomics questions, including questions about amino acid composition of proteins, patterns of stabilising and positive selection and mechanisms of retention of duplicated genes and new function evolution, were typically answered either by analyzing phylogenies of select gene families  <cit>  or by full-genome analysis of triplets of genomes with two ingroup genomes compared to measure evolutionary rates, while the third, outgroup, genome used to polarize the observed changes  <cit> . as the strategy of genome sequencing shifts from broad taxonomic coverage to sequencing multiple closely related genomes  <cit> , a need arises in a set of tools to accomplish a phylogenetic analysis of amino acid substitutions in coding portions of a large number of protein families simultaneously and to address the question of generality of patterns observed in limited and possibly biased set of select gene families. questions that can be asked using such approach include, but certainly are not limited to enquiries about long-term changes in amino acid compositions of proteins, about selective constrains and pressures across the genome and evolution of novel gene functions by retention and modification of duplicated genes. here we present a tool to accomplish phylogenetic analysis of amino acids substitutions on the whole-genome scale using multiple amino acid alignments of over  <dig>  gene families from twelve completely sequenced drosophila genomes and illustrate its utility by the analysis of the resulting database of amino acid substitutions spanning  <dig> million years of drosophilid proteins evolution.

global patterns of amino acid compositions of proteins is thought to not be at a detailed balance, but rather appears to be gradually evolving by consistently adding rare to and removing common amino acids from the amino acid repertoire of protein sequences  <cit> . there is an on-going debate on whether is pattern reflects the order in which amino acids have been added to the genetic code  <cit>  or is caused by biases in mutability of particular codons  <cit> . as pointed out by  <cit> , one way to address this controversy is to analyze the observed trends in a range of genomes of increasing degree of divergence: if the observed patterns are caused by the effect of amino acid polymorphism reflecting mutation-selection biases they are expected to become less pronounced as divergence between genomes increases. furthermore, there may be substantial differences in selection pressures on reciprocal amino acid substitutions  <cit> : changes from polar to non-polar amino acids in human proteins are more permissive than vice-versa. such asymmetry and the degree to which is can contribute to the large-scale changes in amino acid composition has not yet been measured on the scale of several genomes.

differences in patterns of selective pressure have also been predicted between evolutionary retained duplicated genes and single-copy genes  <cit> . duplicated genes can persist in genomes either because one of the copies has acquired a new function , or because both copies are now needed to perform the function or functions previously accomplished by a single copy . subfunctionalizaton can occur either by means of partitioning of the ancestral functions between the two copies , or by means of balanced degradation, i.e., fixation of hypomorphic alleles in each copy  <cit> . each of these mechanisms implies relaxation of stabilizing selection, resulting in faster evolution in paralogs than in single-copy genes. specifically, pure neofunctionalization occurs by accumulation of mutations in one of the copies, while the other remains under stabilizing selection  <cit> . subfunctionalization occurring through balanced degradation, on the other hand, is accompanied by accumulation of deleterious mutations in both paralogs. finally, subfunctionalization occurring by tissue- or developmental stage-specialization of gene expression without a change in functionality would result in retention of stabilizing selection action in both paralogs. it is much harder to make predictions about other types of subfunctionalization, such as subdivision of pre-existing multiple substrate specificity between duplicated genes, because the two functions may depend on different parts of coding portion of the gene and, therefore, retaining one but not the other may relax selective constraints acting on at least part of the sequence. previous studies of duplicated genes in drosophila genomes  detected elevated signal of positive selection in a subset of gene families with duplications using ka/ks approach. here we report a genome-wide analysis of differences between duplicated and single copy genes in frequency and spectrum of amino acid substitutions.

RESULTS
application of acidminer to drosophila data: a database of amino acid substitutions in  <dig> genomes
the main purpose of acidminer is to extract amino acid substitutions data from multiple alignments and to expand them in the form of relational tables so then standard sql can be used to perform queries by any combination of criteria and to calculate aggregates. acidminer takes raw data in the form of multiple alignments and newick protein and species trees, processes it to produce derivative data such as parsimony-based polarization of substitutions and stores the result in a relational database structure. the raw data for the analysis reported here was a set of multiple amino acids alignments from  <dig> completely sequenced drosophila genomes . a set of sql queries that can be run against this database to produce custom datasets with given restrictions and/or calculate any aggregates including statistical parameters on different datasets. in addition, for tasks not easily expressible in sql, data already in the database to produce further derivative data. examples of such tasks are: defining clades for each duplication, calculating number of substitutions in each clade , calculating protein lengths in clades, calculating ages  of substitutions and duplications.

the resulting database in its current form includes  <dig> , <dig> amino acid substitutions occurring in  <dig> drosophilid genomes spanning  <dig> gene families. it consists of  <dig> tables defining the base data model. two additional tables contain preloaded data for gene ontology and amino acid substitution properties, such as pair-wise change in polarity. main tables include families table, tree structure tables for protein and species trees with a separate record for each tree node and a branch terminating in this node, a substitutions table with a record for each unambiguous and ambiguous substitution including a reference to branch where it occurred  and a duplications table, which includes phylogenetic information about each duplication and the two clades generated it. the database is available for download from acidminer website  <cit>  in the form of a virtual machine. any standard sql tool can be used; queries for most of the queries we used for this study are also available in the acidminer repository, along with the source code and a detailed description of the database structure.

fluxes and asymmetries in amino acid substitutions
contrary to the prediction based on the effect of intraspecific polymorphism  <cit> , the observed gain-loss pattern does not become less pronounced as the divergence between genomes increases . rank correlation with the global gain-loss pattern from ref  <cit>  slightly increases with branch depth, while mean pair-wise asymmetry  and correlation with amino acid frequency remains flat. there is a slight tendency towards decrease of mean asymmetry  with the depth of phylogeny , but neither of the pair-wise comparison of shallow vs. deeper branches is significant.

pair-wise asymmetry of amino acid gains and losses had a clear manifestation in terms of average change in amino acid polarity. amino acid pairs with the largest polarity gain had the highest asymmetry towards net gain of the less polar amino acid . the degree of polarity asymmetry differed among genes of different functionality : nucleic acid- and nucleotide-binding proteins had the strongest asymmetry towards net gain of non-polar amino acids, while in receptor and transporter proteins such asymmetry was not observed. likewise, net loss of polarity was the highest in proteins with intracellular localization, intermediate in proteins with extracellular localization and the lowest in membrane proteins, indicating the role of hydrophobicity of the protein’s cellular environment on relative gain and loss rate of polar and non-polar amino acids.

frequencies and radicality of amino acid substitutions in duplicated genes
duplicated genes appeared to accumulate more amino acid changes since duplication  than single copy genes . although the difference was statistically significant, it was not drastic: among  <dig> gene families with duplications and with at least  <dig> substitution in both duplicated and unduplicated parts of the phylogeny paralogs accumulated more substitutions per unit of branch lengths than single copy genes in  <dig> families . this relationship also varied across functional groups of genes, being the strongest in non-tf dna-binding proteins, weaker in enzymes and protein-binding proteins and undetectable or reversed in other functional groups of proteins. overall the rate of substitutions was the greatest in paralogs and the lowest in unduplicated sections of phylogenies of gene families with duplications, both when all substitutions and unambiguous substitutions only were considered .

paralogs also evolved by more radical substitutions. across functional groups of proteins  duplicated portions of phylogenies accumulated amino acid substitutions with greater average absolute change in polarity , while single copy genes typically did not differ significantly from gene families without duplications. likewise, both overall and in every single functional category, paralogs differed by amino acid pairs with lower exchangeability  <cit>  . again, single copy genes in families with duplications were intermediate between genes with no duplications and paralogs overall and typically did not differ from genes with no duplications within each functional category.

as expected, substitution rates and radicalilty decreased with mean expression rate in the whole fly and increased with the coefficient of variance of expression rate across larval and adult tissues  <cit>  , corroborating previously observed patterns of stronger selective constraints in highly expressed genes and in household genes  <cit> . however, both effects were much less pronounced in paralogs than in single-copy genes; neither regression over mean expression level was significant  and, while relative rate of substitutions increased with cv of expression rates across tissues, difference in polarity showed no correlation in paralogs. to summarize this pattern, the rate and radicality of duplicated genes evolution appeared to be uniformly high independently from gene expression rate and ubiquity. data on rates and radicality of amino acid substitutions organized by gene family are available in additional file  <dig> 

clade asymmetries in duplicated genes
clade asymmetries by molecular function categories are presented on fig.  <dig>  protein- and rna-binding proteins were characterized by the highest asymmetry of substitutions rates, while nucleotide-binding proteins and transcription factors had the lowest . nucleotide-binding proteins, on the other hand, demonstrated the highest asymmetry in both absolute polarity change and exchangeability of substitutions in the two clades, along with transcription factors, enzymes and structural proteins. the lowest radicality clade asymmetry was seen in rna-binding and transporter proteins. data on rates and radicality of amino acid substitutions organized by duplications are available in additional file  <dig> 

discussion
several caveats in the data and analysis require attention. firstly, alignments we used may contain pairs of paralogs, in which one of the copies is undergoing pseudogenization and is nor longer expressed, but has not yet acquired a frameshift, which would allow it to be recognized as a pseudogene. indeed, there is a significant excess of nonsense mutations  present in the terminal branches of phylogeny , indicating presence of pseudogenes in the alignments. pairs of paralogs, in which one gene copy is undergoing pseudogenization, will demonstrate clade asymmetry, mimicking the signature of neofunctionalization. however, such paralogs are almost certainly present only in the most terminal branches of drosophila phylogeny spanning over  <dig> mln years, because the half-life of duplications, in which one of the copies undergoes pseudogenization, is 2- <dig> mln years . terminal branches include a minority of duplications in our database and excluding such branches from the analysis does not alter the results . this indicates that the observed clade asymmetry is not an artefact of pseudogenes. a direct comparison of clade asymmetries in terminal vs. non-terminal duplications is not possible for two reasons. firstly, there are much fewer substitutions in the terminal branches, so there is an intrinsic difference in statistical power. secondly, clade asymmetry analysis is based on unambiguous substitutions and the frequency of unambiguous substitutions increases with the depths of the phylogeny, possibly biasing such comparison.

on the other hand, some true functional paralogs may be missing from the alignments, particularly those resulting from ancient duplications, due to homology below the threshold used by the reciprocal blast algorithm . this creates a bias towards less divergent paralogs, reducing our ability to detect elevated rates of evolution in duplicated genes. relative magnitude of these opposing biases remains unknown.

further, results presented in table  <dig> do not necessarily indicate that clade asymmetries are more likely to manifest themselves in substitution rates than in substitution radicality. the number of test surviving multiple test correction probably reflects differences in statistical power rather than a true biological phenomenon.

systematic loss/gain asymmetry in amino acid composition in  <dig> drosophila genomes corroborates patterns previously observed in a variety of taxonomically diverse triplets of genomes  <cit> . this pattern does not become less pronounced as more and more distant genomes are included into consideration, indicating that it is not caused by the effect of polymorphisms reflecting mutation-selection balance influenced by mutational asymmetries  <cit> .

we also demonstrate that this net loss/gain asymmetry is strongly correlated with source and destination amino acid polarities: substitutions of polar amino acids by non-polar ones have a higher net rate than the reciprocal substitutions. in the past we have demonstrated a similar polarity-related asymmetry in selection coefficients against amino acid substitutions in human proteins  <cit> ; however this asymmetry was largely limited to strong selection  and was not seen in evolutionary substitution rates.

one may hypothesise that replacing polar amino acids by any is less disruptive for the protein function because polar amino acids have a lower tendency to be located internally in the tertiary protein structure  <cit> . if so, we would expect the decrease of polarity due to amino acid substitutions to be the lowest in membrane proteins, in which polar amino acids in within-membrane domains tend to be internally located. indeed, the decrease of polarity due to substitutions is the weakest in receptor and transporter proteins, many of which have membrane-embedded hydrophobic regions  and in proteins with membrane localization .

a question remains how is it possible that asymmetry in amino acid gains and losses systematically removed polar amino acids more often than non-polar ones  over  <dig> mln years of drosophilid evolution ? there is no evidence that the relationship shown on fig. 2a has a tendency to weaken in the most recent branches of the phylogeny , which would have indicated an approach to an equilibrium. rather, the frequencies of amino acids in proteins appear to be far from an equilibrium and we observe a constant turnover of polar amino acids due to more relaxed selective constraint acting on the amino acid of external location. one may further speculate that perhaps such systematic loss of surface polar amino acids would gradually change protein folding as external sites become occupied by more hydrophobic amino acid residuals. this process may be a potentially important mechanism of acquiring new functions by duplicated genes.

we have demonstrated that, in a genome-wide assessment, duplicated genes evolve both faster  and through more radical amino acid substitutions  than single copy genes . likewise, single copy genes in families with extant duplications tend to evolve faster and more radically than single copy genes in families without extant duplications, indicating that duplications are more likely to be retained in gene families with weaker selective constraints.

just like with the signed polarity change, the absolute change of polarity is not significantly different between duplicated and single copy genes among genes coding for transporter proteins, corroborating the hypothesis of the importance of relaxed selective constraint on surface sites of water-soluble proteins .  the exchangeability index, on the other hand, is significantly lower in duplicated transporter proteins, suggesting that paralogs in these genes families do evolve through more radical substitutions, just without systematic net loss of polar residuals.

data on the asymmetry of clades resulting from duplications supports the hypothesis of widespread neofunctionalization accompanying retention of duplicated genes: over 1/ <dig> of all duplications show a significant asymmetry in amino acid substitution rates with false discovery rate  <dig>  and almost 1/ <dig> of all substitution show asymmetry, which stands bonferroni correction . much fewer duplications show a significant asymmetry in radicality of substitutions, although about 6% have a significant asymmetry in absolute polarity change . gene families of different functionality differ from each other in the degree of clade asymmetry with a hint of a negative correlation between asymmetry in rates  and asymmetry in radicality . no molecular function category stands out in terms of tendency to display signatures of neofunctionalization, although rna-binding proteins have the lowest  difference in rates and radicality of substitutions between duplicated and single copy genes  and the lowest clade asymmetry of substitution radicality in paralogs , indicating that, perhaps, in these proteins neofunctionalization is less common. interestingly, transcription factors appear to show low neofunctionalization signal in terms of substitution rates , but a strong neofunctionalization signal in terms of substitution radicality . one may hypothesize that positive selection for a novel functionality can operate either by increased rate of substitutions, or by favouring more radical changes without the increase of rates.

CONCLUSIONS
we have designed a tool, which allows a detailed phylogenetic analysis of amino acid substitutions in a large number of multiple alignments with or without duplicated genes present. the algorithm is capable to polarize and establish phylogenetic position of all substitutions for which it is possible  and to list all possible alternatives for other, ambiguous substitutions. it results in a database, which can be used to answer questions about patterns of amino acids substitutions genome-wide or in particular categories of genes such as molecular functions or duplication status.

the analysis of such database of substitutions in  <dig> drosophila genomes confirmed previously observed non-equilibrium patterns of net losses and gains of individual amino acids, demonstrated that these patterns do not weaken with the depth of phylogeny and revealed a strong correlation between polarity of amino acid and propensity to display a net loss. we hypothesize that this effect can be explained by relaxed selective constraints on externally located amino acid sites occupied by polar residuals. evolution of duplicated genes is characterized by both higher relative rate of substitution and more radical nature of these substitutions, as compared to single copy genes. the rate and radicality in paralogs displays a weaker relation with mean expression rate and variance of expression rates across tissues than in single copy genes. this pattern, along with the strong asymmetry between clades resulting from duplication events, indicates widespread neofunctionalization of retained duplications.

