BACKGROUND
α-synuclein  is a key player in the pathogenesis of a group of neurodegenerative diseases defined as synucleinopathies, including parkinson disease , dementia with lewy bodies , and multiple system atrophy . the discovery that aggregated α-syn is the major component of lewy bodies   <cit>  indicates a role of α-syn in pd. neurons containing lbs are the hallmark of pd and dlb, whereas in msa α-syn is deposited in oligodendrocytes referred to as glial cytoplasmic inclusions   <cit> . in its aggregated form, α-syn is enriched in β-sheet structure, orderly organized into oligomers or amyloid fibrils  <cit> . as such, many amyloid proteins are characteristic of specific neurodegenerative disorders, for instance alzheimer disease  and prion diseases. for several decades it has been speculated that the key to understanding age-related neurodegenerative disorders may be found in the unusual biology of prion diseases. this hypothesis is being increasingly supported by experimental evidence. the self-propagation of amyloid-β  aggregates is also known from in vitro studies  <cit>  and inoculation experiments  <cit> . however, only recent experiments using genetically modified rodents have established that aβ can be induced to deposit in brain by a prion-like mechanism. intracerebral injection of aβ-rich brain extracts from ad patients or from aged app-transgenic mice stimulated the premature formation of plaques in these models  <cit> . aβ lesions in app transgenic mice are also inducible by injections of pure, synthetic human aβ fibrils, although synthetic seeds are less powerful than aggregates formed within the living brain. like prions, aβ seeds vary in size from small, soluble, protease-sensitive aggregates to large, insoluble, protease-resistant fibrils  <cit> .

accumulating experimental data indicate that the seeding principle also applies to other pathogenic proteins that form amyloid-like inclusions within the cells. this is also the case of α-syn which, in its misfolded state, forms assemblies known as lbs  <cit> . in pd, α-syn aggregates arise first in the brainstem and then spread to telencephalic structures  <cit> —a dynamics indicative of prion-like spread of protein aggregation. numerous studies have shown cell-to-cell transmission of soluble or aggregated α-syn, both in cultured cells and in mouse brains, resulting in α-syn aggregation and neuronal dysfunction in the recipient cells  <cit> . importantly, injections of synthetic  α-syn fibrils also induce the recruitment of endogenous soluble α-syn protein to form lb-like pathology and neuronal degeneration in primary cell culture  <cit>  and in non-transgenic  host mice  <cit> . lastly, melki et al. have shown that two different α-syn polymorphs  exhibit marked differences in their propensity to penetrate the cells, as well as in their toxicity and seeding aggregation in cells, suggesting the existence of different α-syn strains  <cit> .

on the basis of these findings, we considered the possibility that recombinant human α-syn could acquire prion-like properties, once it is converted into a β-sheet-rich structure, and determine the fate of endogenous α-syn in human immortalized cell lines.

RESULTS
aggregation properties and structural characterization of recombinant α-syn assemblies
evidence in literature shows that, under different experimental conditions, the formation of lb-like inclusions can be induced in cultured cells overexpressing human α-syn  <cit> . to test whether the same process may be induced in the non-transfected human sh-sy5y cell line we applied different α-syn fibril assemblies to the cell culture.

first, we expressed in bacteria and then purified recombinant human α-syn protein  either as wild-type sequence or tagged with a flag epitope, and established a protocol to induce structured amyloid assemblies as previously shown for the production of mammalian synthetic prions  <cit>  . because various intermediate forms of α-syn develop during the process of fibril formation, we decided to collect β-sheet-rich structures at different time points during the fibrillization assay:  at the early inflection of the sigmoid curve;  at the middle portion of the curve; and  at plateau .

we reasoned that these diverse β-sheet-rich assemblies might differ in quaternary structure. as predicted, atomic force microscopy measurements showed diverse assemblies: oligomers, and short and long amyloid fibrils . from the statistical analysis of the three different preparations  we identified three different assemblies enriched in:  oligomeric structure, indicating spherical, ring-like characteristics;  short fibrils, the protofibril-like structure, and  long fibrils .

toxicity of α-syn aggregates in cells
we assessed the cytotoxicity of equal concentrations of three different α-syn preparations on human neuroblastoma sh-sy5y cells using the 3-- <dig> -diphenyltetrazolium bromide  assay. this cell survival assay showed that there was no statistically significant difference among the various forms of α-syn preparations in the cell line used . a comparison of the toxicity of α-syn short and long fibrils does not reflect any specific toxicity, except for the well-known slightly higher toxicity of oligomeric species  <cit>  .

effects of exposure of human neuroblastoma cell lines to different α-syn assemblies
we adopted different strategies to validate the observation that exogenously added assemblies can enter and be incorporated into cells. either recombinant human α-syn or flag-tagged recombinant human α-syn protein was employed. the use of the flag-tagged protein allows the detection of exogenously added protein assemblies. indeed, after seven days in culture only short amyloid fibrils were able to enter the cells and promote the recruitment of endogenous α-syn into aggregates, while oligomers and long fibrils could not. as a matter of fact, to effectively serve as a seed for aggregation, exogenously added assemblies must first enter the cells and persist for a sufficient period in cellular compartments accessible to the endogenous α-syn protein. a single exposure of β-sheet-rich structures of recombinant human α-syn—which we define as short amyloid fibrils—was sufficient to permit the aggregation of endogenous α-syn in non-transfected human neuroblastoma sh-sy5y cells. the sh-sy5y cells exposed to short amyloid fibrils of recombinant human flag-tagged α-syn were stained with either an anti-human α-syn antibody or an anti-flag immunoglobulin . the immunoreactivity was mostly cytosolic, with co-localization of anti-flag and anti-human α-syn antibody. the result yielded by immunofluorescence was verified by biochemical experiments, which confirmed the increase of endogenous α-syn .next, we analyzed the aggregation of the endogenous α-syn in serial cellular passages. for this purpose we incubated the protein preparation with the sh-sy5y cells only at passage  <dig> , and at each passage we measured the levels of α-syn using immunofluorescence . only a residual staining of endogenous α-syn could still be observed in the subsequent passage  and no staining was detectable in the ensuing two passages . surprisingly, aggregates of endogenous α-syn appeared at passages four to six . at passage p <dig> we observed many small, dispersed aggregates, while at passages p <dig> and p <dig> we began to observe larger aggregates and perinuclear inclusions in the cytoplasm of sh-sy5y cells . we performed additional passages  and in each one a sustained aggregation of endogenous α-syn was still present. therefore, the infected sh-sy5y cells are able to promote, upon subpassaging, stable aggregation of endogenous α-syn. this accumulation occurs at the protein level since pcr analysis confirmed that the levels of α-syn transcripts were not altered after infection .interestingly, the endogenous aggregates of human α-syn in the sh-sy5y cell line were thioflavin s -positive . this dye binds to β-sheet-rich structures such as amyloids, confirming that the aggregates induced at sixth passage contained significant β-sheets, like lbs do. thus, the fact that these α-syn aggregates share hallmark features of pd-like lbs led us to conclude that α-syn short amyloid fibrils seed and recruit normal, endogenous α-syn to form pathologic aggregates in the sh-sy5y cell line.

short amyloid fibrils of α-syn induce accumulation earlier in transfected sh-sy5y cells
we performed similar experiments using a human neuroblastoma sh-sy5y cell line stably overexpressing human α-syn . upon infection with short amyloid fibrils of α-syn and after six passages in cell culture, we observed stronger staining and, most importantly, the presence of several spots of α-syn throughout the cytosol. the accumulation of α-syn was confirmed using the western blot technique at p <dig> in both sh-sy5y that overexpress α-syn and the non-transfected cells . this suggests that α-syn short amyloid fibrils are able to seed aggregation of overexpressed α-syn in this cellular model. due to the already high levels of α-syn in sh-sy5y cells that overexpress human wild-type α-syn, the formation of endogenous α-syn aggregates upon infection with recombinant assemblies was evident earlier  compared with non-transfected sh-sy5y cells  . moreover, these aggregates in sh-sy5y overexpressing α-syn at passage p <dig> were ths-positive . furthermore, the sequential extraction with 1% triton x- <dig> lysis buffer followed by 2% sds lysis buffer confirmed that the endogenous aggregates of α-syn are insoluble in these buffers. the cells treated with short amyloid fibrils and passaged up to p <dig> exhibited a significant amount of triton x- <dig> insoluble α-syn and high-molecular-weight species , which required sds buffer for solubilization . we observed weak signals in the sds supernatant fraction. on the contrary, in the pellet fraction we detected bands in the stacking part of the sds-page gel, which are comparable to those of short amyloid fibrils formed in vitro .

endogenous α-syn aggregates display lb-like properties
to further characterize endogenous α-syn aggregates, the cell lines were probed with an antibody specific for α-syn phosphorylated at position  <dig> . this post-translational modification of α-syn aggregates has been found in lbs of pd brains. moreover, p-s <dig> α-syn has been reported to accumulate in the nuclei of α-syn transfected cells  <cit> , and in tg mice that express human α-syn  <cit> . a single-staining immunofluorescence confirmed higher levels of p-s <dig> α-syn within the nucleus after nine passages upon infection  in both non-transfected and transfected sh-sy5y cells, compared to control non-infected cells . since exogenous recombinant short amyloid fibrils are not phosphorylated in vitro, these modifications occur de novo within the cell after infection and passaging. in addition, the cytoplasm of several α-syn-infected sh-sy5y cells contained α-syn aggregates . quantitative analysis showed that the number of cells with these cytoplasmic inclusions was remarkably higher in amyloid-infected cells compared to non-infected cells  . thus, we concluded that although overexpression of α-syn induces aggregation, this occurs to a much greater extent when combined with infection. interestingly, in amyloid-infected cells we found the same increase in phosphorylated aggregates compared to transfected cells   indicating that most α-syn aggregates induced by short amyloid fibrils are phosphorylated.

together, these observations indicate that the endogenous α-syn aggregates in this cell culture model exhibit lb-like defining features.

discussion
immortalized cell lines and primary-cultured cells are commonly used in the research of synucleinopathies. volpicelli-daley et al. <cit>  have reported a seeded inclusion formation in primary neuronal cultures that did not overexpress α-syn, and sacino et al. <cit>  have investigated the aggregation process in primary mixed neuronal-glial cultures using recombinant wild-type α-syn and pd-linked mutations . nevertheless, the drawback of employing primary cell models is that they have a limited use for transmission experiments. moreover, the cellular populations might be altered during repeated sub-passaging. this is one reason why we focused on immortalized cell lines, as they yield more homogenous cell preparations, cells can be passaged for long periods, and they harbor a sufficient quantity of samples for biochemical analyses. indeed, here we show that one defined molecular assembly of extracellular α-syn is able to induce endogenous α-syn to aggregate, thus supporting the hypothesis that α-syn pathology can spread via a prion-like self-templating mechanism. this finding is a shared feature with other cell culture models that are permissive to prion replication, such as neuroblastoma n2a cells  <cit> . this infected cell culture model has provided valuable insights into the biogenesis of the scrapie prion protein  in terms of subcellular localization, conversion, and physiopathological consequences. therefore, using the immortalized sh-sy5y cell line, which replicates α-syn aggregates, is important to better understand the mechanism involved in α-syn aggregation. we focused our attention on non-transfected sh-sy5y cells, and these findings were also confirmed in another cell line that does not overexpress α-syn protein. the gt <dig> cell line  <cit>  was treated with short amyloid fibrils of recombinant human α-syn, and we observed the same results, indicating that this aggregation phenomenon extends to multiple cell types, even to those that do not overexpress α-syn . these cell cultures will allow us to study the mechanism of cellular uptake of fibrils , the conversion mechanism of endogenous α-syn protein into aggregates , and their sub-cellular localization.

CONCLUSIONS
in this study we characterized three different fibril assemblies of recombinant α-syn protein  and evaluated their effect on immortalized cell lines. our findings show that recombinant human α-syn can adopt a conformation  able to recruit cellular α-syn into aggregates that can replicate and accumulate in vitro in non-transfected cells. although we used synthetic recombinant assemblies, and not the aggregates from brain homogenates either from pd patients or transgenic mice, we observed prolonged and sustained aggregation and accumulation of endogenous α-syn in non-transfected and transfected sh-sy5y cell lines. our findings point to α-syn short amyloid fibrils as the pathological species of α-syn aggregates primarily involved in the transmission of α-syn pathology. our data support the hypothesis that the sequence of events leading to lb formation can be recapitulated in cultured cells. in summary, we developed a new approach for the study of α-syn aggregates in cell culture. the advantage of our system is that it can be employed for prolonged experimental periods since the accumulation of α-syn is sustained over time. this approach systematically minimizes the possibility of clonal artifacts and represents a valid tool for potential therapeutic screening that targets pathologic α-syn aggregates.

