BACKGROUND
dna microarray technology is a powerful approach for genomic research, playing an increasingly important role in biomedical research. this technology yields simultaneous measurement of gene expression levels of thousands of genes, allowing the analysis of differential gene expression patterns under different conditions such as disease  states or treatment with different chemotherapeutic drugs. due to small differences in rna quantities and fluctuations generated by the technique, the intensity levels may vary from one replicate to the other due to effects which are unrelated to the genes, requiring data normalization before they can be compared.

therefore, normalization is an important step for microarray data analysis. the purpose of data normalization is to minimize the effects caused by technical variations and, as a result, allow the data to be comparable in order to find actual biological changes. several normalization approaches have been proposed, most of which derive from studies using two-color spotted microarrays. some authors proposed normalization of the hybridization intensity ratios; others use global, linear methods, while others use local, non-linear methods. several authors suggested using the spike-in controls, housekeeping genes, or invariant genes  <cit> .

recently, some authors suggested the use of non-linear normalization methods  <cit>  which are believed to be superior to the above mentioned approaches. the locally weighed regression lowess procedure  <cit>  has been widely used for this purpose and implemented by several microarray analysis software packages  <cit> , but similar methods are suggested such as splines  <cit>  and wavelets  <cit> .

here, we compare three different well-known microarray data normalization methods, namely: loess regression , splines smoothing  and wavelets smoothing . in addition, we propose two different normalization approaches, called kernel regression   <cit>  and support vector regression   <cit> , which, to the best of our knowledge, have yet to be applied for microarray normalization. in order to assess the most appropriate normalization technique, benchmark studies were carried out using data derived from codelink™ mouse microarray experiments  <cit> , generated at our cell and molecular biology laboratory .

RESULTS
we sought to highlight the performance of five different methods of microarray normalization, namely: loess, splines, wavelets, kernel and support vector regression in a simulated microarray and in an actual codelink™ microarray platform, which comprised ten thousand mouse genes. although we have focused on the use of simulated two-color cdna microarray data analysis, our discussions are also applicable to the single-color oligonucleotide microarrays.

the artificial microarrays composed by ten thousand spots were generated using the model proposed by balagurunathan et al.   <cit> . the parameters used were:  and  for sinusoid shape,  and  for banana shape and,  and  for mixed shape. gene expression was generated by an exponential distribution with parameter λ = 1/ <dig> and the outliers were generated by a beta distribution with parameters b. for more details, see balagurunathan et al. .

the smoothing parameters used in each dataset are described in table  <dig>  for svr, we tested a range of values and, as a result, we selected ε =  <dig>  and c =  <dig> as the most adequate one. it is important to highlight that the parameters are arbitrary; therefore, we chose the optimum parameters for each method, i.e., the one which resulted in the lowest mean square error. in figure  <dig> are described the mean square errors for each normalization method applied to three different simulated microarrays with no outliers.

in order to compare the perturbation caused by the presence of outliers and the robustness of each normalization method, we randomly inserted  <dig>   <dig>   <dig>   <dig> and 40% of outliers  at three different expression levels , and the respective mean square errors between the regression curve and the actual curve  was calculated. this step was repeated  <dig> times to estimate the average sum of the squared errors and their variance. the wilcoxon and the kolmogorov-smirnov tests were performed in order to determine whether the five regression methods differ from one another in any significant manner.

a high performance normalization technique should yield unbiased corrections and corrections with the smallest standard deviation.

comparison of the results presented in table  <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> shows no important difference between lr, ss and ws. although the non-parametric kr method has been successfully applied in econometrics data analysis  <cit> , it displayed a poor performance for microarray normalization, probably because it is highly sensitive to outliers  <cit> .

deg: differentially expressed genes

deg: differentially expressed genes

deg: differentially expressed genes

upon analyzing table  <dig>  it is possible to observe, in the case of sinusoid shape, that when outliers are inserted in regions of low gene expression, svr, ws, ss, lr and kr, in this order, have the lowest to the highest mean square error, being statistically different  from one another. for the banana and mixed shapes, lr and ss presented a lower mse than ws. in table  <dig>  it is interesting to note that when outliers are inserted in regions of medium gene expression, i.e., high density of genes, the order of performance remains the same as in table  <dig> and svr displays a mean square error which is significantly different from the others . lr and ss showed no significant difference  and kr is significantly worse than the other methods . in table  <dig>  the outliers are inserted in a high gene expression region. once more, the trend is maintained, namely, kr is the most affected by outliers  and no differences between ss and ws  were observed for the sinusoid shape. for the other two shapes, lr and ss were better than ws .

in all three cases , svr is the affected by outliers , independently the microarray's shape. in addition, svr yields the smallest standard deviation, followed by lr, ss, ws, with kr displaying the largest deviation. in addition, the five methods were applied to actual microarray data, with outliers inserted artificially, and the results were the same when compared to those obtained from artificial microarray experiments.

in figure  <dig>  we illustrate the performance of the five normalization methods applied to actual microarray data, without the insertion of artificial outliers. a small difference could be observed in the normalization curves in which the genes displayed low and high expression, due to the low quantity of genes and the high variance.

discussion
by analyzing the extent to which the outliers could disturb the regression curve, we observed that kr is more highly sensitive to outliers than lr, ss and ws in all three cases . in all three cases, svr is shown to be the least affected.

the superior performance of splines, when compared to kr, may be explained by the degree of smoothing, which varies according to the density of points, differently from kr, which has a fixed window size. wavelet also has a slightly better performance than kr, probably due to multi-resolution properties. in general, ss and ws presented similar performance when we compared the median of the mean square error using the wilcoxon test. however, when we used the kolmogorov-smirnov test, they presented a statistically significant difference . ss and ws constitute somewhat better normalization techniques than lr when we analyzed the sinusoid shape, but, for the other two shapes, lr is better than ss and ws. for practical purposes, the differences between them in terms of disturbance by outliers are too small to be of any concern.

the svr method is shown to be very robust to outliers presented at different gene expression levels, becoming the best normalization technique to identify actual differentially expressed genes.

one well-known problem in identifying differentially expressed genes is normalizing genes displaying low expression levels, due to the low quantity of the corresponding transcripts and the high spot intensity variance. an equivalent problem occurs with genes presenting very high expression levels due to the low frequency of these genes. once more, under these conditions, the svr method is shown to be better than other currently used methods.

we performed the same tests for five other pairs of codelink™ microarrays and the results obtained were the same: the svr is the most robust to outliers and the kr method is the worst method, being highly sensitive to differentially expressed genes and yielding poor regression curves.

other methods, which are also robust to outliers and are based on a new regression method called two-way semi-linear model  <cit>  have also been applied for microarray data normalization. this new approach developed in the last few years, deserves further studies, which we are planning to undertake in the future.

CONCLUSIONS
we have proposed a new approach to normalize microarray data and tested this svr method by benchmark studies and by several simulations. the results obtained with svr were superior than those obtained with some widely used normalization techniques such as lr, ss and ws. svr is shown to be more robust to outliers even at very low and very high gene expression levels, being useful to identify differentially expressed genes. even tested in different microarray shapes, svr was superior to the other methods, while lr, ss and ws presented similar performances. therefore, we have demonstrated that svr is feasible and very promising for microarray data normalization.

