BACKGROUND
bacterial biofilms are defined as sessile communities of bacteria that form on air-liquid or liquid–solid interfaces, or even intracellularly  <cit> . due to their high resistance to any attempts of removing them, biofilms have a profound impact in many clinical settings, including catheter-associated urinary tract infections  <cit> , periodontitis  <cit> , and otitis  <cit> , as well as pseudomonas aeruginosa infections of cystic fibrosis patients  <cit> . much research has been done on disease mechanisms relating to the biofilm lifestyle. yet, many of the early studies do not consider that growth conditions for the bacteria differ across the biofilm and also change with time. as one example, bacteria residing within the fully matured biofilm have limited access to nutrients and oxygen, but are also well protected from anti-microbials, as well as the host immune system. in contrast, bacteria that grow at the surface of the three-dimensional structure or are still in the early phases of biofilm formation would have better access to nutrients and oxygen, but are also more exposed to anti-microbials. some temporal studies of gene expression in biofilms were done years ago  <cit> . spatial studies have been done more recently. these were facilitated by advances in microscopy techniques, as well as the development of fluorescent probes  <cit> .

fusions of gene promoters to the structural genes of fluorescence proteins were used to study heterogeneity in biofilms of several bacterial species. this was done to measure: i) spatial gene regulation in biofilm of bacillus subtilis <cit> , ii) real-time spatial gene expression in geobacter sulfurreducens electricity producing biofilm  <cit> , iii) quantitative gene expression in biofilm of salmonella <cit> , iv) single cell gene expression in b. subtilis biofilm  <cit> , and v) the effect of inhibitors on pseudomonas aeruginosa biofilm  <cit> . to reduce complexity and facilitate genetics experiments, flow cell technology was developed to grow the biofilm  <cit> . this allows the biofilm to form under continuous hydrodynamic conditions at a controlled and reproducible flow rate. in this study, we used promoter fusions to green fluorescence protein , flow cell biofilms, and fluorescence microscopy to measure temporal and spatial expression of selected biofilm associated genes in escherichia coli biofilms.

the genetic system that is used for this study consists of the flagellar  <cit>  and global regulator  <cit>  complex flhd4/flhc <dig> <cit>  and the two-component systems for osmoregulation envz/ompr  <cit>  and colanic acid activation rcscdb  <cit> . these three regulatory systems are part of a partial transcriptional network that centered around flhd/flhc and regulated all the biofilm associated cell surface organelles  <cit> . in particular, ompr and rcsb in their phosphorylated form are inhibitors of flhd expression  <cit> . rcsb and ompr are regulators of type i fimbriae  <cit> , as well as expression of many other genes  <cit> . in planktonic e. coli, growth phase dependent expression of flhd required ompr. additionally, flhd expression in the ompr mutant was much higher  <cit> . this was also true for flhd expression and swarming of xenorhabdus nematophila <cit> .

while all the above research involving ompr, rcsb, and flhd/flhc was done with planktonic bacteria, this study investigates the impact of this regulation on biofilm formation. in particular, we wanted to accomplished three goals: i) provide proof of concept that the study of temporal and spatial expression of biofilm associated genes can lead to the identification of novel targets or target mechanisms for the development of biofilm prevention techniques  and treatment options ; ii) attempt to identify flhd/flhc as the first such targets, because it is a transmitter between numerous environmental conditions and many cellular responses, and iii) establish ompr and rcsb as control mechanisms that can be taken advantage of to increase flhd expression and reduce biofilm amounts.

RESULTS
temporal gene expression of flhd, ompr, and rcsb in e. coli biofilm
expression of flhd peaked at 12 h and increased again towards 51 h of biofilm formation
fluorescence microscopy images were produced from flow cell grown biofilm of the e. coli genetic parent strain ajw <dig> that contained the flhd::gfp fusion plasmid, called pps <dig>  fluorescence signals obtained from these biofilms were highest at 12 h, lowest at 35 h, and then increased again towards 51 h of biofilm formation. this was seen in all four time series of images that had been taken from four independently formed biofilms. a selection of images from one of these experiments is shown in the left column of figure  <dig>  occasionally, we observed high signals in individual bacteria of the 3 h sample, but the number of bacteria on the slides was not indicative of a biofilm at that point in time.

the images from figure  <dig> were converted into quantitative data by calculating the percent area of the images that were fluorescent. the resulting expression profile for flhd showed a peak at 12 h . fluorescence was lowest at 35 h and increased again towards 51 h. we also noticed a small single point peak at 3 h, which is in agreement with the occasional high fluorescence of small numbers of individual bacteria that was visualized on the images . since fluorescence from the green fluorescence protein reporter is indicative of flhd expression, we conclude that flhd expression was highest at 12 h, lowest at 35 h, and increased again towards 51 h.

the temporal expression of ompr, but not rcsb, correlated inversely with that of flhd
expression of the negative regulator of flhd expression, ompr, exhibited a temporal profile  that was almost the inverse of flhd expression between 21 h and 51 h of biofilm formation. specifically, ompr expression increased between 21 h and 34 h, while flhd expression decreased. between  <dig> and 51 h, ompr expression decreased, while flhd expression increased. expression of another negative regulator of flhd expression, rcsb, did not correlate with the temporal expression profile for flhd . until 25 h, the fluorescence signal from the rcsb::gfp plasmid containing strain was very weak, but increased steadily after this point in time.

mutations in ompr and rcsb abolished temporal differences in flhd expression
the fluorescence signals from flhd::gfp in the ompr and rcsb mutant strains were higher than those from the other strains at all times. expression of flhd in the ompr mutant increased over the first 12 h and reached a steady state level after that . between 12 h and 24 h, expression of flhd in the rcsb mutant  increased more slowly than in the ompr mutant, but was reasonably growth phase independent after 24 h as well. this slower increase in flhd expression in the rcsb mutant  correlates with the reduced increase in rcsb expression  during the same time period, relative to the increase in ompr expression . statistical analysis of the data with the loess procedure yielded confidence bands for the ompr and rcsb mutant strains that did not overlap with that of the parent .this indicates that there is indeed a statistically significant difference between the parent strain and either of the two mutants.

in comparison, the expression profile for our housekeeping strain that contains the acek::gfp fusion plasmid was high at all times . expression increases in any strain during the first 12 h can be explained by the increase in bacterial cell numbers during the early development of the biofilm.

spatial gene expression of flhd in e. coli biofilm
from the temporal gene expression experiment, we knew that the highest expression of flhd was at 12 h and 51 h of biofilm formation. as a consequence, we performed the spatial gene expression experiment for flhd at those two time points. in both the 12 h  and 51 h  biofilms, the expression of flhd was highest at the outer layer of the biofilm. fluorescence calculated from the individual images of the z-stacks showed that at 12 h, there was little or no expression of flhd within the first 2 μm from the surface that the biofilm had formed on . expression increased rapidly at 2 μm to approximately 50% coverage. in 51 h biofilms, there were three distinct intensity levels . until 3 μm, the expression of flhd was very low; at  <dig>  μm, the expression jumped to 50% and maintained this level until 6 μm; across the upper 2 μm of our biofilm, flhd expression increased to approximately 75% of the total area of the images. our housekeeping gene in comparison was highly expressed all throughout the biofilm .

the temporal gene expression study had determined that the expression of flhd in the ompr and rcsb mutant strains was constitutively high throughout the experiment after a primary increase during the initial time period of biofilm formation. as time points for the spatial experiment, we selected 33 h for the ompr mutant  and 51 h for the rcsb mutant . interestingly, expression of flhd in both mutants was high across all layers of the biofilm. fluorescence was between  <dig> and 95% coverage across the entire biofilm of both mutants . by all appearances, both ompr and rcsb abolished spatial differences in flhd expression together with temporal ones, while increasing overall expression.

mutations in ompr and rcsb reduced biofilm biomass
the 3d reconstructions of the biofilms showed that the biofilm from the ompr and rcsb mutants was much thinner than that of the parent strain. the mutant biofilms were no more than 4 μm, as opposed to >8 μm for biofilm from the parent strain . this observation indicates that the elevation of flhd expression levels in the two mutants does indeed have the predicted outcome of reducing biofilm amounts. however, we were unable to quantify thickness of the parental biofilm with the fluorescence microscopy beyond 8 μm due to optical limitations of the objective used for these experiments. to quantify biofilm biomass, the crystal violet  assay was performed with parent bacteria, and ompr and rcsb mutants . both mutants produced a considerably smaller amount of biofilm than the parent. this difference was more pronounced for the ompr mutant  than for the rcsb mutant .

discussion
in the introduction, we postulated that a biofilm prevention target would be characterized by its expression early in biofilm development. this was the case for flhd whose expression peaked at 12 h. a biofilm treatment target was postulated to be characterized by expression late in biofilm development and at the outermost edge of the biofilm. this, too, was true for flhd/flhc. expression of flhd increased again towards 51 h, the highest expression of flhd was in the outer layer of the biofilm. based upon these results, we come to the conclusion that the flagella master regulator complex flhd/flhc may be our first target for both, biofilm prevention and treatment techniques. this would fulfill our first two goals: i) provide proof of concept that our approach can identify targets for biofilm prevention and treatment techniques and ii) establish flhd/flhc as the first such target. in fulfillment of the final goal of this study, we identified two mechanisms to increase flhd expression and reduce biofilm amounts. mutations in the two-component response regulator genes ompr and rcsb increased flhd expression to the point where temporal and spatial differences in expression were abolished. these expression increases where paralleled by decreases in biofilm amounts, relative to the parent strain.

the expression profiles of flhd, ompr, and rcsb can be related to biofilm phases
originally described in pseudomonas aeruginosa, it is now widely accepted that biofilm development in many bacteria involves reversible attachment, irreversible attachment, maturation, and dispersion  <cit> . these phases are characterized by cell surface organelles such as flagella, type i fimbriae and curli, as well as numerous exopolysaccharides. the following three paragraphs relate the temporal expression profiles of flhd , ompr , and rcsb  to current literature on biofilm developmental phases. according to our previous review  <cit> , the hypothesis for the temporal expression profiles was that flhd expression may peak during reversible attachment, ompr expression during irreversible attachment, and rcsb expression may increase towards maturation.

a recent review article summarized the regulation of motility during biofilm formation  <cit> . the authors believe that flagella are important in the motility-to-biofilm transition in a way that inhibition of motility encourages biofilm formation by means of several functional  and regulatory  mechanisms  <cit> . our temporal expression profile of flhd is partially in agreement with this postulate. we saw a peak in expression at 12 hours , which may resemble reversible attachment, and a time period of low flhd expression around 34 h, possibly resembling irreversible attachment. however, expression of flhd increased again towards 51 h . this late increase is not necessarily in agreement with current biofilm models. however, guttenplan and kearns  <cit>  leave room for flagella regulators that may still be discovered. also, the role for flagella in dispersal is controversial.

the hypothesis  <cit>  that ompr expression may be highest during irreversible attachment was built upon the fact that phospho-ompr was a negative regulator of flhd expression  <cit>  and a positive regulator of curli  <cit> . our temporal expression profile of ompr is in agreement with this hypothesis. the peak for ompr was at 34 h, where flhd expression was minimal . the production of curli has previously been recognized as a control mechanism for biofilm formation  <cit> , an adherence tool to human uroepithelical cells  <cit> , and part of the motility-to-biofilm transition. csgd contributes to this transition by activating the expression of curli and inhibiting flagella biosynthesis  <cit> . the expression peak of the positive curli regulator, ompr, at 34 h could be our marker for irreversible attachment.

maturation of a biofilm typically requires the synthesis of an exopolysaccharide capsule that serves as a ‘glue’ to keep the microcolony together and contributes to adherence to the surface. this capsule can consist of many different substances, among them the k-capsule polysaccharide that is a contributor to the intracellular lifestyle of uropathogenic e. coli <cit>  and colanic acid, which has been recognized early as an important factor in forming the three dimensional structures that constitute the biofilm  <cit> . the phosphorelay system rcscdb is an activator of colanic acid production  <cit> , while also activating the synthesis of type i fimbriae  <cit> . these multiple functions of rcsb may explain the slow and steady increase of rcsb expression during biofilm formation  that cannot be correlated with a single phase of biofilm development. with the exception of the late increase in flhd expression, our temporal expression profiles are in agreement with our hypothesis from the review article  <cit> , as well as current literature.

regulation of flhd by multiple response regulators offers ample opportunity to control biofilm amounts and cell division
since the goal of our research was to modulate signal transduction pathways and reduce biofilm amounts, the next step after the identification of flhd/flhc as our first target would be the attempt to increase flhd expression levels, ultimately causing a reduction in biofilm amounts.

the expression of flhd is regulated by many environmental and genetic factors. environmental factors include temperature  <cit> , osmolarity  <cit> , and the nutritional state of the cell  <cit> . genetic factors are similarly diverse and include the catabolite repressor protein crp and the nucleoid associated protein h-ns  <cit> , the transcriptional regulator lrha  <cit> , the lysr family protein hdfr  <cit> , and the insertion of is elements into the flhd promoter  <cit> . post transcriptional regulation involves the carbon storage regulator csra  <cit>  and a negative regulator of cell motility, ydiv  <cit> . at the transcriptional level, regulation of flhd expression can be accomplished by several of the response regulators of two-component systems, such as rcsb  <cit> , ompr  <cit> , and qsec  <cit> .

in this study, knock-out mutations in rcsb and ompr yielded an impressive increase in flhd expression in the ompr and rcsb mutants . additionally, expression of flhd was not anymore dependent upon the biofilm phase, after the biofilm had formed  or the location of the individual bacterium within the biofilm . the temporal expression profile of flhd in the ompr mutant is similar to the one that was observed previously in planktonic bacteria  <cit> . however, in planktonic bacteria, we never observed more than  <dig> or  <dig> fold increases in flhd expression in the ompr mutant, relative to the parent. considering the fact that the images for flhd in the ompr mutant had been obtained at a much reduced excitation intensity , the difference in flhd expression between the two strains must be much higher in biofilm than in planktonic bacteria.

intriguingly, the ompr and rcsb mutants are also our first two mechanisms to reduce biofilm amounts by elevating the expression levels of flhd/flhc. this observation provides confidence in our conclusion that impacting the signal transduction cascade, consisting of multiple two-component response regulators and flhd/flhc can be used to control biofilm amounts. since the number of two-component systems in e. coli is rather large  <cit>  and response regulators respond to a broad range of environmental signals, the two-component signal transduction mechanism offers ample opportunity at controlling bacterial phenotypes and behaviors by deliberately changing the bacterial environment.

CONCLUSIONS
the bacterial species e. coli includes many pathogens, in particular biofilm formation  <cit>  and prevention  <cit>  in uropathogenic e. coli  have been researched intensively over the past few years. the goal of this study was to use an e. coli k- <dig> strain as a model to show that the study of temporal and spatial gene expression can lead to the identification of targets for the development of novel biofilm prevention and treatment options. we propose flhd/flhc as the first of such targets and ompr and rcsb as two mechanisms to control this target. our intention is to identify more of these targets/target mechanisms, using the temporal/spatial gene expression approach on a selection of biofilm associated genes. with respect to flhd/flhc, we believe that a gene that is this highly regulated by so many environmental and genetic factors is ideally suited to be controlled by deliberate changes to the environment, through a signal transduction cascade that may involve additional two-component response regulators beyond ompr and rcsb, ultimately impacting biofilm amounts. the two-component control mechanism may be particularly important for upec strains where two-component signaling plays a large role in motility, quorum sensing, biofilm formation, and virulence  <cit> .

