BACKGROUND
prebiotics are dietary carbohydrates, which escape digestion in the small intestine, but undergo bacterial fermentation in the large intestine, and beneficially affect the intestinal microbiota  <cit> . in addition to a well-established effect on bowel habit and stool bulking, animal studies suggest that ingestion of non-digestible carbohydrates has a protective effect against colon carcinogenesis  <cit> .

inulin-type prebiotics are fermentable fructans that stimulate growth of bifidobacteria, which are regarded as benefical organisms populating the large bowel  <cit> . prebiotic products include the long-chained inulin and the short-chained oligofructose, in both of which the monomers are linked by β bonds that are not digested in the upper intestinal tract.

since the cultivable part of the faecal microbiota probably constitutes only 20–50% of the gut microbes  <cit> , it is important to explore effects on this complex ecosystem by use of molecular fingerprinting methods allowing representation of the non-cultivable bacterial species. an example of such a fingerprinting method is denaturing gradient gel electrophoresis  of pcr-amplified 16s rrna genes, which have proved very useful for analysis of faecal bacteria  <cit> . while the dgge profiles based on amplified rrna genes  provides a fingerprint of the composition of the investigated community, they do not necessarily reflect metabolic activities, and could even originate from dormant, lysed or dead cells. the number of ribosomes in prokaryotic cells is correlated to growth rate  <cit> , and profiles based on amplified ribosomal rna sequences  may better reflect the metabolically active bacterial community. indeed, a recent study showed that alterations of bacterial community profiles after ingestion of prebiotic oligosaccharides by human subjects were only detected in dgge profiles generated from bacterial rrna  <cit> .

the objective of the present study was to elucidate the effects of dietary carbohydrates with different digestibility including sucrose, potato starch, inulin, oligofructose and a cornstarch-based control on the composition and activity of the rat intestinal microbiota as measured by physiological parameters, short-chain fatty acid composition, selective cultivation, dna-dgge and rna-dgge.

RESULTS
weight gain and feed consumption
during the five weeks of feeding, the rats fed the oligofructose containing diet  consumed only 79% of the amount of feed consumed by rats in the control group . consistently, also the weight gain of these rats was significantly  lower  than recorded for the control rats. .

effects on caecal weight, ph and scfa content
caecal weight  and ph of the caecal contents of animals fed either potato starch, inulin or oligofructose were significantly higher  than in animals fed the control diet . capillary zone electrophoresis revealed a content of acetic acid ranging between  <dig> and  <dig> mm in caecum of all animals, while the corresponding concentrations of propionic and butyric acid was generally lower. the concentration of butyric acid and propionic acid in the caecum content of animals fed with either of the fructans was higher than in the other groups. the increase in propionic acid concentration reached statistical significance in animals fed with inulin, whereas the concentration of butyric acid was significantly higher  in animals given oligofructose .

effects on selected cultivable bacterial groups in faeces
faecal contents of cultivable aerobic bacteria ranged between  <dig> and  <dig> per gram, and of cultivable anaerobic bacteria between  <dig> and  <dig> per gram. numbers of coliform bacteria were significantly lower, and numbers of lactic acid bacteria growing on rogosa agar were significantly higher  in the faeces from animals fed with either of the fructans than observed in the control group . additionally, numbers of enterococcus spp. were lower in animals on the inulin diet than in the control animals.

effects on dgge fingerprints of faecal microbiota
the average number of bands obtained on dna-based dgge profiles was  <dig>  ±  <dig>  while the corresponding number for rna-based profiles was  <dig>  ±  <dig>  the numbers of bands obtained did not differ significantly between the five dietary groups. principal component analysis of obtained dna-based as well as rna-based dgge profiles revealed that samples from animals belonging to the same dietary group clustered together, but that all dietary groups produced different profiles with the only exception of the rna-based profiles of the control and sucrose groups, which overlapped .

by comparison by eye of dna and rna based profiles obtained from the same faecal samples, two specific bands were observed, which were prominent in the rna based profiles but absent or vague in the dna profiles from all animals fed with inulin . a similar evident difference between dna- and rna profiles was not observed in samples from any of the other dietary groups . cloning and sequencing of the excised bands resulted in sequence fragments of 173– <dig> bps, which matched 100% to sequences within the genera of bacteroides and rikenella, respectively, both of which belongs to the order of bacteroidales .

discussion
in order to simulate the food consumption of western consumers, a western-type diet was given to rats in the present study. it is generally recognized that consumption of fructans such as inulin and oligofructose specifically stimulates bifidobacteria, probably due to production of β-fructosidase by these organisms, which makes them able to ferment these substances  <cit> . in the present study, a significant in vivo stimulation of species growing on rogosa agar was observed . this medium is designed to selectively promote growth of lactobacilli, but may give rise to many false positive colonies from faecal samples  <cit> . although evidence exists that at least some species of lactobacillus are able to utilize fructans in vitro  <cit> , and can be stimulated by these in vivo  <cit> , some of the observed increase in colony counts on rogosa may therefore be attributed to an increase in bifidobacteria  <cit> .

we speculate, that the stimulation of bifidobacteria/lactobacilli may occur also through other mechanisms than specific fermentation of the ingested carbohydrate, e.g. the effect on ph may favour growth of lactic acid bacteria over other gut microorganisms competing for intestinal nutrients.

we recorded increased levels of butyrate and propionate in caecal contents of animals fed with inulin and oligofructose, respectively. increased butyrate formation is generally considered to be a desirable effect, since butyrate induces apoptosis in cancer cell lines, and is also the preferred fuel for enterocytes  <cit> . it should however be borne in mind that neither lactobacilli nor bifidobacteria produce butyrate, thus the observed increase must result from stimulation of bacterial species other than these.

our findings of increased caecum weights and decreased caecal ph in animals fed with indigestible fructans , indicate increased fermentation in caecum, and are consistent with previously reported studies  <cit> . also animals fed with potato starch exhibited increased caecal weight and decreased ph  in consistence with a previous study  <cit> . this indicates that potato starch may have fermentation-stimulating effects on the gut environment.

analysis of rrna genes as well as of extracted ribosomal rna in faeces from animals fed with sucrose, potato starch, inulin, oligofructose and control diets by dgge resulted in different profiles from animals belonging to each of the five dietary groups, with the only exception of the rrna-based profiles of the control and sucrose groups, which overlapped . the average number of bands obtained by dgge was approximately  <dig> in all of the dietary groups, indicating that the overall complexity of the microbiota was unaltered by the ingested carbohydrates. notably, the sucrose-based diet and the cornstarch-based control diet produced different phylogenetic bacterial fingerprints . this indicates, that although cornstarch is not resistant to digestion in the small intestine, a part of it may escape digestion and reach the bacterial community in the large bowel  <cit> . cornstarch consists uniquely of glucose subunits, while the subunits of sucrose is glucose and fructose, and it can be speculated that the presence of fructose stimulates gut bacteria other than those stimulated by glucose.

additionally, it is notable that the phylogenetic composition of faecal bacteria  as well as the fingerprints of metabolically active organisms in faeces  differed markedly between animals fed with the long-chained inulin and the short-chained oligofructose , indicating that the bacterial subspecies specifically stimulated by these two carbohydrate sources are different, although no major differences was observed between these two groups by selective cultivation . furthermore, inulin caused a significant increase in the level of butyric acid in caecum, while oligofructose caused an increase in the level of propionic acid as compared to the control , which substantiates the indication that different bacterial populations are fermenting these two fructans. consistently, previous studies revealed different effects of short- and long-chained fructans on large intestine physiology and formation of aberrant crypt foci in rats  <cit> . we speculate that the long-chained fructans travels further into the large bowel before they are degraded than the short-chained fructans, and that this may partly explain that different groups of bacteria are affected. additionally, when degrading inulin, microorganisms equipped with endo-fructanases will have an advantage compared to organisms producing only exo-fructosidases, while this is less true for oligofructose degradation.

it has been reported that the impact of consumption of oligosaccharides on human faecal microbiota could be detected only by comparison of rna-dgge profiles, while no effect on dna-dgge profiles was seen  <cit> . however, a much larger diversity in faecal microbiota from human subjects than in genetically homogeneous experimental animals fed a completely controlled diet is to be expected, and this larger diversity may have masked an eventual effect on the human dna-dgge profiles.

comparison of dna-based and rrna-based profiles from the animals fed with inulin revealed that two bacterial species both belonging to the order of bacteriodales were not sufficiently abundant to be visible on the phylogenetic fingerprint, but had a very high rrna content, suggesting a highly active protein synthesis, i.e. rapid growth and metabolism . while there has been extensive focus on the specific bifidogenic effect of inulin  <cit> , only few reports exist describing effects on other species although it is known that also other intestinal bacteria including species of bacteroides are able to ferment fructo-oligosachharides  <cit> . due to its contribution to putrefaction in the intestinal environment, bacteroides is not normally counted among the bacteria which it is desirable to stimulate, although it also contributes to the synthesis of vitamins  <cit> , and has recently been reported to modulate maturation of the host immune system  <cit> . therefore, a decrease in the bacteroides population after intake of fructo-oligosaccharides, which has been seen in human microbiota-associated rats  <cit>  and in human volunteers  <cit> , is considered a beneficial effect. such a decrease is not contradicted by our observations, since the identified species of the phylum bacteroidetes are not visible on the dna-dgge profile , but our current findings suggest that these although they are small, these populations may be very actively growing in the inulin-fed rats. still, rapid growth would be expected to result in an increase in the population size, and it should be taken into consideration that ribosomes are quite stable, and that the ribosomal concentration in bacterial cells is not down-regulated immediately when growth stops. the explanation for the prominent bands on the rna-dgge profiles may therefore be that the high ribosome content in the bacteriodetes species resulted from stimulation of growth of a small subpopulation e.g. associated with a given intestinal compartment. shedding of bacteria with a high ribosome concentration would occur continuously from such a subpopulation and the stable ribosomes would remain in the bacterial cells excreted with faeces. this has been suggested to be the explanation for the high ribosome content of intestinal esherichia coli, which, similarly, is not correlated to rapid growth of the entire intestinal e. coli population  <cit> . another explanation for the prominent differences between the bands representing the bacteroides and rikenella sp. on the dna-dgge and rna-dgge gels may be bias of the preceding nucleic acid extraction procedures and/or pcr amplifications. however, since such a difference was observed only in the animals fed inulin, and only for these particular bands, we find it unlikely that it should be the result of pcr bias.

CONCLUSIONS
we conclude that moderate changes in the carbohydrate composition of the feed affected the phylogenetic composition of the intestinal microbiota. in specific cases, also the ribosome content of given species was changed.

this underlines the need for studies, which include phylogenetic analysis of the intestinal microbial communities present as well as assessment of their activities in order to fully explore the effect of prebiotics on the intestinal microbiota.

