BACKGROUND
plant invasion into new environments is an extremely costly problem, not only monetarily but also ecologically. invasive plant infestations reduce biodiversity by displacing native species and can literally destroy some native ecosystems by altering important ecosystem characteristics  <cit> . however, the reasons why some plants remain at low abundance in their home range but become dominant in their new range is not well understood and remains one of the most perplexing questions in ecology. multiple non-exclusive hypotheses have been proposed to explain plant invasion into new environments  <cit> .

a long standing idea in the field of invasion biology is that of enemy release  <cit> . this hypothesis posits that introduced plants escape their native co-evolved specialist enemies, which allows them to rapidly increase their numbers  <cit> . blossey and notzold  proposed the evolution of increased competitive ability  hypothesis, which builds on the idea of enemy release and has generated much interest in recent years  <cit> . the eica hypothesis suggests that costly defense against specialists no longer enhances fitness of plants in the introduced range; therefore introduced plants will evolve to put fewer resources into defense allowing them to increase allocation of resources towards growth and reproduction  <cit> . this hypothesis has been supported by experimental evidence, but only in part  <cit> . multiple refinements to the eica hypothesis have been proposed to account for altered selective pressures in the new environment including the presence of generalist enemies  <cit>  and changes in resource availability  <cit> .

the majority of studies examining eica and other hypotheses of plant invasion have focused on ecological, physiological and to some extent chemical plant characteristics  <cit> . however, with the current revolution in genomics technologies, the question arises as to whether ecological phenomena such as plant invasion can be better understood by studies of genetics or gene expression profiling. the development of genomics resources for non-model species of invasive weeds is increasingly becoming possible as new technologies become more available and affordable, as demonstrated by broz et al.  <dig>  and anderson et al.  <dig> , aiding in the ability of researchers to investigate the biology of invasive weeds  <cit> . in regards to ecological hypotheses, it may be particularly useful to characterize expression of genes related to plant defense and competitive ability.

recently, an est  library resource was developed for the problematic invasive plant, centaurea stoebe l.  hayek   <cit> . c. stoebe, a native to eurasia, is able to invade not only ruderal habitats, but also rangelands, pastures and prairies in north america, where it often establishes dense monocultures and excludes native plant species. c. stoebe first appeared on both coasts of north america around the late 1800s  <cit> , and has since greatly expanded its range to all but three states in the continental us  <cit> .

molecular marker studies revealed relatively large amounts of genetic diversity within and among populations in both the native and introduced ranges  <cit> , and suggest that this species has been introduced to north america multiple times. thus, genetic drift resulting from bottle-necks or founder effects does not seem to have played an important role in the invasive success of this weed. extensive field collections thus far conclude that the native range consists of morphologically indistinguishable diploid  and tetraploid  forms of the weed  <cit>  that occasionally occur in mixed stands  <cit> . in the introduced range, populations had been found to contain the tetraploid form exclusively  <cit>  until a recent extensive survey identified a single mixed stand of diploid and tetraploid plants in western canada  <cit> . this suggests that both forms of the weed were introduced, but only the tetraploid has become an invasive problem  <cit> .

c. stoebe is able to tolerate a wide variety of soil types and precipitation amounts in both eurasia and north america  <cit> . robust cross-continental comparisons have provided empirical evidence for a niche shift between native and introduced populations  <cit> , and more recently between native and introduced tetraploid c. stoebe, with the invasive tetraploids occurring in drier and warmer climates  <cit> . moreover, the range of the native tetraploid in eurasia has expanded over the range of the native diploid within the past 100– <dig> years  <cit> , and introduced tetraploids appear to have a higher ecological tolerance, or niche breadth, than either of the native forms  <cit> . thus, the invasive success of c. stoebe appears to be partially due to pre-adaptation of the native tetraploid cytotype to drier climates, a trait which has been further selected for in the introduced range  <cit> . however, more studies are needed to rule out other alternatives related to the weeds invasive success.

both diploid and tetraploid forms of c. stoebe are out-crossing, insect-pollinated asters, but the diploid tends to have a biennial monocarpic life cycle, whereas the tetraploid tends to be a polycarpic perennial, continuing to flower over multiple growing seasons  <cit> . compared to native populations, introduced tetraploids exhibit the highest proportion of polycarpic plants and have the greatest number of stems per plant  <cit> , which may increase their reproductive capacity. it is hypothesized that this perennial polycarpic life cycle is selected for, particularly in environments lacking natural enemies  <cit> , which may help explain why the tetraploid form became predominate in the introduced range.

although there are a small number of studies that examine ploidy differences between native and introduced populations of plants, this factor is most often unaccounted for in ecological studies of invasive weeds  <cit> , including c. stoebe. many of the worst weeds are polyploids, and changes in plant ploidy may lead to changes in life history traits, genetic diversity, gene expression or capacity for adaptation and evolution  <cit> . therefore, in a comparison of plants from both the native and introduced range, it is important to compare the same taxonomic unit  <cit> , and understand differences between taxonomic units.

as it appears that both ploidy pre-adaptation  and selection  may be important factors in c. stoebe invasion, we were interested in characterizing the three distinct geo-cytotypes of c. stoebe: native diploids, native tetraploids and introduced tetraploids. we grew plants from multiple populations, representing each of the three geo-cytotypes in a common environment and monitored plant performance characteristics and life cycle habits. in addition, we identified gene sequences in the c. stoebe est library that may be involved in constitutive basal plant defense or rapid evolution, as these traits may be important in the plants invasive success. expression of these genes was characterized in each geo-cytotype using quantitative pcr.

based on ideas of enemy release and rapid evolution of plants in the introduced range, and on trends in polyploidy, we developed hypotheses concerning plant performance and gene expression of the geo-cytotypes. first, we hypothesized that introduced tetraploids would exhibit reduced expression of constitutive defense and secondary metabolite related genes, but an increase in plant performance when compared to native tetraploids, due to a partial release from enemies. second, we also expected that genes involved in genome stability would be expressed to a greater extent in introduced versus native tetraploids due to possible novel environmental stresses experienced in the introduced range. although evolution is predominately thought to be due to random mutations, there is some evidence that expression of transposable elements and dna repair enzymes influence genetic stability and stress-induced evolutionary strategies in organisms  <cit> . therefore, we also assessed transcript accumulation of two active transposable elements and a dna repair enzyme, which might facilitate rapid evolution in a new environment. finally, we hypothesized that native tetraploids would exhibit increased expression of genes involved in secondary metabolite production compared to diploids, due to potential increases in the metabolic activities of polyploids  <cit> .

RESULTS
plant performance and life cycle analysis
no significant differences in vegetative plant performance characteristics were found between c. stoebe geo-cytotypes . before bolting, the plant biomass index tended to be higher in diploid populations than in tetraploids, but the results were not significant . similarly, stem height was not different between the three geo-cytotypes . however, differences in life cycle were noted between ploidy groups; a higher percentage of both native and invasive tetraploid plants flowered in the first year compared to the diploid plants . fewer than half of the diploid plants flowered in their first year of growth, and over 60% died after flowering . in comparison, over 75% of both native and introduced tetraploids flowered their first year and only 24% and 7% died after flowering, respectively . in addition, tetraploids produced more new rosettes after senescence of the parent plant than diploids . interestingly, the number of capitula per plant  was not different between the three geo-cytotypes. the observed differences in life cycle characteristics reflect the moncarpic life cycle of the diploid and the polycarpic life cycle of the tetraploid  <cit> , and are likely important in plant population fecundity over time, as illustrated by a simulation of seed production . over a fifteen-year period, this simluation estimates production of  <dig> ,  <dig> , and  <dig>  million seeds for populations of the native diploid, native tetraploid, and introduced tetraploid, respectively .

gene expression analysis
tetraploid plants from the introduced range had significantly lower rates of gene expression for all three pal transcripts compared to tetraploid plants from the native range, providing evidence in favor of our hypothesis . pal <dig> transcript accumulation in introduced tetraploids was  <dig>  times lower than the amount in native tetraploids, whereas pal2a and pal2b were  <dig>  and  <dig>  times lower, respectively . pal  <dig> expression was lower than expression for either form of pal  <dig> in all geo-cytotypes . similarly, glucanase transcripts showed over a two-fold reduction in expression in introduced tetraploids than their native counterparts . chitinase expression was  <dig>  fold lower in introduced tetraploids than native tetraploids . in general, expression of all tested secondary metabolism- and defense-related transcripts was lower in tetraploids from the introduced range compared to their native counterparts.

for each sample, total rna  was estimated using the appropriate standard curve for each gene of interest and normalized using the geometric mean of the three standards: actin, cytochrome c oxidase  and ubiquitin , as suggested in vandersompele et al.  <dig>  <cit> . genes of interest included three isoforms of pal   <dig>  2a, 2b, involved in secondary metabolism; chitinase and glucanase, involved in defense response; and a transposable element  and dna repair/recombination gene , potentially involved in rapid evolution. geo-cytotypes are 2× eu, native eurasian diploid populations; 4× eu, native eurasian tetraploid populations; 4× us, invasive north american tetraploids. significant differences in gene expression  were determined for geo-cytotypes of interest  using pair-wise comparisons of lsmeans. lsmeans were back-transformed and expression values are shown relative to native eurasian tetraploid populations . fisher's lsd and absolute t values are reported for each pair-wise comparison.

contrary to our second hypothesis, introduced tetraploids showed over two-fold less expression of a transposable element  transcript than native tetraploids . the other transposable element  showed extremely low levels of transcript accumulation in most samples, nearly all of which fell below the standard curve for that gene . of the usable values, the data suggested that introduced populations expressed this transposable element to a lower extent than native populations, but the sample size was very low and thus overall values may not accurately reflect expression in these populations. expression of rad was low in all plant types, but also showed the highest relative mean expression in native tetraploids, although this result was not significant .

diploid and tetraploid plants from the native range showed similar relative expression levels for seven out of ten genes tested; pal <dig>  glucanase, chitinase, rad, and the three housekeeping genes . expression of pal2a and pal2b was higher in native tetraploids compared to diploids  as hypothesized. expression of cacta transposable element was also higher in native tetraploids compared to diploids . introduced tetraploids showed similar expression profiles when compared to diploids for nine of the ten genes tested . the expression of pal2b was over three fold lower in introduced tetraploids compared to diploids .

discussion
plant performance and life cycle analysis
ridenour et al.  recently reported that in a common garden in montana, c. stoebe plants from north america exhibit greater biomass, tougher leaves and increased trichome density when compared to their eurasian counterparts  <cit> . based on this finding and hypotheses such as eica that suggest invasive plants may evolve to increase resource allocation to growth  <cit> , we expected that introduced tetraploids would out-perform both native diploids and tetraploids. however, in our study, neither of the plant vegetative growth characteristics examined , showed a significant difference. ridenour et al.  performed the bulk of their experiments on populations with unknown ploidy; however, one experiment containing plants of known ploidy revealed greater rosette diameters of introduced tetraploids compared to native tetraploids  <cit> . conversely, müller et al.  observed that hungarian and german diploids had greater dry weights and shoot diameters than north american tetraploids when grown in a european soil, but sample sizes were relatively small  <cit> . the observed differences may be due to the various populations chosen, the type and origin of soil used , or other factors involved in each of the above studies. these inconsistencies may suggest that vegetative growth is not the best indicator of invasiveness.

as previously noted by müller , life cycle differences between c. stoebe geo-cytotypes may have greater relevance to fitness than single performance traits  <cit> . in the first year of this study, flowering plants of all geo-cytotypes had a similar number of capitula : however, fewer diploid plants flowered in the first year of growth than tetraploids, diploids formed fewer new rosettes, and diploids suffered greater mortalities after flowering . in combination these measures suggest that the reproductive capacity of tetraploids is greater than that of diploids. additionally, we expect introduced tetraploid populations to have a higher reproductive capacity when compared to the native tetraploids, as illustrated by a simulation of seed production . ongoing experiments will provide more complete information about the life-cycle of these plants and seed production over their entire life span. thus, although we did not detect any significant differences in vegetative traits between c. stoebe geo-cytotypes, there is some indication of a long-term difference in plant fecundity, with the invasive tetraploid showing highest performance of the three geo-cytotypes studied.

gene expression analysis
secondary metabolism and defense
we selected three distinct pal unigenes for analysis of secondary metabolite-related transcript, as this enzyme represents the first enzymatic step in the flavonoid synthesis pathway which contributes isoflavones, anthocyanins, condensed tannins and other secondary metabolic compounds in plants  <cit> . flavonoids are often stored in plant tissues as 'pre-formed' defense compounds and may act as pathogen and herbivore deterrents  <cit> . the expression of pal gene transcripts in addition to the secondary metabolites resulting from the flavonoid pathway are known to be important in plant defense against pathogens, herbivores and environmental stresses  <cit> .

a chitinase and a beta- <dig> -glucanase were selected to analyze defense-related transcription, as these transcripts represent members of the pr family of proteins, which have been widely implicated in plant resistance to pathogens  <cit> . different forms of chitinase are involved in both active and passive defense responses in plants  <cit> . glucanases have also been implicated in plant resistance to pathogens, and beta- <dig>  3-glucanases comprise part of the pr- <dig> group of pathogenesis-related genes  <cit> .

the fact that pal, chitinase and glucanase transcripts were all reduced in introduced tetraploids compared to native tetraploids  might suggest that populations of plants from the introduced range will be less defended against herbivores than natives, as is generally predicted by the eica hypothesis. some studies suggest that constitutive or basal levels of defense-related transcripts in plants, similar to those analyzed in this study, can be used to predict pathogen susceptibility and induced defense responses  <cit> . very subtle genetic mutations, such as those in the arabidopsis cpr  mutant, have been shown to increase basal levels of systemic acquired resistance, which in turn increase levels of pathogen resistance  <cit> . in addition, the over-expression of pr proteins in planta typically results in a phenotype of enhanced disease resistance  <cit> . plants with high constitutive defenses may, however, also have a lower degree of defense induction than those with low constitutive defenses  <cit> .

recent reports indicate that introduced c. stoebe plants are better defended against both generalist and specialist enemies than natives  <cit> . this observation, in combination with the current study, may suggest that introduced populations have a higher potential degree of defense induction. however, the current study only measured levels of genes that may be involved in constitutive defense. thus, our results must be interpreted with caution with regard to ecological hypotheses of plant defense in biological invasions.

it is important to note here that the release of c. stoebe from specialist enemies has been considered an important factor in the invasive success of the weed, and this has spurred the introduction of a number of biological control species to north america over the past thirty years  <cit> . although many of these specialist herbivores have become established and widespread, c. stoebe densities have only been reduced in a few specific areas , and the weed continues to expand its range at other sites  <cit> . interestingly, field observations in north america suggest that introduced c. stoebe experiences little pressure from generalist herbivores and pathogens , indicating that c. stoebe currently experiences a partial release from both specialist and generalist enemies in the introduced range.

in order to better understand defense responses in c. stoebe, future studies should monitor gene expression and physiological responses in tetraploid geo-cytotpyes when exposed to pathogens and herbivores. this would help determine if expression of genes involved in constitutive defenses are good predictors of pathogen and herbivore susceptibility in c. stoebe. in addition, it would be interesting to test the response of c. stoebe geo-cytotypes to a variety of generalist and specialist enemies at the level of gene expression.

evolutionary capacity
the activity of transposable elements could facilitate evolution by reorganizing the genome, and may be one important aspect in this process  <cit> . therefore, we hypothesized that introduced populations of c. stoebe would have the highest expression of the transposable elements analyzed, potentially due to novel stresses encountered in the introduced range. however, this was not the case. in fact, native tetraploid populations had the highest expression rate of one catca en/spm subclass transposable element . the expression of rad, which is involved in dna recombination/repair  <cit> , was also highest in native tetraploid populations, but was not significantly different from that of introduced populations .

although the expression of transposable elements could facilitate rapid evolution, transposition may not be adaptive and could cause deleterious genomic rearrangements as opposed to beneficial ones. in other studies, certain transposable elements have been detected in plants at specific growth stages or under conditions of biotic and abiotic stress  <cit> ; however, the biological role of active transposition currently remains unclear. additionally, recent evidence suggests that epigenetic mechanisms such as dna methylation and chromatin remodeling can play an important role in the regulation of gene expression in polyploids which may facilitate adaptive plasticity  <cit> . similarly, paramutation  can also result in differential regulation of genes between polyploids and their diploid progenitors  <cit> . thus, although we did not detect the changes we predicted in expression of transposable elements, it is entirely possible that factors other than chromosomal rearrangement through transposition are responsible for the observed changes in gene expression.

plant ploidy
although plant ploidy is often unaccounted for in comparisons of native and introduced populations, we found it to be a necessary and essential component for gene expression analyses. in native populations, we found lower expression of pal2a, pal2b and the transposable element in diploids compared to tetraploids, and all other genes examined showed similar relative expression . the literature suggests that gene expression rates in polyploids tend to vary depending on plant species, ploidy, genetic background, and the genes examined; however, the phenomenon of gene dosage compensation appears to be common  <cit> . this dosage effect results in gene or protein expression patterns in polyploids which are similar to their diploid progenitors. we did not necessarily expect to see this phenomenon in our plant populations because other studies involving ploidy and gene or protein expression have traditionally utilized plants with the same genetic background  <cit> , whereas evidence suggests that c. stoebe plants within the native range harbor different genetic backgrounds  <cit> . however, it appears that gene dosage compensation may be occurring to some extent in the native cytotypes of c. stoebe. additionally, we observed increased expression of two pal transcripts in native tetraploids compared to diploids, which may reflect increases in secondary compounds due to polyploidy as is seen in other plants  <cit> .

interestingly, native diploids exhibited similar expression profiles for nine of the ten total genes analyzed when compared to introduced tetraploids , also suggesting gene dosage compensation. this result was rather surprising in that the diploid appears to be extremely rare  in the introduced range, whereas the introduced tetraploid is a very problematic weed. therefore, it is likely that other factors, such as plant performance characteristics, life cycle traits and the expression of other genes, are of greater importance in determining the success of tetraploids over diploids in the introduced range. overall, the observed differences in gene expression between and within ploidies highlights the importance of using appropriate plant types when examining a particular species in both the native and introduced range.

alternative gene roles and regulation
genes similar to those selected in the current study have been detected in response to a variety of cues and conditions that do not necessarily reflect their primary annotation. for instance, many genes involved in defense response  <cit> , flavonoid biosynthesis  <cit>  and active transposition  <cit>  have been detected during particular points of plant growth and development. in this study we attempted to minimize any possible developmental differences in gene expression by sampling expanded, fully developed rosette leaves of similar age from all plants. all of the plants were grown in the same greenhouse environment and at the time of sampling remained in rosette form, none showing signs of bolting. if the genes tested here were expressed predominantly in response to developmental cues, it could be expected that expression of transcripts would be extremely similar across all geo-cytotypes, which is not what was observed.

additionally, it is possible that the defense genes analyzed in this study are important for aspects other than plant defense against enemies. for instance, the production of certain flavonoids are thought to play important roles in photo-protection, frost hardiness and drought resistance  <cit> , which could influence expression of pal genes. c. stoebe occupies areas in both the native and introduced range that are often subject to these types of abiotic stress  <cit> . thus, expression of pal transcripts and resulting flavonoid accumulation may be important in both the biotic and abiotic stress response of the plant.

CONCLUSIONS
although we sampled only a small subset of genes, we identified differences in gene expression between native and introduced populations of plants that may have ecological relevance. we found that introduced tetraploids exhibited lower expression of constitutive defense genes than native tetraploids, as might be predicted based on general ideas of enemy release and rapid evolution. plant origin and ploidy were found to have a significant effect on both life-cycle characteristics and gene expression. this highlights the importance of determining plant ploidy in ecological and genomics investigations, and suggests that c. stoebe invasion can be influenced by both plant ploidy and altered gene expression in the introduced range.

we have demonstrated that the quantitative analyses of gene expression in native and introduced plant populations reveal trends that may provide additional insight into ecological hypotheses. however, the mechanisms underlying the observed changes in gene expression remain unclear, and further work is needed in this area. a better understanding of the genetic and molecular basis of invasiveness in exotic plants is not only an interesting case study in evolution, but is important to further our understanding how these invasions occur, and to choose appropriate management interventions. the techniques used in our study can provide an important complement to classical ecological measurements of plant fitness and competitive success.

