BACKGROUND
as a unique variety of microarray, genome tiling array targets not only known transcripts that are dispersed across the genome, but intensively covers all known contiguous regions on the genome with overlapping or evenly-spaced probes. being more unbiased than common gene expression arrays, tiling arrays have the ability to empirically investigate transcriptional activity across all known genomic regions, some of which may contain unknown transcripts and splicing variants. studies using tiling arrays in human and arabidopsis thaliana have shown that the number of transcripts exceeds predictions by up to  <dig> times, and further, many exist outside of annotated exons  <cit> . besides transcriptome mapping, other applications also make tiling array an ideal tool for whole-genome analysis  <cit> , including chip-on-chip for dna-protein interactions, medip-chip for dna methylation, dnase chip for identification of hypersensitive sites, and array comparative genomic hybridization  to study dna copy number variation.

however, in recent years with advancing technology and lower costs, high-throughput sequencing  has gained unprecedented attention in genome research. with its inherent single-base resolution, ngs achieves higher accuracy in exon boundary mapping and can be used for snp detection  <cit> . further, its unlimited dynamic range enables detection of any subtle changes in the transcription level  <cit> . despite significant cost reduction for ngs, tiling array remains more cost-effective for large samples — which typically provide higher and more reliable statistical power — therefore, cross-platform collaboration between deep sequencing data and array data has been considered  <cit> .

additionally, relatively few ongoing research projects seek to solve biological questions on a whole-genome scale, so it is more likely that several linked qtl regions or intervals identified in genome-wide association studies are pursued in detail. such specific interests can be addressed by using capture oligos for targeted enrichment of dna fragments representing the genomic region of interest  <cit> . these capture oligos might be applied either in solution-based or microarray-based methods, thus combining the two platforms in the array assisted targeted sequencingapproaches, where targeted regions could be tiled on dna capture arrays, and the hybridization products could be used in the follow-up sequencing library preparation  <cit>  this customized tailoring tool selectively enriches only the regions of interest and provides the opportunity to reduce both cost and processing time, while retaining high sensitivity through high-throughput technology.

in this paper, we would like to address issues and challenges in designing probes suitable for genome tiling and targeted sequencing. in particular, we present the penalized uniqueness score, which serves as a controlling criterion to eliminate potential cross-hybridization, and a flexible tiling array design pipeline.

RESULTS
penalized uniqueness score
in microarray design, selected probes should have similar hybridization efficiencies under a specified narrow band of temperature, as well as minimal potential for both self-hybridization and cross-hybridization  <cit> . however, these selection constraints become much more difficult to satisfy when applied to tiling probes designed for a large genomic region. among these conditions, cross-hybridization is most problematic, when a non-targeted nucleotide sequence hybridizes to the designed probe. cross-hybridization contributes to the overall probe signal intensity and may potentially compromise the downstream analysis  <cit> . a similar situation with lower specificity also troubles deep sequencing, when short reads need to be either aligned to a reference genome or assembled into contigs  <cit> .

experimental techniques and analytical methods have been developed to overcome this issue. commonly, approaches to probe design are mostly blast  <cit>  based  <cit> ; other researchers  <cit>  also employ suffix array  <cit>  for faster indexing and alignment, however at the cost of increasing space complexity.

furthermore, gräf et al. <cit>  proposed the idea of uniqueness score  for cross-hybridization control in tiling probe selection. following their original definition, a genome sequence in question is called g, which is a part of the whole genome assembly gs. if a substring x of g occurs only once in gs, and each substring of x occurs more than once in gs, then this substring x is called a minimum unique substring  of g. at each position of g, if the substring from this position to the end of g is unique within gs, then there exists one shortest unique prefix starting from that position, which is called a minimal unique prefix  at that position. the uniqueness score is then defined as the number of mus within any candidate genome interval; finding u could then be achieved by counting the distinct end positions of mup within the region. details and proof could be found in  <cit> .

however, in this definition of the score, they only considered the absolute number of mus without accounting for the distribution of length and coverage within the probe. hypothetically, the first half of a probe could contain no mus, while the remainder might harbor a large number of mus . in certain extreme cases, for longer oligonucleotide probes, the original definition would give a score higher than the specified threshold, even though the actual coverage of these mus is only 50%, and cross-hybridization could still occur. another possible scenario is that compared to sequences with shorter mus, probes with longer and near-window-sized mus are more vulnerable to cross hybridization. a schematic illustration of the  <dig> aforementioned cases is shown in figure 1; some potentially vulnerable probes from one typical array can be found in table  <dig> 


u
u


p

blat hits, number of hybridization-quality alignment to the reference genome. mus coverage is the length of the region on the probe covered by mus. mus avg. len, is the average length of all mus within the probe. u, the original uniqueness score. up, the penalized uniqueness score.

hence we define the penalized uniqueness score up as the following,

  up=u×cmus×1−meanlmus/lmax 

cmus, is the proportion of the probe covered by all mus within.

lmus, is length of the mus within the candidate probe.

lmax, is the maximal length of mup, default is  <dig> 

u, is the number of mus within the candidate probe.

distribution quartiles of model parameters for one agilent chip are shown in table  <dig>  so in the best case scenario, all mus cover the whole probe and the coverage will induce no penalty on the uniqueness score. regarding the average length of mus, it will normally give a coefficient between  <dig>  and  <dig> .


penalized uniqueness score evaluation
after blat  <cit>  alignment,  <dig> % of all agilent human whole genome chip-on-chip probes found to have unique quality alignment, while only  <dig> probes had been mapped to multiple locations. we made back to back box-plots  for both scores to visualize the general group differences in their distributions. both plots show similar overall pattern. probes with unique alignment tend to have a higher score. a visible difference of the grouping effect between the two scores could be found, that for the penalized uniqueness score the difference of median between group  <dig> and  <dig> is much lower than the difference of median between group  <dig> and group  <dig>  an estimate of grouping effect, calculated using below formula , would give up a ratio of  <dig> , almost two times higher than  <dig>  for u, suggesting a larger difference in the distribution of the penalized score between unique probe group and probes with multiple alignments.


  medianu1−medianu2medianu2−medianu≥ <dig> 

to access directly the relative performance of the two scores, receiver operating characteristic curve  was adopted measuring the trade-off between sensitivity and specificity. curves for both score were overlaid on figure  <dig>  it could be seen that both scores work quite well and strongly deviate from the diagonal, however, a visible trace of difference could be identified at the upper left corner, suggesting a clear gain of advantage by the penalized score.


design parameters
the melting temperature , defined as the temperature at which 50% of the oligonucleotide and its perfect complement are in duplex and the other half are in the random coil state, is essential for the success of stable hybridization, where a narrow band of tm across all probes is highly desirable  <cit> . common thermodynamics prediction models utilizing only base composition, like gc content  <cit>  or base counts  <cit> , have been proposed and widely used for short oligonucleotides. however, these simple models do not consider the actual probe sequence, but rather use only the summary statistics of the sequence. the loss of information will inevitably lead to lower prediction power. the nearest-neighbor model later proposed is considered more robust and accurate  <cit> . thus, in this algorithm we implemented the adapted prediction model of tm  using the same parameters as in  <cit> . aside from tm, the gc content could also be controlled separately.

  tm=∑Δhd+Δhi∑Δsd+Δsi+Δsself+r×lnct/b+ <dig> ×logna+ 

to limit self-hybridization potential, palindromic content, measured as the maximal proportion of inverted repeat , could be controlled via a user-specified threshold. interestingly, unlike in  <cit> , where the author claimed that palindromic sequences are more unique in the genome, we observed an opposing relationship between palindromes and uniqueness : agilent's catalog probes with higher palindromic content tended to have lower mean uniqueness scores, which caused a left-shifting of their distributions when using a high palindrome cutoff. small yet significant correlations could also be detected for both uniqueness scores u, - <dig>  ; up, - <dig>  ] and blat hits  with palindromic content. however, the distribution of blat scores is extremely left-tilted, since most probes are aligned only once, therefore, despite supporting our findings, the correlation test may not be valid.


repetitive regions, as one major source of cross-hybridization, account for a large proportion of mammalian genomes like human and pig. the most commonly adopted approach to handle repetitive regions is to exclude those using tools like repeatmasker  or window masker  <cit> . however, evidence suggests a role for repetitive dna in gene conversion; therefore not all repeats are “junk”  <cit> . tandem repeats have also been shown to be associated with regulation of transcription factor binding  <cit>  and various disease forms including cancer  <cit> . thus, when the uniqueness score is used to control cross-hybridization, regions, that were masked as repetitive but had a high uniqueness score, could still be included. therefore it is suggested that, as an optional but recommended preprocessing step, target regions of the genome could be masked with the aforementioned tools. further, a parameter controlling the proportion of repetitive masked regions on the candidate probe is available, allowing for either full exclusion of repetitive regions or partial inclusion of a specified proportion. back-mapping agilent chip targets to the reference sequence also suggests inclusion of repetitive sequence, with  <dig> probes having a repetitive proportion greater than zero, and  <dig> probes being completely masked as repetitive.

probe selection algorithm
tiling arrays can be designed in the most straightforward way, either using an end-to-end fashion or with a fixed distance or overlap between neighboring tiles. however, these simple strategies will easily encounter problems like cross-hybridization and low hybridization potential, problems that would eventually contaminate the data. also, instead of having a high coverage up to 100% initially, the number of probes with valid signals could fall significantly in the end. to gain more control of the expected quality while giving better resolution and coverage, we present the following design strategy and pipeline.

the algorithm searches for candidate probes in an intuitive growing fashion, from the 5' of the sequence to the 3' end. in general, we attempted to make neighboring probes having a fixed size of overlap, if the targeted probe satisfies the user-specified constraints. otherwise, the adjacent positions overlapping with  <dig> nt more or less would be tested, and the search would keep shifting until the next valid probe is found or the boundary of the genomic region is reached. pseudo code of the detailed selection mechanism is shown in the algorithm  and penalized uniqueness score of  <dig>  , and limited self-hybridization potential, having a mean palindromic content of  <dig> % . to address the coverage and resolution of our design, we chose the whole human chromosome  <dig>  as the target region, and detail settings could be found in method.

with our implementation, it took around  <dig> hours on a  <dig>  ghz single core pc to finish the process. in table  <dig>  we summarize the agilent catalog design and our custom designs, showing that our flexible strategy could achieve higher coverage with fewer and, on average, longer probes. the coverage was assessed using two types of measurement, the raw non-redundant bases covered  and the total length of unit-sized  windows in which at least one probe was placed.


‡
‡
* agilent human whole genome chip-on-chip set 244k .

† overlapping size set to − <dig>  probe length range  <cit> , tm range  <cit> , up range , gc content range .

‡ table cell is formatted as median/mean.

¶ using the length of all unit-sized  windows in which at least one probe was placed.

uniqueness of palindromic sequence
to investigate further the relationship between sequence uniqueness and palindromic content, we utilized data from a separate experiment in which we used our implementation to design tiling arrays for several chromosome regions of the pig genome. for one of them, on sus scrofa chromosome  <dig>  from  <dig> bp to  <dig> bp, we built the profile of all design parameters for all possible 60-mer probes in the indicated region. in total  <dig> candidates were evaluated.

for the two uniqueness scores , unlike for the agilent catalog array, their distributions were far from normal, both having a peak at zero and a flat, uniform interval followed by a narrow, bell-shaped region. this “twin-peak” distribution makes any formal statistical tests infeasible. however, by thresholding on palindromic content, we determined the density of uniqueness scores for candidates with palindromic content higher than the cutoff; in this way, we directly visualized sequences with higher palindromic content which are subject to removal in the probe selection process. when using a higher cutoff the trend of differences resembles that observed for the agilent chip: the density curves tilt left, with both peaks shrinking and the saddle region raising. in particular, the proportion of sequences with close to  <dig> uniqueness score remained large in the high-palindrome group , yet the high uniqueness peak vanished.


finally, we further filtered out candidates violating those probe selection parameters used in the design, which include a narrow band of melting temperature , moderate gc content , no base exceeding 60%, and no single and di-nucleotide repeats exceeding the thresholds of  <dig> and  <dig> respectively. after filtering, a similar pattern persists, yet is not so pronounced, suggesting that the filtering removed more candidates with low uniqueness scores. one particular feature is that the candidates with high palindrome  and  <dig> uniqueness scores were removed by filtering.

benchmarking of public array data
we further used our penalized uniqueness score to evaluate array data from public repository. we choose one popular platform from agilent, human whole-genome expression array 4x44k , which contains  <dig> unique probes. we randomly selected from this platform  <dig> single color array datasets all having proper replicate  for each factor level. probes are scored using our penalized uniqueness score. for each experiment, like running a practical microarray analysis we performed pre-processing and filtering, details could be found in method. in the end, we derived summary statistics of the penalized uniqueness score for filtered probes , which are over-saturated or outlying and thus could be related to cross-hybridization. for the analyzed experiments, the number of probe filtered varies from  <dig> to  <dig>  interestingly, for all except one experiment , those filtered probes exhibit lower average up score and thus are less unique according to our measurement. to achieve statistical power of  <dig>  when using a two sided t-test to detect a mean difference of  <dig>  with a standard deviation of  <dig> would require at least  <dig> observations in each sample. therefore, we only perform t-test for those experiments which has more than  <dig> probes filtered out. in all three experiments significantly lower uniqueness scores are detected for those filtered probes.


t 
discussion
the probe selection algorithm implemented in this study utilizes the proposed penalized uniqueness score as a controlling criterion of cross-hybridization, together with several other parameters for the flexible tweaking of the positional distribution, optimal hybridization efficiency, and essential constraints of sequence complexity. profiling agilent’s catalog probes confirms the appropriateness of our parameter settings. the intention of the algorithm is to allow a part of the probe to overlap with its neighboring tiles, giving higher coverage and resolution for experiments, like a targeted sequencing library preparation. however, it can also be used to design chip-chip experiments, which require distantly-spaced probes across large genomic regions. to achieve this, the selection algorithm behaves slightly differently when a negative overlap is specified, and it will not attempt to shift to the 5', if that would induce overlapping. studies have shown that sequence polymorphisms may affect probe hybridization efficiency  <cit> . thus common snps defined in databases, like dbsnp, could be excluded in the input fasta files by cutting the region into two new regions, or snp could be masked with lowercase letters and controlled like repetitive regions.

the design is done on a per-sequence basis thus the memory requirement of the implementation depends on the largest sequence contig in question. for each sequence header defined in the source fasta files, to calculate the uniqueness score all corresponding mup entries in the prefix file have to be imported and processed in ram; each entry will need two integers for the position and the length of the prefix, respectively, to be stored in the array. this in turn suggests that for large genome tiling design - e.g., when covering a whole mammalian chromosome, which could have a length of 3× <dig> bp, - storing only the prefix array will take about  <dig> gb of memory on a 64-bit machine. additionally, the algorithm runs in linear time with various parameters affecting the exact time expectation. yet further parallelization is easily available either on a per-sequence basis given sufficient memory or on a per-chunk basis, since, in our implementation, the individual sequence is initially pieced into segments with continuous non-ambiguous bases and sequentially processed. simple per-chunk test utilizing  <dig> parallel processes further reduced the running time to approximately  <dig> min for the same designing task that is presented in the comparison section.

compared to traditional blast-like alignment methods, our definition of the penalized uniqueness score makes less parametric model assumptions for the homologous estimation, letting it be more sequence-driven and less sensitive to arbitrary parameter settings. the calculation of the score makes usage of genometools , which is memory relaxed, and inherently benefit from the computational efficiency of the fm-index  <cit> . as a rational variable, it provides a more continuous distribution and a wider dynamic range for the uniqueness measurement without further increase in the computational complexity, while showing higher sensitivity and specificity over the original count score, which only takes discrete integers ranging from  <dig> to the user specified maximal length of mup. the score itself, like the original count score, measures the degree of uniqueness and dissimilarity of the sequence to the rest of the genome, which means the lower the score the higher possibility for non-specific binding. thus, it could be further factored in the background correction model or at the normalization step prior to the downstream array data analysis, to correct for cross-hybridization noises using the uniqueness score. such a correction model could take the typical form as the exponential-normal convolution model in rma algorithm  <cit> , by adding an additional term for non-specific binding noise.

concerning palindrome sequences, which play an important structural role in the biogenesis of microrna  <cit>  and also have other functional characteristics like acting as restriction enzyme sites  <cit> , our results suggest that with higher palindromic content the sequence tends to have a lower uniqueness score, contrary to what has been previously claimed in  <cit> . aside from nucleotide sequence, sheari et al. studied the palindrome in protein sequence using a linguistic measurement, in which they also related palindromes with low sequence complexity  <cit> . under our uniqueness measurement, lower complexity normally leads to fewer and longer mus in the region, resulting in a lower penalized uniqueness score. our experimental observations could also be explained in plain theory, since a highly palindromic sequence will share a large identical segment with its reverse complement strand; thus there should be fewer unique substrings found in such regions.

CONCLUSIONS
in this study, we defined the penalized uniqueness score, which could serve as a better measurement for sequence heterogeneity, showing higher sensitivity and specificity. the efficient and flexible tiling probe selection algorithm we implemented could assist in the design of various types and scales of genome tiling task, with high coverage and resolution, while giving more control of the expected hybridization efficiency. using agilent's catalog array and experimental data, our in silico analysis revealed that palindromic sequence exhibiting relatively lower uniqueness . re-analyzing public array data further provided support of using the penalized uniqueness score to discriminate non-specific probes for microarray data analysis.

