BACKGROUND
the emergence of multicellular animals from their protist ancestors brought evolutionary novelties together with some significant genetic challenges. for example, it is believed that the genes involved in cell-cell communication, cell adhesion and cell differentiation probably arose before or concomitantly with the origins of multicellularity  <cit> . one of the protein families involved in cell-to-cell communication in metazoa is the family of scaffolding proteins known as membrane-associated guanylate kinases , which organize protein complexes at cell or synaptic junctions . the maguks have a wide variety of biological roles, such as regulating cell polarity  <cit> , connecting transmembrane proteins  with the cytoskeleton in tight junctions  <cit> , and regulating synapse formation and plasticity  <cit> . therefore, maguks are of critical importance to the development of multicellular animals.

the maguk family have been divided into different classes or groups, according to phylogenetic position and protein domain architecture . these maguks classes are known as calcium/calmodulin-dependent proteins kinase , palmitoylated membrane protein , zona occludens , caspase recruitment domain family , disc large homolog , calcium channel β subunit , and membrane-associated guanylate kinase with an inverted repeat . all classes contain the following: one or several pdz domains , a catalytically inactive guanylate kinase  domain with homology to yeast guanylate kinase and a src homology  <dig>  domain  . members of the magi class, on the other hand, have two ww  domains instead of the sh <dig> domain. these ww domains are situated downstream of the guk domain . all of these modular motifs in maguk mediate protein-protein interactions.

the maguk protein gene family had been considered to be exclusive to metazoa  <cit>  and, hence, a key gene family for determining metazoan origins. however, a recent est survey showed that an homolog of magi is present in the protist c. owczarzaki  <cit> , which seems to be the sister-group to the choanoflagellata+metazoa clade. this finding led to new questions, such as whether other maguks were already present in the ancestor of metazoa, the time of divergence of this gene family, and whether choanoflagellates also had maguk homologs. to answer these questions we have undertaken a taxon-wide search of the maguk family in eukaryotes. our search included the complete genome sequence of the choanoflagellate m. brevicollis and the genome trace sequence data of c. owczarzaki, from which we have completed the full gene annotation by race pcr. our data reveals that the maguk protein gene family already diverged in premetazoan lineages.

RESULTS
types of maguks
previous genomic comparisons have used different names to classify the distinct maguk classes  <cit> . our data reveals that there are at least ten different types of maguks. in the interest of clarity we have classified the maguk into  <dig> classes: magi, cacnb, zo, carma, dlg <dig>  dlg1- <dig>  mpp <dig>  mpp2- <dig>  mpp <dig>  and cask. those maguk classes with their corresponding protein domain architecture are shown in figure  <dig>  although the protein domain architectures of maguks are well conserved among the taxa within each class, some proteins have lost some of their domains, or their sequences are highly divergent. figure  <dig> shows the canonical protein domain architecture; additional details and particularities are shown in additional file  <dig> 

phylogenetic analyses of the guanylate kinase domain
broad phylogenetic sampling of the guanylate kinase  domain was performed in order to check the monophyly of maguk within the larger guk super-family. although magi and cacnb homologs are considered to be members of maguk, their guk domains are very divergent and the alignment quality decreases considerably when both of them are included. thus, phylogenetic trees have been inferred either with magi or with cacnb representatives. the maximum likelihood  phylogenetic tree that includes cacnb homologs is shown in figure  <dig> , while the analysis including magi is shown in additional file  <dig>  statistical support for this last tree is very low, as it has a truncated guk domain that leaves very few amino acid positions left for phylogenetic analysis. in any case, both topologies suggest that the "core maguks" group  is monophyletic . the trees also suggest that either the cacnb or the magi group is the sister-group of the "core maguks". which of those classes, magi or cacnb, is more closely related to the "core maguk" group remains elusive. in fact, whether any of them should really be considered maguks is unclear even though magi and cacnb share the pdz domain and the sh <dig> domain with the rest of maguks respectively . their domain architecture may as well be a product of convergence.

survey of maguks and phylogenetic analyses
our survey and protein domain analysis of maguks show that they are only present in metazoa, choanoflagellates and the protist c. owczarzaki. we did not find any maguks in any of the available fungi, amoebozoan, and other eukaryotic genomes. eumetazoan  taxa have at least one homolog representative of seven of the ten main classes of maguk, namely magi, cacnb, dlg 1- <dig>  zo, mpp2- <dig>  mpp <dig>  and cask . carma and mpp <dig> groups appear to be exclusive to vertebrata. the placozoan trichoplax adhaerens has a similar maguk repertoire as cnidaria, as it only lacks the mpp <dig> class and it has instead a dlg <dig> homolog, which is actually missing in cnidaria. however, the poriferan amphimedon queenslandica, lacks homologs for mpp <dig>  zo, and cask and some of its proteins branch in unclear positions within the tree.

an ml tree was inferred from the sh <dig> + guk domains of the "core maguk" proteins. the magi and the cacnb classes were not included in the analysis. magi were excluded as they do not have the sh <dig> domain and their guk domain is truncated. similarly, although cacnb have sh <dig> and guk, their sequences are very divergent and leave few amino acid left for phylogenetic analyses. we searched, among other eukaryotes, the genome sequences of m. brevicollis, c. owczarzaki, the cnidarian nematostella vectensis, the poriferan a. queenslandica, the placozoan t. adhaerens, plus a few representative bilaterians. when homologs from taxa with a relevant phylogenetic position, such as hydra magnipapillata, were found, they were also included in the phylogenetic analysis.

the topology of the ml tree shows two statistically supported main clades . one clade, which we name as the "dlg super class", consists of all dlgs plus zo and carma. the other, which we name as the "mpp super class", comprises all mpps and cask. the different maguk classes are supported in our phylogenetic tree. thus, zo, carma, dlg <dig>  dlg1- <dig>  mpp <dig>  mpp <dig>  and cask all appear as monophyletic groups, with varying bootstrap support. mpp 2- <dig> is the only group that appears as a paraphyletic group.

within the dlg super class, zo and carma group together and they branch as a sister-group to dlg <dig>  an a. queenslandica protein with a domain architecture that is typical of dlg <dig>  appears as the sister-group to the dlg5+zo+carma clade. the dlgs of both c. owczarzaki and m. brevicollis group together as the sister-group to the whole dlg super class. within the mpp super class, mpp <dig> groups within cask, mpp <dig> forms a clear clade, while the remaining mpp genes do not appear to be monophyletic. capsaspora-mpp branches as the sister-group of the entire mpp super class, whereas monosiga-mpp appears within the metazoan mpp group.

finally, three putative maguk-like genes from m. brevicollis branch in an intermediate position between the dlg and the mpp super classes.

to check the possibility than one or several lateral gene transfer  events may have occurred from metazoans to choanoflagellates and c. owczarzaki, we performed a neighbour-net analysis to see whether alternative trees may hint to a potential lgt event. the analysis clearly shows that the homologs of c. owczarzaki and m. brevicollis do not come from lgt from metazoans since they clearly group outside the major metazoan maguk types, as we would expect if lgt between metazoans and those protists had taken place . instead their homologs branch deep into the root of the tree.

protein domain architecture of maguks in premetazoan taxa
several maguks are present in some non-metazoan taxa. both the protist c. owczarzaki and the choanoflagellate m. brevicollis present putative magi, dlg and mpp homologs. the dlg and mpp proteins of c. oczarzaki and m. brevicollis cluster basal to the dlg and mpp super classes respectively . m. brevicollis has three additional maguk-like proteins, which branch in intermediate positions between the dlg and mpp super classes. the protein domain organization of m. brevicollis and c. owczarzaki maguks are shown in figure  <dig>  the putative monosiga-dlg, which branches as a sister-group to the capsaspora-dlg, has the canonical dlg protein domain architecture, with an l <dig> domain, the three pdz domains and an sh <dig> and a guk domain. on the other hand capsaspora-dlg lacks the n-terminal l <dig> domain and the first two pdz domains . with regard to the mpp homologs, both m. brevicollis and c. owczarzaki present the standard mpp protein domain architecture: two l <dig> domains, one pdz, and the sh <dig> and guk domains. we found that the monosiga-mpp has an additional c <dig> zinc finger domain  in the c-terminal end. the c3hc <dig> domain is a ring finger that plays a key role in the ubiquitination pathway of metazoa. interestingly, the dlg <dig> of vertebrates, which are also known as psd- <dig>  <cit> , also has an n-terminal pest domain between l <dig> and the first pdz domain, which is also involved in polyubiquitination  <cit> .

the capsaspora-magi has the canonical protein domain architecture of the magi class at the n-terminal end, with the pdz, the guk and the two ww domains. however, it lacks the pdz domains at the c-terminal end as previously shown in  <cit> . two putative magi homologs from m. brevicollis  were identified in the guk phylogenetic analysis . they present diverging protein domain architectures, lacking the two ww domains seen in the typical magi proteins. moreover, we have also identified three maguk-like proteins in m. brevicollis with unique protein domain architectures, in which the core sh <dig> and guk domains are wrapped around several consecutive pdz domains both at the n- and c-terminal ends .

discussion
reconstruction of maguk diversity in the metazoan ancestor
our survey of maguk proteins shows that three canonical maguks are present in both the protist c. owczarzaki and the choanoflagellate m. brevicollis . both organisms have homologs of the metazoan dlg and mpp super classes. additionally, c. owczarzaki has a magi homolog as previously stated  <cit> , whereas m. brevicollis has two putative magi-like homologs, although with divergent and unique protein domain architecture . since c. owczarzaki is most likely the sister-group of choanoflagellates and metazoa  <cit> , our results suggest that the common ancestor of metazoa, c. owczarzaki, and choanoflagellates already had three types of maguk: a dlg-like, an mpp-like and a magi-like protein . a canonical magi was, thus, either lost or drastically diverged in the choanoflagellate lineage. alternatively, the capsaspora-magi may represent an independent acquisition of the pdz-guk-ww-ww domain architecture. additional genomic data from other choanoflagellates will be needed to draw definitive conclusions. although in theory one can not rule out the possibility than one or several lateral gene transfer  events may have occurred from metazoans to choanoflagellates and c. owczarzaki, we favour the hypothesis that the maguk protein family appeared prior to the divergence between c. owczarzaki and choanoflagellates. in fact, the neighbour-net analysis shows that the homologs of c. owczarzaki and m. brevicollis do not have a clear relationship with any of the metazoan maguk types, as we would expect if lgt between metazoans and those protists had taken place .

interestingly, we have also identified three unique maguk-like proteins in m. brevicollis. two of them present the canonical pdz-sh3-guk domains of maguk, but with several consecutive pdz domains at both the n-terminal and c-terminal ends. one of those m. brevicollis maguk proteins homolog has several guk duplications, and the third one has an additional protein domain: a phosphatase kinase . all these maguk-like proteins constitute novel domain architectures that had not been found in any other organism up to now. novel protein domain arrangements that include several consecutive copies of a domain have already been found in m. brevicollis  <cit> . whether these maguk-like protein domain arrangements are also present in other choanoflagellates or in other opisthokont protists remains unclear. in any case, our data shows that choanoflagellates, or at least m. brevicollis, underwent an independent lineage-specific diversification of the maguk protein gene family. functional analysis on these genes may clarify what roles the different genes are playing in m. brevicollis.

in fact, the role of maguk proteins in these premetazoan taxa remains an open question. in the sponge a. queenslandica both the dlg and magi homologs are specifically expressed only in epithelia-like tissue  <cit> . moreover, it has been shown that a. queenslandica has and expresses several other components of the synaptic junction  <cit> . interestingly, those components are expressed in the flask cells and the epidermis. it is therefore possible that the interaction between maguks and the complex protein scaffolds found in eumetazoan post-synaptic scaffolds or in tight-junctions, was already present in sponge. to which components m. brevicollis or c. owczarzaki maguks interact is unknown. answering this is beyond the scope of this manuscript. such information, however, may be crucial to decipher the role of maguks in unicellular taxa. moreover, additional data from colonial choanoflagellates or ichthyosporeans should yield important insights into this question, since they may harbor some scaffolding assemblages that enable the different cells in the colony to communicate.

evolutionary history of maguk
our data show that although the maguk family most probably originated within choanozoans , it clearly expanded within metazoans. in fact, it seems that the expansion of maguks in metazoans occurred at least in two distinctive periods in the course of evolution, as observed in many other protein families  <cit> . the first expansion occurred at the very early metazoan evolution before the divergence between sponges  and the rest of metazoans. the second expansion is likely to have happened at the early evolution of vertebrates. accordingly, both porifera and placozoa have several extra maguks classes, and vertebrata has two exclusive classes, carma and mpp <dig>  that were most probably generated by independent duplications in the vertebrate lineage.

the analysis of the protein domain organization mapped onto our phylogenetic analysis sheds some light on the evolutionary history of maguks. for example, a duplication of a protein kinase domain followed by its recruitment in the n-terminal site of one mpp protein brought about a new type of maguk, the cask class. this event probably took place either in the common ancestor of placozoa and eumetazoa, or at the origin of metazoa followed by the loss of this maguk type in porifera . moreover, the vertebrate-specific mpp <dig> class seems to have derived from cask, most probably by an additional duplication of the cask homolog in vertebrates followed by the loss of the protein kinase domain and the two l <dig> domains. vertebrates have the largest repertoire of maguks. not only do they have the vertebrate-specific maguk classes such as carma and mpp <dig>  but they also have several genes that appear to have diverged in the early vertebrate evolution . although the sponge a. queenslandica has a maguk with the typical carma domain architecture , it branches as the sister-group to the entire dlg <dig>  carma and zo group. we hypothesize this a. queenslandica gene represents the ancestral form of this whole group. in fact, dlg <dig> and zo are already present both in the placozoan t. adhaerens and in all other eumetazoans, except for the cnidarian n. vectensis which does not have a dlg <dig> homolog. the class cask is also present both in t. adhaerens and in other eumetazoans. this indicates that cask, dlg <dig> and zo arose prior to the divergence between placozoans and the rest of eumetazoans.

it is worth mentioning that the interpretation of these results needs additional data, since the phylogenetic position of the basal metazoans is still under debate . if the placozoan t. adhaerens is indeed the sister-group of cnidarians and bilateria  <cit> , then cask, dlg <dig>  and zo appeared in the common ancestor of both placozoans and eumetazoans; and the dlg <dig> homolog was lost in the cnidarian lineage. however, if placozoans are indeed the most basal metazoans or sister-group to sponges  <cit> , then the lineage leading to sponges  did lose their zo, cask and dlg <dig> representatives. finally, and even though the topology of the maguk tree remain the same with whatever method used, some of the nodes of our tree do not have high bootstrap values. thus, some of the implications regarding the evolutionary history of maguk within metazoans may need to be revisited with additional data.

CONCLUSIONS
in this study we have identified several maguk and maguk-like homologs in premetazoan taxa. overall, our data show that the maguk protein gene family is not exclusive to metazoa. this gene family most probably diversified within the opisthokonts before the divergence between capsaspora and the choanoflagellata + metazoa clade. thus, dlg, mpp and magi were already present in the last common ancestor of the metazoa, choanoflagellates and capsaspora+ministeria  clade. the family further diversified within metazoans, most probably in two major episodes  and up to ten different maguk types evolved with different roles.

the choanoflagellate m. brevicollis has, independently of metazoa, undergone a lineage-specific diversification of maguk-like proteins that have unique domain architectures. this represents a diversification independent from the one occurred in metazoa. additional genomic data from other choanoflagellate taxa will help elucidate whether this diversification is specific to choanoflagellates or just to the m. brevicollis species. moreover, m. brevicollis has different and unique magi-like homologs, not found in metazoa. functional analyses will be needed to better understand the roles of maguks in the unicellular relatives of metazoa.

