BACKGROUND
brucella spp. are highly infectious pathogens causing a systemic multi-organ disease in humans and sterility and abortion in animals. brucellosis is currently the most important bacterial zoonosis worldwide. in the absence of an adequate long-term antibiotic treatment, acute human brucellosis  may relapse or turn into chronic disease  <cit> .

during the acute phase of infection, brucellae are capable of replicating in the macrophages of the mammal host where they are found within a nutrient-poor vacuole. several genes encoding enzymes participating in amino acid and purine or pyrimidine biosynthesis have proven to be essential for intracellular replication  <cit> . at a later stage of chronic infection, persistence of brucella has been evidenced by the detection of live bacteria in abscesses of patients. these bacterial cells could be reactivated to full virulence only by the infection of tissue cultures  <cit> . the mechanisms enabling brucella to persist in eukaryotic hosts are still unknown. work on mycobacterium tuberculosis has demonstrated that hypoxia and starvation are key factors triggering bacterial persistence  <cit> . a starvation model incubating bacteria for several weeks in phosphate-buffered saline and developed  <dig> years ago  <cit>  was chosen for transcriptome and proteome analysis of m. tuberculosis <cit> . microarray-based analysis confirmed the results obtained by proteomics: the level of transcription, the biosynthesis of lipids and the process of cell division are reduced, whereas several factors involved in long-term survival and in stringent control are induced. to date, only a few brucella proteomic studies have been published which investigated the protein profiles of b. melitensis grown in rich culture medium  <cit>  or under stress conditions  <cit> , of the cell envelope of b. abortus <cit> , and, more recently, of b. suis during macrophage infection and under oxygen depletion  <cit>  and of b. abortus in macrophages  <cit> .

in addition, viable brucellae are able to persist in the environment, and periods of survival in soil, manure and water have been determined, reaching up to  <dig>   <dig>  and  <dig> days, respectively  <cit> . soil may even be the natural habitat of the lately described species b. microti <cit> .

the aim of our study is to better understand and characterize the adaptation of b. suis to extreme nutrient starvation as it may occur under specific conditions of persistence during the infection of the host, using a well-described model. a quantitative proteome analysis comparing the protein profiles of brucellae under starvation with those cultured in rich medium was performed.

RESULTS
survival of b. suis under extreme starvation conditions
based on early work performed on m. tuberculosis <cit> , we have developed a simple nutrition starvation model to study the impact on long-term viability of the pathogen. following growth in rich medium, bacteria were incubated in a salt solution devoid of carbon and nitrogen sources under shaking and aeration. oxygen concentration was kept constant in order to avoid variation of a second parameter. a sharp decline of approximately  <dig>  logs was observed over a period of  <dig> weeks, followed by stabilisation of the number of viable bacteria during the next  <dig> weeks . the colony formation on ts solid medium of bacteria sampled from the salt solution for enumeration of viable bacteria confirmed that these maintained their capacity to grow in rich medium. additional experiments performed under the same conditions but over a period of  <dig> weeks showed that stable concentrations of viable brucellae were obtained throughout a period of more than  <dig> months . this behaviour indicated the adaptation of a subpopulation of the pathogen to the environmental conditions encountered. the growth curves of b. suis under nutrient starvation are similar to those of mycobacterium sp.  <cit> . both, long-term survival of a “starvation-resistant” subpopulation and an equilibrium between dying bacteria and those replicating while feeding on nutrients released by dead brucellae, have to be taken into consideration. washing of the bacteria and replacement of medium after three weeks of incubation, however, did not alter the survival kinetics , indicating that soluble metabolites originating from dead bacteria may play, at best, a minor role. the lack of net replication of b. suis is an indirect proof of extreme starvation and indicates the set-up of a state of persistence.

proteome analysis of b. suis after six weeks of nutrient starvation
figures  <dig> and  <dig> each show one representative gel out of three featuring the proteomes of b. suis under long-term starvation conditions  versus late log/early stationary phase in rich medium . on the 2d-dige reference gels, a total of  <dig> and  <dig> different protein spots were detected in the pi ranges 4– <dig> and 6– <dig>  respectively.

up- and down-regulated proteins during starvation are separately marked in figures  <dig> and  <dig>  respectively. details of these gels together with the tags identifying the spots of interest are available in the additional files  <dig> and  <dig>  the proteins with either increasing or decreasing concentrations under long-term starvation are presented in table  <dig> and have been classified according to their potential functions.

athe indicated number is an arbitrary designation of the annotated spots on the 2d proteome maps .

bopen reading frame number attributed by paulsen et al.  <cit> .

cas annotated by paulsen et al.  <cit> .

dcalculated from the amino acid sequence of the translated open reading frame.

eincrease or decrease of protein concentrations after normalization of protein spot intensities from 2d-dige gels of b. suis recovered from a 6-weeks-starvation condition as compared to normalized protein spot intensities of corresponding spots from early stationary phase control of b. suis in ts broth.

fstatistical significance of the ratio described ine.

*indicates lack of statistical validation of the ratio described ine, but increase in protein concentration was observed in each of the three independent experiments.

the group of proteins involved in adaptation to atypical environmental conditions contains two proteins: the first one belongs to the dps family  , the second was identified as “putative organic solvent tolerance” protein  . dps-like proteins are strongly conserved among bacteria and are characterized by two major functions: protection against damage caused by oxidative stress and adaptation to starvation  <cit> . binding of dps to bacterial dna results in the formation of condensed, crystalline structures in which dna is protected against damage or degradation  <cit> , and dps most likely plays a direct role in gene regulation during starvation. dps from m. smegmatis, also increased under starvation stress conditions, and for which dna-binding has been shown experimentally, has 52% amino acid homology to brucella dps. the “putative organic solvent tolerance” protein has been described to regulate the permeability of the outer membrane, inhibiting most likely the influx of toxic molecules  <cit> . it also participates in the biogenesis of the outer membrane  <cit> . brucellae may increase the concentration of this protein under starvation stress, in order to protect themselves from toxic molecules possibly released from dead bacteria.

in e. coli, expression of the “heat shock” protein dnak is positively controlled by the σ <dig> factor , also under starvation stress  <cit> . in starved b. suis, dnak  showed increased concentrations whereas concentrations of the co-chaperone controlling the nucleotide and substrate binding by dnak, grpe , was reduced. the reduced concentrations of grpe, may result in a lowered dnak-activity. this may finally lead to atp saving, which might be crucial under dormancy-like conditions. in addition, dnak turned out to be of significance during the acute phase of b. suis infection, both for intramacrophagic replication and resistance to low ph  <cit> .

within the group of transcriptional regulators, one induced protein belonged to the ros/mucr family . this regulator participates in the transcription of genes involved in the succinoglycan biosynthesis of sinorhizobium meliloti, a plant symbiont closely related to brucella. succinoglycan is essential for alfalfa colonization by s. meliloti and the installation of this symbiont  <cit> . in macrophage and murine models of infection, the regulator mucr has been described as a virulence factor of b. melitensis <cit> . preliminary studies on a mucr-mutant of b. melitensis further suggest that mucr regulates exopolysaccharide biosynthesis and genes involved in nitrogen metabolism and stress response  <cit> .

a biological function has not yet been attributed to the induced outer membrane protein omp31- <dig> . annotated as porin, the other outer membrane protein omp2a , encoded by gene omp2b, may participate in the uptake of molecules by brucella, and the extreme starvation could act as a signal to increase porin density in the membrane. the glycerol-3-phosphate transporter ugpb  was also induced under starvation, in agreement with similar observations in e. coli <cit> . interestingly, brucella ugpb is cell-surface-located and plays a role as adhesin and invasin during infection of epithelial cells  <cit> . glycerol-3-phosphate is a metabolic intermediate of glycolysis and phospholipid biosynthesis, and brucella may try to increase the take-up of such potential energy supplier to compensate atp deficiency. it remains to be investigated if ugpb has a double function in brucellae and whether a nutrient stress may promote subsequent invasion of host cells. the concentration of bacterioferritin , the major actor in iron homeostasis, was also increased under starvation conditions with low levels of iron. it has been described previously that the bacterioferritin-related iron pool induces membrane proteins to adapt to low iron concentrations, confirming the central role of bacterioferritin in the iron storage of brucella <cit> .

during starvation, two enzymes involved in leucine and glutamate biosynthesis, 3-isopropylmalate-dehydrogenase  and carbamoylphosphate synthase , respectively, were repressed, indicating that the bacteria reduced their metabolic activity. in contrast, concentration of the glycine cleavage system p protein  increased. this protein is part of the glycine decarboxylase multienzyme complex, also annotated as glycine cleavage system, and functions as a glycine dehydrogenase. in a signature-tagged mutagenesis screen investigating long-term survival of b. abortus in mice, the p protein was identified as a factor participating in chronic persistence of the pathogen  <cit> . in m. tuberculosis, the activity of glycine dehydrogenase has been found to increase 10-fold upon entry into a state of nonreplicating persistence in vitro <cit> . another protein of this system, gcvt, has been described thereafter as being essential in intramacrophagic survival of b. suis <cit> . since this enzyme catalyzes the step resulting in release of nh <dig>  activity of the glycine decarboxylase multienzyme complex may allow starving bacteria to recycle ammonium residues from glycine metabolism for minimal biosynthetic activities required under these conditions. in addition, concentrations of several amino acid transporters increased , which is in agreement with other studies describing their positive regulation by the stringent response allowing bacteria optimal adaptation to starvation . in the group of factors linked to protein metabolism, two ribosomal proteins  were starvation-induced. this seems to be contradictory to the obvious shut-down of cellular metabolism. however, in order to maximize stringent response depending on the interaction of rela with ribosomes carrying uncharged trna molecules, the rate of synthesis of some ribosomal subunits may be increased. in contrast, seca , participating in protein translocation/secretion, was found in lower concentrations in starved brucella, indicating an additional strategy to reduce metabolic activity and energy consumption.

in analogy to the observed repression of amino acid biosynthesis, energy-consuming de novo dna and rna biosynthesis was also reduced. rna degradation increased, indicating a higher turnover than under control conditions and enabling bacteria to rapidly recycle the corresponding molecules. increased degradation was also noticed for fatty acids, leading to the speculation that brucellae might use own fatty acids for minimum energy supply. indeed, the induction of a putative long-chain acyl-coa thioester hydrolase  has been previously observed under anaerobic denitrification, suggesting a switch to β-oxidation for energy supply under anaerobic stress conditions  <cit> .

in the group of energy metabolism-related proteins, one single subunit of the atp synthase  was identified as being induced under starvation conditions as compared to early stationary phase in rich medium, indicating that brucella attempts to counteract obvious atp limitation. as membrane-associated proteins are not systematically separated in 2d gel electrophoresis, the identification of only one atp synthase subunit was conceivable. thioredoxin  participates in nadph-dependent formation of disulfide bonds in target proteins  <cit> , hence consuming reduction equivalents are no longer available for electron transport and atp synthesis. the decrease in thioredoxin under starvation stress is in agreement with the observed reduction in amino acid  biosynthesis, resulting in energy saving.

a single protein involved in oxido-reduction, alkylhydroperoxide reductase c , has been identified as being down-regulated under these extreme starvation conditions. in b. subtilis, ahpc was postulated to be responsible for the detoxification of endogenous organic hydroperoxides arising from unsaturated fatty acids and from nucleic acids during growth under oxidative stress  <cit> . in brucella abortus, ahpc is the primary detoxifier of endogenous h2o <dig> generated by aerobic metabolism  <cit> . down-regulation of this enzyme in brucellae was therefore in accordance with a reduced oxidative bacterial metabolism during long periods of starvation with absence of noticeable growth. spots  <dig>   <dig>  and  <dig>  were identified as being significantly regulated , but the low concentrations of these proteins in the samples did not allow their identification.

CONCLUSIONS
the aim of this work was to gain a deeper insight into the regulative processes of b. suis to survive under extreme starvation mirroring possible living conditions of the bacteria in the host or the environment. in summary, b. suis was capable to adapt to long-term, severe nutrient deficiency by the combination of three major strategies, allowing reduction of metabolism and of energy consumption to the strict minimum necessary for survival: shortened biosynthesis of amino acids, nucleic acids and thioredoxin; degradation possibly associated with the recycling of molecules ; and reduced secretion . the contribution of subcellular material of dead bacteria to the survival of adapted brucellae within the culture medium remains a matter of debate. the initial decline of the growth curve of b. suis under starvation  does not support primary “bacterial cannibalism” as survival strategy. despite the fact that replacement of the culture buffer did not alter survival kinetics of the bacteria, indicating a state of persistence, it cannot be completely excluded that during the observed long-term survival, a low-level balance establishes between dividing and dying bacteria and that c- and n-sources may be available at very low concentrations. in any case, a high degree of starvation is evident from the lack of increase in the number of cfus under these conditions. furthermore, it is interesting to mention the capability of b. abortus to fix and assimilate co <dig> from the atmosphere as a substitute of carbon sources of organic origin  <cit> . the 2d-dige experiments presented in this study, however, did not allow to answer the question whether b. suis possibly fixed co <dig> under these experimental starvation conditions.

