BACKGROUND
the problem addressed in this work is the inference of gene-gene interactions that are specifically associated with a phenotype  from two sets of gene expression data, one in the presence and one in the absence of the phenotype, and without use of prior biological knowledge. this problem is fundamentally different from that of inferring gene-gene interactions from one set of microarray data, for which several techniques have been proposed  <cit> , such as those based on bayesian networks  <cit> , pairwise mutual information  <cit>  and graphical gaussian models  <cit> . in our case, any interactions representing general biological functions that are unrelated to the phenotype are ignored. coupled with additional biological knowledge, the identification of such phenotype-specific interactions has the potential of shedding light on the responsible pathways. the term "cancer interactome" has been used in the above context, and part of the aim of this paper is to provide a novel methodology that is helpful for the derivation of such interactomes.

to solve this problem, we may wish to apply a traditional gene interaction network inference methodology, such as bayesian network inference, on each of the two microarray data sets, for example one representing healthy samples  and another representing cancerous samples, and then compare the two resulting networks  in an effort to identify differences in gene membership and network topology that may be related to the phenotype. however, each of the two resulting networks will be affected in different ways depending on the nature and number of the samples in each category. furthermore, constructing the topology of network graphs often requires the use of heuristic or greedy algorithms that are sensitive to the number of biological samples in each of the two sets of microarray data, as well as noise in the expression data. therefore, it becomes unclear how the differences in the two networks will identify gene interactions that are linked to disease. another approach  <cit>  consists of incorporating an extra "cancer node" to the network in addition to the "gene nodes." this approach may yield a selection of genes related to cancer, but the mutual interrelationships of those genes with respect to cancer will not be revealed from the resulting network. instead, we wish to introduce a novel type of graph with edges connecting pairs of genes that interact with respect to cancer, without including a cancer node. phrased differently, the missing "cancer node" is associated with each connected gene pair  in the whole graph, so that the edges of the graph identify the gene pairs that are cooperatively associated with cancer. this kind of three-way representation is not feasible in a graph whose nodes are genes augmented by a cancer node. thus, this methodology provides insight that existing methods cannot provide.

recently, microarray data have been extensively analyzed at the level of gene modules, rather than individual genes, using prior biological knowledge  <cit> , thus facilitating a higher-level view of the effects of diseases on gene expression. in contrast, our technique operates at the level of gene pairs and does not make use of prior biological knowledge.

what is a proper quantitative criterion to determine if two genes "interact with respect to cancer"? we could consider some measure of correlation between their joint expression levels and cancer. however, while this approach is proper if used for classification based on gene pairs, it is not appropriate for our purposes, because this correlation may be due to the independent contributions of the individual correlations between each of these genes and cancer, in which case the two genes do not interact. it is important to ensure that the correlation of a gene pair with cancer is due to cooperative effects, as opposed to independent contributions of the individual correlations. such cooperative effects suggest a functional significance. examples out of many possible biological reasons are the joint presence of two transcription factors each of which has a binding site in a promoter of an oncogene; the joint presence of a kinase and a transcription factor that must be activated; and the joint presence of the two elements of a dimeric transcription factor. in each of these cases, the two corresponding genes are strongly associated with cancer jointly, but not as much individually. on the other hand, individual oncogenes may not appear in our resulting graph, unless they are accompanied by properly identified "partner genes" to which they link. traditional gene interaction network inference algorithms may then work in a complementary fashion to help identify interactions of the oncogenes that may not cooperative with respect to cancer.

to address this problem, we use the information theoretic measure of synergy  <cit> . the synergy of a gene pair with respect to cancer is defined as i - , where i is the symbol for mutual information  <cit> , g <dig> and g <dig> are random variables representing the expression levels of the two genes and c is a binary random variable representing the presence or absence of cancer. it can be seen as the "whole" minus the "sum of the parts." intuitively speaking, if the amount of information that a pair of genes jointly provides about cancer is higher than what could be attributed to the additive independent contributions of the two individual genes, then this suggests that the additional information is due to some cooperative  interaction involving these genes within a shared pathway. this is consistent with the definition of the word "synergy"  as "the interaction of two or more agents or forces so that their combined effect is greater than the sum of their individual effects."

we define two genes to be "synergistically linked with respect to a phenotype" if their corresponding synergy is positive. these links can be depicted as edges in a graph representing a "synergy network," in which nodes are genes, depicting potential gene-gene interactions associated with a phenotype. in this paper, we include in the synergy network those edges corresponding to statistically significant synergies. when coupled with biological knowledge, this graph provides clues helpful for deciphering pathways responsible for the phenotype.

in previous work  <cit>  these quantities were defined only for bilevel gene expression data, i.e., assuming genes are either "on" or "off," using arbitrary thresholds to binarize expression values inferred from microarrays. here we introduce a novel dendrogram-based computational methodology generalizing these definitions by applying them directly to the continuous expression levels, allowing identification of high-synergy gene pairs. we apply this methodology on publicly available prostate cancer microarray data  <cit> . one of our main conclusions from the analysis of these data is that rbp <dig>  is synergistically linked with respect to prostate cancer with many other "partner" genes, many of which are ribosomal genes. our results are also supportive of the hypothesis that prostate cancer is linked with cellular damage from oxidative stress combined with the inhibition of the apoptotic mechanisms normally resulting from such damage.

RESULTS
illustrating examples
to clarify how the synergy can be measured from a set of continuous expression values, we consider some hypothetical extreme examples of two-dimensional gene expression scatter plots . the expression level of each of two "oncogenes"  is sufficient by itself to distinguish health from cancer. on the other hand, the expression level of each of two genes may be totally uncorrelated with cancer , and yet the pair of these two expression levels is also sufficient to distinguish health from cancer , because cancer occurs when the two genes are either both "on" or both "off." it is also possible that the expression levels of two genes are totally uncorrelated with cancer, and so is the pair of the two .

the amount of information that the expression level of one or more genes provide about cancer can be quantified from the set of gene expression data using information theoretic tools  <cit> . for example, if g designates the expression levels of a gene and c designates the presence or absence of cancer, then the uncertainty of cancer given these two expression levels is equal  <cit>  to the conditional entropy h, and the amount of information that the gene provides about cancer is equal to the mutual information i. these quantities are directly generalized if we replace the expression g of a single gene with the set of expression levels of all members of a gene set. the amount of information about cancer that is due to the purely cooperative effects among all the members of a gene set can also be quantified using information theoretic tools  <cit> , specifically the synergy of a gene pair with respect to cancer previously defined as i - . it is possible for synergy to be negative , as well as positive. intuitively, we see that the synergy of the hypothetical genes in figure 1a is negative, because of the underlying redundancy , while the synergy of the genes in figure 1b is positive, because the combination of the two genes is required for such determination.

if we are interested in classification of cancer based on a gene pair, then we wish to select the two genes that minimize the conditional entropy h, or, equivalently, maximize the mutual information i. if, however, we wish to infer biomolecular interactions related to cancer, then the "figure of merit" should be the synergy i - . these are two different tasks, and in this paper we focus on the latter.

evaluation of synergy from expression data
if the expression levels have been binarized so that each of the genes is in one of two expression states , then the evaluation of the uncertainty in the form of conditional entropy is straightforward  <cit> . for example, each pair of genes has only four expression states , and we can collect statistics by counting how many times each of these four states is encountered in health and in disease. information theoretic quantities such as entropy and mutual information can then be evaluated from the probabilistic model that results from the relative frequencies . figures 1d, 1e, 1f illustrate the concept of binarized expression data from the corresponding scatter plots of figures 1a, 1b, 1c, respectively. the resulting synergies can easily be evaluated as - <dig>  + <dig>   <dig>  respectively.

binarization of expression data imposes a constraint that limits the usefulness of these techniques. each gene has its own optimum "binarization threshold" to distinguish when it is "on" or "off," which is not clearly defined, and even if it was, significant information will still be lost by not accounting for the precise intermediate expression levels. we addressed these shortcomings by generalizing the above methodology to directly obtain measures of entropy, mutual information, and synergy from continuous gene expression data without any binarization, as explained below.

it is intuitively clear that the uncertainty will be low if the joint expression levels can be partitioned into clusters of samples with similar joint expression levels, so that each of the resulting clusters is "homogeneous," i.e., it contains predominantly healthy or predominantly diseased samples. this is the case in the two-dimensional scatter plots in figure 1a and figure 1b  as well as the one-dimensional projections for each of the two genes in figure 1a .

if the expression data are binarized, then each joint expression state automatically defines a "cluster" of co-located samples, as in figures 1d, 1e and 1f, in which case evaluation of all information theoretic quantities are straightforward, as explained earlier. for example, the average uncertainty of predicting whether or not a sample is cancerous is equal to the average entropy of the joint expression states  <cit> . our proposed computational methodology that directly uses continuous expression values generalizes this concept in a consistent  manner, because the average uncertainty of cluster-classifying whether or not a sample is cancerous is equal to the average entropy of the clusters partitioning the set of joint gene expression data . figure  <dig> shows dendrograms resulting from clustering for the corresponding cases in figure  <dig>  for each dendrogram, a horizontal line whose distance from the leaves of the tree is meant to represent a threshold of biological significance, defines a partition of the samples into a number of clusters, each of which has associated binary entropy related to the homogeneity of its class labels. the average of these individual cluster entropies, weighted by the relative membership of each cluster, defines the conditional entropy of cancer given the choice of gene, out of which measures of mutual information and synergy can directly be evaluated .

in summary, we first introduce a methodology for estimating the uncertainty  of predicting whether a sample is affected by a disease given the continuous expression levels of few particular genes in a number of diseased and healthy samples. for example, estimation from a number of samples of the conditional entropy h where c is a binary random variable and g <dig>  g <dig> are continuous random variables is a problem that has not been addressed before. the synergy between two genes can then be directly evaluated using this measure.

to confirm the validity of our methodology we applied our results on a simulated expression data set  in which several gene pairs were assumed to be jointly associated with cancer . our results confirm that the synergy methodology accurately deciphers these associations. for comparison, we also apply a traditional gene interaction inference method in various ways on these data to illustrate why such methods cannot be used to infer interaction with respect to cancer, as explained earlier.

application to prostate cancer gene expression dataset
we did an exhaustive search through all gene pairs in a publicly available prostate cancer data set, identifying the gene pairs with highest synergy and validated our results by confirming that their p values are extremely small and hypothesized on their biological interpretation. we applied our methodology on publicly available prostate cancer expression data  <cit>  from  <dig> prostate samples,  <dig> of which were deemed to be healthy and  <dig> of them cancerous using rma-normalized values .

we first ranked all genes in terms of their conditional entropy h. the ten lowest scoring genes are shown in table  <dig>  these are the genes that are individually most correlated with cancer, because the same genes would equivalently have been found as highest scoring in terms of the mutual information i. nearly all genes in the list are well-known biomarkers of prostate cancer, such as hpn  <cit> erg <cit> , amacr  <cit> , folh <dig>  <cit> , tacstd <dig>  <cit>  and agr <dig>  <cit> , thus validating the dendrogram-based technique for estimating entropy.

using exhaustive search, we then also ranked all gene pairs in terms of their synergy i -  . the p value entries are explained in methods. notably, the top-ranked genes in individual gene ranking  are different from those in the highest-synergy gene pairs , consistent with the expectation that pairs of synergistically linked genes with respect to cancer are not necessarily individual cancer biomarkers. figure  <dig> shows the corresponding scatter plot and dendrogram of the highest-synergy gene pair .

to determine the extent to which our numerical results could be due to pure chance we performed statistical validation experiments by repeating the identical computational procedures after permuting the gene expression matrix . the resulting synergy network and a listing of the top-ranked gene pairs with their p values are shown in figure  <dig> and table  <dig>  respectively.

validation with independent gene expression dataset
to confirm that our results are applicable when used on independently obtained samples, we used a prostate cancer gene expression dataset containing values for  <dig> malignant and  <dig> healthy samples from a different laboratory  <cit> , to which we refer as the "validation dataset." we found that direct numerical evaluation of synergy from the validation dataset is not meaningful, because the p value for even the top-ranked gene pair is  <dig>  , indicating that results are not statistically significant.

in our case, the figure of merit, synergy, is not measurable by any classification performance. rather, the high synergy of a gene pair with respect to a phenotype is due to a boolean logic connection between the gene pair and the phenotype, such as "prostate cancer tends to occur only in the simultaneous expression of gene a and lack of expression of geneb." our approach is aimed at deriving such logic relationships, as they are the ones that may lead to valuable biological insights. therefore, a qualitative validation should focus on those logic relationships. figure  <dig> shows the scatter plots of the top-ranked gene pairs in both the original and the validation dataset, chosen so that each new gene pair does not contain any gene previously used for this purpose . for better illustration of the concept, we also include for each scatter plot the separating line derived from a linear support vector machine with an error penalty parameter of  <dig>  it is clear that the tendency for the location of the joint expression levels is preserved in all cases.

discussion
the purpose of this paper is twofold. first, to disclose a novel methodology of analyzing continuous microarray data aimed at discovering sets of genes synergistically associated with a phenotype such as cancer. second, to apply this methodology on a set of expression data identifying gene pairs whose high values of synergy cannot be explained by pure chance, suggesting biological significance. these tasks have been achieved, as evidenced by the extremely low p values  corresponding to some of the gene pairs. as an additional indication of the biological relevance of our results, we present two examples of scatter plots , in which the same sample  consistently appears to be mislabelled as cancerous, as was the case in figure 3a.

the next step would be to interpret the results aiming to better understand mechanisms responsible for prostate cancer and this requires coupling with existing biological knowledge. for example, although we may have established the synergistic association of a gene pair with respect to prostate cancer, this does not necessarily mean that the interaction of these two genes causes the cancer; it is, however, an indication that these two genes interact, directly or indirectly, within a shared pathway that is associated with cancer, but the cause-versus-effect relationship between them is unclear. here, we mention some already known facts involving the genes in the highest-ranking pairs. we hope that current and future biological knowledge will lead to a satisfactory biological interpretation of these results, helpful for inferring biological mechanisms responsible for prostate cancer.

the gene that appears in most of the high-synergy gene pairs is rbp <dig> . it turns out that all the gene pairs in table  <dig> that include rbp <dig> are governed by the same molecular logic: prostate cancer tends to occur only when the following two events occur simultaneously:  rbp <dig> is expressed at low levels and  its partner gene is expressed at high levels. it is known that rbp <dig> is downregulated in several cancers, and an explanation has been proposed based on the fact that rbp <dig> inhibits the pi3k/akt survival pathway  <cit> , therefore downregulation of rbp <dig> promotes derepression of pi3k/akt signalling and inhibits apoptosis of malignant cells. it has also been found that hypermethylation of rbp <dig> is common in several tumors and cancer cell lines  <cit> , which may partly explain its downregulation.

another central gene with multiple partner genes  is ptgds . interestingly, ptgds has also been linked to apoptosis concomitant with downregulation of pi3k  <cit> . we found that a synergistic gene pair that includes ptgds obeys the same "molecular logic" as rbp <dig>  i.e. prostate cancer occurs in the simultaneous low expression of ptgds and high expression of the partner gene.

there are several synergistic "partner genes" for rbp <dig> or ptgds some of which  serve as partner genes to both . the top-ranked gene pair consists of rbp <dig> and eef1b <dig> .

many of the highest-ranking synergistic partner genes for rbp <dig> and ptgds  are associated, directly or indirectly, with oxidative stress, including eef1b <dig>  <cit> ; ftl  <cit>  ; hla-dpb <dig>  <cit>  , ywhaq  <cit>  , uqcrh , known to be involved in oxidative phosphorylation, and ubc  <cit>  . furthermore, slc25a <dig>  is also known to be involved in oxidative phosphorylation.

taken together the above observations are consistent with the previous  <cit>  speculation that these microarray data indicate that prostate cancer is often associated with cellular damage caused by oxidative stress combined with inhibition of the apoptotic mechanisms that are normally triggered by the damage. they are also consistent with other recent results  <cit>  linking prostate cancer with oxidative stress.

another observation is that many of the genes serving as synergistic partners to rbp <dig>  are ribosomal, including genes directly encoding for ribosomal proteins as well as translation elongation and initiation factors. the mrnas of most such genes share a 5'-terminal oligopyrimidine tract  used for translational control. it has been proposed that oncogenic transformation by akt involves intervention in translational controls through the mtor pathway, which activates the kinase s6k and controls the translation of 5'top mrnas  <cit> . the mrnas of ribosomal genes including elongation and initiation factors are often up-regulated in expression profiles from diverse tumors and clustered together  <cit> . furthermore, the variation in expression of these ribosomal genes was found significantly correlated with variation in the cell doubling time, supporting the notion that the genes in this cluster were regulated in relation to cell proliferation rate or growth rate  <cit> .

the high synergy between rbp <dig> and the ribosomal genes is largely reflected by the fact that there are a number of samples that are healthy despite the fact that rbp <dig> is underexpressed. these are the samples for which the ribosomal genes are underexpressed, for example those corresponding to the lowest nine green dots in the rbp1/eef1b <dig> scatter plot . we speculate that mrna underexpression of the cluster of ribosomal genes protects the organism from cancer by inhibiting cell proliferation even if the cell has been damaged, apoptosis is inhibited and the akt survival pathway is activated as a result of rbp <dig> underexpression.

in addition to rbp <dig> and ptgds, several other genes appear in central positions in figure  <dig>  some of which are already known to participate in pathways jointly involving prostate cancer and oxidative stress, such as ptn   <cit>  and clu  <cit> . knowledge of their "interacting partner" genes, as provided by the synergy network, can help identify the precise nature of these pathways.

CONCLUSIONS
the unique feature and strength of using synergy networks resulting from gene expression analysis is that it focuses on finding genes that are cooperatively correlated with disease, rather than just correlated with disease, and therefore it can be helpful for the inference of pathways responsible for disease. furthermore, identification of gene pairs that are synergistically associated with disease has obvious applications in combinatorial approaches for treatment, as single targets would, but the very definition of synergy, not be sufficient. in this paper we have introduced a methodology estimating synergy directly from continuous expression data for tens of thousands of genes, with sufficiently low computational complexity allowing exhaustive search of all gene pairs . our technique is also extendable to include any types of biomarkers, including alternatively spliced isoforms and protein expression or post-translation modification data, shedding further light on putative responsible pathways.

synergy networks are complementary to, and different from, traditional gene interaction networks. the success of our results cannot be measured by prediction accuracy, because the aim is not classification. instead, we seek to find gene pairs whose combined information correlates with a phenotype better than the sum of either gene individually. furthermore, traditional gene interaction algorithms operate without any reference to cancer, and they can be useful for identifying interactions involving known oncogenes, which by themselves are unrelated to cancer and our technique would not identify. each approach provides valuable information that the other cannot provide.

our proposed methodology requires access to a set of gene expression data that is rich not only for diseased but also for currently rare healthy  samples to ensure the statistical significance of the results. using such rich and balanced datasets, the same methodology can be generalized to discover synergistic triplets of genes using the definition of multivariate synergy  <cit> , which will provide additional and more significant information helpful for pathway inference, as it will suggest that all three genes in the triplet will be members of a shared pathway. such collection of high-quality standardized gene expression data is not expensive compared with other efforts such as sequencing, and we hope that it becomes incorporated in some of the existing or future cancer initiatives.

