BACKGROUND
genes encode the amino acid sequence of their protein products that in turn assemble into organized cellular structures to perform specific functions that support cell physiology and organism development. in recent years the explosion of genome sequence data has enabled the investigation genome and proteome evolution and the formulation of hypotheses on the mechanisms creating diversity and fixation of the characteristics that we observe in extant organisms  <cit> . the paradigm used in comparative genomics and proteomics is that sequence and structure conservation is a sign of selective pressure and can be used to identify "functional" elements  <cit> .

on the other hand gene products do not act in isolation but form a complex web whose specific links are important to determine phenotypes. thus, at a different level, conservation of the specific physical and functional links among gene products might reveal the processes that have shaped "interactomes", the intricate web determining the formation of the functional complexes that we observe in the cell. although the available experimental information about interactomes is not as complete and as accurate as the one on genomes, the recent completion of large protein interaction studies has offered an unprecedented amount of information about the protein web shaping cell organization  <cit> . we are now in the position to ask questions about conservation of protein interaction networks. at present, comparative interactome analysis has revealed a limited conservation when specific edges, representing physical interactions and connecting orthologous proteins are compared in interactomes of different model organisms  <cit> . on the other hand the topological properties of the graphs representing interactomes are similar in distantly related species and markedly different from typical random graphs. as a matter of fact, all experimental protein interaction networks display features, such as high clustering coefficient and scale-free degree distribution that are not found in random networks  <cit> .

the question arises as to whether these topological properties are found in interactomes because they are the outcome of common evolutionary processes or rather they have been imposed on random or quasi-random networks by natural selection because they confer some selective advantage. as an example, the power-law degree distribution can be explained by a model based on growth and preferential-attachment, whereby new proteins preferentially link to highly connected proteins  <cit> . a second type of network models, known as hierarchical  <cit> , can overcome some limits of "growth and preferential attachment" scheme and yield interactomes that are both scale free and characterized by a high clustering coefficient.

alternatively these two topological characteristics may not be the result of any specific growth mechanism but rather they may have been selected in evolution because they confer to the cellular system some functional advantage. while some specific links among proteins may be conserved because they are part of functional modules, such as for instance signaling pathways, conservation of global graph properties are more likely to reflect some general properties of the cell.

we tested the hypothesis that some features of cell organization may be explained by molding of the cell interactome so that, under selective pressure, it acquires specific topological characteristics that are reflected in advantageous functional patterns in the cell.

to this purpose we use a cellular automaton model of a cell  <cit>  and, starting from a random spatial distribution of proteins, we let the automaton evolve under interactions rules that are either determined experimentally, thereby mimicking the interactions that occur in the cell milieu, or selected at random. we next define a metric of cell self organization and we show that cellular automata evolving under experimentally-determined interaction-constraints reach a higher level of organization than those ruled by random interactions. furthermore natural networks are more "robust", since they yield pseudocells, whose organization is not affected by small stochastic perturbations of the initial conditions of the system.

RESULTS
model from data
graph representations of protein interaction networks are static and as such they are inadequate to model the highly dynamic protein interaction network inside the cell. to fill this methodological gap we have designed and implemented protnet a computer model that captures the discrete and stochastic nature of protein interactions  <cit> . protnet represents an in silico cell as a three-dimensional lattice in which molecular entities  can shift, rotate and form new complexes with their neighbors, or dissociate, depending on a set of interaction rules. each lattice point of the automaton corresponds to a volume with linear size  comparable to the diameter of an average globular protein. the cell is filled with proteins with an occupancy  compatible with the estimated crowding of proteins in the cell cytoplasm  <cit> . the whole procedure can be seen as a sort of "discrete molecular dynamics" applied to interacting proteins in a cell. we have used the protnet model to monitor the dynamic consequences of the global and local properties of protein interaction networks.

the biological protein interaction networks that provide the rules for the evolution of the cellular automaton are "yeast_net" and "human_net", representing the interactions in the yeast and human cells. both networks have been obtained from the resource mentha  <cit> . this resource integrates all the published information curated by the imex  <cit>  databases mint  <cit> , intact  <cit> , dip  <cit> , biogrid  <cit>  and matrixdb  <cit>  and uses a ranking procedure, similar to the one implemented in wi-phi  <cit> , to offer human and yeast interactomes where each interaction is assigned a weight according to experimental support . yeast_net includes the  <dig> interactions with the highest weight. the complete list of experimental human interactions has been filtered by setting a weight threshold in order to have a number of high confidence interactions comparable with that of yeast_net. the two resulting networks both include  <dig> protein species  and  <dig> interactions . to each natural network we associate a random network assembled according to erdös-rényi  model  <cit> . in table  <dig> we have reported the main topological characteristics of the networks that we have used in the simulations presented here.

irrespective of the interactions rules, starting from a random distribution of proteins in the space, the protnet cell evolves in time till it reaches a dynamic equilibrium state where the number of complexes of a given degree remains approximately constant . we call the cubic lattice whose organization evolves under the rules set by a protein interaction network a "pseudocell".

we have used such a model to answer the following questions about pseudocell organization.

a) is the pseudocell obtained by using as input an experimental network different  than one originating from a network with an equivalent number of nodes connected at random?

b) if we perform independent simulations with the same input graph, how similar are the structures of the resulting pseudocells? is the structure of pseudocells governed by experimental interaction rules more robust to perturbations introduced in the initial system settings? does it make any difference if the input graph is a random or a natural network?

c) what are the network topological properties responsible for self-organization?

self-similarity index: a measure of cell organization
interactomes obtained by integrating protein interaction data compiled from a variety of experimental techniques appear as intricate webs where each protein can deal with a large number of partners. this somewhat contrasts with the observation of organized leaving cells where any given protein tends to form one or a few specific protein complexes. ribosomal proteins mostly assemble into ribosomes whereas proteasomal proteins are found preferentially in proteasomes. even a simple interactome, such as the one in  can in principle support the formation of many complex types that are compatible with the rules established in the interaction graph. nevertheless complexes formed in natural cells take a precise structure and dynamic organization emerging from both local and global properties of the interactome topology. in order to investigate if our model can simulate these self-organization properties we observed the evolution of the organization of our cellular automaton under the constraints of the interaction rules encoded in the interactome. we define a pseudocell as more organized if contains complexes that are more "coherent", that is if they are characterized by the presence of a cohesive subset of interacting proteins that, like a repeating pattern, can be found in many complexes. the rationale behind the idea of coherence and organization is more clearly explained in figure  <dig>  the two outlined pseudocells are both compatible with the interaction rules represented in the simple graph at the top. however, the complexes of different composition that are formed in the pseudocell at the left are fewer than the ones found at the right. thus we define the first pseudocell as more organized. we introduce here a new metrics, the self-similarity index , to quantify self-organization in pseudocells and compare pseudocells originated from different networks. the ssi is formally defined in the methods section. in a few words it defines how complex a pseudocell is. a pseudocell formed by identical large complexes has maximum ssi whereas a pseudocell containing a large variety of complexes of different composition has a small ssi.

starting from proteins randomly distributed in the cell grid, figure  <dig> shows the evolution in time of the ssi in pseudocells whose interactions are governed by the experimentally determined networks of s. cerevisiae  and homo sapiens  or by random networks, with approximately the same number of nodes and edges. during the interaction and diffusion phases, small complexes start to aggregate till the pseudocell reaches an equilibrium state in which the emerged complex structure remains stable. the ssi rises comparably in both types of pseudocells, but after a few thousand simulation steps, when large complexes begin to form, the ssi of pseudocells governed by random networks reaches a plateau, while that of pseudocells governed by natural network interaction rules continues to grow. notably the self organization properties of natural networks are observed in simulations of pseudocells covering a wide range of protein concentrations . consistently with our definition of ssi these results indicate that pseudocells governed by natural networks reach a higher level of organization, irrespective of protein concentration.

pseudocells are robust to perturbations
an additional property of living cells is that of being robust to perturbations. in other words we expect a cell model to be able to recover organization, once it is perturbed, and to reach again a structure that is similar to that it had before perturbation. we modeled this property by measuring the similarity/diversity of cell organization when equilibrium is reached in the cell automaton, starting from different initial "cell configurations" . to compare different pseudocells we defined a second metric of cell organization that we call the inter-cells similarity index . this metric  is similar to the ssi that we have defined to monitor cell organization. the difference being that icsi measures the similarity of the ensemble of complexes that are formed in two different cells and not the diversity of the complexes in a cell. figure  <dig> shows the pairwise icsi values of ten different pseudocells for each of the three types of input networks . similarly to what observed in the case of a self organization of single cells, pseudocells that organize under the rules of the natural interactomes reach an organization that is similar in all the cells, irrespective of the initial distribution of the protein monomers.

self-similarity index at equilibrium depends on the topology of the underlying interactomes
next we asked whether any topological property of the protein interaction network was responsible for the observed variation in the kinetic of pseudocell organization. to this end we generated families of networks with different, tuned, topological properties. different algorithms have been proposed to generate networks with tunable parameters  <cit> . most of them are based on the configuration model proposed in  <cit> . here, in order to generate networks with tunable degree distribution and transitivity we used the algorithm developed by volz  <cit> . we designed the network topology in three different settings:

• designed networks whose degree distribution is taken from the yeast interactome but having transitivity coefficient in the interval  <dig> <cit>  with steps of  <dig> .

• designed networks whose degree distribution is that of an erdös-rényi random network with transitivity coefficient in the interval  <dig> <cit>  with steps of  <dig> .

• designed networks whose degree distribution is that of the human natural interactome with transitivity coefficient in the interval  <dig> <cit>  with steps of  <dig> .

table in additional file  <dig> reports the topological characteristics of the described networks  together with the values of the yeast and human natural interactomes and an erdös-rényi network. these networks with designed topological properties, namely with different degree distributions and transitivity coefficients, were used as input for protnet. after  <dig> steps the equilibrium ssi was measured. notably we observed that increasing values of the transitivity coefficient corresponded to increased ssi values. to describe such relationship, we modeled a multiple linear regression equation where the ssi was associated to the different topological metrics of the initial networks. our model is defined by the following regression equation:

 ssii=β0+β1sffii+β2apii+β3diameteri+β4acci+β5transitivityi+β6modularityi+εi 

where the dependent variables are the scale free fitting index  <cit>  , average path length , diameter, average clustering coefficient  <cit>   , transitivity  <cit> . the dispersion matrix in figure  <dig> shows all pair-wise combinations of the variables. a linear relationship between two or more independent variables indicates redundancy in explaining the dependent variable. the matrix describes linear relationships between transitivity, clustering coefficient and modularity and between average path length and diameter. f-test following regression allowed us to determine the redundant variables and remove them from the model. regression results show a linear relationship between the transitivity coefficient  and the ssi, while other network metrics such as the degree distribution, the average path length or the modularity were either redundant or non-significant. the adjusted r-squared value, used to measure the goodness of the fit, indicates that about the 80% of the ssi is explained by the transitivity coefficient. further details about multiple linear regression is available in additional file  <dig> 

CONCLUSIONS
the available experimental information on protein interaction networks reveals a poor conservation of the specific interactions between ortholog proteins in different model organisms. this is not surprising and could be explained by a high functional redundancy of some of the interactions occurring in a cell. in other words, aside from those few interactions that are necessary to form very specific complexes, many of the remaining interactions revealed by the experimental methods that are currently used to draw the interactome could be inessential but contribute in a redundant way to cell organization. for instance a protein that needs to perform its function near the cytoskeleton may find different ways to achieve its spatial localization by interacting with different partners linked to the cytoskeleton. on the other hand all interactomes described so far are characterized by graph topological properties that are conserved in distantly related species.

here we have asked whether any of the topological features of protein interaction networks could be responsible for the ability of cells to reach a robust organization. to this end we have used a cell automaton model that simulates a cell space where interactions between proteins can occur. although in principle the model can represent cells where proteins are present at different concentrations and interact with different affinities, here we focus on the topological properties of the network and we use a simple model where proteins are all present at the same concentration and interact with the same "strength".

by defining a new metrics of cell organization the self-similarity index, we have shown that starting form a random distribution of protein monomers in a cell lattice, at each time step, protein complexes begins to form and the pseudocell starts organizing its structure. interestingly the pseudocells that evolve under the rules of a natural protein interaction network reach a higher level of organization when compared to cells evolved under the interaction rules imposed by a random network.

since the interactomes differ from random network in their topological properties we have asked which topological property is responsible for the ability of natural cells to reach a robust organization. by assembling modified networks with tailored degree distribution and clustering coefficients we have been able to show that the clustering coefficient explains more than 80% of the dependence of the self-similarity index on topological properties. thus, we propose that the clustering coefficient of the protein interaction network of natural cells has been fixed by natural selection to confer self organizing properties on the cell interactome.

