BACKGROUND
clinical bioinformatics is concerned with the analysis and visualization of complex medical datasets  <cit> . in contrast to the classical 'main stream' bioinformatics field which focuses on the analysis of biological information , here the main focus is to collate heterogeneous data sets from disparate data sources  and develop novel algorithms for the analysis of such heterogeneous data sets. thus, the key goal is the simultaneous evaluation of clinical and basic research data with the aim to improve medical care and care provision . for complex diseases such as psychiatric disorders, a wealth of information about patients is usually available. this includes clinical data, standard laboratory evaluations, genetic data, brain imaging data and data obtained from molecular profiling experiments. the recent advance in technological innovations allows to perform high throughput experiments resulting in an enormous increase in the amount of biomedical data generated. yet, the different sources of data are commonly kept separate which means that valuable information is lost or neglected. due to this lack of integrated analysis, the importance and relationships between clinical observations and the underlying molecular mechanisms are not understood. in clinical bioinformatics, a major aim is to combine these different sources of information and identify emerging features of the diseases under investigation. these features may reveal links to other pathologies and uncover networks of relationships between different diseases.

novel clinical bioinformatics approaches could thus provide a better understanding and definition of complex diseases resulting in more accurate, improved diagnosis and better therapies. over the last years, a need for personalized medicine is increasingly appreciated as it has been apparent that standard treatment approaches are rarely efficient across the entire patient population. schizophrenia is a good example for a disorder that presents with a broad spectrum of different clinical manifestations which almost certainly is due to the existence of diverse underlying etiologies that happen to present clinically with similar symptoms  <cit> . difficult diagnosis and low success of current drug regimes are an inevitable consequence. it would be highly desirable to identify patient subgroups corresponding exactly to the underlying disease pathology, thus facilitating the choice of the most appropriate treatment.

here, we present a clinical bioinformatics approach to improve diagnosis and understanding of complex psychiatric diseases, which entails the application of a graph theoretical approach that captures information about patients and all disease associated data in a network. we investigate the relationships between patient specific variables and the disease and show how dependencies between these variables can be used to obtain important insights into disease pathologies and are directly related to improved diagnostic approaches. we use this methodology for an integrated assessment of data derived from different profiling platforms and standard laboratory tests and show how it can improve the understanding of highly heterogeneous disorders.

RESULTS
schizophrenia – a complex disease
the clinical data used in this study was derived from two different profiling platforms and standard laboratory tests. metabolites in the csf of  <dig> individuals  and  <dig> demographically matched healthy volunteers) were profiled by h-nmr. serum proteins of the same subjects were investigated by lc mass spectrometry. for the nmr dataset, signals corresponding to the same molecules were averaged. in the mass spectrometric dataset, each variable referred to a mass spectrometric peak including adduct formation and isotopes. the study also includes measurements of csf and serum glucose levels derived from a standard laboratory test on all patients.

the structure of the available data can be easily visualized in the form of two layers of a network . the first layer contains all patients and reflects the dependency structure between them. these dependencies may arise from common genetic backgrounds or similar endo-phenotypes. in the present study, all patients were unrelated. the second layer of the network comprises all variables assessed in the patient population. in the present study, these variables were levels of molecules in the serum and csf of the patients. similarly, the layer could contain information about the clinical state of the patients, e.g. symptom severity, blood scans, brain imaging results etc. the interactions in the lower layer reflect the dependency structures between the variables, for example involvement in related biochemical pathways.

importantly, these associations may reveal disease relevant features such as dependencies between symptom severity and genetic background or levels of blood proteins. for psychiatric disorders, dependency structures such as the association between clinical features such as hallucinations or delusions and respective molecular abnormalities are not well understood.

in the first instance, we applied fanova to investigate differences between the patient and control populations. in clinical terms, this means to identify which individual factors are associated with the disease state. to correct for multiple hypothesis testing, the false discovery rate was controlled and all p-values adjusted accordingly . the determination of the relationship between individual molecules and the disease state embodies an intuitive connection between exploratory data analysis and the investigation of dependencies between variables. in complex diseases, interpretation is greatly improved if associations between disease associated variables are known and sometimes correlated analytes can be of great help to uncover abnormal pathway structures. we were able to identify several variables that remained significant after controlling the false discovery rate at a level of  <dig> .

we aimed to use the links in the two-layer network to assess the complexity of the disease by determining whether all abnormalities were equally distributed amongst the patient population or whether these abnormalities are concentrated in particular systems of molecules or subgroups of patients. therefore, similar to barabasi et al.  <cit> , a bipartite network was generated that included all molecular analytes in one partition and all patients in the other partition. we assessed the heterogeneity in the network by markov chain clustering. the algorithm was expected to cluster patients that featured similar abnormalities with the affected molecular compounds. the clustering of patients and variables gives, therefore, an estimation about the heterogeneity of information in the network. maximization of the bipartite modularity yielded  <dig> distinct clusters. one third of the patients could be found in one cluster having profound abnormalities in levels of serum primary fatty acid amides which were not shared by the remaining patients . the identity of the primary fatty acid amides was confirmed by re-analysis of commercially available standard compounds.

the heterogeneity of the patient population is well reflected in the distribution of the node degrees. it can be seen that the patients co-clustering with the network of primary fatty acid amides have a far higher average node degree than the remaining patients . the same phenomenon can be observed for the primary fatty acid amides which have a far greater average node degree than the remaining molecules . it can also be seen that the degree distribution of the molecular compounds follows power law indicating the presence of few highly connected nodes .

interestingly, the abnormalities found for primary fatty acid amides were not related to the significant differences we observed in csf glucose and glutamate levels which are a known feature of the schizophrenia pathology  <cit> .

in an extended dataset , we confirmed the dependency structure of the above mentioned fatty acid network and compared the associations between schizophrenia and affective disorder. figure  <dig> compares the stability of the fatty acid network using the entropy measure during the clustering procedure. for schizophrenia patients, the entropy increased at a lower clustering coefficient and followed a log-linear shape. for affective disorder patients, the network was more stable and split apart at a higher clustering coefficient. the shape of the entropy curve was linear for affective disorder patients and reached a far lower value than the network derived from schizophrenia patients. in affective disorder, the network of primary fatty acid amides was strongly connected and very stable due to a higher degree of alteration of the molecules in this patient group.

mapping patients on the "diseasome" network
the concept of encoding relationships between individuals, diseases or molecules into networks is called network medicine  <cit>  and has been shown to produce biologically interesting results in the investigation of disease gene associations  <cit> . as noted by loscalzo et al, the application of network concepts in complex diseases can result in novel approaches for diagnosis and treatment  <cit> . here, we applied this concept to achieve an integrated representation of complex disorders encoding all relevant information simultaneously. graph theoretical approaches are suited to capture the complexity of human diseases and provide a theoretical framework to easily incorporate molecular readouts and patient information to give a comprehensive description of a disease state.

using the graph theoretical approach, the similarity of patients can be readily determined from the integrated patient information enabling the assessment of disease similarity and possibly, the subclassification of patients. this would be particularly desirable for psychiatric disorders for which the highly heterogeneous symptoms may result from different etiologies and possibly contribute to the low efficacy of current drug regimes. extending the concept of subclassifying patient cohorts to the single patient level leads to a conceptual framework often referred to as personalized medicine. patient specific information can be incorporated into the network approach and may allow for an individualized assessment of a given patient's disease state  <cit> . besides facilitating more efficient treatment approaches, a system of robust yet patient specific hallmarks of a complex disorder would be invaluable in the design of clinical trials, the development of new drug candidates or the identification of novel drug targets. in the context of psychiatric disorders, a personalized diagnosis and treatment approach would be of particular value as patients' responsiveness to treatment can currently not be predicted, impeding appropriate and successful therapy.

networks are an intuitive concept of visualizing disease related information. importantly, they may allow the investigation of relationships between related diseases such as schizophrenia and depression which may share parts of their biochemical underpinnings. often, the consideration of clinical information only is not sufficient to diagnose these diseases unambiguously. in fact, no single symptom is specific for schizophrenia  <cit> . the presence of certain symptoms or molecular abnormalities ultimately results in the diagnosis of a certain disease. in other words, the spectra of symptoms and other possible abnormalities such as molecular alterations form a 'disease space' in which every illness has a particular location . it is important to note that finding a patients location in this disease space is by no means bound to be a 'black and white' process in which a particular individual either has a disease or no disease. we would rather be able to replace this binary thinking by a continuous scale in which intermediate states between being ill and being healthy are possible. from a network point of view, the disease space can be imagined as a graph in which the diseases form the nodes and the relatedness between them the links. finding the patient's exact location in this network or disease space is at the heart of personalized medicine and has many important implications for treatment approaches as a treatment of the patient ultimately results in a 'movement' of the patient across the network. mathematical formalization will be described in a separate manuscript.

CONCLUSIONS
in this study, we analyzed complex psychiatric diseases in the form of disease networks. we quantified robust associations between analytes measured with different profiling platforms and standard laboratory tests and were able to determine a subgroup of patients that featured remarkable abnormality in a molecular system of primary fatty acid amides. the results were validated in an extended dataset of schizophrenia patients and the network properties compared to the ones present in affective disorder. we found that in affective disorder, the molecular networks were more profoundly altered when compared to schizophrenia. the methodology helps to statistically assess the complexity of a given disease and disease associated patterns can then be further investigated with regards to their diagnostic utility or help in the prediction of novel therapeutic targets. the applied framework is able to enhance the understanding of complex psychiatric diseases and may give valuable insights into drug development and personalized medicine approaches.

