BACKGROUND
a major obstacle in beta cell research has been the lack of a human pancreatic beta cell line that is functionally equivalent to primary normal or neoplastic beta cells because of difficulties in obtaining and culturing them for long periods of time  <cit> . therefore, animal insulinoma cell lines are widely used to study both physiological and pathophysiological mechanisms involved in glucose metabolism and to establish in vitro models for the beta cell damage occurring in type  <dig> diabetes  <cit> . nevertheless, recent studies comparing sequences that lie upstream of, or flank the transcription start site of the insulin gene among different species, led to the conclusion that the rodent promoters are markedly different from the human one, urging caution in extrapolating data from rodent promoter studies to the etiology and therapy of diabetes  <cit> .

insulinomas are the most common pancreatic islet cell tumors, arising from the beta cells within the islets of langerhans. most of them are sporadic  <cit>  and small, displaying a benign behaviour, but still cause substantial morbidity since they produce excessive amounts of hormones. in fact, their key hallmark is uncontrolled insulin secretion, despite hypoglycemia. compared with normal beta cells, insulinomas also tend to secrete more proinsulin, leading to an increased ratio of proinsulin to insulin  <cit> .

although the clinical association between hypoglycemia and pancreatic beta cell tumors was already described in  <dig>  <cit> , the molecular mechanisms involved in this disease remain unknown. histochemical studies in human insulinomas showed that tumors have reduced insulin protein content compared with normal beta cells; hence it is possible that decreased storage capacity and uncontrolled hormone release are responsible for the hyperinsulinemia  <cit> .

persistent hyperinsulinemic hypoglycemia of infancy , or nesidioblastosis, is a rare disorder characterized by unregulated insulin secretion and profound hypoglycemia  <cit> . phhi could also be characterized by the histological appearance of endocrine cells lying in the duct epithelium, with an apparent failure to aggregate into discrete islets of langerhans  <cit> . however, there is some controversy on the etiology of the disease because severe hypoglycemia can also occur in the presence of apparently normal islets  <cit> .

to the best of our knowledge, the number of human cells growing in vitro which persistently release insulin is limited  <cit> .

in view of the great demand for easily accessible beta cell lines for physiological and medical relevant studies  <cit> , we set out to generate and characterize human insulin-releasing long term cell cultures derived from biopsies of insulinomas and nesidioblastosis.

here, we describe three new insulin-releasing low passage cell lines, derived from two independent insulinomas  and one nesidioblastosis that maintain the antigenic characteristics and insulin secretion profile of the original tissues at least for up to  <dig> cell passages.

although the behaviour of these cell lines does not perfectly mimic the primary beta cell physiology, they are extremely valuable tools for developing bioengineered beta cells offering unique opportunities to investigate complex aspects of tumor biology, insulin secretion and beta cell function.

RESULTS
primary cultures and establishment of cell lines
three ex-vivo primary cultures  were obtained from independent donors after surgical resection of the tissue and cell processing. cells were successfully grown as monolayers up to passage number  <dig> , showing fibroblastic-like morphology. all cell cultures were characterized by an overall 2-dimensional growth pattern. nevertheless, all of them also presented the capacity to form cell clusters .

in order to confirm their human origin, diploid condition and chromosomal structure, we karyotyped all three cell lines. cells at passages  <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> for, respectively, apm, cpr and vga lines were karyotyped following standard techniques, as described in material and methods section. this procedure confirmed the human origin of all three cell cultures and also showed an unaltered number of chromosomes, when compared to normal human cells. interestingly, cpr cells presented a chromosomal abnormality in mosaicism on chromosome  <dig> / <dig>  xy) .

functional analysis and cell lines characterization
in order to approach the cell cultures characterization, we studied, by confocal immunoflourescence  microscopy, several pancreatic islet markers, such as insulin, glucagon, c-peptide, glut- <dig> and pdx- <dig>  as well as ductal , mesenchymal  and one of the endocrine pancreatic tumor  cell markers. as shown in fig. 1c, while apm cells were positive for chromogranin, pdx- <dig> and insulin, and vga cells showed a positive staining for chromogranin, pdx- <dig>  glut- <dig> and glucagon; only cpr cells presented a positive staining for chromogranin plus all the beta cell markers analysed . it is important to note that, almost all of the cells of each cell culture analyzed, presented the same staining pattern described above. nevertheless, a cell proportion of less than 1% was desmin, alpha-actin, vimentin or ck19-positive .

next, we also investigated the mrna expression levels of some neuroendocrine and exocrine markers by means of rt-qpcr. in general, all of the genes studied presented positive expression. in order to follow the evolution of the cell cultures, the data shown in figure  <dig> represent the means of, at least, three experiments performed with mrna samples obtained from different cell passages. interestingly, all cell lines presented less than 1% of chromogranin and insulin expression when compared with human islet cultures, set as 100%. as previously reported  <cit> , our cell lines also showed lower levels of the beta cell potassium – atp channels subunit sur <dig>  and reduced levels of the prohormone convertase  <dig> and  <dig>  . in agreement with the immunohistochemistry data from the biopsies and the immunofluorescence performed in the cell cultures, glucagon mrna levels were barely detected only in cpr and vga cells . furthermore, in order to control for the proportion of exocrine pancreatic cells, the cell lines amylase levels were also monitored. all cell lines presented a very low abundance of exocrine cells as shown by the almost undetectable amylase mrna levels detected .

cells lines were periodically monitored, from the beginning of the primary cultures and every three cell passages, for intracellular hormone content and release and, also, for glucose-induced insulin secretion to select for functional beta cell populations. as shown in table  <dig>  all three cell cultures presented greatly increased accumulated insulin and proinsulin release . moreover, in accordance with the described behaviour of insulinomas, decreased c-peptide release and barely detectable insulin content were also observed in these cultures. furthermore, no insulin secretion response was observed upon exposure of the cells to high concentrations of glucose , showing no capacity to respond in a physiological manner to increased glucose concentration .

a stimulation index = insulin secretion : insulin release 

n.d.: not detected

cell growth properties
in order to establish the growth parameters of the cell cultures, we compared their growth in the presence of 10% fcs and determined the doubling times for each one of them. as shown in figure  <dig>  apm, cpr and vga cells displayed similar growth curves, presenting a doubling time of approximately  <dig> h .

we also set out to study the cell behaviour of these cultures upon treatment with a panel of growth factors and hormones, which have been described as proliferation inducers in cancer. we determined that all three human cell lines cultures presented similar proliferation patterns. while none of them responded to epidermal growth factor  at any tested concentration; either insulin-like growth factor  <dig>  or recombinant human prolactin  induced a significant growth increase  on apm, cpr and vga cells, the highest stimulation rate being exerted at  <dig> ng/ml and  <dig> μg/ml for igf- <dig> and rhprl, respectively  moreover, simultaneous stimulation with rhprl and igf- <dig>  at suboptimal concentrations, had no additive effect on cell proliferation .

next, we evaluated the clonogenic ability of the cell lines, defined as the capacity of isolated cells to form colonies. we demonstrated that vga, cpr and apm cells were unable to form colonies when seeded at low density .

on the other hand, the anchorage-independence was also tested by seeding the cells onto an agar overlay. as shown in figure  <dig>  when adhesion to a substrate was prevented, all cell lines formed spheroids, but only apm cells were able to proliferate under this condition .

vga, cpr and apm cells growing in 96-well plates were incubated with increasing doses of doxorubicin  , and cell viability was evaluated  <dig> h after treatment by means of mts, as described in material and methods. we observed that only cpr cells were sensitive to doxo, exhibiting an ic <dig> of  <dig>  μm .

the suceptibility of the human beta cell lines to serum starvation was also studied. subconfluent monolayers were incubated for  <dig> h in the absence of fcs and the viability was then measured using mts assay. as shown in figure 5b, apm cells were  <dig>  fold more susceptible to serum starving than vga cells.

adhesiveness ability and expression of adhesion molecules
we first examined the adhesiveness ability of cpr and apm cells to different substrates. as shown in figure 6a adhesion to plastic, to control substrate, to fibronectin  and to col iv was similar between all of the human beta cell lines. more over both insulinoma cell cultures presented more adhesiveness to laminin  

integrins are a family of cellular transmembrane receptors that recognize different extracellular matrix components, such as fn. by western blot  and if analysis, we show that all insulinoma cell lines express similar levels of β1-integrin .

since the expression of e-cadherin, a  <dig> kda transmembrane glycoprotein, is associated with cell-cell adhesion, we next examined its expression at the protein level. we observed that only apm cells were positive for e-cadherin, as detected by wb and if . classical cadherins are defined by their ability to form complexes with catenins. we found that all insulinoma cell lines expressed β-catenin, without significant differences among them .

spreading, migration and invasion abilities
the percentage of spreading cells was determined  <dig> min after plating by scoring cell morphology under a phase-contrast microscope. we determined that while 60% of vga cells showed a flattened round base and lamella or filopodia extensions , apm and cpr cells presented only 30% of spreaded cells .

"wound-healing" assay was used to analyze the in vitro migration ability of the human beta cell lines. four hundred μm wide wounds were made in confluent monolayers of the different cell cultures, including primary cultures of human normal islets, and migration into the cell-free area was observed and measured. while at  <dig> h after the initial wound was made vga cells had covered about 30% of the cell-free area, cpr and apm cells showed a significantly lower migratory ability, covering less than 15% of the original wound in the same time period. interestingly, we determined that primary cultures from normal human islets completely closed the wound during this same time period .

we also analyzed the invasive capacity using "transwell" chambers, with filters of  <dig> μm pores covered with the reconstituted basal membrane matrigel. twenty two hours after seeding, the number of insulinoma cells that invaded the matrigel and the filters was evaluated by means of an inverted microscope. however, no invasion was found either in amp, vga or cpr cells .

proteases secretion profile
proteases are expressed in normal processes but also, in a non-regulated manner, during pathological events as tissue invasion and metastasis. among the principal proteases associated with the invasive capacity of tumor cells are the metalloproteinases  and the serine protease upa. therefore, we evaluated upa, mmp- <dig> and mmp- <dig> activity secreted to the conditioned medium of the human cell lines. all cell lines were able to secret mmp- <dig>  with no differences among the cell types . however, none of the analyzed cells appeared to be secreting mmp- <dig> .

constitutive upa activity was very low in all cell types, being detectable only in vga cells .

discussion
most insulinomas are derived from monoclonal proliferation of pancreatic islets beta cells; therefore, they constitute good models for studying both tumor and beta cell biology.

here, we report the morphological and cytogenetic features, as well as the biological behaviour, of three long term cultures of insulin producing human cells derived from two isolated insulinomas and one nesidioblastosis case. to the best of our knowledge, the number of in vitro grown, persistently insulin-secreting human cells is very limited. recently, the human glucose-responsive insulin secreting nes2y cell line, derived from a patient with persistent hyperinsulinemic hypoglycemia of infancy, was established. this cell line was characterized as presenting a population doubling time of approximately  <dig> h, an insulin promoter unresponsive to glucose, a lack of atp-sensitive potassium channel and a defect in the pdx <dig> insulin gene-regulatory transcription factor  <cit> . moreover, two years ago, gartner and collaborators described a few characteristics of eight long-term insulin-secreting cell cultures maintained in vitro  <cit> . so far, the only human insulinoma-derived cell line  lacks persistent and glucose-induced insulin secretion and presents several chromosomal abnormalities, specifically including the chromosome  <dig> tetraploidy, with three out of four chromosomes  <dig> being aberrant and showing a chromosomal material translocation at a specific locus of the human insulin gene  <cit> .

the cell lines described here displayed the same antigenic and insulin secreting profiles as the original tumors. it is important to note the fact that the barely detectable intracellular insulin levels is in accordance with the description of insulinomas as having poor or almost non-existent capacity for insulin storage, thus presenting no positive staining for insulin  <cit> . unlike the cm cells, our cell cultures presented large amounts of human insulin secretion which was maintained throughout the different passages, in addition to an unaltered number of chromosomes and only an insertion in mosaicism on chromosome  <dig> in the cpr cells.

in agreement with the very well characterized excessive and/or uncontrolled insulin release, displayed by insulinomas and nesidioblastosis  <cit> , none of our cell cultures presented glucose-induced insulin secretion. it has been suggested that the histological resemblance of nesiodioblastotic pancreata to those of immature fetuses may have arisen as the result of inappropriate control during the earliest phases of endocrine pancreatic development  <cit> . further results supported this conclusion, adding that in nesidioblastosis, this similarity is not only anatomic, but also functional, because of their defective recognition of nutrient secretagogues, and lack of glucose dependence of their camp mediated insulin release  <cit> . furthermore, the lack of glucose-regulated insulin secretion, observed in our human insulin-producing cell lines, might be attributed to the loss of the sulphonylurea receptor gene  which would lead to the absence of functional atp-sensitive potassium channels.

the elevated levels of proinsulin detected in our cultures, could be related on one hand, to diminished mrna levels of prohormone convertase  <dig> and  <dig> displayed in these cell lines. these enzymes are responsible for cleavage of proinsulin and thus are involved in the presence of this insulin precursor in secretory granules. on the other hand, it has already been reported that unlike normal pancreatic beta cells, in which proinsulin to insulin conversion occurs in acidic immature secretory granules of the trans-golgi apparatus, in insulinomas, this conversion already takes place in the golgi apparatus, but remains incomplete, resulting in the formation of secretory granules containing both proinsulin and insulin. this indicates that in insulinomas, sorting into secretory granules may not be a prerequisite for hormone conversion  <cit> .

it is important to note that, probably due to their benign nature, the cell lines generated in our work presented several growth features, including dependence of trophic factors, reduced clonogenic ability and capacity to form cell clusters, which are similar to those found in human normal islet primary cultures. the human insulin-releasing cell lines described here presented a relatively low proliferation rate, which appears to be in agreement with the already published data and also with the rate found in human islet primary cultures  <cit> . moreover, this low proliferation rate could explain the resistance to doxorubicin treatment observed in our cultures, since this kind of compounds has been associated with low success rates in well-differentiated tumors  <cit>  and are only used in malignant insulinoma treatment  <cit> .

among the panel of growth factors tested, only igf- <dig> and rhprl were able to induce cell proliferation of our cell lines. several studies have pointed igf- <dig> as a growth promoter for beta cells  <cit> . furthermore, the mitogenic activity of the lactogen family of hormones, which include prolactin, have also been described for normal and neoplasic human beta cells  <cit> .

metastasis is the process by which tumor cells establish new tumor foci at different and distant organs. this is a very complex multistep process, in which each step is crucial and strictly regulated. acquisition of invasive ability involves changes in adhesion, migration and extracellular proteolysis, culminating in shedding of tumor cells into the circulation  <cit> . few studies focusing on cell migration and invasion properties of endocrine pancreatic tumor cells  are available. we evaluated every step of this process in our cell models.

firstly, the migration capacity of our cell cultures was compared with that displayed by human islet primary cultures. the results showed that even when all the insulin-releasing cultures presented very low migration, the motility of the neoplastic cells was very low, and surprisingly, this ability increased in hyperplastic -derived vga cells. this result is in agreement with the higher spreading capacity detected in these cells. the highest migration values were obtained in primary cultures of normal human islets. it remains to be elucidated which are the causes of this unexpected cell behaviour.

we next examined the adhesiveness ability of cpr and apm cells, determining that adhesion to plastic, to control substrate, to fn and to col iv was similar between all of the human beta cell lines. both insulinoma cell cultures were more adhesive to ln. the differences found in the adhesion pattern could be explained by variations in the expression profiles of adhesion molecules. fn is an extracellular protein which binds cells via specific integrins. in agreement with the similar adhesiveness to fn, we found no differences in β1-integrin expression between the cell lines. moreover, the only report we found, focused on down regulation of e-cadherin, a homotypic cell-to-cell interaction molecule ubiquitously expressed in epithelial cells, reported on the rip-tag model but, so far this has not been confirmed by studies on primary epts  <cit> . in our work, we found a lack of e-cadherin expression in two out of three human beta-cell lines studied. we showed, for the first time, that the apm human insulinoma derived cells, the only one presenting positive staining for e-cadherin, also displayed the lowest mmp- <dig> activity. these facts could, at least in part, explain the poor migration ability of this cell line, correlating with the benign behavior of the original tumor. cadherins are linked to the actin cytoskeleton through catenins and, in particular, β-catenin binds directly to the intracellular domain of e-cadherin. surprisingly, and in spite of the differences found in the e-cadherin expression, all insulinoma cells presented similar levels of β-catenin. therefore, it is possible that the β-catenin found in the vga and cpr cells is involved in other cellular functions, independently of adhesion.

overall, the results related to cell invasion and migration of these cultures are in agreement with the ones found in hyperplasic cells or benign tumors from which these cultures were derived, indicating that the cells maintained the original characteristics throughout the cell passages.

these human insulin-releasing cell lines have been characterized in detail, and express several key features of normal pancreatic beta cells, such as expression of a number of islet genes  and formation of cell clusters.

CONCLUSIONS
the cell lines described in this work represent, even when their behaviour do not perfectly mimic the primary beta cell physiology, valuable tools for the study of the molecular events underlying beta cell function and dysfunction. the merits which become evident from the characterization and use of apm, cpr or vga cells in diverse functional studies reported here, should be balanced against the short lifespan of primary beta cells which also undergo a rapid decline in their function and granulation with time in culture.

it is important to say that, we are currently performing comparative proteomic studies, in order to further characterize the differences between normal human islets cultures and these cell lines.

collectively, these observations prompt research towards successful establishment of bioengineered human beta cells, providing a large and much needed source of cultured human beta cell tissue for experimentation. more over, the cell lines described here could also be useful to improve the knowledge on the molecular biology of insulinomas in order to select and/or validate new therapeutic targets and diagnostic biomarkers.

