BACKGROUND
the mediterranean basin has been the stage of various paleogeographical events that have helped shape the genetic diversity and phylogeographic patterns of numerous taxa. in particular, the connection between the mediterranean sea and the atlantic ocean closed about  <dig>  million years ago  causing the mediterranean sea to desiccate during the messinian salinity crisis, an event that ended  <dig>  mya, with the formation of the strait of gibraltar  <cit> . the opening of the strait led to the separation of terrestrial faunal elements in the region into allopatric units  <cit> , as in the cases of the spiny-footed lizards acanthodactylus erythrurus  <cit> , or the west mediterranean newts of the genus pleurodeles  <cit> . regarding the study performed on the spiny-footed lizards, the iberian acanthodactylus e. erythrurus apparently became separated from its north african relatives around  <dig> mya  <cit> , and it was also the refilling of the strait of gibraltar that may have led to the separation between pleurodeles waltl and the north african newts pleurodeles nebulosus and pleurodeles poireti  <cit> . another extremely influential event occurred during the pleistocene when sea level and climate oscillations led to repeated isolation and connection of taxa  <cit> , and consequent population differentiation . at a more local scale, the atlas mountains originated during the mid- to late miocene as a consequence of the impact between the eurasian and african plates  <cit> , and seem to have been an important barrier for allopatric speciation . all these events have made the mediterranean basin a centre for genetic differentiation that, in some cases, has led to vicariant speciation, partially explaining the observed high levels of biodiversity  <cit> .

tarentola geckos are members of the family phyllodactylidae  <cit> , and the genus is currently comprised of  <dig> different species  <cit> . tarentola is distributed across the mediterranean basin and on many macaronesian islands, including madeira, the selvages, the canary and cape verde islands  <cit> . on the other side of the atlantic ocean, three species are accepted: t. americana, from cuba and the bahamas; the recently described t. crombiei  <cit>  endemic to cuba; and the probably extinct t. albertschwartzi  <cit> , known from a single specimen allegedly from jamaica. since all the macaronesian islands are volcanic, and therefore have never been connected to the mainland  <cit> , the most likely hypothesis is that these geckos reached these islands by transmarine dispersal  <cit> . regarding the neotropical members of tarentola, these also seem to be the result of a post-gondwanan dispersal from the old world  <cit> .

the mediterranean basin harbours nine different species of tarentola, namely t. mauritanica, t. chazaliae, t. deserti, t. boehmei, t. annularis, t. neglecta, t. mindiae, t. ephippiata, and t. fascicularis, a former subspecies of t. mauritanica recently elevated to the species level  <cit> . although several molecular studies have been published for some of these species, these have always been focused on one  <cit>  or a few taxa  <cit> . moreover, all species of mediterranean tarentola have never been assembled into a phylogenetic context using a multilocus approach. the majority of the studies have been focused on the phylogeographic patterns of the moorish gecko t. mauritanica. this species is characterized by an extremely high mitochondrial genetic variation in north africa, which led to the hypothesis that this taxon could be, in fact, a species complex  <cit> . in contrast, the european populations of the moorish gecko have very low mitochondrial diversity, initially thought to be the result of a recent introduction  <cit> , probably human-mediated. however, a recent study  <cit>  has demonstrated that this low mtdna variability that characterizes the european populations of t. mauritanica could be the result of genetic hitch-hiking, and not solely due to a recent colonization event.

additionally, several studies have demonstrated the paraphyly of t. mauritanica with respect to t. angustimentalis from the canary islands  <cit> . a recent study  <cit>  concluded that populations of t. fascicularis from libya and central tunisia constitute a monophyletic lineage and, together with t. mindiae and t. neglecta, represent the sister group of t. deserti. on the other hand, previous mtdna studies indicated that t. fascicularis is paraphyletic with respect to t. deserti  <cit> , although sampling was limited in all cases.

therefore, in order to estimate an evolutionary hypothesis able to explain the previously mentioned patterns we have increased the taxonomic and geographic sampling in this study. further, we used two mitochondrial, and four nuclear markers in order to better evaluate the inter- and intraspecific relationships within the genus tarentola from the mediterranean basin.

RESULTS
mtdna genealogy
with the program alter  <cit>  the  <dig> concatenated mitochondrial sequences were reduced to  <dig> haplotypes used in the analyses. a total of  <dig> bp , corresponding to  <dig> bp of 12s rrna and  <dig> bp of 16s rrna, were used. according to jmodeltest the model of nucleotide substitution that best fits the 12s rrna dataset is the sym+i+g, and for the 16s rrna it is the hky+g. according to the obtained mitochondrial dna genealogy results , we were able to recover six major groups within the mediterranean species of tarentola, geographically represented in figure 2; one group corresponding to t. chazaliae; another one clustering t. annularis and t. ephippiata; t. boehmei appears as two separated lineages; another clade comprised of t. neglecta and t. mindiae, sister taxa to both t. deserti and t. fascicularis; and another group clustering t. mauritanica and t. angustimentalis with this latter rendering the former paraphyletic, as previously reported  <cit> . within these major divisions t. chazaliae is basal to all mediterranean tarentola and t. annularis and t. ephippiata are sister taxa. within the t. boehmei group considerable diversity was obtained, with one lineage from southwestern morocco appearing as an independent evolutionary entity, sister to all remaining tarentola, although this relationship was not statistically supported. in fact, the southwestern moroccan clade of t. boehmei is the only one presenting strong geographic coherency, with the remaining lineages of this species clustering specimens from different geographic localities. a further feature of the t. boehmei lineage is the existence within this clade of a specimen assigned as t. deserti  by carranza et al.  <cit> . in fact, sc <dig> was collected from the same locality as td <dig>  a specimen morphologically identified as t. deserti, and that falls within the t. deserti clade  <cit> , and far away from the distribution range of t. boehmei. unfortunately, there is no available information for the nuclear markers of this specimen, in order to determine if this is a case of hybridization, mitochondrial introgression between t. boehmei and t. deserti, a misidentification  or some other form of error.

the group comprised by t. mauritanica and t. angustimentalis can be subdivided into six different evolutionary clades ; clade i is present in central and southwestern morocco; clade ii corresponds to the exclusive iberian lineage first identified by perera and harris  <cit> ; clade iii is present throughout europe and north africa; a new clade assigned as clade iv occupies central morocco; the t. angustimentalis  lineage within the t. mauritanica complex; and finally clade vi distributed across southern iberia, northeastern morocco and northwestern algeria. hereafter, this major group is referred to as the "t. mauritanica complex".

when analysing the last major lineage, there is evidence that t. neglecta and t. mindiae are sister taxa to both t. fascicularis and t. deserti, rather than the previous estimate of relationships  <cit> , in which t. neglecta, together with t. mindiae and t. fascicularis, were sister taxa to t. deserti. a paraphyletic t. fascicularis with respect to t. deserti, as already obtained in previous studies,  <cit>  was also recovered. this major group that hereafter is referred to as the "t. fascicularis/deserti complex" was subdivided into nine different lineages , characterized by little geographical and clear phylogenetic structure. specimens from clade vii occur from eastern morocco to central and southern algeria, fitting the known distribution of t. deserti  <cit> . in fact, the specimens from this study collected in the algerian sahara  are located in the north and south border of the type locality of this species   <cit> . the sister lineage of clade vii is clade viii present in western libya, lampedusa and conigli islets , and on the border between libya and egypt, morphologically assigned to t. fascicularis . clade ix ranges from central tunisia to chergui island  and conigli islet in which the recently described subspecies t. fascicularis wolfgangi  <cit>  from central tunisia clusters with the remaining specimens. clade x ranges from north to central tunisia, and clade xi is present in the benghazi region , and on the libya/tunisian border. the type locality of t. fascicularis is ain teyanah,  <dig> km south of benghazi  <cit> , and specimens from clade xi are included in this area. clade xii is present in northeastern libya and northwestern egypt, while specimens from clade xiii occur in northwestern algeria. lineage xiv is represented by a unique individual  from northeastern morocco, and clade xv occurs in northern algeria between djelfa and batna.

this same topology was obtained with both phylogenetic methods, except regarding the specimen db <dig> that appears as sister taxon to clade xii with the bayesian inference .

ndna genealogy
concerning the phylogenetic inference with solely the four nuclear markers , we used a total of  <dig> individuals, with a combined length of  <dig>  bp;  <dig> bp for the acm <dig>   <dig> bp for the mc1r,  <dig> bp for the pdc, and  <dig> bp for the rag <dig>  the nucleotide models obtained for each gene were the gtr+g for the acm <dig>  the gtr+i+g for both mc1r and rag <dig>  and the k80+g for the pdc. the topologies obtained from both phylogenetic methods  were exactly the same, except regarding the specimen coded as db <dig>  which appears as sister taxon of clades ii and iii in the bi analyses, and the clade clustering t. annularis and t. ephippiata, which is estimated to be the sister taxa of all other ingroup lineages using bi.

from the analysis of the nuclear dataset, four of the six major lineages identified in the mitochondrial phylogeny are recovered. however, the phylogenetic relationships within each of these lineages are quite different, relative to the ones obtained with the mtdna dataset, and several of them are poorly supported with multiple polytomies. according to the ml analyses, t. ephippiata and t. annularis are sister taxa to t. chazaliae, although poorly supported. also, the two mtdna independent lineages of t. boehmei are recovered as monophyletic and contrary to the mtdna phylogeny is considerably supported . the iberian clade  within clade iii renders the latter paraphyletic and, therefore, they could be considered a single lineage based on the ndna data. clade vi appears as the sister taxa of both clades ii and iii, instead of clade iv. relationships between clades i, iv and v are unresolved. the group comprised by the t. fascicularis/deserti complex, t. neglecta and t. mindiae contains a single individual from clade i  that is more related to these taxa, rather than to the specimens from the t. mauritanica complex. this major group is characterized by several very poorly supported lineages. clade vii is recovered, although an individual from clade viii  makes this lineage paraphyletic. the t. mindiae and t. neglecta clade is again recovered as a lineage, with an individual from clade x  as sister taxon to this lineage. finally, all north algerian, and northeastern moroccan mtdna lineages  were recovered as a distinct lineage by the ndna.

combined analysis  and age estimates
in order to perform this analysis , we used a total of  <dig> individuals, and  <dig>  bp . all lineages identified with the mtdna dataset were recovered, although some of the relationships between them were altered. according to this genealogy, t. annularis and t. ephippiata appear as sister taxa, in turn related to t. chazaliae. these three species split from the remaining mediterranean tarentola approximately  <dig>   mya. the t. boehmei lineage appears as monophyletic and originated around  <dig>   mya. within the t. mauritanica complex, clade i is sister taxon to clades ii, iii and iv, and all six lineages from this major group originated between  <dig>   and  <dig>  mya , corresponding to the late miocene and late pliocene, respectively. as obtained from the mtdna dataset alone, clade vi is the sister taxa to all remaining lineages from this species complex. tarentola neglecta and t. mindiae are sister taxa to the t. fascicularis/deserti complex, and the split between these groups occurred around  <dig>   mya. the phylogenetic relationships within the t. fascicularis/deserti complex remain unresolved, and with little geographic correspondence, although all north algerian clades  were clustered together, and represent a distinct lineage. the cladogenesis between the t. mauritanica complex and the clade formed by the t. fascicularis/deserti complex plus t. mindiae and t. neglecta took place around  <dig>   mya, corresponding to the mid-late miocene.

discussion
in light of the ages obtained for the node estimation, it is clear that the genealogy of the north african tarentola dates back to the miocene, with some speciation events predating most of the known paleogeographic occurrences that took place in the western mediterranean. this is true regarding the early split of the ancestor of the lineage formed by t. annularis, t. chazaliae and t. ephippiata, and for the origin of t. boehmei. interestingly, the split between the t. mauritanica complex and its sister clade formed by the ancestor of t. neglecta, t. mindiae and the t. fascicularis/deserti complex, was around  <dig>  mya , which is coincident with the period of uplift of the atlas mountain chain  <cit> . the establishment of this geographic barrier may have separated the ancestor of the t. mauritanica complex to the western part of the atlas, subject to a semiarid and sub-humid bioclimatic region, while the other major lineage could have been isolated eastwards, and confined to a more arid and saharan typical habitat. later, around  <dig>  mya the common ancestor of t. neglecta and t. mindiae separated from the t. fascicularis/deserti complex. the maintenance of tarentola species adapted to a saharan climate still occurs today, with t. deserti, t. neglecta and t. mindiae all occurring in drier regions than t. mauritanica  <cit> . the vicariant effect of the moroccan atlas mountains has also been detected in other reptile species, such as agama impalearis  <cit>  and mauremys leprosa  <cit> .

the connection between the mediterranean sea and the atlantic ocean was interrupted during the late miocene in a period that started  <dig>  mya and ceased  <dig>  mya, causing the messinian salinity crisis  <cit> . this event led to the establishment of a land bridge between africa and europe and an opportunity for faunistic interchange, as reported for the spiny-footed lizard acanthodactylus erythrurus  <cit> , the snake natrix maura  <cit> , the skink chalcides bedriagae  <cit>  and the newts of the genus pleurodeles  <cit> . regarding the t. mauritanica complex, cladogenesis between clade vi and the remaining lineages  matches very closely the closing of the strait of gibraltar, and is contemporary to the messinian salinity crisis. according to our node age estimates, the separation between clade iv  and the ancestor of both clades ii  and iii  occurred during the early pliocene, around  <dig>  mya, after the opening of the strait of gibraltar, although the confidence interval could cover this period . therefore, considering the confidence interval of this node estimate, the colonization of the iberian peninsula by tarentola from north africa could have been during the messinian salinity crisis, or after the opening of the strait of gibraltar during the early pliocene. the crossing of the strait of gibraltar after it reopened has already been documented for the podarcis wall lizards  <cit>  and psammodromus algirus  <cit> .

our results recover a well-supported mitochondrial phylogenetic tree for tarentola from north africa, adding considerably to what was previously known concerning this genus  <cit> . however, mitochondrial gene trees can be misleading particularly due to historical hybridization and introgression , and data from multiple unlinked loci should be used to infer phylogenetic history. our nuclear phylogeny, while limited in resolving power, with several polytomies for the most recent nodes, did recover four of the six major lineages identified with the mtdna alone.

although, much debate has surrounded the validity of t. angustimentalis as a full species  <cit> , our results from the nuclear dna do support this taxon as an independent lineage within the t. mauritanica complex. therefore, the recognition of t. angustimentalis implies that the t. mauritanica group is, in fact, a complex of several distinct forms that need to be recognized as full species. however, we suggest that elevation of independent lineages to specific status should only be done after an assessment of morphological variation, and detailed sampling to fully determine their distribution. various recent studies have highlighted how taxonomic changes can be premature when cryptic diversity occurs, even if prior geographic sampling is extensive . the primary objective of this work is not to make taxonomic revisions, but to assess the phylogenetic relationships within and between mediterranean tarentola.

according to the combined analysis, a monophyletic t. deserti was recovered, but this group renders t. fascicularis as a paraphyletic assemblage. it seems likely that t. fascicularis is actually a complex of lineages, some of which may deserve specific status. in order to unravel their evolutionary relationships, additional sampling and a morphological evaluation are required, especially across the western part of t. fascicularis' distribution range, and further identification of possible hybrids and contact zones. regarding the recovered north algerian lineages , at least for clade xv there is already morphological evidence that this is, in fact, a distinct species . if so, our phylogenetic data gives support to this as a monophyletic lineage.

CONCLUSIONS
mediterranean tarentola are a complex of species complexes whose differentiation was initiated in the middle miocene. the advent of multilocus approaches has, in general, caused researchers to move away from a strict reliance on gene trees, and it is now recognized that the signal from one gene tree is less important than the sum of signals across gene trees and loci  <cit> . therefore, we support the phylogeny obtained by the combined data, which supports some already accepted relationships, but also indicates various novel ones:

 t. annularis and t. ephippiata are sister taxa, and t. chazaliae appears as a sister taxon to this pair of species. these three species differentiated from the remaining tarentola during the miocene, around  <dig>  mya.

 t. boehmei presents considerable genetic variation, and is sister taxon to all remaining north african lineages, comprised by the t. mauritanica complex, t. fascicularis/deserti complex, t. neglecta, and t. mindiae. the cladogenesis of t. boehmei occurred around  <dig>  mya.

 regarding the t. mauritanica complex, clade vi is sister taxon to all remaining lineages  <cit> , whose differentiation took place around  <dig>  mya.

 a new lineage within the t. mauritanica complex was identified  from central morocco, sister taxon of clades ii and iii.

 t. angustimentalis is recovered as a monophyletic lineage within the t. mauritanica complex.

 t. neglecta and t. mindiae form a sister clade to a complex of t. deserti and t. fascicularis, as opposed to the relationships recovered by joger and bshaenia  <cit> . the ancestor of both t. neglecta and t. mindiae got split from their sister taxa about  <dig>  mya.

 t. fascicularis is paraphyletic with respect to t. deserti.

 two north algerian clades  are recovered, that are weakly supported as the sister taxa to the remaining specimens of the t. fascicularis/deserti complex.

 the separation between the t. mauritanica complex and the clade comprised by the ancestor of t. neglecta, t. mindiae and the t. fascicularis/deserti complex, occurred around  <dig>  mya , which is coincident with the period of uplift of the atlas mountain chain.

this study has considerably refined the major groups that exist, and at least in the iberian peninsula and northwestern africa has defined their biogeographic patterns. the situation in northeastern africa remains more obscure. detailed morphological and modelling approaches, combined with further sampling will be needed to ensure that taxonomic changes can be made in order to reflect the complex evolutionary history of the group.

