BACKGROUND
temperament refers to stable patterns of emotions, thoughts and behaviors, which are observable in early childhood and appear to be biologically-based. most models of temperament include a construct related to distress and avoidance . the temperament construct of behavioral inhibition, or "inhibited temperament", is defined as the predisposition for a person to respond to new people, places or things  with wariness or avoidance behaviors  <cit> . inhibited individuals are likely to show wary, avoidant, or fearful responses to novelty. in contrast, uninhibited individuals typically respond to new people and things with positive approach behaviors. inhibited temperament has a well-characterized phenotype and is associated with increased risk for both social anxiety disorder  <cit>  and major depression  <cit> . the study of inhibited temperament may thus provide clues about a specific developmental trajectory for anxiety and depressive disorders.

based on its reactivity to novelty and other types of uncertainty, individual differences in amygdala functioning have been proposed as a neural substrate of inhibited temperament  <cit> . the amygdala's response to faces may be particularly salient for inhibited temperament, given the heightened risk for social anxiety. face stimuli strongly elicit amygdala responses  <cit> , with several studies suggesting the response is modulated by individual differences in inhibited temperament  <cit> . for example, schwartz and colleagues  <cit>  found that young adults who had been identified as behaviorally inhibited during childhood showed greater amygdala activation to novel relative to newly familiar faces, compared to those who were behaviorally uninhibited. these results support the involvement of the amygdala in mediating temperamental differences, but do not address whether there are any differences in the temporal dynamics, or timing, of the amygdala response, such as latency, duration, and peak.

individual differences in the temporal dynamics of emotional response, or "affective chronometry", have been suggested as an important component of affective style  <cit> ; for example, a typical pattern of emotional response might be characterized as a "quick temper" or being able to "recover quickly" from negative emotions. differences in the time course of behavioral affective responses have been associated with individual differences in both introversion/extraversion  <cit>  and depression  <cit> . these individual differences in the time course of affective responses presumably reflect differences in the temporal dynamics of brain regions supporting emotional responses, such as the amygdala.

we are not aware of any studies of temperamental differences in the temporal dynamics of amygdala response, although a finding from the anxiety literature highlights the potential importance of studying temporal dynamics. amygdala latency and magnitude for people with a spider phobia were compared to non-phobic participants in an event-related fmri study  <cit> . participants viewed pictures of spiders and neutral pictures. spider phobics had shorter latencies to respond to the pictures of spiders  than the nonphobic participants, even though the magnitude of the amygdala's activation did not differ between the two groups. similar to spider phobics, persons with inhibited temperament can be considered to have neophobia, or a fear of novelty. neophobic responses are not necessarily identical to simple phobic responses, as they are both more generalized and often weaker in intensity, but they nevertheless involve clear perception of certain stimuli as potentially threatening, and engender avoidance responses. to the extent that these phobias reflect a similar neurobiology, persons with inhibited temperament may be predicted to have faster amygdala responses to novel stimuli.

in this study, we used a slow event-related fmri paradigm to measure the temporal dynamics--latency, duration, and peak--of amygdala response to novel neutral faces compared to newly familiarized neutral faces in persons with inhibited or uninhibited temperament. the event-related paradigm allows estimation of the temporal dynamics of the blood oxygen level dependent  signal in a specific region. we hypothesized that inhibited participants would have an amygdala response characterized by shorter latency when viewing novel compared to familiar neutral faces. given that magnitude differences have been observed in past studies of inhibited  <cit>  individuals and that latency differences alone could not account for these differences, we hypothesized that either the peak and/or the duration of the activations would be enhanced in inhibited individuals.

RESULTS
behavioral data
to determine if there were temperamental differences in face memory, we compared performance on immediate and delayed face memory. on the immediate memory task, average performance was at the 50th percentile  for both the inhibited  and uninhibited  groups, t = . <dig>  p = . <dig>  delayed memory performance was similar for both the inhibited  and uninhibited  groups, t = -. <dig>  p = . <dig> 

to validate that participants were actively engaged in the task and to assess possible group differences in memory for the faces shown during the task, we performed a post-scan recognition task using both examples of the familiar and novel faces from the task. both groups demonstrated similar accuracy for both the familiar faces  and the novel faces .

temporal dynamics
to determine if the temperament groups differed in the timing of the amygdala's response to faces, we compared onset latency, duration, and peak of response to novel relative to familiar faces. for each analysis, we used a repeated measures analysis of variance with temperament group  as the between-subjects factor and face type  as the within-subjects factor.

latency
temperament group differences emerged in the temporal dynamics of amygdala activations. for the onset latency, there was a significant interaction of temperament group and face type in the left amygdala, f =  <dig> , p = . <dig>  and in the right amygdala, f =  <dig> , p = . <dig> . there were no significant main effects. we followed the significant interaction findings with post-hoc analyses. in the right amygdala, the interaction reflected a significantly faster onset to novel compared to familiar faces in the inhibited group, f =  <dig> , p = . <dig>  but not the uninhibited group . in the left amygdala, the effect of face type did not reach our statistical threshold in either group, but there were trends toward a faster onset to novel faces in the inhibited group  and a faster onset to familiar faces in the uninhibited group .

duration
the duration of the amygdala's response to all faces differed by temperament group with inhibited participants showing a longer duration of response to both familiar and novel faces . the main effect of temperament group was significant for both the left and right amygdala, f =  <dig> , p = . <dig> and f =  <dig> , p = . <dig>  respectively. there were no other significant effects for either amygdala, indicating that duration reflects a general difference in temporal dynamics that is not specific to novel stimuli.

peak
peak amygdala response did not differ significantly across temperament groups, face types, or the interaction of temperament group × face type.

magnitude
magnitude represents the overall amygdala response as typically measured in fmri studies. to assess whether the inhibited participants showed a greater amygdala response to novel faces, we compared magnitude of amygdala response to novel compared to familiar faces between the two temperament groups. for magnitude of amygdala response, there was a main effect of temperament group in the right amygdala, f =  <dig> , p = . <dig>  with response to faces greater in the inhibited temperament group . in the left amygdala, the magnitude was also larger in the inhibited group, but the difference failed to reach significance . we did not observe a temperament group × face type interaction, as the inhibited group showed enhanced responses to both novel and familiar stimuli, rather than a selective increase in the magnitude of response to novel relative to familiar faces.

whole-brain analysis
to determine if other brain regions showed a response to the novel faces, we performed exploratory whole brain analyses testing for temperament differences of the novel > familiar contrast. the inhibited participants showed a greater bold response for the novel > familiar contrast in the right cerebellum . the cerebellar cluster  included both crus i and lobule vi. there were no brain regions where bold response was greater for the uninhibited participants for the novel > familiar contrast. while overall activation to faces, across subjects, was seen in expected regions, such as fusiform face area, thalamus, and visual cortex, none of these differed significantly by temperament group.

discussion
the results of our study provide initial evidence for temperamental differences in the temporal dynamics, or timing, of the amygdala's response to faces. the amygdala of inhibited persons responded more quickly to novel relative to familiar faces and had both longer and greater magnitude of amygdala response to both novel and familiar faces.

these results extend previous reports of temperament-based differences in magnitude of amygdala response  <cit>  by demonstrating temperament-related differences in the amygdala's latency to respond to novel faces. our observation of shorter response latency in inhibited temperament is consistent with a previous study showing amygdala latency differences in spider phobics viewing spider versus neutral pictures  <cit> . both studies found the latency difference in the entire amygdala region of interest. group differences in the amygdala response were only detectable because latency differences were specifically modeled and examined, demonstrating the importance of measuring temporal dynamics. faster amygdala responses may reflect a bias for detecting novelty and potential threat  <cit> . this bias could result from either a higher saliency evaluation , or through a more generally lowered threshold . in either case, the more rapid engagement of the amygdala processing may lead to faster triggering of limbic mediated or modulated processes, including heightened orienting responses and vigilance for potential threat.

persons with inhibited temperament had longer amygdala responses to both novel and familiar faces suggesting a general difference in temporal dynamics that was not specific to novelty. this finding stands in contrast to modeling of spider phobic responses, in which larson et al.  <cit>  observed shorter duration responses. the shortened duration in that study may have been caused by a visual avoidance of the spider pictures by the spider phobics, whereas in this study, the pictures of neutral faces were unlikely to elicit a strong avoidance response, even for people with social anxiety. the longer duration in the present study suggests a prolonged engagement of the amygdala. given the ambiguous nature of novel social stimuli, a longer amygdala response could reflect a prolonged appraisal period. alternatively, the prolonged activity may also reflect an extended influence of other brain regions, such as the visual cortex, or less effective inhibition of the amygdala by prefrontal cortical regions involved in regulating limbic responses. future effective connectivity analysis might advance our understanding of temperamental differences in the relationships between visual cortex, prefrontal cortex, and the amygdala.

inhibited participants had a greater magnitude of amygdala response to both familiar and novel faces suggesting a generalized response to faces. beaton and colleagues  <cit>  reported a similar finding in their study of amygdala responses to faces of strangers compared to friends in people classified as shy or bold . however, this general response to faces is not consistent with the selectively increased response to novel versus familiar faces initially reported by schwartz and colleagues  <cit> . differences in either study design or samples may account for the discrepancy. first, schwartz used a block design whereas both beaton and we used an event-related design. the alternating novel-familiar block design used by schwartz and colleagues inherently provides paradigmatic familiarity: once a participant sees the first stimulus in a block, they know they will see that same stimuli repeatedly and for alternating blocks, they also know what the next block will be. in contrast, studies with random presentation of the conditions  prevent participants from knowing what they will see next . this may increase uncertainty about, and therefore amygdala response to, even the familiar faces. also, because block designs provide greater statistical power to detect changes in bold signal, the failure to find the novelty effect may be a type ii error. second, schwartz selected adult participants based on behavioral observations made during childhood. beaton used a current self-report measure in adults, and we used both current and retrospective self-report in adults. the identification of inhibited temperament in childhood may have contributed to the greater amygdala response to novelty as the early assessments may more closely reflect the underlying biology, prior to the influence of environment. moreover, the childhood assessment in the schwartz et al. study was based on a direct assessment of behavioral responses to multiple types of novelty, which may further heighten the ability to observe differential biological responses to novelty in their sample.

increased activation to novel faces in inhibited persons was evident in the right cerebellum. the cerebellum has traditionally been viewed as controlling motor function; however, evidence is accumulating for a broader preparatory function in multiple neural systems, including sensory, attention, and memory systems . temperamental differences in the novelty responses of the cerebellum may reflect heightened preparatory responses to sensory stimuli, particularly potentially salient visual stimuli such as novel human faces.

several caveats are warranted in interpreting the findings from the present study. first, we used self-report measures to assess both childhood and current inhibited temperament. researchers in the field of inhibited temperament  have traditionally relied on behavioral assessments of temperament during infancy or early childhood. early behavioral assessments may be ideal for identifying biological-based differences which are yet to be significantly impacted by environment. however, these longitudinal, prospective studies are not practical for most researchers. the self-report instruments used here were developed for consistency with the infant and toddler behavioral assessments, have good reliability and validity, and have been associated with expected outcomes like social anxiety  <cit> . second, the sample size for the study was relatively small. however, amygdala responses have been consistently demonstrated with samples of this size, including the study by schwartz and colleagues  <cit> , and were large enough to see differences in temporal dynamics and overall duration and magnitude. post-hoc power analysis suggest that a sample size twice as large may have detected additional main effects of temperament, but no other novelty effects. still, given the reduced statistical power afforded by small sample sizes, these results should be interpreted with appropriate caution. finally, there was a trend for ethnicity to differ between the two temperament groups. to ensure that ethnicity did not confound the temperament results presented, we performed post-hoc tests for ethnicity effects within the inhibited group and found no significant differences.

CONCLUSIONS
although fmri studies have increasingly explored potential neural correlates of personality, the timing of the brain's response has been almost completely ignored. findings from this study provide initial evidence for temperamental differences in the temporal dynamics of the amygdala's response to novel and familiar faces. extending our knowledge to individual differences in how the brain responds to stimuli may provide new avenues for identifying underlying mechanisms of temperamental risk for the development of anxiety and depressive disorders.

