BACKGROUND
nontypeable  haemophilus influenzae is an exclusively human pathogen whose primary ecological niche is the human respiratory tract. h. influenzae is a common and important human pathogen, causing otitis media in children and lower respiratory tract infection in adults with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease   <cit> . the course of copd, the fourth leading cause of death in the world, is characterized by intermittent worsening called exacerbations. approximately half of exacerbations are caused by bacterial infection, with h. influenzae being the most frequent bacterial cause  <cit> . in addition to causing exacerbations, h. influenzae also chronically colonizes the lower airways of adults with copd. the normal human respiratory tract is sterile below the vocal cords, as determined by culture. however, in adults with copd, the lower airways are colonized by bacteria, with h. influenzae as the most common pathogen in this setting  <cit> .

the human respiratory tract is a hostile environment for bacteria. nutrients and energy sources are limited. in the setting of copd, airways are characterized by an oxidant/antioxidant imbalance and by an inflammatory milieu  <cit> . thus to survive and cause infection in the human respiratory tract, h. influenzae must express proteins and other molecules to enable persistence in this unique environment.

in previous work, we characterized the proteome of h. influenzae that was grown in pooled human sputum obtained from adults with copd in an effort to simulate the environment of the human airways in copd  <cit> . in comparison to the same strain of h. influenzae grown in chemically defined media,  <dig> proteins were present in greater abundance in sputum grown-conditions at a ratio of >  <dig>  compared to media-grown conditions. these included antioxidant proteins, stress response proteins, proteins that function in the uptake of divalent cations and proteins that function in the uptake of various molecules. interestingly, the second most abundant protein with regard to the ratio of sputum-grown to media-grown analysis was urease c, the alpha subunit of urease, which was present in an abundance of 7-fold greater in sputum-grown conditions compared to media-grown conditions. this is an interesting finding in light of the observation by mason et al  <cit>  who monitored gene expression by h. influenzae in the middle ear of a chinchilla, the most widely used animal model of otitis media. the gene that encodes urease accessory protein, ureh, was induced  <dig> -fold in bacterial cells in the middle ear compared to baseline. these two genes, urec and ureh are part of the urease gene cluster and were among the most highly up regulated genes. these observations suggest that expression of urease is important for survival and growth of h. influenzae in the respiratory tract.

ureases are nickel dependent enzymes that catalyze the hydrolysis of urea to form ammonia and carbon dioxide  <cit> . urease is best studied as a virulence factor in helicobacter pylori which colonizes the stomach and proteus mirabilis which causes urinary tract infections  <cit> . urease is also important for survival and pathogenesis of several bacterial species  <cit> . urease functions to raise the ph of the environment, allowing survival in acidic media; urease also enables bacteria to use urea as a sole nitrogen source  <cit> . while these are the best known functions of urease, this protein also interacts with the human host and acts as virulence factor by several other mechanisms, including activation of macrophages  <cit> , induction of inflammatory mediators  <cit> , dysregulation of gastric epithelial tight junctions  <cit> , apoptosis  <cit> , activation of platelets, enhanced survival in macrophages  <cit>  and others  <cit> .

virtually nothing is known about the urease of h. influenzae. in view of the high degree of up regulation of urease expression by h. influenzae in the respiratory tract and the importance of urease as a virulence factor in other bacteria, the goal of this study is to characterize the urease of h. influenzae. in particular we have constructed knockout mutants of urec and the urease operon to assess urease activity by h. influenzae, characterized the urease transcript, determined the optimal ph for urease activity and demonstrated that the urease operon is present in clinical isolates from otitis media and copd. analysis of pre and post infection serum samples from adults with exacerbations of copd caused by h. influenzae demonstrated directly that urease is expressed during human infection. finally, we demonstrate that urease activity enhances survival of h. influenzae at a reduced ph.

RESULTS
identification of urease gene cluster
the α subunit of urease, which was present in increased abundance in h. influenzae grown in pooled human sputum based on proteomic analysis, is a protein of  <dig> amino acids with a predicted molecular mass of  <dig> kilodaltons that is encoded by urec  <cit> . the urec gene is the third gene in the urease gene cluster, ; urea and ureb encode the γ and β subunits respectively and uree, uref, ureg and ureh encode urease accessory proteins. these genes correspond to loci hi <dig> through hi <dig> in h. influenzae strain kw <dig> rd  and to loci nthi  <dig> through nthi  <dig> in h. influenzae strain 86-028np .

characterization of mutants
a urec mutant was constructed in our prototype copd exacerbation strain 11p6h by replacing the urec gene with a non polar kanamycin resistance cassette by homologous recombination using overlap extension pcr . the mutant construct was confirmed by pcr using oligonucleotide primers in and around the gene in the wild type strain and the kanamycin cassette in the mutant, and by sequencing through the region of homologous recombination. an immunoblot assay of whole cell lysates probed with rabbit antiserum raised to recombinant urease c reveals the presence of an ~ <dig> kda protein band in the wild type strain, corresponding to urease c, and no bands in the urec mutant .

complementation of the urec mutation was accomplished by cloning a fragment corresponding to the promoter region of the urease operon upstream of urea through urec into plasmid pspec and transforming the plasmid into the urec mutant  <cit> . the complemented mutant expresses urease c detected by specific antiserum .

a knockout of the entire urease gene cluster was constructed using a similar overlap extension pcr strategy . the mutant construct was confirmed by pcr and sequencing through the region of homologous recombination. an immunoblot assay of the whole bacterial cell lysate of the urease operon mutant probed with antiserum to urease c reveals an absence of a urease c band  that is present in wild type.

to further characterize the urease operon mutant, genomic dna from wild type and urease operon mutant strains was purified, restricted with ecor <dig> and subjected to southern blot assay. probes that corresponded to the amino terminal region , the central region  and the carboxy terminal region  of the gene cluster and the kanamycin cassette revealed an absence of each of these  <dig> genes in the mutant and the presence of a kanamycin cassette as expected .

characterization of purified recombinant urease c
recombinant urease c was purified by elution from a metal affinity column and refolded by sequential dialysis in buffers that contained decreasing concentrations of arginine. analysis of the purified protein by sds page showed a prominent band at the predicted size . preparations of the purified protein also revealed a second band of varying intensity of a lower molecular mass. immunoblot assay with antibody that recognizes the  <dig> histidine tag detected both bands, indicating that the smaller band resulted from proteolytic degradation of the full length protein . protease inhibitors were used during purification and storage; however the purified protein was prone to proteolytic degradation. the purified recombinant protein was used to raise antiserum in rabbits and to measure antibody by elisa in human serum. thus, this level of proteolytic degradation would not be expected to adversely affect these experiments.

characterization of urease activity
crude cell extracts of h. influenzae 11p6h were used to determine urease activity in wild type 11p6h and mutant strains. the urec knockout mutant and the urease operon mutant both demonstrated no detectable urease activity compared to wild type and urec complemented mutant when grown in laboratory media . we conclude that the urea-h gene cluster accounts for all detectable urease activity of h. influenzae under the conditions of this assay. in addition, knocking out urec alone, which encodes the major structural subunit of urease, completely abrogates urease activity.

the optimal ph of h. influenzae urease was determined by preparing whole cell extracts in phosphate buffers ranging in ph from  <dig> to  <dig>  the optimal ph for urease was  <dig>  with marked reduction in activity at lower ph .

to begin to assess factors that control urease expression in h. influenzae, the effect of nitrogen availability on urease production was measured by adding increasing concentrations of ammonium chloride to bacteria growing in broth culture. urease production decreased as the concentration of added ammonium chloride increased .

analysis of urease transcript
reverse transcriptase pcr was performed to determine whether genes urea through ureh of the urease gene cluster are transcribed as a single transcript or as multiple transcripts. reverse transcriptase pcr was performed using rna isolated from h. influenzae 11p6h grown in broth using primers designed to correspond to transcripts that would span adjacent genes in the gene cluster . figure  <dig> shows that the genes of the urease gene cluster are transcribed as a single transcript. control assays confirmed that the purified rna was free of contaminating dna .

presence of urease operon in clinical isolates
to determine whether the urease operon is present in clinical isolates of h influenzae,  <dig> clinical isolates, including  <dig> otitis media strains and  <dig> copd strains were studied by pcr. primers corresponding to genes located in the 5' region , central region  and 3' region  of the operon were designed. amplicons of identical size were obtained from  <dig> of  <dig> clinical isolates with all  <dig> sets of primers . these results indicate that the urease operon is present in all strains tested and that no variation was observed in the lengths of these genes in diverse strains tested.

a blastn search with the sequence corresponding to the urease operon was performed to determine which strains of h. influenzae whose genomes are available in genbank contained the urease operon. five of  <dig> strains whose complete genome has been sequenced contain the urease operon. a high degree of sequence similarity in the urease operon is present among the  <dig> strains. in strain r <dig>  which is urease negative, the urease operon is replaced by a single gene with homology to the gonococcal mtrf gene  <cit> . sequence analysis of the same region of  <dig> additional urease negative strains revealed sequence that is very similar to that of strain r <dig>  <cit> .

transcription of the urec during growth in pooled human sputum
to assess expression of urease in conditions that simulate conditions in the human respiratory tract in copd, transcription of urec was measured in h. influenzae that was grown in the presence of pooled human sputum from adults with copd in comparison to growth in the absence of human sputum using quantitative real time pcr. results of urec were normalized with gyra, a gene that is constitutively expressed  <cit> . transcription of urec in media plus sputum was  <dig>  ±  <dig>   fold greater than transcription of urec in media alone . we conclude that transcription of urec is up regulated when h. influenzae grows in media with added human sputum compared to growth in laboratory media alone.

human antibody responses
to determine whether urease was expressed by h. influenzae during infection of the human respiratory tract,  <dig> serum pairs from patients who experienced exacerbations due to h. influenzae were assayed for the development of antibody to purified recombinant urease following exacerbation.

the cutoff value for a significant percentage change between pre-exacerbation and post-exacerbation serum igg levels was determined as previously described  <cit> . eight control pairs of serum samples obtained  <dig> months apart  from adults with copd who were clinically stable and who had negative sputum cultures for h. influenzae were subjected to elisa with the purified recombinant urease. the % change in od <dig> values between the paired control samples was calculated. these paired control serum samples demonstrated a  <dig> % ±  <dig>   change when tested with urease. a change in od of  <dig> % represented the upper limit of the 99% confidence interval for the control samples. therefore, any increase in value from pre to post exacerbation serum pairs of ≤  <dig> % was regarded as a significant change. a significant increase of serum igg antibodies to urease was seen in  <dig> of  <dig> serum pairs . we conclude that h. influenzae expresses urease during infection of the human respiratory tract and is a target of human serum antibodies in adults with copd.

susceptibility of h. influenzae to acid conditions
the ability of wild type and urease mutant to survive exposure to acid was investigated in the presence and absence of urea. incubation of h. influenzae at ph  <dig> in the absence of urea, resulted in ~35% survival of wild type and mutant strains. however, in the presence of either  <dig> mm or  <dig> mm urea, survival of the wild type strain increased whereas no change in survival was observed in the urease c mutant or the urease operon mutant . survival of the complemented mutant closely paralleled that of wild type, supporting the conclusion that urease mediates survival in acid conditions.

discussion
as an exclusively human pathogen, h. influenzae expresses molecules that mediate survival in the hostile conditions of the human respiratory tract. previous studies in animal models and in conditions that simulate those in the human airways identified urease as a molecule that is expressed in high abundance by h. influenzae, providing evidence that urease plays a role in the pathogenesis of infection. furthermore, urease activity may contribute to the pathogenesis of pulmonary infections due to actinobacillus pleuropneumoniae in pigs  <cit> . these observations lead to the present study which is the first to characterize h. influenzae urease.

the h. influenzae urease gene cluster resembles that of other gram negative bacteria, possessing three contiguous structural genes  that encode the urease apoenzyme. knocking out urec alone by insertion of a nonpolar kanamycin cassette in its place resulted in complete loss of urease activity . urease is a multi-subunit enzyme that requires an elaborate pathway for assembly in its active form. associated with its three structural genes are  <dig> accessory genes which are necessary for synthesis of active enzyme. based on available data from other organisms, ureefg form a complex that keeps the apoenzyme in a conformation that will accept nickel. h. influenzae ureh, a structural homolog of ured, is located downstream of the ureefg, similar to the organization of the h. pylori urease gene cluster. h. influenzae does not have a urer homolog, a regulatory gene that is present in some bacteria with urea-inducible urease  <cit> . reverse transcriptase pcr demonstrated that the h. influenzae urease gene cluster is transcribed as a single transcript .

urease activity in h. influenzae was dependent on nitrogen  availability as activity was maximal in the absence of added ammonium chloride and was markedly reduced as the concentration increased . this down regulation of urease expression by nitrogen sources is observed in other bacteria, including brucella abortus and klebsiella aerogenes and suggests that urease functions in assimilation of nitrogen from urea  <cit> . because urea is translocated onto epithelial surfaces by secretory systems and in tissue exudates, urea is present in epithelial lining fluid of the human respiratory tract in concentrations approximately equal to that in plasma  <cit> . thus, we speculate that the urease of h. influenzae facilitates nitrogen assimilation in the nutritionally limited environment of the human airways and the middle ear space.

two indirect lines of evidence have suggested that h. influenzae expresses urease during human infection. mason et al  <cit>  showed that urease h is expressed during infection of the middle ear in chinchillas and qu et al  <cit>  showed that urease c was expressed in markedly increased abundance during growth in pooled human sputum. the present study advances those observations by showing directly that h. influenzae expresses urease during airway infection in adults who experienced exacerbations of copd. paired pre and post infection serum samples were subjected to elisa with purified recombinant urease c to characterize the antibody response to urease following infection. because the pre infection serum samples were collected one month prior to acquisition of the infecting strain of h. influenzae, an increase in the level of antibody to urease indicates the development of new antibodies following infection. all serum samples had detectable levels of antibody to urease and  <dig> of  <dig> patients developed significantly increased levels following infection compared to their own pre infection levels . this frequency of antibody response following bacterial infection is typical as heterogeneity in immune responses to bacterial antigens among individuals is a hallmark of copd  <cit> . note also that recombinant purified urease c was used in the elisa and this protein is only one of  <dig> proteins that comprise the urease complex; thus, a urease c-based elisa may underestimate the frequency of new antibody responses to urease following infection. these results indicate that h. influenzae expresses urease during exacerbations of copd and that urease is a target of human antibody responses.

an important result from the present study is the observation that urease functions to mediate survival of h. influenzae in an acid environment. urease mediates survival in low ph as a virulence mechanism in other bacteria, notably h. pylori which must survive in the stomach. other selected respiratory pathogens express urease but the role of urease in pathogenesis of respiratory tract infection is unclear  <cit> . microenvironments in the human respiratory tract are likely low ph, consistent with the speculation that the high level of expression of urease in the respiratory tract mediates survival in acid microenvironments. furthermore, h. influenzae is now known to invade and persist in respiratory epithelial cells and macrophages, suggesting that withstanding lower ph in intracellular compartments may be a virulence mechanism  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
the present study demonstrates that 1) the urea-ureh gene cluster of h. influenzae is exclusively responsible for urease production because knock out mutants show no urease activity. 2) genes of the urease gene cluster are transcribed as a single transcript. 3) urease expression is regulated in response to nitrogen availability. 4) the optimal ph for urease activity is  <dig> . 5) the urease operon is present in all strains of h. influenzae tested including otitis media and copd isolates. 6) transcription of the ure operon is up regulated when h. influenzae grows in human sputum, consistent with the earlier observation established by proteomics analysis  <cit> . 7) urease is expressed in the human airways during infection in adults with copd and is the target of human antibody responses. and 8) urease mediates survival of h. influenzae in an acid environment. in view of the high level of expression of urease in the respiratory tract, future work will focus on elucidating the role of urease as a virulence factor for h. influenzae infection of the human respiratory tract.

