BACKGROUND
myzus persicae   is an exceptional species in many respects. it is extremely polyphagous, highly efficient as a plant-virus vector and one of the most widespread insect pests, as it has been recorded on all continents where crops are grown  <cit> . the species has a typical aphid annual cycle , i.e., a sexual generation on peach during winter and spring, alternating with many parthenogenetic  generations during spring on peach and on various crop and non-crop annual plant hosts in summer and autumn. the sexual generation may be lost either totally  or partially . genotypes with different reproductive strategies can occur sympatrically in peach growing areas where populations on summer crops consist of new recombinants that have migrated from peach and old clones that survived the previous winter parthenogenetically on winter hosts. their proportions depend on the availability of peach trees for the sexual phase and the severity of winter which mostly affects the parthenogenetical overwintering  <cit> . the plasticity in the mode of reproduction is a great biological advantage for m. persicae, because as a species, it is able to adapt to different climatic conditions in terms of day length and temperature  <cit> . sexual reproduction provides the advantages of cold hardy eggs and new gene combinations in the subsequent generations. asexual reproduction has the advantage of maintaining successful gene combinations and success in temperate regions where green bridges are available. the effect of reproductive strategy on the population structure of m. persicae has gained much attention recently. studies conducted in australia  <cit>  and europe  <cit>  showed that clonal diversity was greatest in populations capable of a sexual phase compared to parthenogenetic ones. the most extreme case of reduced variability has been documented from scotland, where the majority of the stable long-term population appears to consist of only three genotypes  <cit> .

myzus persicae exhibits strong selection with respect to host-plant adaptation on tobacco. tobacco-feeding populations show consistent morphological differences from those on other crops, regardless of the mode of reproduction or origin  <cit> . the subspecies name, myzus persicae nicotianae, has been given to the tobacco population  <cit>  and genetic differences have also been reported between the specialist  and the generalist  subspecies  <cit> . the two taxa experience multifarious divergent selection, i.e., selection against cross-host migrants and their subsequent generations, which is crucial for the maintenance of host specialization  <cit> . in outdoor choice experiments with winged females, it has been shown that the two taxa have evolved an improved host recognition mechanism which is based on chemical cues perceived prior to the initiation of feeding  <cit> . gene-flow between the two taxa is reduced due to differences in the mode of reproduction  or to the existence of prezygotic reproductive isolation mechanism in sexual populations  <cit> .

myzus persicae has developed multiple insecticide resistance mechanisms which have spread to many parts of the world due to aphid migration or to human transport activity  <cit> . the international trade in plants offers considerable potential for the widespread distribution of insect pests  <cit>  and m. persicae is ideally suited for this. it is associated with many transportable crop hosts and its primary host, the peach tree, has been spread throughout the world. knowledge of the inter-regional or inter-continental dispersal routes of m. persicae and the between region genetic variation will be helpful in elucidating several aspects of its ecology that offer explanations for the spread and persistence in heterogeneous environments of successful genotypes. this information could also help to predict the evolution and spread of insecticide resistance mechanisms at both regional and global scale, to locate sources of host-plant resistance or biological control agents and to make inferences about the relative fitness and persistence of the pest. to our knowledge no other study has attempted to examine the genetic variation of m. persicae or the spread of certain genotypes at such a global scale. some studies have focused mainly on insecticide resistance mechanisms. for instance, a phylogenetic analysis of a fragment of the para-sodium channel gene flanking the kdr and super-kdr mutations in samples from various countries and continents suggested multiple independent origins of both mutations  <cit> . in other recent studies the genetics of m. persicae was examined using microsatellite dna genotyping analysis, but not at a global scale, mostly in populations of the same or of two neighbouring countries  <cit> . in some cases certain asexual genotypes were widespread and found on herbaceous crops from year to year  <cit> .

in this paper we studied the genetic variation of m. persicae at a global scale by examining worldwide samples. a particular aim was to understand the population structure and to identify the possible routes of global dispersal.

RESULTS
microsatellite analysis was carried out using four independent runs of  <dig> samples per run. it was possible to include some of the same samples on all four runs. the accuracy of the capillary system for alleles known to be the same was generally  <dig> bp or less. the abi capillary genotyper produced slightly different size calculations for some of the samples that had been analysed previously using older abi systems. the results were tabulated and used as input for population genetic analysis programmes.

bayesian clustering analysis
the posterior probabilities  of the whole data set, which included all the  <dig> parthenogenetic lineages, were calculated with structure software  <cit>  for k values 1– <dig> without any prior population information. following the pointers for choosing k provided in previous studies  <cit> , the best solution for k proved to be  <dig> in four independent runs. there was a sharp increase of ppd values with k moving from  <dig> to  <dig>  for k >  <dig> the gain of information is rather less and exhibits gradually lower values. a plateau appears to be reached at k =  <dig>  and the information brought by the fourth k cluster  is less important than the information brought by the former three. it seems that splitting the samples in three clusters represents the optimal subdivision of the data and avoids unjustified and less informative oversplitting.

distruct software  <cit>  was used to create an admixture clustering plot of the  <dig> m. persicae predefined samples . each aphid lineage is represented as a vertical bar partitioned into three coloured segments, the lengths of which are proportional to the estimated membership coefficients of the lineage in each of the three k genetic clusters defined by structure. the four independent runs performed using structure gave almost identical plots . cluster  <dig> contained almost all lineages from france and those from pepper and potato from slovenia . one french lineage from weed showed a high membership coefficient to cluster  <dig>  most of the peach lineages from eastern central greece, some from peach in northern greece and from uk crops , one from peach in argentina and one from pepper in spain had high membership coefficients for cluster  <dig> 

cluster  <dig> is characterized by the lineages collected from tobacco . most of the lineages from peach in northern greece, where tobacco is widely cultivated, showed a high membership coefficient for cluster  <dig>  lineages belonging to cluster  <dig> were also found on crops in uk, canada, turkey and slovenia, on weeds in chile and on peach in central eastern greece and japan.

cluster  <dig> is characterized by the lineages collected from potato in new zealand and australia . high membership coefficient to cluster  <dig> was observed in various lineages from uk crops as well as in a few lineages from crops in slovenia, canada and japan and weeds in sri lanka. apart from the three samples france , greece tobacco  and new zealand/australia  all the others were not pure and this is also demonstrated in their mean membership coefficients to the three clusters .

1frp = france peach plus four lineages from weeds; wet = western europe tobacco, ngp = northern greece peach, cgp = central eastern greece peach, grt = greece  tobacco, auo = new zealand potato plus two lineages from australia from potato and peach, sco = scotland other than tobacco crops, eno = england other than tobacco crops, slo = slovenia pepper and potato. 2n = number of lineages examined.

allele frequencies, hardy-weinberg equilibrium and linkage disequilibrium
a moderate to high allelic diversity was found in the seven populations analysed. apart from the highly polymorphic locus m <dig>  the number of alleles per locus and population ranged from  <dig> to  <dig>  in the other five loci. the average over all loci and populations was  <dig>  alleles/locus . mean allelic richness  ranged among populations from  <dig>  to  <dig> . mean observed heterozygosity over all loci ranged from  <dig>  to  <dig> , with no significant differences among populations . the uk population had the largest values for every diversity indicator . significant single locus deviation from hw equilibrium was observed in  <dig> out of the  <dig> tests. the loci which showed deviations were m <dig>  m <dig>  m <dig>  m <dig> and myz <dig>  in all cases the deviation was associated with a positive fis value, i.e., a heterozygote deficiency. the multilocus test showed significant positive fis values in four out of the seven populations examined . significant linkage disequilibrium was observed in  <dig> out of the  <dig> locus pairs examined.

1frp = france peach plus four lineages from weeds; ngp = northern greece peach, cgp = central eastern greece peach, eut = western europe and greece tobacco, auo = new zealand potato plus two lineages from australia from potato and peach, uko = uk other than tobacco crops, slo = slovenia pepper and potato. frp* = refers to frp without the four lineages from weeds. nzo = refers to auo without the two lineages from australia. 2first line number of alleles, second line allelic richness , third line heterozygosity observed and fourth line heterozygosity expected.

1frp = france peach plus four lineages from weeds; ngp = northern greece peach, cgp = central eastern greece peach, eut = western europe and greece tobacco, auo = new zealand potato plus two lineages from australia from potato and peach, uko = uk other than tobacco crops, slo = slovenia pepper and potato. frp* = refers to frp without the four lineages from weeds. nzo = refers to auo without the two lineages from australia. 2n = number of genotypes examined. 3probabilities for heterozygote deficit/heterozygote excess, ns = non significant.

fst and genetic distance analysis
the pairwise multilocus fst analysis revealed important interpopulation variation and the global fst value was  <dig> . relatively high values were observed in comparisons between most of the european populations and those from australasia. high values were also observed in most of the comparisons between the tobacco population from europe  and those from tobacco-free regions . however, the peach population from a tobacco-growing region in northern greece  showed mostly low fst values when compared with the former two sample categories, suggesting similarity to both . the uk population showed low or moderate fst values in the comparisons with each of the other regions including australasia suggesting it has links with all the major populations. the spatial population subdivision was also supported with the single-locus test for allelic differentiation as all pairwise comparisons were significant . the nj tree based on the das genetic distance  resulted in two major clusters. the first cluster contained the samples from new zealand/australia  and that from uk . in the second cluster tobacco lineages  and those from peach from the tobacco-growing region in northern greece  formed a distinct group separated from the remaining samples.

discussion
the present study has revealed a broadly heterogeneous genetic structure of m. persicae at a global scale as evidenced by high allelic differentiation and relatively high fst values between certain populations, and the partitioning of genetic variation by the bayesian clustering analysis. the observed genetic variation can be attributed to mode of reproduction, host-plant adaptation, differences between regions and dispersal.

genetic diversity and reproductive mode
a moderate to high genic diversity was found at the intrapopulation level, as well as cases of both single and multi locus deviations from hw equilibrium which was associated with heterozygote deficiency. the populations on peach, which are expected to contain only or mostly cyclical parthenogenetic genotypes, showed hw deviations in one or both of m <dig> and myz <dig> loci. in the populations from herbaceous hosts, which probably consist of a mixture of obligate/functional and cyclical parthenogens, some heterozygote deficiency was observed in m <dig>  m <dig> and m <dig> loci. heterozygote deficiency in microsatellite loci appears to be common among aphid species  including m. persicae  and it has been recorded in both sexual and asexual populations. however, some studies have found less deviation from hw equilibrium in sexual populations . in populations found on secondary hosts, hw deviation might be expected due to the presence of asexual lineages. asexuality with strong clonal selection is likely to cause deviations from hw equilibrium in polymorphic loci, such as microsatellite markers, via hitch-hiking and evolution in clonal lineages. the direct effects of local clonal propagation were mediated in the current study by removing clone duplicates. in some cases, e.g., hi lineages of rhopalosiphum padi  in france  <cit>  and m. persicae in victoria australia  <cit> , a heterozygote excess has been found in asexual lineages. in r. padi this excess is attributed either to ancient loss of sexuality and the consequence of accumulated mutations or to a hybrid origin. in other cases, however, asexual lineages showed heterozygote deficiency and heterozygosity levels close to that of their sexual counterparts . this has been associated with a recent loss of sexuality and the time has not been sufficient to allow accumulation of mutations in asexual lineages. it has also been suggested that gene flow between sexual and asexual functional parthenogens producing males may be sufficient to prevent differences in heterozygosity accumulating between reproductive modes. previous studies have discussed reasons why r. padi  <cit>  and m. persicae  <cit>  sexual populations show homozygous excess . all of these studies concluded that null alleles were not responsible for the effects as these would have been detected during the scoring process. wahlund effect of sampling from distinct gene pools in the same population may contribute to the homozygote excess at least in some populations that have been examined here. in support of this, the bayesian analysis showed that some populations contain members of more than one genetic cluster.

partitioning of genetic variation – host-plant and region
in general, the high fst values obtained in pairwise population comparisons and the estimated overall value  are among the highest reported in an aphid species using microsatellite markers  <cit>  and in the same order as those reported in previous studies for m. persicae populations from europe  <cit>  and australia  <cit> .

the bayesian clustering and admixture analysis partitioned the genetic variation into three clusters, european , tobacco  and australasian populations . clusters  <dig> and  <dig> correspond to the generalist m. persicae persicae while cluster  <dig> corresponds to the tobacco-adapted subspecies m. persicae nicotianae. cluster members are spread over all continents and in most of the countries from which populations have been examined. these results support the hypothesis that the globalization of agriculture will have an immediate impact on the evolution of pest populations. previous studies have provided more direct evidence of this through the spread of obligate/functional parthenogenetic genotypes . in addition to anthropogenic activity, m. persicae populations will be influenced by natural mating and biological processes according to geographical region  and to tobacco adaptation, i.e., nicotianae vs. persicae . in general, the proportion of membership for the tobacco cluster  <dig> was greater in tobacco-growing areas. in addition, the genetic distance and the fst analyses supported the separation of the tobacco aphid populations as well as the regional population structure of persicae. it is worth noting that the separation between the peach population from eastern central greece and the equivalent from northern greece, as revealed by fst and bayesian analyses , was not as strong as observed in a previous paper . a possible explanation is that the two peach samples from greece examined here  were a mixture of genotypes of both subspecies at a different ratio according to the region. an influx of the tobacco aphids  into the peach orchards of eastern central greece associated with cluster  <dig> and the converse in peach orchards in northern greece could be an explanation.

tobacco-adapted lineages
our results suggest that certain alleles are associated with the genotypes of m. persicae feeding on tobacco. this can be considered as defining a tobacco adapted aphid 'genome' perhaps encoding a series of important enzyme variants for this specialisation as a result of continuous selection on this plant. this phenomenon is associated with the taxon m. persicae nicotianae and according to our results it is widespread and appears to have moved into countries where tobacco is not cultivated  or the cultivation is limited . it is not surprising to find nicotianae on other crops, since it is able to colonize and reproduce on various herbaceous hosts within the vast host range of m. persicae s.l.  <cit> . it is likely that the source of the uk nicotianae genotypes is europe. studies using the european suction trap network  <cit>  have shown that m. persicae s.l. in europe can migrate over southern england. evidence that supports the continental origin of uk nicotianae is the identification in this study of a red nicotianae genotype found in the uk and also a tobacco region in southern greece . we also noticed that none of the m. persicae genotypes sampled historically in the uk  aphids. the earliest introductions of exogenous aphids to australia and new zealand were likely to be associated with settlers from europe, especially from the uk. in support of this, previous studies revealed many common microsatellite alleles between m. persicae genotypes from australia  <cit>  and europe  <cit> . europe does also seem to be the origin of other non-indigenous australasian aphid pest species such as elatobium abietinum    <cit> . in the present study, parameters were similar or higher when the new zealand population were compared with european populations. moderate or high genetic diversity has also been reported in previous new zealand  <cit>  and australian studies  <cit> . theoretical and empirical work suggests a general pattern of loss of genetic diversity during colonization  <cit> ; this is because emigrant populations are serially bottlenecked  <cit> . the substantial genetic variation observed in new zealand and australian m. persicae suggests that the species has not been bottlenecked and this could be attributed to sexual reproduction  <cit>  and the time that it has been there. in australia the species was first recorded in  <dig>  <cit> , although it is believed to have existed there since at least  <dig>  this period is adequate for the mutation of new microsatellite length alleles in asexual lineages  <cit>  and for sexual reproduction to give rise to diversified genotypes. in the aphid schizaphis graminum  , which was introduced in the usa in the 1880s, sexual reproduction was considered as the main reason for the high diversity observed  <cit> . the uk m. persicae population is believed to lack holocyclic forms and therefore restoration of the full sexual cycle through mutation or though breeding between clones with partial loss of sexual reproduction   <cit>  may have been required. nevertheless, introduction of sexual clones cannot be excluded. another factor is possible multiple introductions of m. persicae in new zealand. van toor et al  <cit>  reported that clones nz <dig> and nz <dig> appeared to be introduced as they contained many unique alleles when compared to the remaining nz population. additional support for the existence of multiple introductions was found when nz <dig> was recognised as being a common asexual m. persicae clone found in scotland . exchange of genotypes between new zealand and australia could also occur as demonstrated for sitobion genotypes  <cit> . the two australian lineages examined in the current study had  <dig> of the  <dig> alleles recorded in common with the new zealand population suggesting a recent common origin.

clone dispersal
the present study revealed some genotypes that were sampled many miles apart in different countries some of which had been identified before, e.g., clones b  and d   <cit> , and others we identified for the first time in the current study e.g., clone m in uk and slovenia; a genotype found in france and greece, another in uk, greece and bulgaria and another in southern greece and slovenia. these studies have suggested that widespread clones appear to occur as a result of selection for insecticide resistance in agriculture  <cit> . we have examined a relatively small number of individuals in the m. persicae population, yet we have detected these clones. this suggests that the number of successful insecticide resistant genotypes is still relatively limited, despite the possibility of resistance genes combining into more and more genotypes in sexual populations every year. in addition to the spread of resistant clones, it has also been found that asexual tobacco aphid lineages have spread between neighbouring countries such as greece and italy  <cit>  and in the current study a widespread nicotianae lineage was found in southern greece and slovenia and another in greece, uk and bulgaria. we also report here that a distinct tobacco lineage has been found in greece and chile. a previous study found only one microsatellite genotype of the tobacco aphid in chile and it seems likely that the lineage we have identified is the same as that reported by fuentes-contreras et al.  <cit> . these studies suggest an old world origin of southern american nicotianae as the subspecies exhibits genotypic variation in europe  <cit> , but none in chile  <cit> . during the last decade several studies have revealed that the spread of certain genotypes over distant geographical areas is a common phenomenon among aphid species  including m. persicae  <cit> . the rapid spread of the m. persicae s.l. lineages in different countries and continents should be attributed mostly to human transport and commerce. while winged aphids may be transported very rapidly over great distances by low level-jet streams  <cit>  other studies have found that particular genotypes remain localised  <cit> . the widespread lineages reported in the current work probably represent asexual genotypes reproducing parthenogenetically all-year-round. this trait enables them to spread because their reproduction will not be altered by temperature, day length or the requirement for peaches to complete their life cycle. these clones might represent 'general-purpose genotypes'  <cit>  with broad ecological tolerance, which predominate in fluctuating environments through selection, although anthropogenic activities, e.g., insecticide selection pressure might also be involved  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
the present study is the first attempt to elucidate the pattern of global genetic variation of m. persicae s.l. using high resolution dna markers. figure  <dig> is a representation of some of the processes that influence population structure. the populations of m. persicae in and around peach orchards exhibit considerable genetic diversity and in some cases population parameters are close to those of sexually reproducing insects . geographical separation does create discrete gene pools as exhibited by the separation of new zealand and european sexual populations. sympatric speciation has generated a tobacco race of m. persicae and this process could clearly have been aided by agriculture with monocultures selecting tobacco adapted genotypes . in addition to selection by tobacco, selection by insecticides is likely to have played a role in determining population structure. in the early stages of the evolution of resistant genotypes inbreeding could occur, reducing population diversity . in all of these cases, any well adapted genotype could bypass sexual reproduction to become clone. the most successful of these asexual lines will become superclones spreading naturally as well as being aided by commercial activities . long lived superclones will accumulate mutations. examples of these superclones can be found in both nicotianae and persicae lineages. evidence was reported of movement of the tobacco aphid from europe to s. america and the spread of some persicae lineages to geographically distant regions . uk populations consist of asexual clones originating from diverse sources. this information highlights the ultimate ability of polyphagous aphids to adapt to different environmental conditions and the role of commerce in the globalization of insect pests.

