BACKGROUND
sperm competition is the norm in the animal kingdom and in many taxa, such as amphibians, snakes, passerine birds and mammals  <cit> , sperm structure and function can be correlated with the level of sperm competition  <cit> . gomendio and roldan  <cit>  found that in promiscuous species of primates and muroid rodents which experience a high degree of sperm competition, there tends to be an increase in sperm length compared to species where there is less sperm competition. a subsequent analysis of  <dig> species of rodents supported this latter conclusion  <cit>  and anderson and dixson  <cit>  have clearly found a positive correlation between volume of the sperm midpiece and sperm competition. tourmente et al.  <cit>  showed that an increase in the level of sperm competition in snakes is correlated with an increase in sperm length and that this elongation is largely explained by increases in midpiece length. in snakes, the midpiece contains structures which, in other taxa, are present in the remainder of the flagellum, suggesting that it may integrate some of its functions. pitnick et al.  <cit> , however, cautioned in a review that several studies have shown no relationship in terms of sperm length and sperm competition in mammals  <cit> .

spermatozoa with more rapid swimming speeds have a fertilizing advantage during sperm competition in the atlantic salmon  <cit> , mallards  <cit> , domestic poultry  <cit>  and mammals  <cit>  as evaluated by means of computer aided semen analysis . anderson et al.  <cit>  showed that the mitochondrial membrane potential was not only higher but better maintained in chimpanzee spermatozoa  compared to human spermatozoa . maree  <cit>  produced similar results when comparing sperm mitochondrial membrane potential in humans and three species of old world monkeys. apart from these investigations on sperm function and those on sperm morphometry mentioned above, no studies on sperm competition in mammals have included data on potential differences at the sperm ultrastructural level. moreover, few studies have compared the structure and function of spermatozoa in promiscuous versus eusocial mammals , largely because the latter mating strategy is so rare.

naked mole-rats  are one of only two eusocial mammals  <cit>  with reproduction typically restricted to a single female  and male within large colonies of 40- <dig> individuals  <cit> . although not strictly monogamous, as multi-paternity has been recorded for this species  <cit> , most other males and all other females  are reproductively suppressed. this restriction of breeding to a small subset of the entire population  possibly presents a low risk for sperm competition and it is predicted to have shaped the structure  and motility  of spermatozoa in this species.

here we describe the sperm structure of breeding, subordinate and disperser male naked mole-rats using light and electron microscopy . the sperm motility of these naked mole-rats has been studied by means of casa to establish baseline parameters. this data was used to test the hypothesis that levels of male intrasexual competition may influence the structure and motility of spermatozoa. we predict that in naked mole-rats with limited intrasexual competition amongst males, sperm head length, midpiece length and tail length will be shorter when compared to promiscuous species. it is further predicted that breeders will have better sperm quality than subordinates since the latter are reproductively suppressed.

RESULTS
sperm structure: light microscopy
a typical naked mole-rat spermatozoon is characterized by an irregular shaped head, a neck, a poorly defined midpiece and a tail. the most striking feature emerging from the micrographs is the large amount of polymorphism encountered, particularly in terms of sperm head shape . consequently, sperm structure varies markedly with sperm head shape, including round, oval, elongated, slightly lobed, severely lobed and asymmetrical heads. there are several further variations that could only be described as irregular or amorphous . due to this variation in sperm head shape, it was difficult to statistically determine differences between the breeders, subordinates and dispersers in terms of sperm morphology. however, there did not appear to be any striking difference in the type of sperm head abnormalities encountered in these three groups of males and no significant differences  were found in their sperm morphometry. jointly, the basic morphometric dimensions such as length, width and perimeter  indicate that the naked mole-rat has very small spermatozoa relative to other mammals.

*data are combined for breeders, subordinates and dispersers.

light microscopy of the midpiece revealed a very small and irregularly shaped structure . the midpiece closely adheres to the sperm head and often exhibits irregular borders. it was accordingly sometimes difficult to distinguish the midpiece from the posterior part of the head, particularly the neck. the average tail length is  <dig>  μm  and the tail appears to have an even diameter throughout. although the end piece of the tail is not well defined and apparently short, there appears to be very few tail abnormalities.

sperm structure: scanning and transmission electron microscopy
there were no clear ultrastructural differences among spermatozoa from the cauda epididymis, vas deferens or ampulla.

sperm head
figures 2b-h are transmission electron micrographs depicting the details of the different components of the spermatozoa. figure 2b shows all the major components of a naked mole-rat spermatozoon in longitudinal section. in this figure the head is multi-lobed, the midpiece is small and the tail is homogenously thin. the head consists of granular chromatin that is not fully condensed and in almost all spermatozoa large intra-nuclear spaces are evident which appears to be dispersed chromatin. figure 2c presents two sperm heads that appears severely fragmented. figure 2d shows a very simple acrosome  that covers 30-40% of the head area.

neck
the basal plate is connected to the nucleus by means of longitudinal satellite fibres. while the nuclear fossa is well defined, the capitulum, an electron dense structure, is poorly developed. there are two dominant and five smaller cross banded structures emerging from the capitulum and running longitudinally towards the midpiece . the two dominant cross banded structures each forms two additional cross banded structures lower down in the neck/midpiece. there are accordingly a total of nine cross banded structures  that eventually connect with the outer nine dense fibres surrounding the 9+ <dig> microtubules  . these nine cross banded structures furthermore connect with the outer nine fibres close to the distal centriole. just below the capitulum and surrounded by the cross banded structures is a clearly demarcated proximal centriole  which is 90° orientated in terms of its central axis to the distal centriole. the distal centriole  gives rise to the axoneme, which typically has the 9+ <dig> microtubule arrangement.

midpiece
the shape of the midpiece varies greatly and both sem  and tem  confirmed the light microscopic observations . in both transverse and longitudinal sections, the irregularity of the midpiece is demonstrated. there appears to be five to seven mitochondria present which reveal two major forms. the one form is elongated and the other oval to spherical. the cristae mitochondriales have a spherical or wavy form  and conform to the orthodox state. in the midpiece, the 9+9+ <dig> pattern of the axoneme and the outer dense fibres can be seen . the nine outer dense fibres approximately have the same diameter. other structures in the midpiece include various vesicles of different size and shape . these may represent some of the byproducts of spermiogenesis and are apparently not discarded as part of the contents of the cytoplasmic droplet.

tail
there is not a defined annulus demarcating the posterior part of the sperm midpiece and the start of the principal piece of the tail. the principal piece of the tail contains the 9+9+ <dig> axonemal-outer dense fibre configuration as in the midpiece and shown in figures 2f and 2g. surprisingly, there is no outer fibrous sheath incorporating dense fibres three and eight to form two longitudinal columns. consequently, the ribs of the fibrous sheath in the principal piece connecting the longitudinal columns are also lacking in naked mole-rat spermatozoa . towards the end of the tail, the outer dense fibres are closely associated with the outer doublets of the axoneme. the end piece is not clearly demarcated but only has the axoneme  and no additional fibres on its outside.

sperm concentration and sperm motility
sperm concentration varied from as little as  <dig> × 106/ml to about  <dig> × 106/ml with an average of  <dig>  × 106/ml  . no significant differences  were found in the sperm concentration of breeders, subordinates and dispersers. the volume of the fluid within each ampulla was approximately  <dig> μl and accordingly the maximum number of spermatozoa in both ampullae was estimated in the region of about  <dig> million spermatozoa and at least  <dig>  <dig> when the queen was in estrus. however, it was difficult to determine sperm concentration accurately due to the presence of abundant vesicles within the semen that were slightly larger than the sperm heads. thus, these mentioned values represent maximum estimates for sperm concentration.

*data are combined for breeders, subordinates and dispersers.

vcl = curvilinear velocity, vsl = straight-line velocity, vap = average path velocity, lin = linearity, str = straightness, wob = wobble, alh = amplitude of lateral head displacement, bcf = beat cross frequency.

discussion
a typical mammalian spermatozoon consists of a head partly covered by an acrosome, a neck and a flagellar-like tail. the head of the mammalian spermatozoon is ovate, ensiform or falciform and dorsoventrally flattened. the neck typically consists of the connecting piece and the centriole  <cit> . the mammalian sperm tail contains an axonemal complex of microtubules and a further nine outer dense fibers to complete the 9+9+ <dig> pattern  <cit> . in the midpiece of the mammalian spermatozoon, the axoneme and outer dense fibers are enclosed by a long sheath of mitochondria. the mitochondria itself are elongated and arranged around the core of the sperm tail in a helical fashion. the number of mitochondrial gyres varies between mammalian species, with the relatively short midpiece of the human consisting of about  <dig> gyres, whereas the exceptionally long midpiece of several rodent species contain as many as  <dig> gyres  <cit> . in the principal piece of the flagellum, the axonemal-outer dense fiber complex is surrounded by the fibrous sheath, which is divided into several transverse ribs along the length of the principal piece  <cit> .

the spermatozoa of naked mole-rats in this study deviate markedly from that of virtually all mammals. the sperm head surface is extremely irregular and often form small or large lobes with a high percentage of either dispersed chromatin or so-called nuclear vacuoles. the lobed nucleus in particular appears to be degenerate compared to that of most mammals. together these morphological attributes would result in most naked mole-rat spermatozoa being classified as "abnormal". importantly, these attributes are not considered to be a major consequence of inbreeding as the individuals used in this study originate from colonies in a captive population that include both inbred and outbred pedigrees and a low mean level of inbreeding   <cit> . the high inbreeding coefficient reported in a previous study  among four wild-caught colonies of naked mole-rats in kenya  <cit> , can be due to the fact that three of these colonies were collected within  <dig> km of each other. new colonies of naked mole-rats are usually formed by fissioning and thus neighbouring colonies could have a recent common maternal ancestor  <cit> .

the neck of the naked mole-rat spermatozoon contains a poorly developed capitulum which gives rise to five banded columns. in most mammals and particularly in rodents, however, the capitulum represents a large, solid and well developed structure  <cit> . the well defined midpiece of most mammalian species, particularly in terms of the highly organized helical/non-helical arrangement of mitochondria, is replaced in the naked mole-rat by a small and generally disorganized midpiece. the midpiece length is the shortest of all mammals so far recorded   <cit>  and the total number of mitochondria  is also among the lowest for any mammalian species  <cit> . furthermore, the mitochondria are randomly dispersed and their form varies even within the same sperm midpiece. accordingly, the midpiece of naked mole-rat spermatozoa appears to show various degenerate features.

the greatest deviation from the mammalian pattern in the naked mole-rat spermatozoon is the structure of the principal piece of the sperm tail. in this species, there is no apparent difference found in the size of the nine outer dense fibers surrounding the axoneme. however, in many mammalian species the outer dense fibers numbered  <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> are distinctly larger than the other six fibers and some species also have a larger fiber in position  <dig>  <cit> . although the 9+9+ <dig> pattern persists in naked mole-rat spermatozoa, there is no fibrous sheath present. one of the main suggested functions for the fibrous sheath is to provide structural support/strength to the tail beating rapidly in a viscous medium as encountered in the female reproductive tract  <cit> . structurally these deviations in the principal piece thus represent further simplified and possibly degenerative features of the naked mole-rat spermatozoon.

sperm structure has been extensively used as a tool to assist in both taxonomic and phylogenetic studies and more recently as an indicator of relative sperm competition. for example, van der horst et al.  <cit>  showed that acrosome structure and shape can be used to distinguish among four very closely related ferret species. breed  <cit>  has furthermore shown that sperm head structure is related to phylogenetic relationships in rodents in addition to their phylogenetic derivation . however, despite the fact that certain species' spermatozoa may be derived or have become more specialized or simplified, one seldom encounters the situation where there is such a large variability in sperm form within a given species as observed in the naked mole-rat. human sperm provides a rare example of sperm polymorphism and in human clinical spermatology, any deviation in sperm structure from normal is defined as abnormal according to the so called strict criteria  <cit> . thus, in this study we revealed that, similar to humans, naked mole-rat spermatozoa have a high degree of polymorphism.

an important question that emerges is: which of these "polymorphic" spermatozoa are normal or abnormal and how does sperm morphology affect their ability to fertilize an oocyte? during standard semen analysis procedures, the normality of sperm morphology is an important characteristic in determining the fertilizing potential of spermatozoa  <cit> . in many mammalian species  a relatively high percentage of spermatozoa in the ejaculate are morphologically normal   <cit> . in most of these species the level of sperm competition is high and it can be assumed that there is strong selection pressure to produce a high percentage of spermatozoa that are structurally and functionally normal  <cit> . the end result is that most spermatozoa have an almost equal chance of fertilizing an oocyte.

previous studies which mentioned the existence of variation in male fertility of some mammalian species, still reported a relatively high percentage of morphologically normal sperm, e.g. 77%  in natural populations of red deer  <cit>  and 76%  in adult dogs  <cit> . even the endangered black-footed ferret , which is exposed to a high degree of inbreeding, had 68% normal spermatozoa in the breeding season  <cit> . interestingly, in humans who typically have a low risk of sperm competition, males with more than 15% normal spermatozoa is regarded as fertile according to strict criteria  <cit>  and the lower reference limit for normal forms is 4%  <cit> . preliminary results from our laboratory have shown that the naked mole-rat has only few normal spermatozoa . thus, most of the polymorphic spermatozoa in humans and naked mole-rats are apparently abnormal and accordingly not variations of normal spermatozoa.

consequently, sperm competition would appear to be extremely unlikely in naked mole-rats and there seems to be no need to produce perfectly formed and highly motile sperm. parker  <cit>  emphasized this principle by mentioning that the production of high quality, error free spermatozoa is costly and that there will be selection against it if the costs are not equal to or outweighed by the benefits . thus, in the absence of sperm competition, there may be little benefit in investing energy on the quality of sperm production  <cit> . however, when there is a high risk of sperm competition, every sperm counts and selection will favour the production of high quality spermatozoa  <cit> . further evidence for the absence of sperm competition in the naked mole-rat is entrenched in its sperm structure. both the short midpiece and short tail  of naked mole-rat spermatozoa is typical of mammals with a low risk of sperm competition  <cit> . the possible effect of a lack of sperm competition on the size and structure of spermatozoa is indirectly emphasized by lijfeld et al.  <cit>  who reported that an increased risk of sperm competition selects for longer spermatozoa and reduces between-male and within-male variation in the sperm length in passerine birds. however, another factor contributing to the small size of naked mole-rat spermatozoa could be this species' lower metabolic rate  <cit> . recent studies on the effect of metabolic rate on sperm size  <cit>  have shown that there is a positive relationship between the mass-specific metabolic rate and the total sperm length of both eutherian and marsupial mammals and that species with a lower mass-specific metabolic rate produce uniformly small spermatozoa  <cit> .

despite the fact that few of the naked mole-rat spermatozoa are structurally and physiologically normal , the breeding males in this study were all producing healthy litters of pups prior to their removal. this suggests that they are capable of producing sufficient normal spermatozoa available to fertilize multiple oocytes. the relatively high average sperm concentration found in the current study was probably due to the fact that a very high sperm concentration  was measured in only one male and therefore skewed the data. however, for most males the sperm concentration varied between 5- <dig> × 106/ml and the lower limit of the current study is comparable to the  <dig> - <dig>  ×  <dig> spermatozoa in one half of naked mole-rat reproductive tract previously reported by faulkes et al.  <cit> . this low average concentration of spermatozoa in the naked mole-rat could be another effect of the absence of sperm competition and is consistent with the theory that an increase in sperm competition will increase the number of sperm produced by a male  <cit> . an extreme case of this phenomena is found in the yellow seahorse , a species which also lacks sperm competition, where the testes only contain about  <dig> spermatozoa  <cit>  and results in a sperm:egg ratio comparable to that of the social insects  <cit> .

the degenerative structural state of both the midpiece and the tail could possibly explain the poor motility of naked mole-rat spermatozoa. the kinematic parameters clearly showed that there was both low percentage motility as well as sluggish moving spermatozoa. the low percentage motile spermatozoa recorded in the current study  were similar to the 5% motile spermatozoa reported by tb hildebrandt . although faulkes et al.  <cit>  also found relatively low percentage motile spermatozoa in naked mole-rats , they reported a significantly lower sperm concentration and lower percentage motile spermatozoa in subordinates relative to breeders, which were not evident from the current study. the spermatozoa in the current study were swimming at an average curvilinear velocity of  <dig> μm/s, which may well be the lowest recorded for any mammalian species. in other social mole-rats of the same family , the average sperm velocity is  <dig> μm/s and a high percentage of sperm motility is evident  <cit> . even humans, who have a high percentage of abnormal spermatozoa, typically have more than 60% motile sperm and they swim with an average velocity of about 90- <dig> μm/s  <cit> . the slow swimming speed of naked mole-rat spermatozoa could thus be the result of both the short tail, which beats with a lower force, and the small midpiece with few mitochondria, which may generate less energy for motility.

another aspect that requires attention is how much simplification or degeneration is present in naked mole-rat spermatozoa? part of the answer may be found by looking at sperm structure in the monotremes such as the platypus. here typical mammalian sperm features are maintained and the fibrous sheath of the principal piece of the tail is well developed  <cit> . in contrast, marsupial spermatozoa seem to share sperm characteristics with the sauropsids rather than mammals and therefore reflect a more primitive condition. however, even in this instance the fibrous sheath is a typical feature of the principal piece of the tail. the absence of this feature in naked mole-rat spermatozoa when compared to the primitive mammals accordingly supports the view that this is a degenerative feature in naked mole-rats and not a primitive or simplified feature. naked mole-rat spermatozoa seem to be derived from ancestral rodent sperm with a hooked acrosome. breed  <cit>  concluded in his study on rodent spermatozoa that, "as the hook-shaped sperm head and long sperm tail occur across the muroid subfamilies, as well as in the heteromyid rodents, it is likely to be the ancestral condition within each of the subfamilies with the various forms of non-hooked sperm heads, that are sometimes associated with short tails, being highly derived states". the low number and disorganized nature of the mitochondria in the midpiece of naked mole-rat spermatozoa also appears to show degenerate features rather than simplification. when a spermatozoon has simplified, there is usually great order in terms of its organization  and contrasts sharply with the situation in naked mole-rats.

we evoke the term 'degenerative orthogenesis'  <cit>  to describe the degenerate appearance and poor motility of naked mole rat spermatozoa. according to gould  <cit>  , wilhelm haacke devised the word "orthogenesis" which means "straight  generation" and subsequently "orthogenesis denotes the claim that evolution proceeds along defined and restricted pathways"  <cit> . in this context gould  <cit>  based his interpretation on dissecting the work of some eminent evolutionists of their time  <cit> . while it is considered as a formalist theory standing against the central darwinian principle, it has been interpreted in a broader context by many  <cit> . it is particularly gould  <cit>  that supports a modern use of processes/concepts generally described as saltations  and channels  and includes orthogenesis to understand evolutionary change within the darwinian framework. these notions above represent two sides of gould's conviction that the internal structure of an organism can set and constrain the pathways of change  <cit> .

degenerate animals often have a simpler anatomy than primitive and non-degenerate animals, such as in lepas  <cit> . de villiers  <cit>  furthermore emphasized that it is not only the individual animal of a species that is sensitive to stimuli from the environment, but also the embryo and larvae. for example, de villiers  <cit>  indicated that, in vertebrate embryos, there appears to be a delayed development of certain openings and tracts due to the pressure of assimilated yolk inherited from their ancestors. accordingly gametes would also be exposed and respond to various stimuli and undergo changes. however, the authors, in agreement with de villiers  <cit> , do not suggest that all these changes are palingenetic but rather kenogenetic. morphological degeneration is not a new concept and eimer  <cit>  referred to this as an environmental impetus of a balance between internal and external forces. however, it was viewed in a narrow formalist context which was difficult to analyze scientifically  <cit>  and therefore required interpretation in a broader framework.

most structures in naked mole-rat spermatozoa clearly became degenerate, such as components of the head, midpiece, neck and rest of the flagellum. it is important to draw a clear distinction between sperm degenerative features due to inbreeding and those due to the absence of sperm competition. pure inbreeding degeneration in sperm structure may partly include features such as sperm dna fragmentation  <cit>  and sperm morphology abnormalities   <cit> . degenerative changes due to virtually no sperm competition, however, involve a vast simplification in features, for example the absence of the fibrous sheath in the principal piece of the tail , an abbreviated midpiece with few simplified mitochondria and a poorly developed capitulum in the sperm neck. to our knowledge, this is the first study to describe the presence of such "degenerative features" in a mammalian spermatozoon.

hence, in naked mole-rat spermatozoa it appears both inbreeding and the absence of sperm competition may have contributed to abnormal sperm features but that the degenerative features mentioned above represent very specific absence or modification of structures such as the midpiece and tail. it is possible that natural selection forces operated, but that simplification in sperm structure was primarily driven by the lack of sperm competition. this apparent absence of sperm competition was followed by a morphological degeneration of sperm structures, representing a process of degenerative orthogenesis, and is largely based on their reaction to the internal environment. there does not appear to be any advantage or adaptation in this degeneration of sperm structures and the spermatozoa simplified or degenerated to such an extent that it is on a path of no return. in this investigation our interpretation is in line with gould  <cit>  who considers these older formalist concepts in a broader context in assisting to understand the theoretical base of evolution within a darwinian framework. furthermore, our research presents a unique finding that evolutionary processes such as degenerative orthogenesis may occur right up to the cellular level and not only in the individual or embryo as was previously shown.

CONCLUSIONS
it is hypothesized that naked mole-rat spermatozoa have evolved in response to a lack of sperm competition amongst males who are selected for mating by a behaviourally omnipotent queen. consequently, there was limited selection pressure on spermatozoa and hence they became degenerative. it is surprising that despite the degenerative features and reduced sperm motility, these spermatozoa are nevertheless capable of fertilizing many ova  <cit>  . it is possible that selection pressures in the female to produce a large number of high quality oocytes may compensate for the poor sperm quality. in addition, the oocyte may be specialized in mechanisms that select for the best spermatozoa and may represent sperm selection at the level of female cryptic choice as suggested by snook  <cit> . if our hypothesis is accepted, it will imply a balance between developmental facets being selected for in terms of a "limit" to poor sperm quality  versus developmental pressure for the selection of not only high quality oocytes but also oocytes which can select for the best quality spermatozoa.

