BACKGROUND
microorganisms in natural environments rarely grow as single species, but grow as mixed species consortia in which a variety of intra- and inter-species interactions take place  <cit> . previous studies have shown that species interactions play an important role in the development, composition, structure and function of microbial consortia in biofilms as well as in suspended growth communities  <cit> . studies of species interactions have promoted the understanding of microbial activities in mixed-species communities  <cit> .

identification of relevant genes is an important step toward the elucidation of the molecular mechanisms of species communication. cdna microarray technology has been widely used for mono-species cultures, but only a few cdna microarray studies have been performed for mixed-species consortia due to broad cross hybridization among species  <cit> . variable conservation of genes existed across bacterial species  <cit> . non-target transcripts have been shown to cross hybridize in oligonucleotide microarray studies  <cit> . the problem was addressed previously by carefully selecting co-cultures consisting of one gram-negative and one gram-positive strain, so that rna could be selectively extracted from one strain  <cit> . however, for most mixed-species communities, selective rna extraction is not possible and a method needs to be developed in order to apply cdna microarray technology to such communities.

separating the target species from other community members before extracting rna could be an approach in minimizing cross hybridization on microarrays. immuno-magnetic separation  using magnetic force to recover target cells with paramagnetic beads and specific antibodies has been widely used  <cit> . the ims procedure has been standardized  <cit> . however, isolated cells have not been considered for cdna microarray analysis.

while the purity of recovered cells is important for microarray analysis, it was not always considered in previous studies. in addition, preserving the transcription profile of target cells during ims is critical for downstream microarray analysis and is the most important concern addressed in this study. rnalater  has been used to stabilize and protect cellular rna during sample storage. however, the effect of rnalater on ims separation efficiency has not been explored previously.

this study tested and developed a method that can be used to study the transcriptome of one species in mixed-species communities, including suspended and biofilm communities. escherichia coli was selected as the target species in this study and stenotrophomonas maltophilia as a background species, because we are interested in the interactions between these two species when e. coli forms biofilms in drinking water distribution systems. e. coli is an important indicator of fecal contamination and is detected in some water distribution systems  <cit> . s. maltophilia is a ubiquitous species in water systems. for example, the abundance of stenotrophomonas spp. was 2-6% in a pilot drinking water distribution system  <cit> . isolation of both e. coli and s. maltophilia from water filtration and distribution systems  <cit>  suggests that they share the same niches in engineered systems and that interactions between them take place in such systems.

the efficiency of ims to separate e. coli from various suspended mixtures and biofilms consisting of e. coli and s. maltophilia was evaluated in this study. the recovery and purity of separated e. coli cells were reported. changes in the transcription profiles of e. coli cells due to sample processing and cell separation were quantified by cdna microarray analysis and quantitative pcr  to evaluate the effectiveness of the developed method. we also discussed that the method could be applied to study other species of interest in mixed community systems and was not limited to the example species used in this study as long as a specific antibody for the target species is available.

RESULTS
recovery rate of e. coli
the recovery rate of e. coli by immuno-magnetic separation  from a series of suspended cultures was determined first. a general antibody of e. coli ) was used in this study. using this antibody, the recovery rate of e. coli was  <dig> - <dig> % when separated from suspended cultures with a density up to  <dig>  ×  <dig> cfu/ml . however, the recovery rate dropped to  <dig> % for samples with ten-fold higher cells , which may have exceeded the capacity of separation columns used in ims . therefore, e. coli cell densities in samples were adjusted to less than  <dig> ×  <dig> cfu/ml for subsequent ims.

determining the recovery rate of target species is important when ims is used to separate target species for subsequent cdna microarray analysis. high recovery rates yield sufficient cells for rna extraction, especially for low-abundance target species or when limited sample amounts are available. high recovery rates of e. coli were achieved from samples with a wide range of cell densities . the recovery rates observed in this study were generally higher than those reported previously   <cit> .

purity of e. coli separated from dual-species cultures
suspended mixtures containing  <dig> - <dig> % e. coli cells  were used to evaluate ims for separating and purifying e. coli cells from various communities. one-step ims enriched e. coli cells to a purity of over 95% from mixtures with  <dig> - <dig> % e. coli cells . but the purity of e. coli cells after one-step ims was too low to be acceptable  when separated from mixtures containing less e. coli cells  . therefore, a second ims was performed and e. coli cells were successfully enriched to a high purity of  <dig> % from mixtures containing as little as  <dig> % e. coli cells .

previous studies did not report whether other species, such as s. maltophilia, would bind to the anti-e. coli antibody  <cit> . the high purity of e. coli obtained by one- or two-step ims   suggested that cross-reactivity, if there was any, was not a concern. low purity of e. coli  obtained from mixtures with small percentages of e. coli  was a result of a small fraction  of s. maltophilia cells accumulation in the ls columns, in which magnetically labeled e. coli cells were held during washing. when s. maltophilia was dominant in samples , the relatively low accumulation of s. maltophilia  yielded high number of s. maltophilia cells in absolute terms, resulting in low purity of e. coli after ims. however, since the accumulated s. maltophilia cells were not actually bound to the anti-e. coli antibody, they were removed during the second ims, resulting in highly purified e. coli cells .

real dual-species biofilms harvested from flow cell systems were used to investigate whether ims could also separate e. coli from biofilms. the biofilm matrix was homogenized to disperse cell aggregates into a suspension of single cells before ims. two independent separations were performed for aliquots of dispersed biofilms. two-step ims was able to enrich e. coli to around 95% from biofilms containing only  <dig> % e. coli  . the results demonstrated the feasibility of using ims to separate e. coli cells from biofilms.

it is important to obtain target cells in high purity from mixed species communities for subsequent cdna microarray analysis in order to effectively limit cross hybridization. the results showed that a high purity of e. coli cells could be obtained by ims from different mixed-species communities  with various amounts of e. coli cells .

preservation of rna integrity during cell separation
preserving rna integrity during ims is critical when collected cells are used for subsequent cdna microarray analysis. rnalater  has been used widely to preserve rna in bacterial cells, but the impact of rnalater on ims performance was unknown. the recovery rate of e. coli dropped to 1% if cells remained in rnalater during the complete ims procedure. this may be the result of antibody denaturing by the global protein denaturing reagents present in rnalater. alternative products, such as rnaprotect , contain similar denaturing reagents and are expected to show similarly reduced recoveries.

in order to overcome this problem, rnalater was removed during some steps of the ims procedure. samples were stored in rnalater at 4°c overnight to allow the reagent to penetrate into bacterial cells and to stabilize intracellular rna. rnalater was then removed and bacterial cells were resuspended in separation buffer just before incubation with antibody and microbeads. one-step ims enriched e. coli to a similar level as shown in figure 2a and removed over 99% of s. maltophilia cells . the results confirmed that the modified protocol did not affect the recovery and purity of e. coli processed by ims.

pre-stabilization in rnalater, quick sample processing , low working temperature , and maintaining an rnaase-free environment were combined to limit rna degradation during ims, since rnalater had to be removed during some steps of the ims procedure. the effectiveness of these strategies in preserving the integrity of rna was confirmed by observing, using agarose gel electrophoresis, high quality rna extracted from cells treated with the ims procedure .

impact of cell separation on e. coli transcription profiles
to evaluate whether gene expression profiles were changed during sample processing  and ims cell sorting, cdna microarray analysis was used to compare gene expressions of e. coli cells without dispersion and ims  and with dispersion and ims . to eliminate the possible impact of any non-target rna  of s. maltophilia cells remaining in enriched collections), pure cultures of e. coli rather than dual-species mixtures were used to study changes in transcription profile of e. coli due to cell separation. to this end, pure cultures of e. coli were processed using the same procedure used for dual-species biofilm treatment, including cell dispersion and ims.

differentially expressed genes were identified based on fold-change and statistical significance compared to the control   <cit> . only  <dig> and  <dig> of the  <dig>  orfs exhibited differential expression in two independent microarray studies i and ii, respectively . a complete list of the differentially expressed genes is provided in additional file 1: full list of genes differentially expressed in sorted e. coli cells. only eight of these genes showed consistent changes in both of the independent microarray studies , with three genes up-regulated and five genes down-regulated in sorted e. coli cells in comparison to unsorted e. coli cells. the fold-change of gene expression ranged from  <dig>  to - <dig>  . differential expression of the eight genes in sorted and unsorted e. coli cells, as identified by the cdna microarray analysis, was verified with qpcr using the 16s rrna gene as a housekeeping gene. seven out of the eight genes showed the same trend of differential expression  as revealed by the cdna microarray analysis . moreover, the qpcr results indicated that five out of the eight genes exhibited less than two-fold change in sorted/unsorted cells. it suggested that the actual number of genes affected by the performance of ims sorting may be even less than eight. it further confirmed the effectiveness in preserving the transcriptome of e. coli cells by the method developed in this study.

#fold-changes of gene expression were significantly different from  <dig>  with one-tail t-tests performed .

*sorted e. coli cells: e. coli cells treated with dispersion/homogenization and ims cell sorting after pre-stored in rnalater; unsorted e. coli cells: e. coli cells continuously stored in rnalater without any treatment.

⊕annotations are updated according to records of e. coli k- <dig> mg <dig> in ncbi entrenz gene database.

Ψmean ± geometric standard deviation from two replicate slides, with three built-in replicates in each slide; positive and negative values indicate up- and down-regulation, respectively, in dispersed and ims sorted cells. geometric standard deviation is 2sd, where sd is standard deviation of log <dig> transformation of fold-change.

&mean of the fold change in gene expression from four replicates , positive and negative values indicate up- and down- regulation, respectively, in dispersed and ims sorted cells quantified by the method of qpcr.

this study developed and evaluated a method that can be used to study the transcriptome of one species in mixed-species communities, including suspended cultures and biofilms. it was not surprising to find some genes with changed expression after several treatment steps, i.e., cell homogenization/dispersion, re-suspension in buffer, and ims cell sorting. however, the number of differentially expressed genes was very low . we further searched in the literature whether the eight differentially expressed genes were involved in species interactions or biofilm formation, since this method was specifically developed to identify genes involved in bacterial species interactions in mixed-species communities, including in biofilm communities. none of the eight genes has been shown to be involved in bacterial species interactions. with regard to biofilm formation, only one of the eight genes, flhe, showed a potential effect on biofilm formation by salmonella typhimurium in one study  <cit> . thus, it can be concluded that transcription profiles of enriched e. coli cells were well preserved during ims and the use of ims to separate e. coli showed no obvious adverse effects for future applications of this method to study species interactions, including in biofilms.

CONCLUSIONS
good recovery, high purity and preserved transcription profiles of e. coli, which was used as an example species, indicate that the method developed in this study can be used to study transcription profiles of e. coli in a mixed community with s. maltophilia. although s. maltophilia was used as the background species in this study, this method can be used to remove other background species that exhibit little cross binding with the antibody used, even if the background species would be phylogenetically closer to e. coli than s. maltophilia. similarly high recoveries and purities of e. coli were achieved when sorted from mixtures of e. coli and a salmonella species . in addition, the method should not be limited to studies of e. coli, and it can be applied to study other species of interest for which specific antibodies are available. while antibody dosage and homogenization intensity need to be determined when separating other species of interest, the basics of the method presented here can be applied to other communities. the applicability of the method to study real mixed-species communities has been tested by our recent study in identifying genes of e. coli involved in interactions with s. maltophilia . gene identification of species interactions can lead to further our understanding of mechanisms of species interactions as shown by previous studies  <cit> . the method developed here thus has the potential to contribute to studies in which understanding the mechanisms of species interactions is an important component.

