BACKGROUND
often accompanying the macromolecules deposited in the protein data bank   <cit>  are smaller molecules of biological importance. some of these are energy-carrying cofactors, such as atp, coenzyme a, and nicotinamide-adenine dinucleotide . some analogs of these molecules are either drugs or can be used in drug design  <cit> .

like other biologically relevant molecules, many of these small molecules contain chiral or prochiral centers. an atom is a chiral center if four different chemical groups are attached to it. a chiral configuration can be designated r or s, depending on the arrangement of the attached groups . if, however, two of these groups are identical, then the center atom is prochiral, meaning that it would become chiral if either of the identical groups were substituted for a unique group. these two groups are called diastereotopic, i.e., if either were replaced with a unique group, the molecule would become one or another diastereomer. within a pair of diastereotopic atoms, one is designated pro-r and the other pro-s, indicating the configuration of the chiral atom would result from replacing the diastereotopic atom with a group that has higher priority than the other groups. many ligands contain diphosphate groups that contain at least one prochiral phosphorus atom .

the pro-s and pro-r oxygen atoms of nucleic acid strands are named "op1" and "op2", respectively  <cit> . many enzymes treat the pro-r and pro-s oxygen atoms of dna and rna differently  <cit> . these diastereotopic oxygen atoms are also treated differently in rna-intron splicing  <cit> . small diphosphate-containing molecules also participate in enzymatic reactions in which the distinction between diastereotopic atoms or groups is important  <cit> . unfortunately, many of these diastereotopic atoms do not have standardized names, an issue that has not been investigated to our knowledge. consistent naming of diastereotopic atoms is needful when performing all-atom superpositioning or all-atom root mean square deviation  calculation  <cit> . it is also needful for data mining in the pdb, e.g., structure-based virtual screening for drug candidates  <cit> . in this paper, we will conduct a systematic pdb-wide analysis on the diastereotopic atom names of small molecules containing diphosphate.

RESULTS
inconsistencies in pdb files
there were  <dig> pdb files containing a total of  <dig> distinct ligands having prochiral centers that met our strict criteria. over half of these ligands  had two prochiral phosphate centers that were adjacent to carbon, and one had three , for a total of  <dig> distinct prochiral centers adjacent to carbon. for example, nad contains two because it has a diphosphate sandwiched between two ribose moieties. each distinct prochiral center contains a pair of disastereotopic atoms. we analyzed the names of the atoms at each prochiral center. of these distinct centers,  <dig> had a single naming convention but  <dig> of these also only occurred in a single pdb file. there were  <dig> distinct prochirality centers that had more than one naming convention.

we defined a case of swapped names to occur when all of the following were true between two molecules with the same type of prochiral center:  the highest and second highest priority names were consistent,  the pro-r atom of one prochiral center had the same name as the pro-s atom of a second center, and  the pro-s atom of the first center had the same name as the pro-r atom of the second center .  <dig> of the  <dig> centers had swapped naming conventions as defined above. the remaining center, which had two naming conventions, actually had a naming error. nine of the  <dig> centers with swapped names had additional naming conventions. in every case, we found that the extra naming conventions were caused by errors rather than mere inconsistencies. for example, in a structure of a surfactin synthetase-activating enzyme   <cit> , the diastereotopic atoms attached to phosphorus atom p1a are labeled "o5a" and "o4a" instead of the names "o2a" and "o1a" defined in the chemical component dictionary  from the pdb. in a similar manner, the diastereotopic atoms attached to p2a are named "o2a" and "o1a", instead of the names "o5a" and "o4a" defined in the dictionary file. in another example, in a structure of e. coli carbamoyl phosphate synthetase   <cit>  the o5' oxygen atom is mislabeled as o4' for  <dig> different adp molecules. interestingly, in four of these molecules, the pro-s and pro-r atoms are labeled "o1a" and "o2a", respectively, while in the other four molecules they are labeled "o2a" and "o1a", respectively.

in table  <dig>  we present statistics for sample cases in which there were at least two nonredundant examples of each naming convention. for additional selected examples, see supplement table  <dig> in additional file  <dig>  for our full results, including cases that had no inconsistencies, see supplemental table  <dig> in additional file  <dig> . all results, including those resulting from errors, are included in supplemental table  <dig>  however, we emphasize that the bulk of the results are due to inconsistencies, not errors.

# = number of pdb files in which the given naming convention was observed.

examples of naming inconsistencies
most of the atom naming inconsistencies mentioned in this paper relate to differences found between different files. however, there are a few cases in which naming inconsistencies can be found within a single file. one example is an x-ray crystal structure of alcohol dehydrogenase   <cit> . this structure contains two nad molecules . the prochiral center around phosphorus atom pn has consistent naming between the two molecules, however the prochiral center around phosphorus atom pa does not. in one case the pro-s and pro-r atoms are named "o1a" and "o2a", respectively, and in the other case, the names are "o2a" and "o1a", respectively.

another example is an nmr structure of bovine acyl-coenzyme a binding protein  . this structure contained  <dig> nmr models, in which one phosphorus prochiral center was consistently named and the other was not. for the p1a center, models  <dig>   <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> have pro-s and pro-r atoms named "o1a" and "o2a", while the remaining  <dig> models have them named "o2a" and "o1a", respectively. meanwhile, the pro-s and pro-r atoms at the p2a center are consistently named "o5a" and "o4a", respectively.

discussion
the inconsistent naming of atoms discussed in our paper is due largely to a lack of standardized names, not due to errors on the part of crystallographers or nmr researchers. there can be no errors where there are no rules.

a study of nad molecules by carugo and argos ignored the diastereotopic oxygen atoms for purposes of superimposing molecules because of naming inconsistencies  <cit> . despite their use of atom-specific names for other atoms in the molecules, they only generally referred to diastereotopic oxygen atoms as "terminal oxygen atoms". that was eleven years ago and only involved a study of  <dig> protein structures. this was long before the recent remediation project of the pdb  <cit> . this project has done well to bring molecular and atomic naming conventions for pdb files into conformity with standards established by the international union of pure and applied chemistry  and the international union of biochemistry and molecular biology . however, iupac and iubmb do not have standards for most diastereotopic atoms of small molecules.

there were no obvious overall trends in naming conventions with respect to the pro-r and pro-s atoms. this is likely due to the lack of naming standardization. however, trends are commonly seen among specific ligands . one interesting observation is that the p prochiral center of fad is highly biased in its naming convention ; however, the second center, pa has little bias . another observation is that nad-like ligands tend to have naming conventions such that similar names  are seen on the same "side" of the molecule.

we suggest a general rule that names for pro-s atoms come alphanumerically before names for pro-r atoms. this is similar to the standard of using "op1" for pro-s and "op2" for pro-r in nucleic acids. the data indicates that there is no strong bias for this nor for its opposite convention among diphosphate containing ligands.

regardless of what rules may become adopted, it is important to know to which atom a particular name refers. establishing standard names and topologies that take prochirality into consideration will result in less confusion and more accuracy in studies involving small molecules. until standards are adopted, individuals mining the data need to do their own standardization of the names. this naming can be enforced upfront, prior to the official release of data, or it can be enforced by individuals mining the data.

CONCLUSIONS
current naming conventions do not completely map unique names to unique diastereotopic atoms, resulting in possible confusion or error, or at least the need for researchers to impose their own naming standardization. we herein describe many cases of naming inconsistencies for small molecules containing diphosphate moieties. a future study will assess naming conventions of all atoms in the pdb, addressing more general issues of chirality and prochirality. the in-house software used in this study is available upon request.

