BACKGROUND
after the publication of the human genome in  <dig> , the focus shifted from gene identification to understanding the function of the identified gene products. although the human genome project predicted and annotated genes, cdnas for experimental use were still only available in small numbers. thus, a number of large scale human cdna cloning projects were established including mgc  <cit> , kazusa  <cit> , nedo  <cit> , and the german human cdna project  <cit> . the availability of these cdna collections has facilitated rapid progress in the study of the human proteome. these cdnas, however, contain 5' and 3' untranslated regions  that preclude using them directly to make fusion proteins for downstream applications. thus, several groups are creating human open reading frame  libraries, including the harvard institute of proteomics and the vidal lab at harvard . these large scale orf cloning efforts and other smaller projects employ in vitro recombination cloning to allow rapid dna shuttling between a storage vector and various expression vectors that add 5' or 3' sequences that encode epitope tags or proteins which enable investigation of protein function. elledge developed the first recombination system using the cre recombinase , the non-commercial univector system. the two most widely used commercial recombinational systems are the gateway system by invitrogen and the creator system from clontech, which are generally used by the large scale cdna cloning programs.

the creator system requires only the cre recombinase from bacteriophage p <dig> and loxp, its recognition sequence, for the recombination reaction . initially, orfs are cloned between two loxp sites in a donor vector. then, sequences flanked by these two loxp sites are recombined by cre recombinase into a single loxp site on an acceptor vector. however, the recombination site is regenerated during the reaction leading to undesirable downstream products. to circumvent this problem, the correct clone is selected by employing a positive/negative selection scheme. any recombinant vector that still retains the donor backbone is negatively selected due to the presence of the sacb gene from bacillus subtilis that is lethal to e. coli when its substrate, sucrose, is added to the media  <cit> . the desired recombinant vector is positively selected by reconstitution of the chloramphenicol resistance  gene when the cmr orf on the donor vector properly aligns with the cmr promoter on the acceptor vector. in mammalian cells, a splicing event engineered into the creator system removes the cmr gene to allow for 3' tagging.

our laboratory chose the creator system as our primary recombinational system because of its ready adaptability, minimal cost, and performance. we subsequently enhanced this system to better suit the requirements of our laboratory. first, to allow for easy cloning of orfs into donor vectors, we modified the multiple cloning site on the donor vector to possess two restriction endonuclease sites that occur infrequently in mammalian cdnas. second, various acceptor vectors were created to facilitate different expression technologies for proteomics applications. lastly, mammalian pre-mrna splicing sequences were introduced into the vectors so that linker sequences between 5' tags and the orfs would be removed upon pre-mrna processing. we term this new system 'creator splice'. interestingly, the addition of an intron at the 5' end increased overall expression, probably due to better processing of the mrna. these new adapted vectors are a good resource for common proteomic applications.

RESULTS
optimization of the creator recombination reaction
to facilitate high-throughput orf manipulation, a cost-effective and robust method of dna transfer is paramount. the recombination between loxp sites in the creator system is executed by only one protein . since cre enzyme can be readily produced in a typical laboratory, employment of the creator system can result in significant cost savings. from a  <dig> ml starting bacterial culture expressing his-tagged cre, enough enzyme was purified to perform over  <dig>  reactions. while testing the his-cre enzyme, we discovered that altering the recombination buffer composition had a marked effect on the number of colonies recovered after transformation of the cre reaction into bacteria – a step that is traditionally inefficient. by using the optimized buffer , the number of colonies after transformation increased greater than  <dig> fold over the standard buffer .

modification of donor vectors
to reduce the cost and increase the efficiency of moving orfs into the creator donor vectors, several changes were made to the donors. the multiple cloning site  of donor pdnr dual vector  does not contain any rare-cutting restriction enzyme sites. accordingly, we were unable to standardize cloning protocols using the traditional ligation route since the restriction enzyme sites in the mcs of the donor vector are often present in orf sequences. thus, the mcs of pdnr dual was altered to add an asci site to the 5' end and a paci site to the 3' end . these two sites were chosen for several reasons. first, the 8-base recognition sites for both enzymes occur infrequently . second, asci and paci are compatible in the same restriction enzyme buffer and do not exhibit star activity. third, both enzymes are active against various forms of dna including linear, supercoiled and bacterially methylated dna . fourth, both enzymes digest dna at a non-degenerate and non-interrupted recognition site and cleavage results in a 5' or 3' dna overhang. fifth, both enzymes efficiently cleave dna from a wide variety and quality of preparations. sixth, asci has a strong consensus to the kozak sequence needed for mammalian expression   <cit> . therefore, it was not necessary to add additional sequences to each construct to conform to the kozak consensus. lastly, the paci site contains stop codons for the two non-reading frames. the resulting vector, that also removes a hexa-histadine tag at the c-terminus, is called pdnr mcs  . in addition, we have constructed other donor vectors with different multiple cloning sites: pdnr mcs be  with bamhi, smai, and ecori sites compatible with pgex series vectors  and pdnr mcs es  with ecori, noti and sali sites . we also inserted the lacz alpha sequence into the mcs of our donor vectors . the lacz alpha sequence reduces the time to screen for positive clones as blue colonies indicate undigested wildtype vector.

acceptor vector construction
the utility of recombinational cloning systems lies in the availability of acceptor vectors for the tasks at hand. to this end, we have created over  <dig> acceptor vectors with different tags, promoters, and resistance markers . for expression of proteins in mammalian cells that can be easily purified by immunoprecipitation, visualized in lysates by immunoblot analysis or in cells by immunofluorescence, we have created vectors containing the following epitope tags: single and triple-flag, double-myc, and ha . in addition, we inserted a cassette containing a 5' triple-flag tag and loxp site into the pmscv retrovirus vector. for expression in non-mammalian cells, we created acceptor vectors for both bacterial  and baculoviral expression . for localization using proteins fused to fluorescent proteins, we use vectors plp ecfp c <dig> , plp egfp c <dig> , plp eyfp c <dig>  and plps-3'egfp and we also created a 3' ecfp vector. to expand our repertoire of fluorescent proteins, we mutated the red fluorescent protein gene from clontech  to increase the fluorescent intensity and prevent homodimerization of the resulting red fluorescent protein   <cit> . acceptor vectors containing both 5' and 3' rfp have subsequently been created. we also constructed vectors that fuse a fluorescent protein and the mitochondrial targeting sequence of listeria monocytogenes acta protein   to the cooh terminus of the expressed insert. proteins fused at their cooh terminus to the mito tracker are re-located to the mitochondria . in figure  <dig>  the first  <dig> amino acids of the protein angiomotin fused at the c-terminus to ecfp displayed a cytoplasmic expression . however, when the same protein sequence was fused to the ecfp-mito tracker, it was redirected to the mitochondria and co-localized with cytochrome c . this vector can be used to verify protein-protein interactions in vivo by demonstrating that the re-localization of one protein leads to the re-localization of its partner. for example, the sh <dig> domain of tuba when fused to the mito tracker will recruit actin to the mitochondria  <cit> . in addition, recruitment of the partner away from their endogenous location may lead to phenotypic consequences for the cell that can aid functional interpretation.

addition of splice sites to the creator system 
one issue with recombinational systems is the large linker between the tag and the orf after recombination due to the recombination site and other intervening sequences. for 5' tags in the creator system, the linker size can be between  <dig> to  <dig> nucleotides  depending on which two vectors are recombined. in contrast, the splicing event employed for 3' tags to remove the cmr gene can introduce as little as  <dig> nucleotides . to reduce the linker size for 5' tags, we added splicing signals similar to that utilized for 3' tags. in order to have a functional intron after recombination, the 3' splice acceptor sequence must come from the donor vector and the 5' splice donor and intron sequences must come from the acceptor vector . for the 5' intron, we selected  <dig> nucleotides from the adenovirus l <dig> major late intron before the 2nd leader. this intron does not undergo alternative splicing, does not contain any potential splice donors or splice acceptors, and is unlikely to contain sequences that would reduce splicing efficiency . we purposely chose a small intron size because smaller introns tend to be more abundant in higher expressed mrnas  <cit> . for the donor vectors, we added splice acceptor sequences preceding the mcs . we also chose the splice acceptor from the same adenovirus major late intron used above. both the splice donor and splice acceptor sequences have maximal scores for splice site consensus sequences as defined by the bdgp splice site prediction algorithm. upon recombination and expression in mammalian cells, the resulting pre-mrna will undergo splicing . the amount of sequence between the tag and the resulting protein is now reduced to between  <dig> and  <dig> amino acids in the creator splice system depending on the vectors recombined. three potential splice acceptor sites were also identified using the bdgp splice site algorithm in the cmr orf. since these cryptic sites might reduce protein levels when using a c-terminal tag, we constructed a new vector that introduced silent mutations in the cmr orf to remove the two strongest potential sites . however, removal of these sites did not increase protein levels of 3' tags as analyzed by immunoblot analysis .

expression of constructs in mammalian cells
while the ease of rapidly shuttling a particular orf into various vectors is a major merit of in vitro recombination systems, protein expression levels from the resulting expression vectors must be sufficiently high for the desired assays. to analyze the expression levels of various acceptor vectors, immunoblot analysis was performed on cell lysates. in figure 4a, two different proteins  fused to double-myc tags were expressed in hek293t cells by transient transfection. in this assay, we tested three different tag positions: splice , 5'  and 3' . full-length proteins at the expected sizes were recognized by the myc antibody 9e <dig> in all three combinations of tags for both orfs. interestingly, the creator splice system appeared to have the highest protein expression levels.

to further test our system and to ensure that creator and creator splice systems are compatible, we expressed proteins fused to triple-flag epitopes from vectors derived from various recombinations. in addition to examining the three different tag positions analyzed above, we added two more combinations. first, we wanted to confirm that the donor vectors from the creator splice system could express proteins when recombined with acceptor vectors from the regular clontech creator system . in these recombinants, the splice acceptor sequence in the donor vector is not removed leading to an extra  <dig> amino acids between the tag and the orf. second, we wanted to ensure that the creator splice donor vectors did not interfere with protein expression when using tags at the 3' end . to these ends, immunoblot analysis was performed on hek293t cell lysates after transfection with the indicated constructs . all combinations of tags resulted in full-length protein expression. therefore, vectors from the clontech creator and creator splice systems can be interchanged if necessary. of note, for the vectors tested in this assay, expression levels of proteins arhgef <dig> and arhgef <dig> seemed highest from the creator splice vectors .

to confirm that the creator splice system displays superior expression levels, we tested  <dig> different orfs for differences in protein expression between the clontech creator system, the creator splice system, and the topoisomerase system  all using a triple-flag epitope as the tag. hek293t cells were transiently transfected with the indicated constructs and immunoblot analysis with the flag m <dig> antibody was performed on the lysates. representative gels of two proteins  are displayed in figure 5a and 5b. similar to the results using double-myc epitope tags, the creator splice system appeared to have the highest levels of expression of the creator constructs and was comparable to expression from the non-recombinational topoisomerase vector. one possibility that could account for the differences in expression seen between the 5' creator tags is that the loxp site is masking to some extent the ability of the epitope to be recognized by the flag antibody. to test this possibility, we re-probed the anti-flag immunoblot of nadrin with an antibody specific to nadrin . the nadrin antibody detects more protein from the creator splice construct  than from the 5' clontech creator constructs indicating that differences in epitope detection cannot account for the differences in protein expression.

to quantitate protein expression levels, the band intensity of the tagged proteins, as detected by anti-m <dig> flag antibody, was analyzed. only the band corresponding to the size of the full-length protein is quantitated. to control for transfection efficiency, the vector plp-ecfp c <dig> that expresses ecfp was co-transfected with the test expression vectors, and the amount of fluorescence in the cell lysates was measured. this control will normalize for differences in transfection levels as well as differences in cell count and lysate volume. a bar chart of the expression levels of various constructs normalized by fluorescence levels is shown in figure 5c. only constructs expressed in the creator splice system were comparable with constructs cloned via the non-recombination topoisomerase system. thus, it appears that the additional sequences introduced by the loxp site in the original clontech creator system vectors may reduce expression levels.

discussion
we describe here several improvements on the creator recombinational cloning system that will facilitate the use of the increasingly large number of cdnas available for proteomics applications. in the creator system, a dna fragment can be introduced into the donor vector by standard restriction enzyme digestion and ligation or by the in fusion recombination method . the latter method is used by the large scale cloning laboratory at the harvard institute of proteomics  for the creation of their flex gene libraries . while we have used this method to clone into donor vectors with similar success as hip, it is our system of choice only for inserts larger than  <dig> kilobases or those with internal asci or paci sites. the in fusion method requires longer oligonucleotides than traditional ligation reactions, more expensive reagents , and is prone to high background if the digested vector preparation is contaminated or if digestion is incomplete. for this reason, we altered the donor vector to incorporate asci and paci sites – rare base cutters that would allow us to use the ligation system of cloning in the majority of cases and in fusion recombination for the exceptions.

the interest in any recombination system will increase as more downstream applications become compatible with the system. to that end, we have made  <dig> acceptor vectors and are continually increasing our repository. while we have made vectors for expression in bacteria and insect cells, our primary focus is on mammalian expression and protein function analysis. as seen in figure 1b, the acceptor vectors are modular such that sequences for epitope tags, selectable markers, promoters, and expression systems can be interchanged. one example of an acceptor vector is based on a concept employed by the gertler lab where a protein of interest is fused both to a fluorescent protein and the mitochondria tracking peptide from l. monocytogenes acta protein. proteins fused to this peptide are targeted to the mitochondria . of interest, proteins that bind to the re-targeted protein can also be relocated demonstrating an in vivo interaction and possibly leading to phenotypic consequences that can aid in the analysis of protein function  <cit> .

one major advantage of the creator splice system described here over the creator and gateway recombinational systems is the reduction in linker sequences between the tag and protein. although we deleted extraneous sequences in the donor and acceptor vectors whenever possible, the major reduction in linker size was via splicing. the creator splice system reduces the amount of linker to  <dig> to  <dig> amino acids, similar to that introduced between tags and proteins in a typical restriction enzyme/ligation protocol. since the linker sequence is so small, it is possible to add additional sequences to the acceptor vectors to create the most appropriate linker for downstream applications.

when we compared the creator splice system against the standard clontech creator system, the creator splice system had the highest levels of protein expression. a likely explanation for these increased expression levels is the presence of the 5' intron. there is accumulating evidence that pre-mrnas containing introns are expressed at higher levels than pre-mrnas that lack introns  <cit> . processes involved in mrna maturation are highly interdependent and the presence of introns influences transcription, polyadenylation, nuclear export and translation  <cit> . early steps in the mrna maturation pathway affect later processing steps by imprinting information on the transcript via protein binding , a splicing-dependent complex, is deposited upstream of exon-exon junctions  <cit> . quantitative analysis of intron effects has demonstrated that more protein is produced per transcript when the transcript has undergone splicing and this increase is dependent on the ejc  <cit> . therefore, the increased protein expression seen with the creator splice system is likely due to more efficient processing of the mrna.

interestingly, creator clones with 3' tags also utilize splicing to remove the cmr gene. however, we see reduced expression of these 3' tags as compared to 5' tags in the creator splice system. this reduction might result from differences in sequence and position of the introns used for the 5' and 3' tags. even in identical positions, two distinct introns can have markedly different effects on gene expression  <cit> . the intron chosen for the creator splice system is a bona fide intron from adenovirus that has likely evolved to be very effectively spliced, in contrast to the longer engineered intron for the 3' tag that contains the cmr gene. we also identified three potential splice acceptors in the cmr orf that may lead to undesirable splice products, although removal of two of these sites did not alter subsequent protein expression levels. lastly, the position of the intron can also highly impact protein expression levels and introns proximal to the 5' end enhance transcriptional activity  <cit> .

proteins produced from creator vectors with 5' tags  express at lower levels than those produced from a topoisomerase vector with the same 5' tag. this result is mirrored in bacteria where the loxp site is deleterious to protein expression . this decrease may be due to the extra  <dig> nucleotides of the loxp site in the linker. alternately, the hairpin secondary structure of loxp  may cause the transcription or ribosomal machinery to stall in bacteria  <cit> . in mammalian cells, the effect that the hairpin would have on mrna from 5' tagged constructs is not obvious since it is downstream of the initiation codon and would be unlikely to inhibit the ribosomal complex once bound to rna  <cit> . interestingly, the presence of a loxp hairpin upstream of the start codon in mrna from 3' tagged constructs could adversely affect translation by interfering with 40s ribosomal subunit binding  <cit> .

while many assays do not require or are compromised by high expression levels, it is often easier to reduce expression levels than raise them. this reduction can be accomplished by using a weaker promoter or by transfecting less dna. however, it is often not feasible to transfect sufficient dna required to achieve high expression levels or to improve the promoter to compensate for low expression. most of our assays benefit from high expression levels. intracellular assays such as the mito tracker require high levels of expression for visualization of the fluorescent protein in the cell and to sufficiently pull associated proteins to the mitochondria to induce a phenotype. for mass spectrometry or lumier analysis  require the increased expression of our creator splice system for routine visualization of proteins by immunoblot analysis . the disadvantage of the creator splice system is that it requires an additional donor vector and customized acceptor vectors. this disadvantage is relieved to some extent however, because inserts flanked by asci and paci sites can be easily swapped between the two donors without having to perform additional dna sequencing.

CONCLUSIONS
we have modified the creator system by extending the multiple cloning sites of the donor vectors, creating a repository of downstream vectors, and by increasing expression levels with the creator splice system that allows for splicing at the 5' end. investigators using this system have full control to develop constructs with high expression yet control the tag and linker sequences to maintain or optimize protein function. our system is designed to facilitate proteomic applications and the determination of protein functions in cell-based model systems. these reagents are available to the scientific community upon request, and it is our hope to build up a set of reagents that can become a strong resource.

