BACKGROUND
studies in classic genetic model organisms including the mouse, zebrafish, fly, worm and yeast have led to major advances in biology. all of these systems have in common a sequenced genome and the ability to carry out forward and reverse genetic manipulations. non-model organisms, such as the mosquitoes we study, have not been accessible to mechanistic genetic studies until recently. the availability of genomes, next-generation sequencing and genome editing technologies now make it possible to apply modern genetics to study animals with important and interesting biology previously inaccessible to molecular genetics.

aedes aegypti is the primary vector for dengue, chikungunya and yellow fever – debilitating diseases that together are responsible for hundreds of millions of infections and thousands of deaths annually worldwide  <cit> . female mosquitoes exhibit remarkable behavioral shifts throughout their adult life. ae. aegypti are generally anautogenous, meaning that they do not produce eggs without a blood-meal  <cit> . female ae. aegypti use a variety of chemical and physical cues to locate hosts in their environment and to discriminate humans from non-human animals . although male ae. aegypti do not feed on blood, they also respond to host chemosensory cues, perhaps to locate females congregating near humans  <cit> . at short range, the male locates a potential mate using the specific frequencies generated by a female’s wing-beat  <cit> .

after successfully obtaining a blood-meal, female mosquitoes repress host-seeking behavior  <cit> , and utilize the nutrients in the blood-meal to develop a batch of eggs. a female who has reached this physiological state is known as “gravid”. it is known that egg maturation and the beginning of egg-laying behavior occur between  <dig> and  <dig> h after a blood-meal  <cit> . once the eggs have matured, a gravid female uses cues such as humidity and the presence and quality of liquid water to identify a suitable place to lay her eggs, a behavior also known as oviposition  <cit> . following oviposition, a female mosquito recovers her attraction to hosts and seeks out new blood-meals to produce successive batches of eggs. this process, including host-seeking, egg maturation and oviposition, is known as the gonotrophic cycle  <cit> . disease transmission by mosquitoes is driven by this cyclical nature of female biting behavior, as a mosquito must first bite an infected host before becoming competent to spread infection to subsequent hosts.

genetic resources, such as those that have long existed for conventional model organisms, would greatly facilitate investigation into the mechanistic basis of behavior in mosquitoes. while there has been impressive progress in mosquito transgenesis and mutagenesis in the past  <dig> years , the large size of the ae. aegypti genome  and large transposable element load  present formidable challenges to genome assembly, physical mapping and annotation . despite the limitations imposed by incomplete annotation of new mosquito genomes, several studies have profiled gene expression in individual sensory organs in the mosquitoes ae. aegypti , culex quinquefasciatus  <cit> , anopheles gambiae , and toxorhynchites amboinensis  <cit> .

our work builds on these efforts by incorporating biological replicates sequenced at greater depth and from many isolated tissues in parallel in both females at several behavioral states, and in males. this large dataset makes it possible to detect genes expressed at low levels or expressed in only a few neurons, and to identify differential gene expression with statistical confidence. since the anatomical substrate of host-seeking, egg-laying and other mosquito behaviors is likely to be distributed across several tissues, parallel transcriptional profiling of multiple tissues in a single study increases the likelihood of capturing the full repertoire of genes involved in these complex behaviors.

to generate a transcriptome of peripheral and central neural tissues  in ae. aegypti, we performed illumina mrna-sequencing  on rna isolated from male and female tissues. tissues sampled included the brain, antenna, maxillary palp, proboscis, abdominal tip, legs and female ovary. to understand the influence of blood-feeding state on gene expression, we performed rna-seq on a subset of tissues in female mosquitoes at three time-points: prior to a blood-meal , at  <dig> h following a blood-meal , and at  <dig> h following a blood-meal .

this project, as part of the niaid vectorbase driving biological projects initiative  <cit> , set out to accomplish three major goals: 1) to improve the existing annotation of protein-coding genes in the ae. aegypti genome and identify genes not found in the current genome assembly; 2) to catalogue gene expression at the resolution of single tissues in host-seeking female and male mosquitoes; and 3) to identify changes in gene expression that are correlated with blood-feeding state and its associated behavioral changes. this neurotranscriptome significantly enhances the ae. aegypti genome annotation, and identifies a large number of genes whose expression is sexually dimorphic and/or variable across the female gonotrophic cycle. we anticipate that these data will drive studies of the genetic and neural circuit basis of host-seeking and egg-laying behavior in ae. aegypti.

RESULTS
we profiled ae. aegypti gene expression in tissues of males, and females at three points in their gonotrophic cycle . to confirm the distinct behavioral states associated with these time points in the mosquitoes used for our rna-seq study, we measured responses to live hosts and carbon dioxide, and monitored female egg-laying. a uniport olfactometer was used to measure female mosquito attraction to a human forearm, which was presented along with carbon dioxide  to activate the mosquitoes  <cit> . non-blood-fed females showed strong attraction to these host cues, while blood-fed females did not respond and gravid females showed only modest host attraction . because the act of oviposition is correlated with a return to the state of active host-seeking  <cit> , egg-laying was prevented prior to behavioral testing or tissue dissection by depriving females of access to water. we confirmed that oviposition behavior was normal in these animals by placing individual blood-fed and gravid female mosquitoes into oviposition vials and scoring the number of eggs laid over an  <dig> h period. as expected, blood-fed mosquitoes laid no eggs, but nearly all gravid mosquitoes did .fig.  <dig> 
ae. aegypti life cycle and adult behaviors. a schematic of the mosquito life cycle and the female gonotrophic cycle.
b female host-seeking behavior at three stages of the gonotrophic cycle as assayed in a uniport olfactometer  <cit>  . c eggs laid in  <dig> h after females were offered an oviposition substrate at  <dig> or  <dig> h after a blood-meal . d response to co <dig> assayed in a three dimensional flight tracking arena  <cit> . mean indicated with the black line and s.e.m. by the gray shading; n = 4– <dig> per condition. e summary of flight tracking data, with distance flown quantified in 6-min periods prior to and following a  <dig> s pulse of co <dig>  post-co <dig> activity of blood-fed females is reduced as compared to all other conditions , and pre-co <dig> activity of gravid females is increased as compared to all other conditions 



to determine whether the diminished responses to human hosts following blood feeding can be solely attributed to a reduction in sensitivity to co <dig>  we utilized a multi-insect three-dimensional flight-tracking system  <cit>  to assess the response of a group of  <dig> female mosquitoes to a  <dig> s pulse of co <dig> . as previously described, non-blood-fed female mosquitoes displayed a robust increase in flight activity in response to co <dig>  <cit> , while blood-fed females showed no increase in activity following administration of co <dig>  gravid females displayed elevated pre-co <dig> baseline flight activity. male ae. aegypti mosquitoes also showed a strong response to co <dig> .

to study tissue-specific mrna expression in isolated sensory and neural tissues of male and female ae. aegypti, we dissected individual tissues from pools of non-blood-fed, blood-fed and gravid female mosquitoes, as well as males. tissue was flash-frozen and total rna was extracted and used to generate illumina rna-seq libraries from polya-selected mrna. from female mosquitoes, we generated libraries from brain, antenna, proboscis, maxillary palp, foreleg, midleg, hindleg and ovary . we also dissected the rostrum, a tissue that includes both maxillary palp and proboscis, and the abdominal tip, defined in females as the three terminal abdominal segments, including genitalia and ovipositor . from male mosquitoes, we generated libraries from brain, antenna, rostrum, foreleg, midleg, hindleg and abdominal tip, defined in males as the three terminal abdominal segments, including genitalia . we generated at least three biological replicates for each tissue and subjected each to deep sequencing using an illumina hiseq instrument  .fig.  <dig> neurotranscriptome tissues, sequencing and annotation methods. cartoon of tissues dissected from adult female  and male  ae. aegypti. the rostrum comprises maxillary palp, proboscis and connecting tissue. number of biological replicates and sequencing reads across all conditions  and workflow chart  of analyses  used to update the annotation of protein coding genes in the ae. aegypti genome. e principal component analysis of transcriptome-wide expression profiles of male and non-blood-fed female tissues



correctly quantitating transcript expression from rna-seq experiments depends on accurate gene models. before analyzing gene expression across tissues, the two sexes and the female gonotrophic cycle, we utilized our sequencing data to update the annotation of protein-coding genes in the ae. aegypti genome . the depth, replication and diversity of our sequencing allowed us to re-evaluate the existing annotation of protein-coding genes in the ae. aegypti genome using two complementary approaches: de novo transcriptome assembly using trinity  <cit>  and alignment of sequencing reads directly to the reference genome. by aligning contigs from the de novo assembly back to the genome, we were able to combine data generated from these two approaches and use pasa <dig> software  <cit>  to update existing gene annotations . reads were also aligned to the genome using star  <cit> , and those aligning to genes were counted using featurecounts  <cit> , allowing us to estimate transcript abundance and calculate differential expression at the gene level using deseq <dig>  <cit> .

we first carried out a principal component analysis of male and non-blood-fed female libraries to examine the clustering of data by tissue and sex. large batch effects from library construction methods or problems with tissue contamination during dissection  <cit>  may be revealed by this process. virtually all of the biological replicates of the same tissue clustered tightly in principal component space, and for brain and legs across the two sexes .

a comparison of the protein-coding transcriptomes from the community annotations aaegl <dig>  and aaegl <dig>  and our updated transcriptome, termed aaegl.ru, can be found in fig. 3a-c. in addition to updating existing gene models, analysis identified  <dig> putative novel protein-coding genes that did not overlap with existing gene annotations and > <dig>  new putative alternatively spliced isoforms as compared to the aaegl <dig>  geneset . furthermore, we identified  <dig> predicted protein-coding transcripts with orthology to other insect transcriptomes on unaligned contigs from our de novo assembly that likely derive from unsequenced portions of the ae. aegypti genome . our data also allowed for the extension of existing gene models, substantially increasing the length of utrs and coding sequence for many existing genes as compared to the community reference annotations . together, we propose that there are potentially  <dig> protein-coding genes missing from the currently published annotation, although we note that our data must be integrated with and evaluated in the context of the large body of other genomic, transcriptomic and bioinformatic evidence available for ae. aegypti  <cit> . the results of our reannotation, including novel transcripts, can be downloaded as additional file  <dig> fig.  <dig> reannotation of the ae. aegypti genome. a annotation statistics comparing the base annotations  with the updated aaegl.ru annotation. b summary of added genes and novel predicted genomic loci and transcripts with updated coding sequences as determined by parseval. c statistics of all predicted protein-coding transcripts, with data represented as box plots. median indicated by black line, bounds of box represent first and third quartile, whiskers are  <dig>  times the inter-quartile range and outliers denoted by dots. d rna-seq evidence from  <dig> biological replicates supporting the existence of a pasa2-generated gene model for novel gene ru <dig> within an intron of existing gene model aael <dig> on supercontig  <dig> . e sequence logo of the  <dig> bases upstream of the atg start codon for all open reading frames from aaegl.ru, comprising the kozak sequence



using our updated geneset annotation, we next classified genes into families related to neuronal function by both incorporating previously published classifications as well as considering their relationship to genes in the well-annotated and -studied vinegar fly drosophila melanogaster. for pre-existing genes, we identified their closest orthologue in d. melanogaster using pre-calculated orthology calls of orthodb  <cit> . to account for genes added in our geneset re-annotation, and thus not considered by the orthodb databases, we additionally performed blastx of the predicted coding sequence of all transcripts against the d. melanogaster proteome  and report the top blast hits with e-values below  <dig>  . of note,  <dig> of our  <dig> proposed novel genes  have blastx hits that meet this criterion, as compared to  <dig>  % of all other annotated genes. finally, we point out that due to the incomplete assembly of the ae. aegypti genome  <cit> , ours and other approaches that rely on genomic coordinates to describe gene features will run the risk of duplication or error.

a single example of a novel protein-coding gene, ru <dig>  is depicted in fig. 3d. it has high sequence conservation to the d. melanogaster trp channel water witch   <cit> . notably, the current ae. aegypti geneset annotation lacks a predicted orthologue to water witch, while two other mosquito genomes  contain orthologues. based on this sequence similarity, we have included ru <dig> in our revised annotation of trp channels in ae. aegypti. finally, to aid in transgenesis and other genome engineering approaches, we used all predicted coding sequences to generate a consensus kozak sequence for ae. aegypti .

to describe transcript abundance across tissues, we mapped reads from our tissue-specific rna-seq libraries to the aaegl <dig> genome and report transcript abundances in units of transcripts per million   <cit> . mapping statistics for each library can be found in additional file  <dig>  and tpm values for each replicate library can be found in additional file  <dig> and additional file  <dig>  we first described the expression of genes related to neuronal function in specific tissues of non-blood-fed female and male ae. aegypti using expression values calculated against the aaegl.ru annotation.

insects use three major neurotransmitters: acetylcholine is the primary excitatory neurotransmitter in the central nervous system, glutamate is used for neuromuscular transmission from motor neurons to muscles, and gaba is generally considered to be the primary inhibitory neurotransmitter in insect central synapses. additionally, a number of biogenic amines including serotonin, dopamine, tyramine, octopamine and histamine function as neurotransmitters or neuromodulators.

we identified acetylcholine receptor subunits by orthology to d. melanogaster and an. gambiae  <cit> . expression of most acetylcholine receptor subunits was highest in male and female brain . we profiled the expression of three types of glutamate receptors: kainate, nmda and ampa . overall, we found generally broader expression in peripheral tissues as well as brain, consistent with a role in neuromuscular transmission. ionotropic gaba-a receptors and metabotropic gaba-b receptors were uniformly expressed broadly, with peaks in central brain . we found three histamine receptor orthologues: two most closely related to d. melanogasterhiscl <dig> and one to hiscl <dig> . all were expressed in brain at high levels, with the hiscl <dig> orthologue aael <dig> also expressed broadly in peripheral tissues. interestingly, we were unable to identify an orthologue of the glycine receptor grd in ae. aegypti. however, aael <dig>  annotated by vectorbase as a potential glycine receptor subunit precursor, shows broad expression in peripheral tissues and more modest expression in brain .fig.  <dig> expression of neurotransmitter-related genes. expression of receptors for the neurotransmitters acetylcholine , glutamate , gaba , histamine , serotonin , dopamine  and octopamine/tyramine  in tissues from non-blood-fed female and male mosquitoes. data are presented as the mean log <dig>  for all biological replicates from each tissue. aaegl.ru gene set names and the closest orthologue from d. melanogaster are indicated on the right



our annotation and a previous analysis  <cit>  identified three genes likely to be involved in ammonia transport in ae. aegypti: two predicted orthologues of the d. melanogaster gene ammonium transporter , aael <dig> and aael <dig>  as well as a single orthologue of rh <dig>  aael <dig>  d. melanogaster amt is required for the response of antennal coeloconic sensilla to ammonia  <cit> . ammonia is known to be a host cue for ae. aegypti  <cit>  and an. gambiae  <cit> . aael <dig> was expressed at very low or undetectable levels  whereas  aael <dig> was expressed at high levels in female antenna and proboscis as well as male antenna . aael <dig> was expressed at very high levels in male and female brain, as well as antenna . we propose that aael <dig> and aael <dig> may be involved in ammonia detection in host-seeking ae. aegypti.

biogenic amines represent an important class of neurotransmitters and neuromodulators in insects that have been implicated in processes as diverse as reward, aggression, oviposition choice and the control of context-specific social behavior . ae. albopictus mosquitoes fed constitutively with l-dopa exhibit lower levels of host-seeking behavior  <cit> . serotonin neurons innervate the antennal lobe of ae. aegypti and an. gambiae  <cit> , as well as the gut of ae. aegypti  <cit>  and serotonin has been shown to modulate feeding behavior in larval d. melanogaster  <cit> . most serotonin receptors were expressed at appreciable levels in brain and in various peripheral tissues . dopamine receptors had generally variable expression across tissues, including brain, legs and antennae . octopamine/tyramine receptors had generally lower expression values than other receptors, but were detected in brain as well as peripheral tissues . the tyrr orthologue aael <dig> was highly and selectively expressed in ovary. we generally observed little obvious sexual dimorphism in neurotransmitter receptor expression. this suggests that there is a gross conservation of neuronal cell types and signaling pathways, at the transcriptional level, across male and female tissues.

neurotransmitter processing enzymes can serve as cell-type specific markers to reveal the major neurotransmitters produced in particular tissues. the orthologue of d. melanogaster glutamic acid decarboxylase  <dig>  or gad <dig>  was expressed in brain and all peripheral sensory tissues, but not ovary. in contrast, gad <dig> was largely restricted to brain, as well as male abdominal tip . all dopamine processing enzymes were expressed in male and female brain, including the family of dopamine decarboxylase  genes, as well as tyrosine hydroxylase , tyrosine decarboxylase  and tyramine β hydroxylase . we also observed strong peripheral expression of th and the two ddc orthologues . processing enzymes associated with gaba, glutamate and acetylcholine were expressed in male and female brain, with many also expressed broadly across the majority of tissues sampled .fig.  <dig> expression of biogenic amine-related genes. expression of neurotransmitter transport and processing enzymes , neuropeptides  and neuropeptide receptors  in tissues from non-blood-fed female and male mosquitoes. data are presented as the mean log <dig>  for all biological replicates from each tissue. aaegl.ru gene set names and the closest orthologue from d. melanogaster are provided in additional file 7




genes corresponding to ae. aegypti neuropeptides and neuropeptide receptors were defined by orthology to canonical insect neuropeptides and receptors . many neuropeptides were expressed primarily in brain of male and female mosquitoes, while a number had broader expression patterns that included but were not limited to brain . this is consistent with reports of the direct detection of neuropeptides in specific regions of the brain, including the antennal lobe  <cit> . other peptides, including several predicted orthologues of eclosion hormone , ecdysis-triggering hormone  and bursicon, were not detected at appreciable levels. we speculate that these genes are expressed selectively in earlier developmental stages that were not sampled in the present study of adult tissues. neuropeptide receptors had generally broad expression patterns , indicating that neuropeptides may be centrally produced while exerting anatomically far-reaching humoral effects.

insects sense chemical substances such as tastants, odorants, pheromones, noxious chemicals and co <dig> with an array of chemosensory receptors encoded by large gene families of odorant receptors , odorant binding proteins , ionotropic receptors , gustatory receptors  and the pickpocket  and transient receptor potential  ion channels. other groups have previously used rna-seq to profile gene expression of a number of these genes in various tissues from several mosquito species . our work builds on these efforts by simultaneously profiling expression of all of these chemosensory genes in multiple individual tissues in ae. aegypti in the same study .fig.  <dig> expression of odorant receptor and odorant binding protein genes. expression of odorant receptors   and odorant binding proteins   in tissues from non-blood-fed female and male mosquitoes. data are presented as the mean log <dig>  for all biological replicates from each tissue. aaegl.ru gene set names and the closest orthologue from d. melanogaster are provided in additional file  <dig>  raw tpm values for these and all other genes can be found in additional file  <dig>  c scatter plot comparing or log <dig>  values in the antenna of non-blood-fed female and male mosquitoes. a line is drawn from the origin to the expression value of the olfactory co-receptor orco. genes in d are represented as cyan circles. d table of female-enriched odorant receptors with greater than 10-fold-change in non-blood-fed female versus male antenna and tpm in female greater than 10

fig.  <dig> expression of other chemosensory genes. expression of ionotropic receptors  , gustatory receptors  , ppk channels  and trp channels  in tissues from non-blood-fed female and male mosquitoes. data are presented as the mean log <dig>  for all biological replicates from each tissue. aaegl.ru gene set names and the closest orthologue from d. melanogaster are provided in additional file 7




ors are an insect-specific family of divergent seven transmembrane domain chemoreceptors that sense volatile odors, including pheromones  <cit> . the majority of ors are expressed in the antenna, with restricted subsets expressed in either proboscis or maxillary palp , consistent with previous reports of or-expressing sensory neurons in these tissues in an. gambiae  <cit>  and ae. aegypti  <cit> . in contrast to the ors, obps are expressed widely in the tissues profiled here, and vary greatly in their transcript abundance . similar results were found in an analysis of obp expression in an. gambiae mosquitoes  <cit>  and ants  <cit> .

expression  values for ors were broadly elevated in female as compared to male antenna. antennae of male ae. aegypti are specialized for audition and contain an exaggerated pedicel at their base when compared to female antenna  <cit> . we speculate that extra cell numbers associated with this enlarged pedicel would effectively dilute mrna coming from other cells in male antenna, thus reducing the tissue-wide abundance of odorant receptors and other genes expressed in olfactory sensory neurons. to account for these putative differences, we plotted the expression of ors in male and female antenna  normalized to the olfactory co-receptor orco to reflect the approximate number of olfactory sensory neurons. this normalization depends on the assumption that orco expression is not sexually dimorphic, and therefore a reasonable proxy for olfactory sensory neuron number across sexes. even after accounting for this normalization, we identified  <dig> or genes with apparent enrichment in female antenna, with 10- to 35-fold increase in raw expression values as compared to male antennae . because a number of untested assumptions were the basis of these conclusions, we note that these results would need to be validated independently, perhaps by rna in situ hybridization, to gain cellular resolution of gene expression. increases in mrna expression could arise either by selective upregulation of gene expression in females, or through developmental changes that would lead to an increase in the number of neurons expressing these receptors in females. because female mosquitoes show sex-specific chemosensory behavioral responses to odors associated with hosts and oviposition sites, it is not unreasonable to expect sex-specific differences in ors tuned to these specific odors.

irs are ligand-gated ion channels derived from variant ionotropic glutamate receptors that tend to be gated by ligands such as acids, aldehydes and amines  <cit> . the ir family of ae. aegypti has been previously described  <cit> , and we identified predicted gene models for  <dig> additional irs  using blastx against the d. melanogaster proteome . we found three patterns of ir gene expression: those generally restricted to antenna; others selectively expressed in proboscis, rostrum and maxillary palp; and a small number of irs expressed across many different tissues examined . similar results were previously reported in d. melanogaster, apis mellifera, an. gambiae and culex quinquefasciatus  <cit> .

grs are a family of transmembrane receptors distantly related to ors  <cit>  that mediate detection of pheromones, tastants, co <dig>  <cit> , and in the case of d. melanogaster gr28b , light and heat  <cit> . the annotation of the gr family of ae. aegypti was previously described  <cit> . grs are predominantly expressed in the rostrum, maxillary palp and proboscis , consistent with their primary and conserved role in taste perception  <cit> . notable exceptions include aaeggr <dig>  aaeggr <dig> and aaeggr <dig> , which encode co <dig> receptor genes that function in the maxillary palp  <cit> .

pickpocket  channels are a family of amiloride-sensitive degenerin/epithelial sodium channels  that are involved in the transduction of a number of sensory modalities, including mechanosensation, hygrosensation and pheromone sensing  <cit> . we first identified ae. aegypti ppk channels by searching for orthologues to previously described ppks in d. melanogaster and an. gambiae  <cit> . gene expression profiles of the ppk channels reveal broad expression of most genes across several peripheral tissues , including proboscis and legs, consistent with a role in various forms of contact chemosensation.

transient receptor potential  channels have been implicated in diverse sensory modalities, including heat, light and chemosensation  <cit> . ae. aegypti trp channels were identified by conducting orthologue searches against the  <dig> identified d. melanogaster trp channels  <cit> . we identified orthologues to all  <dig>  and two additional genes predicted to be orthologues of d. melanogaster painless. expression of trp channels was generally broad , with several interesting tissue-specific expression patterns, most notably in brain and antenna.

in addition to profiling specific gene families, we examined transcripts with sexually dimorphic expression . we compared expression in  <dig> tissues between non-blood-fed females and males . differences may arise from sexually dimorphic expression within individual cell-types or differences in tissue-specific cell-type composition between sexes. to identify a set of broadly dimorphic transcripts, we imposed a more conservative threshold of a fold-change greater than  <dig> in any tissues, and examined them for overlapping dimorphism across different tissues . expression patterns of genes that were determined to be dimorphic in at least three tissues are indicated in gray in the venn diagrams in fig. 8g and h, and displayed as heat maps in fig. 8i and j. we note the presence of two newly annotated ru genes in the male-specific transcript set, nix   <cit>  and ru <dig>  myo-sex   <cit>  was identified as male-specific in two tissues. the discovery of these genes likely represents the ability of our rna-seq data to capture transcripts produced from the ae. aegypti male-specific locus on chromosome  <dig> that have eluded classical genome sequencing, and therefore annotation, due to large repetitive regions.fig.  <dig> genes with sexually dimorphic expression. ma plot of differentially expressed genes in brain , antenna , abdominal tip , foreleg , midleg  and hindleg . genes were identified as significantly regulated within a single tissue using deseq <dig> . venn diagram of genes that are dimorphic  in abdominal tip, brain, antenna or any of the three leg tissues in female  or male . transcript abundance of genes, that are female-enriched  or male-enriched  across  <dig> or more tissues , sorted by mean abundance in females in descending order  or males in ascending order 



finally, we examined changes in gene expression across the female gonotrophic cycle. after locating and biting a host, female mosquitoes become engorged on a blood-meal that can exceed their unfed body weight. over the next few days, they must digest this blood and use its nutrients to mature a batch of eggs. during the first  <dig> h following a blood-meal, mosquitoes are less responsive to host cues and demonstrate very little locomotion overall   <cit> . dramatic changes in gene expression in an. gambiae  <cit> , and olfactory function in an. gambiae and ae. aegypti  <cit>  after a blood-meal have been documented. despite these interesting observations, the mechanisms of host-seeking suppression following a blood-meal in ae. aegypti are not well understood. to examine the transcriptional changes associated with this behavioral shift, and begin to approach possible mechanisms, we asked whether there were significant changes in gene expression between non blood-fed, blood-fed and gravid mosquitoes in brain, antenna, hindleg  and several other tissues . genes showing significant changes in expression are displayed in ma plots . we parsed these data to identify dynamics of gene expression across the gonotrophic cycle in these three tissues. hundreds of genes showed selective up- and down-regulation in blood-fed relative to non-blood-fed females . smaller numbers of genes showed peaks of expression in non-blood-fed animals, and suppression in blood-fed and gravid stages, mirroring the behavioral suppression observed in fig.  <dig>  we also identified sets of genes that showed lowest levels of expression at non-blood-fed or gravid stages, and those that had low levels of expression that later peaked in gravid animals. selected examples of genes belonging to several of these classes of gene expression dynamics are shown in fig. 9h-k, including the neuropeptide pyrokinin/pban  and  <dig> ors .fig.  <dig> gene expression changes across the female gonotrophic cycle. ma plots of genes differentially expressed in non-blood-fed versus blood-fed females  or non-blood-fed versus gravid females  in brain , antenna  and hindleg . genes were identified as significantly regulated within a single tissue using deseq <dig> . g z-scores of significantly regulated genes  of either non-blood-fed versus blood-fed or non-blood-fed versus gravid) were clustered into  <dig> qualitatively distinct clusters, four of which are shown as heat maps  abundances of example genes from brain  and antenna  plotted as tpm



discussion
here we present the “neurotranscriptome” of brain and peripheral nervous system tissues in female and male ae. aegypti mosquitoes. we used both genome-guided mapping of rna-seq reads as well as de novo transcriptome reconstruction to improve the annotation of existing protein-coding gene models as well as identify  <dig> putative novel protein-coding genes. by mapping tissue-specific rna-seq libraries to transcripts generated by these updated gene models, we examined gene expression in  <dig> female and  <dig> male tissues from non-blood-fed animals, as well as a subset of tissues from blood-fed and gravid female mosquitoes, representing two important and distinct behavioral states following a human blood-meal.

given the fragmented state of the ae. aegypti genome and gene annotations, it was important to include a de novo assembly approach in our analysis. this allowed us to examine the expression pattern of genes derived from unassembled regions of the genome. for example, a myosin heavy chain gene, ru <dig>  is identical in sequence to ae. aegypti myo-sex  <cit> , a gene linked to the sex-determining m-locus of ae. aegypti in a region absent from the current genome assembly. a targeted search for genes in our dataset with similar expression patterns revealed additional genes with male-specific expression. interestingly, we saw several novel unmapped genes from our de novo assembly in these searches and suggest that these may also derive from unassembled genomic loci similar to the m-locus. a recent study confirmed the presence of such a factor, nix , and demonstrated its critical role in sex-determination in ae. aegypti  <cit> .

the present study is a valuable dataset, presenting a comprehensive view of protein-coding gene expression in adult tissues, and yet it remains incomplete. we only sequenced polyadenylated rna derived from  <dig> adult tissues. we have not explored the repertoire of small rnas including micrornas, non-coding rnas or the regulation of alternative splicing. our re-annotation approach relied on alignments of short reads and de novo transcripts back to the current draft of the genome, meaning that gene models residing on misassembled genomic contigs might be incorrectly represented. indeed, a recent effort to generate a physical map for the ae. aegypti genome found a misassembly rate of approximately  <dig> %, including  <dig> of the  <dig> largest supercontigs  <cit> , making it likely that many gene models that rely on the present assembly remain incorrect. ultimately, a comprehensive annotation of protein-coding genes and non-coding loci within the ae. aegypti genome will require the incorporation of additional genomic sequencing and transcriptomic data derived from distinct developmental stages and tissues  <cit> .

whole tissue rna-seq can identify genes differentially expressed across male and female tissues. however, further work will be required to resolve gene expression profiles in individual cells and cell-types. for the purposes of this study, sexually dimorphic transcripts were conservatively defined as those for which the fold-change observed was greater than  <dig>  though we note that there are many more transcripts with less extreme sex-biased expression. anatomical differences will make it difficult to determine whether observed differences in transcript abundance represent differential regulation within shared cell-types or variation in the cell-type composition of male and female tissues. interestingly, we describe relatively few examples of sexually dimorphic expression within the chemosensory gene families examined, suggesting that the striking behavioral differences seen between male and female ae. aegypti may be encoded in the neural circuits responsible for the processing of sensory stimuli as opposed to gene expression differences at the sensory periphery.

we do note the statistically significant up- and down-regulation of a handful of olfactory receptors in antenna from gravid females. this is similar to an observed shift in or expression in the antenna of an. gambiae following a blood-meal  <cit> , and suggests that a behavioral shift from host-seeking to oviposition site selection may involve the increased expression of particular ors tuned to ligands associated with oviposition sites and a concomitant decrease in expression of ors tuned to host odor. with few exceptions  <cit> , the ligand tuning of specific chemoreceptors has not been determined in ae. aegypti. a systematic effort to de-orphanize ae. aegypti chemoreceptors will be required to address the functional relevance of these observed gene expression changes.

a major goal of this work was to identify gene expression changes correlated with blood-feeding state to gain insight into possible mechanisms by which a blood-meal might influence behavior. we describe many genes that change expression in tissues from blood-fed and gravid mosquitoes, including chemoreceptors, neuropeptides, neuropeptide receptors and neurotransmitter receptors and processing enzymes, all of which might play important roles in the regulation of behavior and physiology. however, genes from these classes comprise a small minority of all regulated genes, and thus, are unlikely to alone explain the marked shifts in behavior as female mosquitoes transition from host-seeking to oviposition.

we envision this dataset as a resource to guide the selection of candidate genes involved in mosquito behavior as well as providing insight into the principles of gene expression regulation by blood-feeding. transgenesis of mosquitoes  <cit>  and precisely targeted mutagenesis with tools such as zinc-finger nucleases  <cit> , talens  <cit> , homing endonucleases  <cit> , and rna-guided nucleases  now allow for the generation of stable mutant lines and other genetic reagents to test the function of candidate genes in mosquito behavior.

CONCLUSIONS
we present a broad view of gene expression in non-blood-fed male and female tissues, focusing particularly on gene families related to neuronal function and chemosensation. we demonstrate that the effects of blood-feeding on gene expression are broad. this study represents the most comprehensive, tissue-specific survey of gene expression in adult ae. aegypti to date and will be foundational in our understanding of the molecular genetic basis of behavior in this important disease vector.

