BACKGROUND
during the last  <dig> years, many studies have been performed aiming at the understanding of mads-box gene function in plants using loss- and gain-of-function approaches, which resulted in a wealth of information about their role in development  <cit> . far less is known about how they act at the molecular level, how they bind to dna motifs  and activate down-stream target genes. it has been shown that mads domain proteins are able to bind to the dna motif cc6gg, the so-called carg-box . this motif has also been found in promoter sequences of a small number of genes that have been annotated as target genes . nevertheless, the exact requirements for this dna motif to be bound by mads-box transcription factors in vivo are still unknown. therefore, methods for the identification of dna target sites are needed.

a powerful method to identify target sites is chromatin immunoprecipitation , which allows purification of in vivo formed complexes of a dna-binding protein and associated dna . in short, the method involves the fixation of plant tissue and the isolation of the total protein-dna mixture, followed by an immunoprecipitation step with an antibody directed against the protein of interest. next, the dna can be purified, amplified, and finally identified by sequencing. alternatively, the amplified dna can be hybridized to micro arrays containing promoter elements or the entire genome as tiled oligonucleotides . the identification of target genes from mads domain proteins by chip has been reported recently  <cit> . a drawback of chip is that for each protein of interest a new specific antibody is required. to overcome this drawback, a protein tagging approach with a general tag could be followed, which we refer to as chromatin affinity purification . in this approach, a generic tag is fused to the protein of interest and subsequently used to isolate protein-dna  complexes based on affinity purification .

in this study we focused on three mads domain proteins from arabidopsis, namely agamous , sepallata <dig> , and fruitfull . ag and sep <dig> are both floral organ identity proteins, and based on the abc model  <cit> , represent c- and e-type proteins, respectively . ag is necessary for the formation of stamens and carpels and is expressed in the inner two floral whorls  <cit> . sep <dig> is expressed in the inner three whorls and is essential for the formation of petals, stamens and carpels in a redundant mode of action with sep <dig> and sep <dig>  <cit> . ful has a function in floral meristem identity  and in fruit development   <cit> , and is expressed in the inflorescence meristem, inflorescence stem, cauline leaves, and in developing ovary walls  <cit> . here, we report the expression of these three mads domain proteins in arabidopsis fused with different tags and the analysis of the phenotypes obtained. furthermore, the first result obtained with chap using a gfp antibody is presented.

RESULTS
protein tagging vectors for plant expression
four different binary vectors were used for the tagging approach in plants . the first vector  contains a double tag, the strep-tag® ii  <cit> , followed by the flag-tag  <cit> , located at the c-terminus of the protein of interest. these peptide tags are both very small, each only  <dig> amino acids long. two other vectors  contain the coding region for egfp   <cit> , which is either located at the n- or c-terminus of the protein of interest  <cit> . the fourth vector  contains a triple ha-tag   <cit> , each encoding for a  <dig> amino acids long peptide. furthermore, all vectors have a constitutive double 35s camv promoter  <cit>  to express the fusion products of ag, sep <dig>  and ful in transgenic arabidopsis plants.

phenotypic and expression analyses of arabidopsis lines expressing chimeric mads-box versions
all constructs were introduced into arabidopsis wild type plants, ecotype columbia- <dig>  and the transformants obtained were analyzed for overexpression phenotypes. the results are summarized in table  <dig> and figure  <dig>  the expected overexpression phenotypes for ag are homeotic changes of floral organs, resembling an apetala2-like flower, curly leaves, and early flowering as described by  <cit> . for ectopic sep <dig> expression, curly leaves and early flowering are characteristics to be expected  <cit> , while ectopic expression of ful results in siliques that fail to shatter, because the dehiscence zone is absent  <cit> .

n, number of plants; %, percentage of plants; oe, overexpression; lof, loss-of-function phenotype; wt, wild-type.

overexpression phenotypes were only observed in about 10% of the plants when the egfp protein was fused either n- or c-terminally . surprisingly, many plants containing an egfp fusion construct revealed a mutant phenotype . plants with either an overexpression phenotype or a mutant phenotype, obtained with construct parc <dig> and parc <dig> , were analyzed by northern blot hybridization for the expression of the introduced ag or sep <dig> transgenes, respectively . this revealed a perfect linkage between plants with an overexpression phenotype having a high ectopic gene expression in leaves, while plants with an ag mutant phenotype , showed no expression. in stead, the latter plants exhibit a smear in the northern blot, which is often observed when a gene is cosuppressed  <cit> . remarkably, for plants containing the sep <dig> fusion construct , no loss-of-function phenotypes were observed, though, the northern blot showed hallmarks of cosuppression, suggesting that silencing of sep <dig> may have occurred. most likely, the paralogs and redundant genes sep <dig> and sep <dig> are not affected, which explains that no mutant phenotype was obtained. plants carrying the ful fusion construct  were not molecularly analyzed, but mutant-like plants in a range of severity were observed, which suggest that also cosuppression had occurred. furthermore, a few overexpression and mutant plants with the ag, sep <dig>  and ful fused to egfp were analyzed for fluorescence  and confirmed the same linkage between expression and phenotype.

plants transformed with constructs containing either the strep-tag® ii-flag-tag or the triple ha-tag displayed only a wild-type- or mutant phenotype. transgenic plants with construct parc <dig>  containing the double strep-tag® ii-flag-tag, were also analyzed by northern blot for the expression of the ful fusion product . remarkably, in contrast to the egfp fusion constructs, all plants with a loss-of-function phenotype revealed ectopic ful expression, which was lacking in plants with a wild-type phenotype. this suggests that this mutant phenotype obtained with the double tag strep-tag® ii-flag-tag is caused by a dominant-negative effect and not by a cosuppression mechanism.

the plants with the triple ha-tag fusion constructs were analyzed by rt-pcr . plants with a mutant phenotype reminiscent with ag  or ful  mutants revealed either no expression, suggesting cosuppression, or overexpression, suggesting a dominant-negative effect, respectively.

expression analysis of the sep <dig> promoter in arabidopsis
the constitutive and strong double 35s camv promoter resulted in high expression of the transgene in those plants that showed an overexpression phenotype. however, in the case of ag and sep <dig>  this promoter caused pleiotropic defects resulting in extremely small and early flowering plants with only a few flowers were produced . to overcome this problem, the double 35s camv promoter was replaced by the endogenous promoter. a  <dig>  kb fragment upstream the atg start codon of sep <dig> was fused to the β-glucuronidase reporter gene, encoding for gus  <cit> . gus staining in transgenic arabidopsis plants was detected in the three inner whorls of the flower , where sep <dig> is normally expressed  <cit> . however, gus signal was also detected in the sepals, pedicels, and even in cauline and rosette leaves , suggesting that the upstream region of sep <dig> is lacking cis-acting regulatory regions for correct expression.

similar misexpression was observed for the mads-box genes ag and seedstick , when only the dna region upstream the first intron or the atg, respectively, was fused to the gus reporter gene  <cit> . in the case of ag, it appeared that the second intron, which contains various cis-acting regulatory elements  <cit>  was essential for the right spatial expression pattern, while for correct stk expression, the first intron should be included in the reporter constructs  <cit> . when the sep <dig> first intron sequence was analyzed in detail different motifs were identified that might act as cis-regulatory elements, including a perfect carg-box . to investigate the importance of the sep <dig> intron sequences, a  <dig>  kb genomic fragment of sep <dig>  including upstream and intron sequences, was fused to a gfp tag  and introduced into arabidopsis plants. in contrast to the observed misexpression when only the sep <dig> upstream region was used, correct spatial and temporal expression was obtained when also the sep <dig> intron sequences were included . the gsep3:gfp  expression is predominantly visible in the nuclei of the floral meristem cells of floral buds from stage  <dig> onwards , while there is no or minimal expression in the rest of the inflorescence . noteworthy, the number of observed loss-of-function phenotypes with an endogenous mads-box gene promoter  is dramatically less than in the case with the 35s camv promoter  or even absent in the case of sep <dig>  .

in summary, the reported results with ag and stk and our results with sep <dig> indicate that intron regions in mads domain genes are important for correct spatial and temporal expression.

ag protein detection and chromatin affinity purification
to investigate whether the chap procedure using tags is feasible we used transgenic arabidopsis plants expressing gag:gfp  as example. correct spatial and temporal ag expression was observed, predominantly in the nuclei of the floral meristem cells of floral buds from stage  <dig> onwards  .

first, we analyzed the gag:gfp  plants by western blotting to see whether the chimeric ag protein is detectable with a polyclonal gfp antibody. for this, protein was isolated from nuclei extracts from wild type arabidopsis  plants and compared with extracts from gag:gfp plants. the western blot  shows a specific band of the expected size in the gag:gfp plants, which was not present in wild type plants.

finally, a chromatin affinity purification with a gfp antibody was performed on a protein extract derived from gag:gfp  plants. as reported before, ag protein is able to bind to its own intron sequence for autoregulation  <cit> . this regulatory region was analyzed for enrichment by real-time pcr, which would demonstrate that the chimeric ag protein is able to bind in vivo to its target sequence. the target dna sequence  was  <dig> fold enriched after affinity purification with gfp antibody demonstrating that chimeric ag is indeed able to bind to its regulatory region .

discussion
the use of epitope tags can facilitate the isolation of protein-dna or protein-protein complexes. here, we report a first attempt of employing a generic tagging approach for the mads domain proteins ag, sep <dig>  and ful. different tags and a combination of tags were used to produce fusion products expressed in plants. there are two important criteria before further steps can be undertaken to identify target genes by chromatin affinity purification . the first basic and most important aspect is to obtain stable expression of the fusion protein. secondly, an expressed fusion protein should be biologically active. both aspects appeared not to be straight forward and appeared to be dependent on the tags used.

the expression experiments in plants using the constitutive and strong 35s camv promoter resulted in mutant phenotypes with all constructs, though, in many cases, not the expected overexpression phenotypes. remarkably, the percentage of loss-of-function phenotypes obtained was very high, even up to 100% in the case of gfp:sep <dig> . the loss-of-function phenotypes were most likely caused by two phenomena, either by cosuppression in the case of the egfp fusions, or by a dominant-negative effect in the case of the strep-tag® ii-flag-tag fusions. with the triple ha-tag both phenomena could have happened. these different tags have been used in many organisms and with many different proteins , however, it has never been reported that they cause these severe problems related to mrna expression or activity of a recombinant protein. the high frequency of silencing with the egfp fusions could be related to the 35s camv promoter, causing high expression of the transgene. expression of mads-box cdnas under the control of the 35s camv promoter without the gfp tag  or expression of gfp tags using endogenous mads-box gene promoters did not reveal such high percentages of cosuppression plants , indicating that the combination of 35s camv promoter and the gfp tag may induce silencing. the silencing efficiencies of mads-box gene expression using the gfp tag in combination with the 35s camv promoter appeared to be comparable when using an rna interference strategy  <cit> . the only exception on this rule is sep3:gfp , which did not result in any plant with a loss-of-function phenotype. in contrast, all gfp:sep <dig> plants show a mutant phenotype. although an intriguing observation, an explanation is missing. the altered biological activity of the ful protein fused to short peptide tags, here referred to as 'dominant-negative' mode of action, could be caused by either trapping interacting proteins and forming non-functional protein complexes, steric hindrance preventing certain interactions, or altered folding of the protein. however, functionality of a fusion product with an epitope tag has to be analyzed case by case. it depends on the tag used and the effect it may have on the protein of interest. our results indicate that the activity of mads-box genes and their products can be dramatically affected by fusions with small peptide tags and gfp tags at both n- and c-termini. this high sensitivity to fusions, however, can also be used as an effective method to obtain high percentages of dominant loss-of-function mutants.

a drawback of an overexpression strategy could be the occurrence of unwanted pleiotropic effects, e.g. early flowering or a reduced number of flowers. furthermore, overexpression or ectopic expression does not mimic the natural situation. the most elegant solution is to express the genes under their native promoter in a mutant background, which will directly reveal their biological activity and eliminate any competition with the untagged endogenous protein. for the isolation of the native promoter, often dna sequences upstream the atg start codon are cloned, although no general rules are available that can predict the promoter region . this approach was followed for the sep <dig> promoter, however, it revealed a lack of specificity compared to previously reported in situ hybridization experiments  <cit> . as described previously for the mads-box genes ag and stk, intron sequences are important for correct expression  <cit> . this appears also to be the case for sep <dig>  because fusion of gfp to a  <dig>  kb genomic fragment of sep <dig> including upstream and intron sequences revealed correct expression patterns. finally and most importantly, it appeared possible to perform chap using a gfp antibody on plants that carried a genomic ag fragment  fused to gfp .

CONCLUSIONS
a powerful method to identify target genes is chip or related chap. chap makes use of an epitope tag fused to the protein of interest and this study revealed that the activities of mads-box proteins are very sensitive to fusions with small peptide and gfp tags. furthermore, for the expression of chimeric versions of mads-box genes it is favorable to use the entire genomic region in frame with the tag of choice. interestingly, though unexpected, it appears that the use of chimeric versions of mads-box genes under the control of the strong 35s camv promoter is a very effective method to obtain loss-of-function mutants, either caused by cosuppression or by alteration of the activity of the recombinant protein. finally, chap is possible with a chimeric mads-box protein using a gfp antibody.

