BACKGROUND
at depths below  <dig> m, reefs are dominated by blue-green light because seawater selectively absorbs the longer, 'red' wavelengths  from downwelling sunlight  <cit> . consequently, many reef fish have visual pigments matched to shorter wavelengths, which are transmitted better by water  <cit> . in addition, ecological studies of fish vision must correct for the spectrum available at the depth where they live  <cit>  and therefore routinely correct spectral sensitivity measurements from the laboratory for the available  light on the reef. this reduces the relevance of red light to reef fish even more. however, this procedure ignores the fact that several marine organisms, including deep sea fish, produce their own red bioluminescence and are capable of seeing it  <cit> . the purpose of this study was  to see "with our own eyes" whether there is indeed a lack of red light at depth in the euphotic zone during daytime and  to identify the observed sources of natural red fluorescence in fish in particular. this work combines results from several studies carried out on coral reefs in the red sea and the great barrier reef and has been supplemented by observations and measurements on fish in the laboratory.

RESULTS
seeing red fluorescence on reefs
we separated excitation from emission wavelengths in the field under natural, day-time solar illumination by scuba-diving below the penetration depth of the red component of sunlight  using masks and cameras equipped with a red filter blocking wavelengths below  <dig> nm . this revealed widespread, natural red fluorescence produced by many microorganisms, plants and invertebrates . the latter included mostly corals  <cit> , but also species for which red fluorescence has never been described before, such as a polychaete species, several sponges  and feather stars .

red fluorescent fishes
of central importance here is our discovery of red fluorescence in reef fishes. using the principle described above to distinguish "regular" red colouration from red fluorescence  we identified at least  <dig> fish species belonging to  <dig> genera in  <dig> families that fluoresced visibly in red . fluorescent patterns usually included the eye ring and parts of the head or thorax and varied substantially between congeners . fins rarely fluoresced, except for the anal fin , the first dorsal fin  or the tailfin . a 'whole body glow', including all fins, was present in the small wrasses pseudocheilinus evanidus and paracheilinus octotaenia. visual and photographic evidence from the field was confirmed by extensive fluorescence microscopy and spectrometry of representative cases . fluorescence showed peak emission around  <dig> nm in most species . enneapterygius pusillus showed a second small peak at around  <dig> nm. p. evanidus differed from all others by having a double peak at  <dig> and  <dig> nm. we tested various light sources, including uv, but were not able to detect fluorescent emission at other  wavelengths in the fish described here. anecdotal field observations suggest that yellow fluorescence may be present in other fishes .

study localities:  <dig> = el quseir ;  <dig> = dahab marine research centre ,  <dig> = lizard island research station ,  <dig> = tübingen ,  <dig> = collection jh, vienna. fluorescent body parts are encoded as follows:  <dig> = eye rings,  <dig> = head ,  <dig> = lateral lines,  <dig> = trunk,  <dig> = first dorsal fin,  <dig> = anal fin,  <dig> = tailfin,  <dig> = snout,  <dig> = dots on body,  <dig> = spine,  <dig> = gut. strength of fluorescence is a consensus measure among observers based on visibility in the field and/or the laboratory: strong  means strikingly bright in the field as well as in the laboratory, easy to photograph and strong spectrometric signal; weak  means only visible under laboratory conditions, requiring long integration times for fluorescence measurement and long exposure times for photography . peak emission is shown as  <dig> nm interval.

mechanism of red fluorescence in fishes
dissection revealed that red fluorescence was associated with guanine crystals in pipefish, triplefins, blennies and gobies . guanine crystals are produced by iridophores and are well known as the source of silvery reflection and iridescence in bony fish <cit> . however, they have never been described to show strong red fluorescence. in e. pellucida and ctenogobiops tangaroai, only about half of the crystals isolated from the eye rings showed bright red fluorescence , suggesting that the fluorescing substance is produced or sequestered independently from the crystals. preparations of crystals maintained strong fluorescence after prolonged storage in a dried or liquid form , allowing us to confirm fluorescence in preserved gobies collected up to  <dig> years before . this is in striking contrast to reflective red pigmentation, which bleaches out within hours after fixation. we did not find fluorescent guanine crystals in p. evanidus. here, microscopic investigation suggests the presence of a fluorescent pigment associated with the bony tissue of scales and fin rays . this pigment has a chemical stability in preserved specimens that matches that of guanine-linked red fluorescence.

as a control, we isolated guanine crystals from non-fluorescing fish. in t. cana , psetta maxima  and engraulis encrasicolus , we found less than 1% of the crystals to fluoresce in red , suggesting that a very low level of red fluorescence may be widespread and is not limited to reef fish.

can red fluorescent fish see red fluorescence?
with few exceptions  <cit>  most marine fishes lack a sensitivity reaching into the red part of the spectrum <cit> . but as far as we know, none of the fish genera listed in table  <dig> has ever been tested for its spectral sensitivity. here, we measured the retinal spectral sensitivity of wild-caught e. pellucida. their retina contains rods and both single and twin cones as previously found in one other goby <cit> . mean wavelengths of maximum absorbance  of the visual pigments in the rods and short-wavelength-sensitive  single cones were  <dig> and  <dig> nm, respectively. λmax values in the twin cones were highly variable, ranging from 518– <dig> nm, although spectra were clustered into two groups with mean λmax values at  <dig>  and  <dig> nm . the majority of twin cones had the  <dig> nm pigment in both members  although both 528/ <dig> and 540/ <dig> twins were also observed. these results suggest that there may be more than two distinct visual pigments in the twin cones, and/or co-expression of opsin genes within the same outer segment, as in other fish <cit> . regardless, fig. 6b shows that there is considerable overlap between the red fluorescence emission spectrum and the absorbance spectra of the visual pigments in the twin cones. it is highly likely, therefore, that this species can see its own fluorescence. a similar result is expected for corythoichthys pipefish, given that long wavelength sensitivity is known from other syngnathids  <cit> .

discussion
the function of red fluorescence
why do some reef fish fluoresce strongly in red, whereas most do not? although non-fluorescent  red pigmentation is widespread in reef fish <cit> , it appears grey or black at depth , allowing fish to blend in with their background <cit> . red fluorescence, however, does the opposite: by emitting a colour that is lacking from the environment, a fish contrasts more against its background. as a result, red fluorescence may function as a communication or attraction signal, as proposed for red-bioluminescent deep sea fishes <cit>  and siphonophores <cit> , ultraviolet-reflecting reef fishes <cit>  and green fluorescent mantis shrimp <cit>  and parrots <cit> .

we see four reasons why red fluorescence may be part of a private communication system in fish. firstly, peaking mostly around  <dig> nm, red fluorescence is at the borderline of what is visible to many marine fishes, and due to rapid attenuation of red light by water, even those that can see red will be able to see it over short distances only. this is suggestive of an adaptive shift away from the "public area" of the visual spectrum into a bordering "private area". secondly, most species found to fluoresce are small, benthic, pair- or group-living fishes, often with conspicuous intra-specific behaviours, but quite cryptic colouration in other parts of the visible spectrum. thirdly, there is strong inter-specific variation within and between closely related genera suggestive of species-recognition . finally, fluorescence is present in structures that are used in intra-specific signalling. this is true for the first dorsal fin in triplefins , the tailfin in pipefish  and possibly the anal fin in e. pellucida  and e. guttata. fluorescent eye rings may function as an indicator of presence  or reveal the direction of gaze . since iridophores are involved in rapid colour change in other fishes  <cit> , fluorescent fish may also be able to change the strength of fluorescence.

one reason why red fluorescence in fishes may have escaped attention is because fluorescence is usually observed during night dives using strong uv light sources. although this reveals the spectacular bluish-green fluorescence typical of many corals, it is not a good strategy to visualize red fluorescence because excitation and emission wavelengths are far apart, making red fluorescence weak relative to the shorter wavelength emissions. moreover, most fish are hiding at night, explaining why red fluorescence had not yet been described for fishes. up till now we have not yet found a nocturnal fish that fluoresces in red, which fits well with widespread reflectant red colouration indicating that crypsis is more important in these species.

final remarks
for a correct interpretation of our results, it is important to stress that it is not required to look through a red filter to "see" red fluorescence during daytime, particularly not for the stronger cases. using a filter merely facilitates its detection in the field. without a filter, red fluorescence at depth is usually only one element in complex, multi-spectral, red-containing colours, such as orange-brown, red-brown, pink, lilac, violet or even bright white in some encrusting corals. cases of pure fluorescence-based red are thus far limited to a few corals and sponges. whether pure or mixed, red-containing colours cannot be generated by reflectance and therefore sources of red fluorescence can be identified without a filter at depth. this merely requires special attention by the diver: although e.g. red-brown is prevalent on reefs, it is not perceived as unusual or unexpected by most. consequently, while red masks are invaluable for initial detection, fluorescence photography is easiest using a regular mask and a camera with a red filter. an alternative is to refrain from a red filter altogether and to adjust the white balance of the camera manually to local light conditions using a white slate. this will emphasize reds, while suppressing, but not removing, shorter wavelengths. at depth, this will highlight any red fluorescence. applying this to fish colour vision, we suspect that, if red fluorescent fish can indeed see their fluorescence, they see it as enhanced contrast involving pink, red-brown or other red-containing, mixed colours in an otherwise blue-green environment. consequently, behavioural experiments should not test the ability of fish to see weak red light, but their ability to distinguish between multi-spectral signals with and without a weak red component in a blue-green flooded environment.

finally, we want to make a cautionary remark on diving safety. diving with a red mask is similar to night diving, with dramatically reduced light intensities and viewing distances. disorientation becomes a serious problem. moreover, it takes several minutes to adapt to the darkness. staying in a small, familiar area and moving slowly and carefully is crucial. furthermore, it is essential to take a torch to read equipment. dials, indicators and computer backlights are either reflectant or luminesce blue or green, making them effectively illegible at depth in the absence of a local white  light source. to circumvent this problem, we also used the oceanic datamask which has a built-in dive computer that can be read irrespective of any filter attached to the front. because of these unfamiliar restrictions, we recommend that only experienced divers use this procedure and that only one partner in a buddy team uses a red mask at any given time. we also recommend attaching filters in such a way that they can be instantly removed without having to change to a spare mask, which one should carry nevertheless.

CONCLUSIONS
we conclude that a considerable number of reef fishes have developed complex patterns of striking red fluorescence which may be used to enhance visual communication by exploiting a waveband invisible to most other fish. at least one species  shows a retinal sensitivity to its own red fluorescence and many species show suggestive evidence that fluorescence is linked to signalling structures. additional studies are required to confirm that this ability is also present in other fluorescent fish. nevertheless, the prevalent assumption that red light is of low importance for reef fish <cit>  must be questioned. obviously, a lack of downwelling red light is not a reason to stop seeing red, adding an exciting novel dimension to reef light ecology.

