BACKGROUND
the walleye pollock  is a commercially important codfish species confined to the north pacific ocean from the sea of japan to the gulf of alaska  <cit> . the population structure of walleye pollock has been investigated by the use of various genetic markers including allozymes, microsatellites, and mitochondrial dna sequences. the structuring is still unclear despite identification of distinct stocks in geographic regions including sea of japan, sea of okhotsk, bering sea, and gulf of alaska  <cit> . the norwegian pollock  is a very rare codfish species that was first discovered and described in  <dig>  and with a geographical distribution restricted to coastal regions of northern norway for all the ca  <dig> specimens so far recorded  <cit> . the norwegian pollock closely resemble the walleye pollock, but previous comparative examinations of morphological features have concluded that the two pollocks represent distinct species  <cit> .

mitogenomics is a high-resolution molecular genetic approach that includes the complete mitochondrial genome sequence  in the analyses. mitogenomics, combined with molecular phylogenetics, has successfully resolved controversial issues of the origin and genetic variation of modern humans  <cit> , as well as phylogenetic relationships among closely related fish species  <cit> . in the present study we have performed analysis that includes the complete mitochondrial genome sequences from multiple individuals of norwegian pollock , walleye pollock , atlantic cod  and haddock  in order to resolve the controversial relationship of the theragra species.

RESULTS
the complete mitochondrial genome sequence was determined for two individuals of norwegian pollock , as well as one new individual each of atlantic cod  and haddock  . the mtdnas were approximately  <dig>  kb in length with identical gene content and organization  compared to previously published sequences in atlantic cod, walleye pollock and haddock  <cit> . heteroplasmy was detected in the etas  region within the control region in both atlantic cod and norwegian pollock. atlantic cod mtdna contains a heteroplasmic tandem repeat  motif of  <dig> bp that vary in copy number from 2– <dig>  <cit> . heteroplasmy at single sites corresponding to that observed in walleye pollock  <cit>  was also found in norwegian pollock mtdna. thus, the etas region was excluded in subsequent phylogenetic analyses.

nucleotide substitutions and deletions were assessed by comparing the complete mtdna sequence of the  <dig> pollock specimens. the total number of variable sites identified was  <dig>  and include all protein coding and ribosomal rna genes, the control region , and  <dig> of the  <dig> transfer rna genes . transition substitutions at third codon positions of protein coding genes were the most common changes, and nucleotide deletions were only observed at one site in the ssu rrna gene as well as in the etas region of the control region. however, no specific substitution feature could be identified in any of the norwegian pollock sequences in comparison to that of the walleye pollock sequences, including no unique sites that distinguished the two proposed pollock species. yanagimoto et al.  <cit>  identified a single nucleotide polymorphism in the nd <dig> gene as a diagnostic marker of pollocks from the sea of japan and the bering sea. interestingly, both the norwegian pollock specimens harbour the sea of japan-type of nucleotide at this position .

a total of  <dig>  nucleotide positions were unambiguously aligned from  <dig> specimens representing norwegian pollock , walleye pollock , atlantic cod , and haddock . the two specimens of atlantic cod and haddock were selected in order to represent distant geographic locations . pair wise distance within and between species are given in table  <dig>  in all cases, except for the two pollock species, interspecific p-distances were found to be significantly higher  than distances within a defined species. here, p-distances among the atlantic cod specimens and the haddock specimens are  <dig>  and  <dig> , respectively, which are similar to that of the  <dig> pollock specimens . the p-distances between genera are about  <dig> fold higher. this observation in the mitochondrial dna sequence is consistent with the conclusion that norwegian pollock and walleye pollock are not genetically distinct.

phylogenetic analysis of the complete mitochondrial genome data-set using maximum likelihood , neighbor-joining , and maximum parsimony , all resulted in a very similar tree topology  with high statistical supports. interesting findings noted from the complete mtdna analysis are that the two norwegian pollock sequences cluster together with those of walleye pollock, and that the two norwegian pollock sequences are more closely related to walleye pollock sequences isolated from specimens in the sea of japan  than any of the specimens from the bering sea. from the mitogenomic phylogeny analysis we infer that norwegian pollock and walleye pollock have to be considered as one single species. the data implicates that the genus theragra consists of only one species confined to both the north atlantic and north pacific oceans, a situation similar to that proposed for the pacific cod  and greenland cod  based on partial mtdna sequence analysis  <cit> . although the genetic data are unequivocal, recent and extensive morphological examination of theragra suggest that the formal taxonomic designations are upheld, but at the subspecific level .

discussion
our finding that the norwegian pollock appears recently derived from walleye pollock lineages within the sea of japan, is puzzling. one possibility is that a subpopulation of walleye pollock migrated from the north pacific ocean into the north atlantic ocean through the bering strait and arctic ocean, the only plausible connection between the pacific and atlantic oceans in the northern hemisphere. if so, the norwegian pollock would be expected to be more genetically similar to walleye pollock from the bering sea than that from the sea of japan due to geographical distances. however, this assumption is not supported in our analysis. furthermore, walleye pollock has not been reported in the arctic ocean, between the bering strait and coast of norway, despite intense fishery activities over years  <cit> . alternatively, walleye pollock could have been introduced  by human to the northeast atlantic from the sea of japan. in fact, the soviet russian authorities did some experiments around  <dig> on transfer of marine species by railway from vladivostok to murmansk , but currently there are no available documentations that include walleye pollock. whatever the reason may be, the presence of a small population of pollock in the north atlantic ocean is a very interesting observation and should be included in ecosystem monitoring approaches  <cit>  of the arctic ocean.

CONCLUSIONS
based on the complete mitochondrial genome sequences we conclude that the walleye pollock  and norwegian pollock  represent one single species, and that norwegian pollock has been recently introduced from the pacific to the atlantic oceans.

