BACKGROUND
microbiologists have long sought to define the physiological characteristics of marine bacteria  <cit> . these studies have largely focused on seawater-inhabiting gram-negative bacteria. none-the-less, gram-positive bacteria are consistently reported from marine samples  <cit> . among these, representatives of the phylum actinobacteria are particularly well represented  <cit> . to date, the genetic basis for marine adaptation in the actinobacteria remains uncharacterized.

early attempts to define marine bacteria centered on the observation that some marine-derived strains failed to grow when seawater was replaced with deionized  water in the growth medium  <cit> . subsequently, this physiological response was linked to a specific sodium ion requirement, which led to the realization that seawater was not simply required for osmotic balance  <cit> . based on this, marine bacteria were further defined by a demonstrable requirement of sodium for growth  <cit> . this requirement was subsequently linked to electron transport  <cit>  and the possession of the sodium pumping respiratory nadh dehydrogenase nqr   <cit> . in addition to electron transport, it has also been reported that sodium is required for amino acid transporters and for the oxidation of compounds such as alanine and galactose in some marine bacteria  <cit> . the ionic requirements of marine bacteria can also include calcium and magnesium  <cit> , but the genetic basis for these requirements is unknown. at present, it remains unclear if similar marine adaptations occur in gram-positive taxa.

the discovery of the sodium-pumping nadh dehydrogenase nqr  <cit>  and the associated genes nqra-f  <cit>  represented the first genetic link to sodium dependence in gram-negative marine bacteria. nqr is one of three types of respiratory nadh dehydrogenases and is known to occur in many gram-negative marine bacteria and some clinical pathogens  <cit> . when present, nqr does not preclude the occurrence of other nadh dehydrogenases in a genome  <cit> . the more common prokaryotic nadh dehydrogenase is the proton-pumping ndh- <dig>  which is also known as complex i  <cit> . ndh- <dig> is composed of  <dig> genes  and displays no homology with nqr yet both are energy-coupling enzyme complexes that create an ionic motive force used to generate atp and drive other cellular processes  <cit> . interestingly, the membrane-bound, ion pumping nuo genes display significant sequence similarity to the six genes that make up the multi-subunit na+/h+ antiporter mrp   <cit> . the third type of nadh deydrogenase is ndh- <dig>  which is typically composed of one to a few proteins  <cit>  and is not an energy-coupling complex or been linked to marine adaptation.

the ability of bacteria to adapt to external changes in the osmotic environment is fundamental to survival  <cit> . osmoadaptation in bacteria typically involves the intracellular accumulation of compatible solutes such as glycine and betaine. these compounds are acquired either by de novo biosynthesis or directly from the environment. bacteria also have mechanisms to survive osmotic down-shock that usually involve a combination of specific  and non-specific  mechanisms of solute efflux together with aquaporin-mediated water efflux  <cit> . one important mechanism of solute efflux is mediated by the mechanosensitive channel of large conductance . this membrane bound, stretch-activated channel is common in bacteria and believed to act as an emergency value to release turgor pressure following sudden osmotic downshock  <cit> . in the marine halophile vibrio alginolyticus, the introduction of mscl alleviated cell lysis following osmotic downshock  <cit>  and thus the product of this gene may represent an important mechanism to survive the transition from marine to freshwater environments.

in addition to specific ionic requirements and mechanisms to survive osmotic stress, comparative genomics has been used to identify other mechanisms of marine adaptation. for example, abc branched chain amino acid  transporters are enriched in bacillus spp. adapted to alkaline and marine environments  <cit> . once taken into the cell, bcaas are converted into l-glutamate, which would help acidify an otherwise basic cytoplasm  <cit> . more recently, an abundance of bcaa transporters was observed in several marine roseobacter strains  <cit> . bcaa transporters also represent a significant portion of the genes observed in marine metagenomes  <cit>  and thus appear to represent an important marine adaptation. marine adaptation genes were also identified in the marine cyanobacterium synechoccocus, which has a greater capacity to transport na+ than freshwater species  <cit> .

actinomycetes belonging to the genus salinispora occur broadly in tropical and sub-tropical marine sediments  <cit> . to date, two species  have been formally described while a third  has been proposed  <cit> . this taxon was described as the first obligate marine actinomycete genus based on a failure to grow when seawater was replaced with di water in a complex growth medium  <cit> . it was recently demonstrated that salinispora spp. are capable of growth with as little as  <dig> mm na+ if the appropriate osmotic environment is provided  <cit> . however, it was also demonstrated that cells lyse in low osmotic strength media  <cit>  suggesting a high level of marine adaptation.

the genome sequences of s. tropica strain cnb- <dig> and s. arenicola strain cns- <dig> along with four unrelated marine actinobacteria  and a large number of non-marine strains provided an opportunity to use comparative genomics to identify genes associated with marine adaptation. an earlier comparison of the two salinispora genomes revealed a large paralogous family of genes encoding polymorphic membrane proteins   <cit> . although functionally uncharacterized, pmps appear to be type v autotransporters. the large number of copies observed in the two genomes led to the proposal that they represent an adaptation to life in low nutrient environments and that they form pores that render salinispora spp. susceptible to lysis in low osmotic conditions  <cit> . the present study expands on that initial observation by employing a phylogenomic approach targeting gene gain and loss events to identify additional marine adaptation genes . these analyses reveal that the mechanisms of marine adaptation in salinispora spp. are fundamentally different from those reported for gram-negative bacteria and that there is no common genetic basis for marine adaptation among the actinobacteria for which genome sequences are currently available. in addition, the results provide strong evidence that gene loss plays a critical role in the inability of salinispora spp. to survive when seawater replaces di water in complex growth media.

RESULTS
marine adaptation genes
two fundamental approaches were used to identify genes associated with marine adaptation in the marine actinomycete genus salinispora. the function-based approach relied on blast analyses using key words derived from previously reported marine adaptation genes . the comparative genomics approach was annotation independent and detected genes that were present in salinispora species but absent or rare in other actinobacteria. thus, the first approach tested for common mechanisms of marine adaptation among marine bacteria while the later had the potential to detect new or unknown gene functions that may be relevant to marine adaptation. all genes detected using these two approaches were then tested for evidence of a recent common ancestry with bacteria associated with hyperosmotic environments.

the function-based approach yielded the largest number of candidate marine adaptation genes , however the vast majority identified using both approaches did not pass the phylogenetic test and therefore did not advance to the final mag pool . ultimately,  <dig> and  <dig> mags were identified in the s. tropica and s. arenicola genomes, respectively. of the mags identified based on gene function,  <dig> are involved in electron transport,  <dig> encode transporters, and 28- <dig>  encode channels or pores. based on comparative genomics, more genes related to marine adaptation appear to have been gained than lost from the two salinispora spp. .

mags identified based on functional class and comparative genomics.

*based on annotation.

**total is not additive because  <dig> of  <dig> genes in the gene gain category were also found in the finvtional analyses.

ets: electron transport system.

species tree
an actinobacterial species tree was constructed using  <dig> of  <dig> amphora marker genes  <cit>   derived from  <dig> actinobacterial genome sequences . this phylogeny is largely congruent to that previously published  <cit>  with the notable exception of the close relationship of stackebrandtia nassauensis dsm  <dig>  to the micromonosporaceae. this relationship is supported by all of the individual gene trees and has also been reported by others  <cit> . the tree clearly shows that the marine actinobacteria for which genome sequences are available are polyphyletic and not deeply rooted. it is also notable that the order actinomycetales is paraphyletic with respect to the bifidobacteriales and that the previously reported polyphyly of the families frankineae and streptosporangineae is maintained in this tree  <cit> .

function-based identification of mags
genes associated with the sodium-dependent nadh dehydrogenase , which have been reported in gram-negative marine bacteria, were not detected in either salinispora genome or in any available gram-positive marine bacterial genomes. thus, when it comes to respiratory electron transport, there appear to be fundamentally different mechanisms by which gram-negative and gram-positive bacteria have adapted to the marine environment. none-the-less,  <dig> candidate mags with annotation linked to ndh- <dig> were initially detected in both salinispora genomes . these genes comprise three partial and one complete ndh- <dig> operon . the  <dig> genes in the complete ndh- <dig> operon  as well as those in the first partial ndh- <dig> operon were not considered further because their phylogenies are in general agreement with the actinobacterial species tree, and thus there was no evidence they had been acquired from marine bacteria.

in contrast, phylogenetic analyses of all  <dig> genes in the second and third partial ndh- <dig> operons revealed close relationships with marine bacteria and thus these genes remained in the final mag pool . the annotation of the seven genes in the second partial ndh- <dig> operon predict that they encode the membranous portion of the enzyme complex, which pumps sodium ions or protons to generate an ionic motive force  <cit> . among these seven genes, stro <dig> and sare <dig> are annotated as hypothetical proteins but likely encode nuoj because top blast hits are annotated as such. the phylogenies of the corresponding seven nuo protein sequences are similar and place them in a clade with nine other actinobacteria . the next three most closely related clades are comprised of nine proteobacteria of which six are of marine origin. the actinobacteria that possess these nuo genes are scattered throughout the species tree , which could be interpreted as evidence for common ancestry within the actinobacteria. to more formally infer the likelihood of gene loss  vs. gene gain  in accounting for the distribution of these genes, the minimum number of loss events and maximum number of gain events was calculated. the resulting loss to gain ratio of  <dig>  indicates that nearly three times as many loss events would be required to explain the observed distribution and thus provides support for the horizontal acquisition of this partial ndh- <dig> complex in salinispora spp. .

the six genes in the third partial ndh- <dig> complex have annotation related to nuo genes however upon closer analysis these genes appear to encode the sodium proton antiporter mrp. the ambiguous annotation is not surprising as mrp genes are known to have sequence similarity to nuo genes  <cit> . both salinispora strains have mrpa-g, which are required for a functional antiporter  <cit> , however mrpa and b are fused indicating that this is a group two mrp operon  <cit> . mrpg was incorrectly predicted by auto-annotation but subsequently resolved based on homology with b. halodurans. mrpcef and g are each too short to produce a robust phylogeny, however, the blast matches for these genes, and the fused mrpab gene, were similar to the longer mrpd sequence and therefore it is inferred they share the same evolutionary history. the phylogeny of mrpd  places the two salinispora spp. in a primary clade that includes five corynebacteria spp. and the gram-negative marine bacterium a. marinum. this clade then shares a common ancestor with a large and diverse group of bacteria that contains at least four phyla including many marine and alkaliphilic species. the ratio of gene loss to gain events for each gene in the mrp operon is  <dig>  , thus supporting gene gain as the most parsimonious explanation for the occurrence of this gene in the two salinispora spp.

s. tropica and s. arenicola contain  <dig> and  <dig> candidate sodium transporter genes respectively , three of which were confirmed as mags following phylogenetic analysis . one of these mags constitutes a na+/bile acid symporter . the orthologs in the two salinispora genomes group phylogenetically with  <dig> actinobacteria including two other marine actinobacteria . the next clade contains acinetobacter spp. followed by a single actinobacterium and a large clade of pseudomonas spp., many of which are human pathogens, and one myxococcus sp. subsequent clades include five gram-negative marine bacteria. the apparent acquisition of this symporter may provide a mechanism to exploit a natural sodium gradient to import bile salts, which can be converted to compatible solutes such as glycine or taurine  <cit> . interestingly, genes for the biosynthesis of the compatible solute glycine betaine were not found in either salinispora genome while genes for the uptake of this compound displayed no evidence of acquisition from marine bacteria and thus were not identified as mags . the second sodium transport gene is a na+/ca+ <dig> exchanger  with phylogenetic links to three different actinobacteria and then nitrococcus mobilis, a member of the gamma-proteobacteria derived from surface waters of the equatorial pacific  followed by a group comprised entirely of marine proteobacteria . the third gene is a na+/ca+ <dig> antiporter  that is largely related to genes observed in marine alpha-proteobacteria . the gene loss to gain ratios of  <dig>  and  <dig>  for the na+/bile acid symporter and na+/ca+ <dig> exchanger, respectively, supports the hypothesis that these genes were acquired. a gene loss to gain ratio was not calculated for the na+/ca+ <dig> antiporter because it was only observed in distantly related actinobacteria and thus was assumed acquired. these calcium transporters may be related to the calcium requirement reported for salinispora spp.  <cit> .

transportdb was used to identify  <dig> abc transporters in each salinispora genome . after phylogenetic analysis of each protein, it was shown that the phosphate transporter pst and branched chain amino acid transporter liv have phylogenetic links to both marine and human associated bacteria  and therefore advanced to the final mag pool . the four genes encoding the pst transporter  display the same phylogenetic relationships and are closely related to homologs in marine cyanobacteria . this transporter may be more efficient at scavenging phosphate from seawater than the form observed in soil actinobacteria. the gene loss to gain ratio of  <dig>  for each pst gene  provides additional support for the acquisition of these genes in salinispora spp. the five liv proteins  maintain the same phylogeny and reveal a close relationship to homologs from the marine actinobacterium janibacter sp. and then four bacteria from the phylum deinococcus-thermus . the next clade contains marine and pathogenic proteobacteria . the gene loss to gain ratio of  <dig>  for each gene in this operon supports gene acquisition .

of the  <dig> and  <dig> channel and pore genes identified as candidate mags based on functional annotation in s. tropica and s. arenicola, respectively,  <dig> and  <dig> passed the phylogenetic test . all of these were previously identified as polymorphic membrane proteins  and showed a strong phylogenetic relationship with homologs in marine bacteria  <cit> . these genes are in high copy number  in both salinispora genomes relative to the closely related genus micromonospora, in which only two copies are observed. a structural alignment of the predicted pmp proteins indicates that each forms a beta-barrel structure, which likely forms a pore in the membrane, and contains a signal sequence common to all pmps supporting that these proteins target the cell membrane.

comparative genomics based identification of mags
a representative dataset comprised of  <dig> actinobacterial genomes was used to identify  <dig> genes that are unique to both salinispora spp. based on the rsd test of orthology . phylogenetic analyses revealed that seven of these genes shared a close relationship with homologs in marine bacteria and therefore advanced to the final mag pool. however all seven of these genes were included among the mags previously identified based on gene function and thus comparative genomics revealed no new mags based on gene gain.

to assess gene loss based on comparative genomics, the micromonospora sp. l <dig> genome was used as the reference sequence for the pair-wise rsd test of orthology in  <dig> representative actinobacterial genomes, including both salinispora spp. four of  <dig> genes with predicted orthologs in at least  <dig> of the  <dig> genomes are absent in both salinispora sequences . these four genes are 1) a large conductance mechanosensitive channel  2) an abc transporter phosphate-binding protein , 3) a had-superfamily hydrolase, and 4) a peptidoglycan synthetase . homologs of mscl play a role in osmotic adaptation in halotolerant bacteria  <cit>  and provide a mechanism to survive osmotic down shock  <cit> . thus, the loss of this gene may play a key role in the inability of salinispora strains to survive when transferred to low osmotic strength media. the gene loss to gain ratio for mscl is  <dig>  and thus highly supports gene loss in both salinispora spp. . based on the rsd analysis, psts was also identified as being lost in both salinispora spp. however, all four genes in the pst operon are present in both salinispora genomes and were already identified as mags based on functional annotation and evidence they were acquired from marine cyanobacteria . thus, it appears that the pst genes observed in both salinispora spp. were too divergent to be detected as orthologs based on a comparison with the micromonospora l <dig> genome. in support of this, a synteny plot in the region of the pst operon suggests that a homologous recombination event has resulted in the replacement of the entire salinispora operon with a cyanobacterial version . the had-superfamily hydrolase and peptidoglycan synthetase  were not considered further as mags based on their functional annotation.

discussion
the marine actinobacteria for which genome sequences are available are broadly distributed throughout the actinobacterial phylogenetic tree and closely related to non-marine forms suggesting they have been independently introduced relatively recently into the marine environment. there is no evidence for a common set of genes linked to marine adaptation in these bacteria suggesting they have responded in different ways to the environmental pressures associated with survival in the marine environment. none of these bacteria, including the obligate marine genus salinispora, possess nqr, the sodium dependent respiratory nadh dehydrogenase that has frequently been linked to marine adaptation in gram-negative marine bacteria  <cit> . thus, there appear to be fundamental differences in the ways gram-negative bacteria and the gram-positive bacteria studied here have adapted to the marine environment.

given that gene acquisition represents a major force driving bacterial evolution  <cit> , it can be inferred that bacteria secondarily introduced into the marine environment will, over time, acquire adaptive traits from other marine bacteria. using annotation as a guide, it was possible to identify a pool of genes in the two salinispora genomes that are both relevant to marine adaptation and share a common evolutionary history with homologs from bacteria that inhabit hyper-osmotic environments. despite the absence of nqr, this pool includes  <dig> genes related to electron transport. these genes comprise two partial copies of ndh- <dig>  one copy appears to encode the membranous portion of complex i, which pumps sodium ions or protons to generate an ionic motive force. the second copy contains mrp genes that likely encode a sodium antiporter that may help maintain a low cytoplasmic concentration of sodium. while mrp is commonly found in bacteria and known to play a role in intracellular ph regulation  <cit> , homologs in the two salinispora spp. are distantly related to any previously described and may represent a new type of mrp antiporter. taken together, the two partial ndh- <dig> complexes likely give salinispora spp. the ability to keep excess sodium out of the cytoplasm while helping to meet the challenges of maintaining a proton gradient in seawater, which typically has a ph of  <dig> . none of the mags were related to the biosynthesis or acquisition of compatible solutes such as glycine betaine, and there was no evidence that any proteins have excessive amounts of acidic amino acids or hydrophobic residues , suggesting they do not accumulate intracellular salts as a mechanism of osmoregulation.

genome sequences for six actinobacteria isolated from the marine environment were available at the time of this study. while the mag pool identified in the two salinispora genomes is not shared by any of these strains, the na+/bile acid symporter is present in both janibacter sp. and a. marinum. in addition, a. marinum also shares the mags mrpd and psts with both salinispora spp. while livk is also observed in janibacter sp. the strain labeled 'marine actinobacterium' has none of the marine adaptation genes identified in the two salinispora genome sequences. while all of the mags identified by gene gain were also identified by functional annotation, the mscl gene was uniquely identified as a mag based on gene loss in salinispora relative to other actinobacteria. the loss of mscl is also observed in eight mobiluncus species, streptomyces viridochromogenes, streptomyces clavuligerus, nocardiopsis dassonvillei, rubrobacter xylanophilus, and two collinsella species and thus is not unique to salinispora spp. these bacteria come either from sludge or a human source, two potentially consistent, hyper-osmotic environments where the loss of this gene may not prove disadvantageous. no other marine actinobacteria have lost mscl and no actinobacteria missing mscl have any of the salinispora mags. these observations led to a series of genetic experiments that demonstrate the importance of mscl in allowing salinispora strains to survive osmotic downshock .

the phylogenies of all but one salinispora mag  contain non-marine actinobacteria, which suggests these genes may also prove adaptive in other environments. for example, the human pathogen nocardiopsis dassonvillei has three of the mags while brevibacterium linens, streptomyces roseosporus, streptosporangium roseum, corynebacterium kroppensteddti, and geodermatophilus obscurus each possess two. in total mag homologs were found in  <dig> non-marine actinobacteria. as with the non-marine actinobacteria that have lost mscl, many of these strains are human pathogens or were derived from activated sludge.

the key word searches and comparative genomics approaches used here yielded a pool of candidate mags that were subsequently tested for phylogenetic links to bacteria associated with hyperosmotic environments. the final list of mags is almost certainly incomplete, as the key word searches were limited and it is possible that adaptations to survival in marine sediments may be very different from those previously reported for seawater inhabiting bacteria. it is also possible that some genes involved in marine adaptation are widely distributed among actinobacteria and thus would remain undetected using the comparative genomics approach. likewise, gene mutation or duplication may lead to environmentally relevant adaptive traits that were not detected with the methods employed. while this study was not a comprehensive assessment of marine adaptation, it nonetheless identified a pool of acquired genes that appear to be highly relevant to the survival of salinispora spp. in the marine environment.

CONCLUSIONS
functional annotation and comparative genomics were used to identify candidate marine adaptation genes in two salinispora genome sequences. using a phylogenomic approach, evidence of acquisition from bacteria associated with hyperosmotic environments was obtained for  <dig> and  <dig> genes in s. arenicola and s. tropica, respectively. an analysis of these genes reveals that the mechanisms of marine adaptation in salinispora spp. are fundamentally different from those reported for gram-negative bacteria and other marine actinobacteria. while not comprehensive, the mags identified are largely associated with electron transport, sodium transporters, and abc transporters and are predicted to represent marine adaptations based on evidence of acquisition from marine bacteria. the results also indicate that the loss of mscl may play a key role in the inability of salinispora strains to survive osmotic down shock. given that salinispora spp. are a useful source of secondary metabolites with applications in human medicine  <cit> , identifying the genetic basis for the osmotic requirements reported for this genus may prove useful for future industrial development.

