BACKGROUND
analysing and mining protein-protein interaction  networks data using evolutionary information is a central research area in bioinformatics . in this context, evolutionary information is usually described by means of the orthology relation between proteins. in general, two proteins are orthologous if they originated from a common ancestor, having been separated in evolutionary time only by a speciation event. orthologous proteins have high amino acid sequence similarity and usually retain the same or very similar function, which allows one to infer biological information between the proteins. obviously, orthology as such is very important in studying evolution. therefore, the problem of establishing proper orthology relations has been widely studied in comparative genomics  and many databases and public resources of orthologs have been made available, such as inparanoid  <cit>  and orthomcl-db  <cit> .

a recent study performed by wutchy et al  <cit>  used such available orthology information for detecting stable evolutionary signal in a yeast ppi network. this signal was extracted at a protein-protein interaction level, using pairwise orthologs with respect to various different species. the authors observed that a high local clustering around protein-protein interactions correlates with evolutionary conservation of the participating proteins. this means that highly connected proteins and protein pairs embedded in a well clustered neighbourhood tend to be evolutionary conserved and therefore retain their evolutionary signal. these findings suggest also that more connected regions of a ppi network are potential mediators of evolutionary information.

motivated by the above observations, in this paper we focus on the explicit use of orthology for detecting evolutionary signal at a functional complex level, that is, functional complexes that can be clearly attributed to this evolutionary signal. to this aim, we try to characterize functions of those complexes predicted by clustering the sub-graph of a ppi network induced by all proteins having orthologs in another given species, but not predicted  neither when clustering the entire network, nor when clustering sub-graphs of the network induced by random sampling of proteins. we consider the resulting functions as a strong characterization of the underlying evolutionary signal of orthologs at functional complex level, since they are suppressed or not observed when clustering using the entire network and are not outcomes of a stochastic process.

specifically, given the yeast ppi network and proteins from another species, we apply a state-of-the-art clustering algorithm to  the yeast ppi network,  the sub-network of the yeast ppi network induced by selecting only proteins with ortholog in the considered other organism, and  the sub-networks of the yeast ppi network induced by sampling a given number of proteins at random. in this way we generate three classes of clusters called gc , oc  and rc . note that the latter class of clusters is the collection of cluster sets produced by the application of clustering to the ppi network induced by a random selection of a set of proteins  repeated for dozens times. for all clusters in each class we infer putative functions by measuring their gene ontology  functional enrichment  <cit>  using only experimentally validated annotations, and consider as putative protein complexes only those clusters with a putative function that is significantly coherent within the corresponding cluster.

the putative complexes of the gc class represent results globally observable in the whole interaction data without any additional information and hence play also a suppressor of any potential external biological signal present in the data. the putative complexes of the rc class simulate a random signal of the given protein sample size in the protein interaction data. thus, the oc class complexes may be attributed to the orthology signal only when their functionality clearly differentiates from those of gc and rc class.

to this end, for a set of complexes and a certain function, we compute the functional retrieval index as the fraction of proteins contained in the complexes and having the function experimentally validated with respect to the set of candidate proteins having the function also experimentally validated and from which complexes were derived. this fraction quantifies the presence of that function in a given protein complex set. this allows us to identify functions whose proteins' fraction is higher in complexes from the oc class than in complexes from the other two classes. consequently, we consider the corresponding complexes in oc class as describing the orthology signal . furthermore, we analyse those complexes in the oc class having a predicted function for its proteins that is not inferred when using complexes of gc class. finally we discuss the new meaningful functions for well-defined as well as for unknown proteins that are present in the compilation of putative complexes.

in previous works on phylogenetic analysis of protein networks and complexes evolutionary information was usually used as a mean for evaluating the preservation of orthology information in functional modules  <cit> . here, however, we incorporate evolutionary information beforehand and perform a comparative differential analysis for detecting evolutionary signal at complex, functional level. our identification of protein complexes uses only the topology of the network of the considered species and orthology information from another species, without requiring knowledge on the interactome of the other species.

in general, our approach differs from comparative network methods  <cit> , as the latter aim to find evolutionary conserved modules across species, thus exploiting both orthology and network topology of the considered organisms. the clusters we obtain are in one species and are related to the orthology signal with respect to another species, but are not required to be evolutionary conserved through species . furthermore, comparative methods mostly do not use 'known' orthologs in available databases but rather they rely on sequence similar proteins, where the level of required similarity is determined by a minimal similarity score threshold. instead, our method exploits the orthology information available in existing databases. moreover, the study we propose differs from those aiming to find evolutionary conserved modules across species because their output results in cluster multiplets derived from all ppi networks of multiple species being compared, where clusters contained in one multiplet are topologically and genomic similar to each other. in particular, in  <cit>  computational technique for dividing ppi networks was proposed in order to perform modular network alignment  <cit> . results indicated that aligning pairs of sub-networks from different species, where these sub-networks are obtained by expanding articulation hubs, may lead to the discovery of conserved protein modules that are not detected when aligning the two whole networks. this is different from the research question tackled in this paper, namely to detect the orthology signal at a functional complex level in a single ppi network given another species. the methodology proposed in this paper generates orthology-driven clusters that contain evolutionary functional signal but are not in general conserved across species. indeed, this could correspond to scenarios where a functional module retains its evolutionary origin while it changed its conformation in other species after speciation, due to evolutionary  events, resulting in a cluster with some links preserved, other being created and some links being lost.

RESULTS
we performed the proposed computational analysis on a widely used and well-studied species, namely saccharomyces cerevisiae , since its ppi network is one of the best characterized and the functionality of its proteins has been extensively studied. this makes yeast a good standard model species for protein network analysis.

protein orthology relationships between the following pairs of organisms were considered:

• saccharomyces cerevisiae vs. escherichia coli

• saccharomyces cerevisiae vs. caenorhabditis elegans

• saccharomyces cerevisiae vs. drosophila melanogaster

• saccharomyces cerevisiae vs. homo sapiens

escherichia coli , caenorhabditis elegans , drosophila melanogaster  and homo sapiens  are standard organisms used in protein network and genome comparative studies  and represent the diverse life-forms from a prokaryote  to the highly complex eukaryote . yeast proteins having an ortholog in another species are here called yeast orthologs. hence, each species comparison produces a different set of yeast orthologs to be investigated.

generating the cluster classes
a state-of-the-art method for detecting communities in biological networks known as mcl  <cit>  was used for clustering networks. mcl was applied to generate the following classes of clusters:

• oyc-e - yeast clusters found using the sub-network induced by the yeast-e.coli ortholog set.

• oyc-w - yeast clusters found using the sub-network induced by the yeast-worm ortholog set.

• oyc-f - yeast clusters found using the sub-network induced by the yeast-fly ortholog set.

• oyc-h - yeast clusters found using the sub-network induced by the yeast-human ortholog set.

these groups are of the oc class mentioned above and we generally refer to them by the common name oyc . the following classes of clusters were generated using random sampling:

• ryc-e - yeast clusters found using the sub-network induced by random sampled proteins of the same number as the number of proteins in the yeast-e.coli ortholog set.

• ryc-w - yeast clusters found using the sub-network induced by random sampled proteins of the same number as the number of proteins in the yeast-worm ortholog set.

• ryc-f - yeast clusters found using the sub-network induced by random sampled proteins of the same number as the number of proteins in the yeast-fly ortholog set.

• ryc-h - yeast clusters found using the sub-network induced by random sampled proteins of the same number as the number of proteins in the yeast-human ortholog set.

these groups belong to the rc class and we generally refer to them by the common name ryc . for each of the four cases given above we performed  <dig> runs. recall that every run produces one particular ryc group. in order to compare these clusters with the gyc or oyc one, we consider the average values of ryc groups computed over all  <dig> simulations according to a given ortholog set.

finally, when mcl was applied to the whole yeast network, we get clusters of the above-mentioned gc class, and we refer to them by the name gyc .

oyc-e
oyc-w
oyc-f
oyc-h
clust. gr. - the cluster group , #clusters - the number of clusters, #complexes - the number of complexes, |c|¯ - the average cluster or complex size, ratio  - the percentage of clusters that are functional complexes

identifying orthology signal at protein complex level
the detected putative complexes are used to identify orthology-related functions. for each class of putative complexes we compute the functional retrieval indexes with respect to the protein sample set from which the complexes were derived by applying the formula  . then, for each function f associated with complexes of the oyc class, we compare its retrieval index ϱ with the retrieval indexes ϱ and ϱ for both ryc and gyc classes using the rule  .

one may consider the comparison of ϱ with ϱ as the random sample filter and ϱ with ϱ as the global sample filter. only if ϱ is greater than both ϱ and ϱ, then the function f and with it associated oyc complexes are considered to be orthology-related. application of the random sample filter differentiates the functions of the oyc class complexes from those which are likely to be observed within the complexes of class ryc and thus by chance. in the case of global sample filter it extracts functions which have greater retrieval rates within the complexes of class oyc than within the complexes of class gyc. hence, these functions are suppressed when considering complexes present in the global topology of the ppi network and are unveiled when considering only the complexes formed by orthologs.

clust. gr. - the cluster group , #complexes - the number of complexes, #functions - the number of functions, total - the numbers in total, ϱ - the numbers after applying the random sample filter, ϱ - the numbers after applying the global sample filter, max{ϱ, ϱ} - the numbers after applying the both filters, ratio  - the percentage of complexes or functions which passes through the both filters

in the case of the random sample filter the number of functions drops considerably, whereas the number of complexes still remains high. as a result, when both filters are combined, one may interpret the total reduction on the number of complexes and functions as primarily caused by the random sample filter, while there is almost no effect on the reduction due to the global sample filer, especially on the number of complexes.

this suggests that in the set of all annotations associated with a given complex of the oyc class, it is very likely to observe an orthology-related function despite the sparse distribution of orthology-related functions in the go hierarchy. as a result, more than 80% of the oyc complexes are always indeed orthology-related complexes, which suggests they mostly do not correspond to an outcome of a stochastic event.

we discuss in the sequel some interesting orthology-related functions as well as novel protein function predictions derived using the proposed methodology.

on orthology-related functions
in the set of yeast orthologs with respect to e.coli we identified  <dig> orthology-related functions. table  <dig> reports only higher level functions in go hierarchy as determined by the go slim functional terms . each go slim characterizes a certain type of biological functions which have some features and tasks in common, and hence they define the functional categories in a biological system.

clust. gr. - the cluster group , cc - cellular component, mf - molecular function, bp - biological process

considering cellular compartments of a cell, we identified ribosomal and chromosomal proteins as being orthology-related. indeed, it has been shown that the ribosomes in the mitochondria of eukaryotic cells resemble those in bacteria, reflecting the likely evolutionary origin of this organelle  <cit> . considering other reported functional categories, numerous phylogenetic data provide strong evidences that there is a constant evolutionary pressure in conserving critical functional domains on proteins that are significant for cell survival. these proteins are usually components of dna/rna replication, transcription and translation apparatus or they are involved in ion transport processes.

because worm, fly and human all belong to eukaryotes, we looked at their common orthology-related functions . considering molecular functions, we retained mostly kinases activity proteins and dna binding proteins. this is true in particular for proteins of kinase activity, which have been found conserved among eukaryotes: these kinase' functional conservations were investigated for yeast, worm, fly and human when studying their evolution  <cit> . orthology-related dna binding proteins have been also known to exhibit high sequence conservation among eukaryotes .

clust. gr. - the cluster group , cc - cellular component, mf - molecular function, bp - biological process

regarding the mcm complex, it consists of six eukaryotic mcm proteins which also share significant sequence similarity with one another. these proteins serve as the eukaryotic replicative helicase, the molecular motor that both unwinds duplex dna and powers fork progression during dna replication  <cit>  and therefore are expected to be orthology-related.

ctp and pyrimidine processes are incorporated in the growth of rna and dna during the process of transcription or dna replication. short-term energy storage is also one of the functions of pyrimidines. hence, as mentioned above, there is a pressure on evolutionary conservation of these processes vital for a cell survival. last but not least, proteins involved in ubiqiunting-dependent processes contain a highly conserved ubiquitin-conjugating  domain; thus, the function is also orthology-related.

on orthology-related complexes and novel predictions
orthology-related complexes are those complexes of the oyc class whose proteins perform at least one orthology-related function. in addition, we call unique complexes those complexes whose proteins have a predicted function that is not inferred for those proteins by any gyc complex. these are the complexes that are new and derived using  the orthology sub-network, that is, uniquely linked to the orthology signal.

given a unique cluster and its protein having a new predicted function not inferred by any gyc complex containing the protein. then, if the function prediction is experimentally or computationally annotated in sgd, this prediction is verified. analogously, if we find the new predicted function has not been experimentally or computationally annotated in sgd, then this prediction is indeed a novel prediction. observe that one cluster can have verified as well as novel predictions at the same time. the number of orthology-related complexes as well as those which produce verified and/or novel protein function predictions are reported in table  <dig>  we may observe that, for each ortholog set, from all complexes with a novel prediction, more than 80% are orthology-related complexes. this is analogous to the reduction effect on the whole set of complexes mentioned above.

clust. gr. - the cluster group , #all - the number of all complexes, #ort.-related - the number of orthology-related complexes

examples of novel orthology-related complexes are given in table 6: they demonstrate that by examining different sets of orthologs we found specific putative complexes, most of them crucial for a living cell.

for instance, proteins of cluster  <dig> are predicted to be involved in mitochondrial proton transporting atp synthase, catalytic core. while atp <dig> and atp <dig> are indeed the part of the catalytic core, atp <dig> is part of the central stalk of mitochondrial proton-transporting atp synthase. cluster  <dig>  however, gives a proper suggestion for the mechanism of the atp <dig>  moreover, as atp <dig> interacts with atp <dig> it may be involved also in the catalytic core.

cluster  <dig> and  <dig> are ubiquintin complexes. in general, in eukaryotes ubiquitin-dependent processes relate to protein degradation, because it is catalysed by a family of ubiquitin-carrier enzymes  which contain a highly conserved ubiquitin-conjugating  domain. previous reports showed that numerous members of this family are functionally overlapping  <cit> . hence, as one could expect, our complexes, cluster  <dig> and cluster  <dig>  are found for all eukaryotic yeast's orthologs, consisting of ubiquitin-conjugating enzymes that mediate protein degradation, indicating a highly conservation of ubcs during evolution for eukaryotes. in cluster  <dig> err <dig> is a protein of unknown function, which has similarity to enolases. this suggests that err <dig> is part of the ubiquitin conjugating enzyme complex. in case of cluster  <dig> the vip <dig> was the only protein found with no ubc activity indicating the involvement of kinases in the complex process of ubiquitination. however, experimental data demonstrated the ubiquitin-proteasome machinery to control the levels of kinases by proteolysis  <cit> . as the mechanism of ubiquitin-mediated protein degradation is poorly understood it requires further investigation.

next, we discuss proteins in the closely related complexes cluster  <dig> and cluster  <dig>  the protein families that mediate vesicle trafficking are conserved through phylogeny from yeast to human, as well as throughout the cell from the endoplasmic reticulum to the plasma membrane  <cit> . our analysis showed proteins of the sec family  and others as sed <dig>  bet <dig>  sly <dig>  hip <dig> and sfb <dig> conserved from worm to human and involved in the coat protein complex ii  that selectively transport molecules and vesicle fusion proteins from the endoplasmic reticulum  to the golgi complex  <cit> . other proteins included in the complexes but not for all species as bug <dig> and grh <dig> have been observed co-localizing on the cis-golgi and they form a heterooligomeric complex binding grh <dig> at the well conserved c terminus of bug <dig>  <cit> . the role of these two proteins in er to golgi transport is mediated by the interaction between grh <dig> with the sec23/ <dig> complex, proteins that we could identify in the same complex a that of grh <dig> and bug <dig>  in these clusters related with vesicle trafficking we could observe other proteins like sft <dig>  coy <dig> and gos <dig> not annotated for the er to golgi vesicle-mediated transport term but we could classify them in the correct cluster. these proteins have been observed to be required for vesicle fusion with the golgi complex  <cit> .

further interesting outcomes are cluster  <dig> and cluster  <dig>  both clusters share the sso <dig> protein but they produce different functional predictions. in the case of cluster  <dig> sso <dig> interacts with proteins of the yeast snare complex , the core of the machinery required for membrane fusion, while in cluster  <dig> sso <dig> is involved with the cvt pathway proteins , a biosynthetic transport route for a distinct subset of resident yeast vacuolar hydrolases. reggiori et al  <cit>  described that the biogenesis of cvt vesicles apparently requires a fusion step catalysed by the vft tethering factor and by the snare complex but they failed to show the proteins that are related in the interaction between the cvt pathway and the snare complex. although to further elucidate the real role of the sso <dig> protein in the interaction between the cvt pathway and the snare complex an experimental validation is necessary, these results show the capability of the presented methodology not only to classify proteins interacting within the same or related clusters but also to predict unknown protein interactions between different pathways and complexes that are currently under investigation. interestingly, cluster  <dig> is found in oyc-w and oyc-h cluster groups corresponding to yeast-worm and yeast-human ortholog sets while cluster  <dig> is found only in oyc-f corresponding to the yeast-fly ortholog set suggesting the complexity and versatility of protein complex evolution.

finally, we discuss cluster  <dig>  which contains the novel prediction for the snf <dig> and rgt <dig> proteins. this complex was observe for yeast-fly and yeast-e.coli ortholog sets but not for the other ones. previous studies in yeast demonstrated that snf <dig> and rgt <dig> are integral membrane proteins with unusually long carboxy-terminal tails involved in glucose transport. this is in compliance with our results that showed both proteins to have a glucose transport activity. however, according to recent studies, although both proteins are very similar to glucose transporters, they apparently do not transport glucose but they interact as glucose sensors. Özgan et al  <cit>  demonstrated that glucose signalling is not the result of glucose transport and that the c- termini of both proteins are signalling domains of these glucose sensors. nonetheless, it remains unclear how glucose transport is regulated and therefore our prediction can be considered as valid. in addition, as the snf3/fgt <dig> protein interaction was not found in yeast ortholog set with respect to human and worm, it indicates that the protein complex is not conserved among all species. aside the snf3/rgt <dig> complex the predicted cluster includes also the hxt-transporters which are responsible for glucose uptake. moreover, in oyc-e this protein complex was assembled with the contribution of cyc <dig>  a yeast protein that binds to the promotors of the hxt genes blocking their transcription. this finding is very interesting as e.coli contains no nucleus and therefore it is likely that an equivalent protein complex exists.

CONCLUSIONS
we proposed a novel methodology for quantifying the functionality of the orthology signal in a ppi network at a functional complex level. the methodology performs a differential analysis between the functions of those complexes detected by clustering a ppi network using only proteins with orthologs in another given species, and the functions of complexes detected using the entire network or sub-networks generated by random sampling of proteins.

results of our experimental analysis indicated the usefulness of the proposed methodology to identify functional categories and complexes that can be clearly attributed to the presence of an evolutionary  signal, as supported by biological evidence from related studies.

as a future work, we intend to investigate possible extension of the methodology to increase its sensitivity. in particular one can exploit the inheritance property present within the go hierarchy, namely each filial go term may inherit features of its parental terms. for example, one could propagate the evolutionary signal between the two closest orthology-related function in the go hierarchy such that all go terms present on the paths between these two terms are also orthology-related.

