BACKGROUND
the availability of complete genome sequences for related organisms can be effectively leveraged to study transcriptional regulatory networks   <cit> . in the past decade, comparative genomics approaches have been routinely employed to study bacterial transcriptional regulatory networks, or regulons, controlled by a single transcription factor . these studies have enabled the identification of core network elements and niche-specific adaptations, providing insights into the evolution of these systems . a conventional trn comparative genomics analysis typically involves three well defined steps  <cit> . the first step consists in the transfer of available information on the regulatory network  to the species under analysis, in order to infer the tf-binding motif in these target species. the second step involves a genome-wide search for putative tf-binding sites in the target genomes using the inferred tf-binding motifs. in the third step, search results from multiple genomes are integrated across orthologs, based on the assumption that only orthologs of regulated genes will systematically display tf-binding sites in their promoter regions.

the power of comparative genomics arises from the aggregation of predictions in multiple genomes under the assumption of functional selection, which dramatically reduces the number of false positives  <cit> . however, the effectiveness of this approach depends crucially on the success of the initial transfer step. information from a reference trn can be transferred though the assumption of a conserved tf-binding motif, a conserved regulon, or a combination of the two  <cit> . as a consequence, several methods have been proposed to transfer regulatory information across species. the simplest approach, here called “direct transfer”, is to use the reference tf-binding motif to search for sites in the target genome. the target motif is hence implicitly defined as a subset of the highest scoring sites in that genome . in “direct discovery”, the direct transfer scheme is further elaborated by applying a motif discovery or optimization algorithm on a set of high-scoring sites from the target genome  <cit> . the alternative to tf-binding motif-based transfer is to assume conservation of gene content in the trn. regulon or “network transfer” is typically implemented through the detection of orthologs for genes in known regulated operons. the promoter regions of the corresponding operons in target genomes are then analyzed with a motif discovery tool to elicit the tf-binding motif . if network information is not available, a minimal network consisting only of the tf-coding gene can be postulated under the assumption of self-regulation, and the tf-binding motif can be inferred with motif discovery tools applied to promoter region of the tf-coding gene . lastly, motif- and network-based transfer approaches can be combined in “mixed transfer” to minimize false positives, at the expense of lowered sensitivity  <cit> .

the limited availability of experimental data on tf-binding sites has hindered attempts at systematically assessing and comparing methods for transfer of transcriptional regulatory networks. early studies on trn transfer indicated that the efficiency of methods based on tf-binding motif transfer faced a sharp drop-off with increasing sequence divergence among the tf orthologs  <cit> . later studies exposed the limitations of network-based transfer methods, due to shortcomings in orthology detection methods and the flexible nature of bacterial trns . it has been suggested that mixed transfer methods provide better results  <cit> , but the scarcity and distributed nature of tf-binding site data have to date prevented systematic benchmarking of these methods. in this work, presented at the  <dig> international symposium on bioinformatics research and applications  <cit> , we report the mining and integration of experimental tf-binding site data from multiple databases into a unified catalog. leveraging this resource, we performed a systematic evaluation of trn transfer methods across pairs of species and using multiple metrics. in agreement with previous reports, our results reveal that motif-based transfer methods perform best, but decay sharply at high tf sequence divergence. in contrast, the efficiency of network-based transfer methods is poor and weakly dependent of phylogenetic distance, while mixed methods do not significantly improve the results of motif-based transfer methods. our analysis also highlights the inadequacy of receiver-operating-characteristic  curves in heavily unbalanced settings and indicates that the precision-recall  area-under-the-curve  is the most informative statistic for assessment of transfer results. we evaluate predictive measures for transfer accuracy and discuss their applicability in the context of comparative genomics analyses.

RESULTS
data compilation and evaluation of metrics for the assessment of transfer methods
to perform a systematic analysis of methods for the transfer of transcriptional regulatory networks in bacteria, we compiled data from five major databases reporting experimentally-validated tf-binding sites across the bacteria domain. after consolidating replicates, we obtained a catalog of  <dig>  tf-binding sites for  <dig> tfs in  <dig> species . to analyze trn transfer, we focused on tf/species pairs that contained at least  <dig> binding sites for the same tf in both species. the resulting dataset contains  <dig> tf-specific species pairs for  <dig> different tfs across  <dig> bacterial species and is dominated by instances of the global transcriptional regulators lexa and fur .

the establishment of an adequate metric is a necessary and crucial element in a benchmark study. when transferring trns from a reference species to a target species for comparative genomics, the result of the transfer process is an inferred tf-binding motif in the target species. given the inferred and known tf-binding motifs in the target genome, one can evaluate the accuracy of the transfer process by directly comparing the motifs or by assessing the efficiency of the inferred motif at retrieving the known tf-binding sites in a genome search. here we focused on the euclidean distance and the kullback–leibler  divergence as well-established motif comparison functions based on the position-specific frequency matrix  defined by the motif  <cit> , and on two standard metrics for classification accuracy based on the area-under-the curve  derived from a tf-binding site search process: the receiver-operating-characteristic  auc and the precision-recall  auc  <cit> . to assess the efficacy of each method at discriminating the efficacy of trn transfer, we simulated transfers by defining inferred motifs as noisy pseudo-replicates or permutations of the known collection of binding sites in the target genomes . we then assessed the quality of these simulated transfers against the known target motif using the four metrics outlined above .fig.  <dig> comparison of methods for the evaluation of trn transfer. the plots show the histogram of euclidean distance, kl divergence, roc-auc and pr-auc values for simulated bidirectional transfers between  <dig> tf-specific species pairs using different degrees of noise , as well as their random and permuted controls. the y-axis shows the number of transfers within each binning value on the x-axis. roc-auc and pr-auc values are normalized to the respective auc of the known target tf-binding motif to compensate for the decreased search efficiency of low information content motifs



as it can be seen in fig.  <dig>  both the euclidean distance and kl-divergence perform only moderately well at discriminating the results of simulated noisy transfers  from completely random or permuted motifs. this result is partly due to the fact that the expectation for random motifs is not to yield maximum distance, narrowing the useful range of motif comparison metrics. the two other contributing factors are the high-dimensionality of tf-binding motifs, which is known to decrease the relative contrast of l-norms  <cit> , and the presence of low information bearing positions in most tf-binding motifs. low information positions are intrinsically close in psfm space, artificially increasing the similarity between motifs for both metrics  <cit> . as a result, in both cases, random and permuted motifs display a considerable spread, leading to significant overlap with the results obtained for simulated noisy transfers. in practice, transfer methods frequently generate motifs comparable to the noisy transfers simulated here, and their overlap with random controls therefore complicates the interpretation of transfer results.

accuracy metrics based on a genome-wide search for known tf-binding sites should in principle provide a more informative metric of the effectiveness of the transfer process, since they evaluate the ability of the inferred motif to locate true binding sites in the target genome. in contrast with motif comparison methods, the expectation for accuracy metrics is hence that incorrect or random transfers should yield very low auc values. however, this does not happen for the roc-auc, a widely adopted metric in bioinformatics  <cit> . this result is due to the large class imbalance in the tf-binding search problem, where a handful of known true sites must be distinguished from the genome background. even though roc curves scale properly with class imbalance  <cit> , they are ill-suited to discriminate between classifiers in a heavily imbalanced context, because the negative class dominates the computation of the roc-auc  <cit> . the net result of this effect is a compression of auc scores for noisy motifs into a very narrow range , making discrimination between near-optimal and noisy transfers almost impossible. this compression affects also the results obtained for random and permuted motifs, which spread all the way up to  <dig>  auc scores, further complicating the interpretation of transfer results. by focusing on the ratio between true and false positives  and otherwise ignoring the negative class, the pr-auc generates scores are not compressed by class imbalance  <cit> . as it can be seen in fig.  <dig>  the pr-auc effectively exploits its range to discriminate between noisy transfers and systematically assigns very low values to random and permuted motifs. hence, the pr-auc provides the most effective metric for the benchmarking of trn transfer methods and was used in all subsequent analyses reported here.

comparison of transfer methods
motif-based and network-based transfer methods rely on different assumptions about the evolutionary dynamics of transcriptional regulatory networks. the former assume that the tf-binding motif is conserved to some extent, while the latter assume that the gene components of the regulon are conserved. as a result, it is presumed that motif-based methods will perform poorly at large phylogenetic distances due to expected divergence in the tf-binding motif, whereas network-based methods are expected to be more resilient to phylogenetic distance if the biological function of the regulatory network is preserved. interestingly, there is evidence supporting and invalidating both assumptions and their corollaries. the sos response transcriptional regulator lexa, for instance, has been shown to target widely diverging motifs in relatively close species  <cit> , whereas some transcriptional regulators, like the heat-shock response repressor hrca or the arginine repressor argr, are known to preserve their binding motif across bacteria to different extents  <cit> . on the other hand, regulon composition has been documented to vary significantly even among closely related species . furthermore, crp/fnr-type regulators have been shown to control completely different networks using closely related motifs across bacteria  <cit> .

here we tested the robustness of trn transfer methods by evaluating the pr-auc of inferred tf-binding motifs in  <dig> tf-specific species pairs, using three motif-based and three network-based methods, as well as a combination of motif- and network-based methods . the motif-based transfer methods include direct transfer and direct discovery methods. in direct transfer, the reference collection of tf-binding sites is used directly to determine the inferred collection by searching promoter regions in the target genome. in direct discovery, the results of a relaxed search and their surrounding regions are used as input for a motif discovery algorithm, with the goal of generating a motif better adapted to the target genome. the network-based transfer methods evaluated differ in how they map genes regulated in the reference genome to the target genome. this mapping can be based on the detection of direct orthology for genes in regulated operons, their functional assignment using clusters of orthologous groups  or orthology detection using their interacting network partners. the mixed approach combines a relaxed tf-binding motif search with the restriction that identified sites must be associated with genes mapped with any of the three network-based transfer approaches.

in agreement with previous research, the results shown in fig.  <dig> reveal that the effectiveness of motif-based transfer methods declines rapidly with decreasing sequence similarity between the tf protein sequences  <cit> . in contrast, the results of network-based transfer methods show only moderate correlation with protein sequence similarity, but these methods perform poorly when compared to motif-based transfer methods. among the three mapping modes analyzed for network-based transfer, the direct ortholog mode provides the best results, but is still only able to generate successful transfers in 15 % of the cases. the poor efficiency of network-based transfer methods supports previous research highlighting the evolutionary flexibility of bacterial transcriptional regulatory networks, which decreases their expected overlap in gene composition . the low efficiency of network-based transfers could therefore stem from an inability of these transfer methods to identify conserved regulated genes  or from the inclusion of too many orthologs without conserved regulation in the transfer process . the interplay between these factors should explain the significant differences observed between network transfer modes, since these variants are intended to progressively relax the concept of orthology in order to enhance recall. to analyze their relative contributions, we computed the spearman correlation coefficient between the search pr-auc reported in fig.  <dig> and the precision/recall of the network transfer process for the different transfer modes. we find that recall , rather than precision , is the dominant factor for the more restrictive ortholog mode. this indicates that detecting enough orthologs with conserved regulation is critical for proper motif inference. however, the situation is reversed for the more relaxed cog  and interaction  modes. these results suggest that the increase in mapped orthologs that are not regulated in the target genome  overcomes any substantial enhancement in recall achieved by relaxed mapping modes .fig.  <dig> comparison of trn transfer methods. the plots show the pr-auc of bidirectional transfers between  <dig> tf-specific species pairs using motif-based  and transfer-based methods , as well as a mixed model integrating direct transfer and the union of all network-based transfer methods. the results obtained with a permutation of the target motif are shown for comparison. the x-axis denotes protein similarity as the blosum <dig> score of the ungapped pair-wise alignment between reference and target tf protein sequences. pr-auc values are normalized to the respective auc of the known target tf-binding motif to compensate for the decreased search efficiency of low information content motifs. spearman correlation coefficients  of pr-auc with protein similarity are shown for each case



in contrast with network-based transfer methods, the different implementations of motif-based transfer yield very similar results . using the reference motif to search promoter regions and define the putative target motif  provides results comparable to those obtained with other motif-based transfer methods and robust with respect to the specific threshold used to define the motif . the use of meme in direct discovery transfers to rediscover the tf-binding motif, which has been postulated to refine and better adapt the inferred motif to the target genome  <cit> , does not provide significant improvements over direct transfer. in fact, when performing motif discovery on the promoter region surrounding the identified sites, meme may identify other genomic elements  as the best motifs, decreasing the accuracy of the method. performing motif inference on the identified sites surrounded by random promoter regions prevents this effect, but does not yield a systematic improvement in pr-auc values over direct transfer. finally, the mixed mode approach, which has been associated with enhanced specificity  <cit> , did not yield a systematic improvement over direct transfer either.

predictive indicators of transfer accuracy
our comparative analysis of transfer methods  indicates that, even at relatively close phylogenetic distances, both motif- and network-based transfer methods may provide inaccurate results. hence, manual curation of transfer results, which has been the de facto standard for comparative genomics of trn in bacteria  <cit> , appears to be a necessary requisite to ensure the reliability of any subsequent comparative genomics analyses. leveraging the tf-binding site catalog compiled here, we attempted to identify predictive indicators of transfer accuracy for motif- and network-based transfer methods. several studies have exploited sequence similarity in the dna-binding domain of the tf as a criterion for clustering putative regulatory regions in motif discovery  <cit> . the rationale for this approach is that similar dna-binding domains will target conserved tf-binding motifs. hence, it is plausible to assume that dna-binding domain sequence similarity could be an efficient predictor of transfer accuracy for motif-based transfer methods.

to test whether dna-binding domain sequence similarity is a good predictor of transfer accuracy, we examined transfer accuracy for two transcription factors  on which we had abundant tf-binding site data and for which the dna-binding domain has been experimentally determined  <cit> . the results shown in fig.  <dig> reveal that dna-binding domain sequence similarity is not a universal predictor of transfer accuracy. for lexa, dna-binding domain sequence similarity shows a clear correlation  with motif-based transfer accuracy, but this correlation is completely absent for fur . our results therefore suggest that for transcription factors  targeting a conserved binding motif, the efficiency of motif-based methods will not significantly decrease with sequence divergence in the dna-binding domain. in contrast, and in agreement with previous findings  <cit> , the accuracy of motif-transfer methods is expected to decrease sharply for lexa and other transcription factors that have significantly altered their binding specificity through evolution. in this context, dna-binding domain sequence similarity provides a more accurate indicator of transfer efficiency than phylogeny .fig.  <dig> assessment of protein sequence similarity as a predictor of trn transfer method accuracy. the plots show the pr-auc of bidirectional transfers between  <dig>  tf-specific species pairs using motif-based  and transfer-based methods  as a function of tf protein sequence similarity. the results obtained with a permutation of the target motif are shown for comparison. the x-axis denotes protein similarity as the blosum <dig> score of the ungapped pair-wise alignment between reference and target tf protein sequences. pr-auc values are normalized to the respective auc of the known target tf-binding motif to compensate for the decreased search efficiency of low information content motifs. spearman correlation coefficients  of pr-auc with protein similarity are shown for each case



the results shown in fig.  <dig> also indicate that dna-binding domain sequence similarity correlates weakly with accuracy for network-based transfer methods. dna-binding domain sequence similarity is a proxy for phylogenetic distance , and the observed loss of accuracy of network-based transfer methods is hence congruent with decreased overlap in the components of regulatory networks for increasing phylogenetic distances  <cit> . it is possible, however, to conceive of other measures that might function as predictive indices of transfer accuracy for network-based transfer methods. these methods rely on motif discovery algorithms, like meme, to infer the functional motif for the transcription factor in the target species, providing some theoretical bounds on expected properties of the inferred motifs. for instance, the information content  of a tf-binding motif is known to correlate with the number of operons regulated by the tf  <cit> . hence, if the size of the regulatory network is assumed to remain relatively constant, we expect the ic of the inferred tf-binding motif to be similar to that observed in the reference species. in a similar vein, the distribution of information in a tf-binding motif is related to the structure of the tf and its mode of binding   <cit> . it follows that measures of information distribution in inferred tf-binding motifs, such as the gini coefficient  <cit> , should not differ much between reference and inferred motifs under the assumption of conserved protein structure. we analyzed the predictive power of these indices on pr-auc using the complete tf-binding site catalog . while neither index can reliably identify successful transfers, both indices reveal clear cutoff values beyond which accurate transfers should not be expected. for both ic and gini coefficient, a relative index of  <dig>  with respect to the known reference motif is a strong indicator of unsuccessful transfer , and the evidence suggests that this may also be true for ic and gini values above  <dig> fig.  <dig> assessment of ic  and gini coefficient  as predictive indices of accuracy for network-based transfer methods. the plots show the distribution of pr-auc from bidirectional transfers between  <dig> tf-specific species pairs using network transfer , with respect to each index. pr-auc values are normalized to the respective auc of the known target tf-binding motif to compensate for the decreased search efficiency of low information content motifs. ic and gini coefficient values are normalized to those observed on the known reference motif. the dotted vertical line designates  <dig>  normalized motif ic/gini. the dotted horizontal line identifies the pr-auc value  two standard deviations above the mean obtained from simulated transfers with permuted motifs.



CONCLUSIONS
transferring known information about transcriptional regulatory networks from reference to target species is a critical step in comparative genomics analyses. in this work, we compiled a catalog of known tf-binding sites in bacteria and performed a methodic evaluation of assessment metrics in order to perform the first systematic analysis of different transfer methods. our results identify the precision-recall area-under-the-curve as the most reliable metric for transfer efficiency. we also show that motif-based transfer methods dramatically outperform network-based approaches, but their efficiency may decrease sharply with increasing phylogenetic distance. we evaluate some predictive indicators of transfer accuracy and show that they are not consistent or precise enough to enable full automation of trn transfer. our results hence support the long-standing practice of manual curation in comparative genomics analyses and reveal that the introduction of more elaborate methods does not clearly benefit motif- or network-based transfer approaches.

