BACKGROUND
the study of the multiple biological dimensions of genes or groups of genes has developed into an exciting research area  <cit> . for example, in drosophila, proteins essential to male reproduction have become a paradigm for the effect of sexual conflict on the rate of nucleotide substitutions  <cit> . this biological dimension has been evaluated with regard to others, such as x-linkage and recombination rates; both known to be correlated to the molecular evolution of genes  <cit> . this example illustrates how the evaluation of any such biologically relevant aspect of a gene, or groups of genes, is now routinely evaluated relative to a set of properties commonly suspected to affect or to compromise the study.

the ability to conduct multivariate analysis of numerous gene properties and their genomic locations in the broader context of a study in gene evolution was nicely illustrated by the analysis of the relationship between codon usage bias, gene expression, and recombination in drosophila and other eukaryote genomes  <cit> . more recently, a virtually comprehensive set of genomic and functional properties that could affect the evolutionary dynamics of genes was analyzed for multiple drosophila genomes  <cit> . these and similar such studies illustrated the difficulty to distinguish mere correlation from causation. for example, the relationships between gene expression levels, codon usage bias, and recombination rates could be a by-product of gc content variation and/or gene density  <cit> .

despite these and similar complications that arise from a wide array of correlations, such analyses illustrated the ability to address questions that could not have been resolved in the pre-genomic era. for instance, it appears that the positive or inverse relationship of recombination rates with the rates of non-synonymous substitutions per non-synonymous site  can be resolved, in part, once genes are separated into two classes: fast evolving genes that experience positive selection and constrained genes under strong purifying selection  <cit> . this example illustrates how the grouping of genes by a particular property can help unveil important biological phenomena.

with complete genome sequences in hand, the power to detect properties that unify or separate large groups of genes has greatly increased. however, while some properties affecting gene evolution have long been studied, other properties have yet to receive attention. post-genomic studies continue to reveal many properties affecting the evolution of genes, including properties that in the past were viewed as too exceptional to be considered of broad relevance to the evolution of genes and genomes. one such property is the coding sequence overlap between two genes. this property has previously been studied in the field of experimental molecular biology in special cases  <cit>  and recently has been more frequently reported in eukaryote genomes  <cit> , but gene constellation has not been noted as a general feature of eukaryotic genomes.

a bird's-eye view of the genome has now begun to reveal that gene constellations once thought to be exceptional in large eukaryotic genomes should perhaps be considered of more general importance  <cit> . for instance, one of the first such discoveries published on a larger eukaryotic genome, d. melanogaster, showed that genes that co-cluster within 20- <dig> kilobases   can generate correlations in the pattern and timing of gene expression  <cit> . this indicates that genes that co-cluster in this way should not be viewed as independent, at least in the context of some research questions. genome biologists have begun to embrace such co-clustering of genes within transcriptional territories as a notable biological feature of the genome, even in large eukaryotic genomes. operationally, for the purpose of our study we refer to deviations from the stereotypical gene architecture as gene constellations because these deviations involve the physical overlap of pairs of genes or their spatial proximity within distances that cover transcriptional territories.

the goal of our study was to examine if gene constellations should be considered as a genomic property affecting functional and evolutionary properties of genes in the drosophila genome. most current analyses of molecular evolution and population genetics in drosophila still implicitly refer to the stereotypical gene as depicted in textbooks . in higher eukaryotes, we typically think of such a gene as a solitary single-copy gene that is, for all practical purposes, independently regulated . however, as we show, the stereotypical gene is an exception in the drosophila genome, not the rule. thus, we pose the question of whether functional and evolutionary analyses of drosophila genes could be biased if the genes analyzed deviate from this stereotypical gene architecture. we also want to ask what we can learn about genome biology if gene constellation is considered a genomic property. from the outset of the study, it was clear that both the scheme to classify gene constellations and the list of properties chosen for analyses were not meant to be exhaustive. as indicated above, results of our analyses are interpreted in two contexts. first, gene constellation is discussed in the context of the biology of genes, or groups of genes. notably, as one would expect based on results obtained from previous genome analyses that have shown that biologically meaningful correlations among multiple properties generally are, albeit significant in statistical terms, generally subtle in magnitude  <cit> , that any gene constellation effects would emerge as subtle also. second, gene constellation is discussed as a parameter that might bias hypothesis testing if ignored. in both cases, the effect of gene constellation on the functional and evolutionary properties of genes is discussed relative to that of better-understood properties, including recombination rate, x versus autosomal linkage, and protein function.

RESULTS
enumeration of gene constellations
deviations from the stereotypical gene architecture were defined as three main groups of gene constellations . of  <dig>  d. melanogaster genes considered,  <dig>   met our criteria for stereotypical solitary  genes . overlapping genes  accounted for  <dig>  of all genes , of which the 5pp gene constellation was most abundant . the second largest group consisted of  <dig>  chromatin co-clustering genes . within this group, the cos gene constellation was most abundant . we provide the list of these genes and their classifications in figure  <dig> and in additional file  <dig>  and with the caveats discussed below, we suggest that this annotation list could be used as is or in modified forms to test datasets for compositional biases.

the scheme described above to classify genes is not the only possible classification. for example, we considered transcriptional territories as a biological reality, which may be important to some studies but less so to others. however, while we did consider transcriptional territories, we did not wish to overemphasize their influence, and thus, we used the lowest threshold of  <dig> kb  to account for their presence. to examine the effect of applying this lower threshold we plotted the fraction of genes within each constellation as a function of transcriptional territory sizes up to  <dig> kb . when transcriptional territories  are considered as part of a gene constellation classification scheme, the expansion of transcriptional territories beyond distances > <dig> kb decreases the percentage of sg estimated . the number of paired overlapping genes remains unaltered, unless distances <  <dig> kb are used to classify overlapping and chromatin clustering genes, in which case single genes would account for ~50% of all genes in the d. melanogaster genome. thus, gene constellations that deviate from the stereotypical gene architecture as defined by us in the methods section, rather than the stereotypical solitary gene, remain a widespread feature of the drosophila genome even when classification schemes ignoring transcriptional territories are utilized.

genomic and functional correlates of gene constellations
gene duplication
whether or not a gene has a duplicated copy in the genome can affect its functional properties and evolutionary dynamics. for example, functional similarity amongst duplicated genes is higher when compared to randomly paired singleton genes  <cit> .

we observed significant  differences in the number of d. melanogaster gene duplications identified in each constellation when compared to the average singleton/duplicate gene ratio of  <dig>  calculated for the whole drosophila genome . specifically, the singleton/duplicate gene ratios were  <dig>  for sg,  <dig>  for 5pp, and  <dig>  for ee, indicating that duplicates were underrepresented is these groups; the same ratios were  <dig>  for 5pi-ei,  <dig>  for cos, and  <dig>  for css, indicating that duplicates were overrepresented for these groups .

ac.f. additional file  <dig> for data and additional file  <dig> for a summary of sample sizes.

baverage values, except for the ratio of x- and autosomal genes, where the value provided should be considered the genome wide ratio.

* and ** indicate significant deviation from the genomic average at p-value ≤  <dig>  and p-value ≤  <dig> , respectively .

therefore, to enhance our ability to study the effect of gene constellation on functional and evolutionary properties while reducing the confounding effect of gene duplication on these properties, duplicated genes  were excluded from further analyses. the relative abundances  of genes in each constellation before and after the removal of gene duplicates from the data remain similar .

chromosomal location
the location of a gene on the x chromosome versus the autosomes may have an effect on its functional properties and evolutionary dynamics  <cit> . for example, recessive mutations are exposed to selection in the hemizygous x of males.

gene constellations occur with expected frequency on the x and on the autosomes of d. melanogaster as predicted by their overall frequency , except for a small deficiency or excess on the x of the ee  and css  constellations, respectively. x versus autosomal linkage was considered during all analyses.

recombination rates
the recombination rate is a correlate of the effect of genetic drift and selection on levels of genetic variation within species and the rates of molecular evolution between species  <cit> .

in d. melanogaster, the average recombination rates of the x-chromosome exceed the recombination rates of the autosomes  <cit>  . gene constellations 5pp, cos and css were found more frequently  in regions of higher average recombination rates on the autosomes . genes on the x belonging to groups 5pp and 5pi-ei were found mostly in regions showing higher recombination rates . recombination rate variation was considered in the examination of the evolutionary properties of gene constellations .

functional similarity
the function of proteins can be correlated to the type and strength of the selection on their underlying genes  <cit> . for example, it is generally believed that genes involved in the early development of the fly are under purifying selection  <cit> , whereas genes involved in male reproduction diversify rapidly between species  <cit> .

we investigated whether pairs of genes in each d. melanogaster constellation display similarities in their function, based on their associated gene ontology  terms . this analysis indicates that genes occurring in particular constellations are subject to similar selection pressures. we present results based on the analysis of functional similarity calculated from the relevance semantic measure  and the gobm measure   <cit> . we found that genes belonging to the groups sg and 5pi-ei were representative of the genomic average  in terms of pairwise functional similarity . overlapping genes  and chromatin co-clustering genes  showed higher than expected functional similarities. results based on the analysis of other functional similarity measures  led to the same conclusion . this bias in gene function was considered when examining the evolutionary properties of gene constellations .

functional enrichment
enrichment of go terms could also result in a bias of the evolutionary properties of gene constellations  <cit> . analysis of the d. melanogaster genome showed that a large number of go terms were over-represented in each gene constellation . many of these were either uniquely overrepresented or enriched in one gene constellation , indicating that gene constellations could be biased also in terms of gene function.

the overrepresentation of particular go terms in a gene constellation may bias its evolutionary properties . to illustrate this effect, we calculated ka/ks between d. melanogaster and d. pseudoobscura for all genes in constellations with overrepresented go terms and contrasted these to the average ka/ks computed for gene constellations in general. we observed that the average ka/ks  for solitary autosomal genes  with overrepresented go terms was  <dig>  ±  <dig> , a lower ka/ks when compared to the ka/ks of  <dig>  when all solitary genes were considered . thus, functional bias in the group sg should decrease ka/ks.

similarly, the average ka/ks of genes with associated go terms that were overrepresented in groups 5pp and cos was below the ka/ks calculated when all genes were considered  . the gene constellations ee, 5pi-ei, and css showed no such bias . therefore, enrichment in function was taken into consideration when examining evolutionary properties .

a c.f. additional file  <dig> for data and additional file  <dig> for a summary of sample sizes.

baverage values except for the measure for expression divergence , where the value provided should be considered the genome wide proportion of differentially expressed genes.

c expression divergence: the percentage of differentially expressed genes between d. melanogaster and d. yakuba.

* and ** indicate significant deviation from the genomic average at p-value ≤  <dig>  and p-value ≤  <dig> , respectively .

correlation of gene expression
the intensity and tissue specificity of gene expression can be correlated to the evolutionary properties of genes  <cit> . for example, selection for translational efficiency is one possible explanation for the connection between gene expression and codon usage bias  <cit> . male-biased expression of genes is correlated to the rate of rapid non-synonymous site substitution of genes  <cit> .

analysis of d. melanogaster gene expression showed that pairs of solitary genes  and overlapping genes  were representative of the genomic average . in contrast, overlapping genes of type 5pp and ee, and chromatin co-clustering genes  showed higher than expected pairwise correlations of gene expression .

evolutionary correlates of gene constellations
conservation of gene constellation
persistence and turnover of gene constellations may be indicative of evolutionary processes and/or technical issues related to gene annotation. for example, ~ <dig> d. melanogaster genes  in different constellations have no consensus ortholog in d. pseudoobscura. this might indicate rapid turnover of genes in particular gene constellations and/or, that these genes are more difficult to annotate and assign as orthologs than others. we compared conservation of gene constellations between d. melanogaster and d. pseudoobscura. the latter species was chosen because one-to-one assignment of orthologs to d. melanogaster genes is well established and this information is accessible .

we observed two patterns amongst the  <dig> orthologous gene pairs without d. melanogaster duplicate genes . first, for most groups, only a low fraction of genes are conserved and/or annotated in the same constellation in both species, most genes are found and/or annotated in a species-specific constellation . in contrast, the two most abundant gene constellations 5pp and cos contain similar or higher fractions of genes that are conserved between species than genes in species-specific constellations.

we found  <dig> d. melanogaster genes that had no orthologs in d. pseudoobscura. these genes may not be annotated, or assigned, or may not be present or recognizable in d. pseudoobscura due to gene loss/fusion or other evolutionary phenomena such as evolutionary rate acceleration resulting from positive selection  . the percentages of genes with missing orthologs in each constellation were as follows: sg , 5pp , ee , 5pi-ei , cos  and css . the fact that genes that should be relatively straightforward to annotate  in d. melanogaster are overrepresented among those missing orthologs in d. pseudoobscura might indicate that these genes now are in certain gene constellation that renders annotation difficult. the fact that the missing orthologs cannot be studied at present makes it difficult to identify the causes of their delayed or failed annotation. however, our results do indicate that the evolution of genes can involve changes in gene constellation. the evolutionary and technical factors explaining these merit detailed analyses that are outside the scope of this manuscript.

codon usage bias
codon usage bias is used as a proxy measurement for the efficacy of weak selection  <cit> .

the average codon usage bias  of the most abundant gene constellation  exceeds the average cai of the d. melanogaster genome . the second most abundant gene constellation  has a codon usage bias below the average. the remaining gene constellations also showed higher  or lower  bias when compared to the genome average.

thus, the two most abundant gene constellations  potentially bias inferences of codon usage in an upward and downward direction, respectively, depending on which of the two might be overrepresented in a given dataset. we would expect that these overlapping gene constellations are more abundant in genomic regions of high gene density  <cit> . thus, the higher than average codon usage bias observed for the gene constellations 5pp and ee is consistent with results of an earlier study that reported high codon usage bias in regions of high gene density  <cit> .

dna sequence divergence
we investigated whether the gene evolution between d. melanogaster and d. pseudoobscura could be affected by the grouping of genes in different constellations. for example, nucleotide sites in genes whose exons overlap might be under dual selective constraint , when compared to solitary genes, where nucleotides encode information for one gene only.

gene constellations with functional overlap  displayed reduced ka/ks relative to the genome average . in contrast, overlap between functional and presumably non-functional regions  was not associated with reduced ka/ks. elevated ka/ks measurements were observed for chromatin clustering genes . the ka/ks ratios of solitary genes  were average. above trends were unsupported when the x chromosome was analyzed, though we did note the low ka/ks of genes in the 5pp group on the x .

our results are consistent with the idea of gene constellations representing a biological feature of genes that can affect  nucleotide substitution rates of genes.

dna sequence polymorphism
genetic polymorphism measures are useful for inferring the influences of selection, drift, and demographics on gene frequencies in populations  <cit> . such studies are involved because they need to consider  complex demographic models and an array of other variables . the subtle effects caused by each variable often leads to competing interpretations of the results.

we examined whether gene constellation groupings are correlated with population genetic measures at the level of genetic diversity  when d. melanogaster populations are analyzed . fst between african and north american populations of d. melanogaster was estimated to investigate whether gene constellations are correlates of genetic differentiation . for example, it is conceivable that population differentiation at exon or promoter overlapping genes differs from other gene constellations in that polymorphisms may affect two genes at a time.

however, we observed that all but one cell in table  <dig> were in broad accordance with the genomic average. a limitation of these analyses is the small number of genes studied ; further, these genes were not chosen at random with respect to recombination rates when they were collected. this will impose limits on the power of multivariate analyses incorporating gene constellation groupings to reveal how this property compares to other, also subtle, properties that influence polymorphism data, e.g., recombination rates .

divergence of gene expression
we investigated whether genes in different constellations displayed different expression levels between species of drosophila. for example, it is possible that high levels of correlation in expression between overlapping genes, as seen for example in groups 5pp and ee in d. melanogaster, may also be manifest as the correlated differential expression between species.

the percentage of genes that are differentially expressed between d. melanogaster and d. yakuba is higher on the autosomes than on the x chromosome . we observed a statistically significant amount of autosomal genes differentially expressed between species for the group 5pi-ei.

variation of gene expression
we investigated whether the differential expression of genes between d. melanogaster populations from africa and europe varied between gene constellations. the relationship of genes that overlap in functional regions  or co-cluster in transcriptional territories could result in their constrained evolution between populations. however, none of the gene constellations emerged as significant outliers when we employed qst as a measure for differentiation of a quantitative character  between populations .

quantification of the influence of gene constellation on evolutionary properties
we have examined a non-exhaustive set of genomic, functional, and evolutionary properties for correlation with gene constellations as defined by our classification scheme. to infer the relative importance of gene constellation grouping relative to that of other properties, we contrasted the statistical effect of this genomic property on the evolutionary dynamics of genes with other factors with known effects. as points of reference, we considered x- versus autosomal linkage, recombination rate and protein function  <cit>    <cit> . for clarity, in figures  <dig>   <dig>   <dig> and  <dig>  we only depict results for autosomal genes ; furthermore, we eliminated genes with overrepresented go terms to minimize the influence of functional bias . sample sizes available for the study of codon usage bias, ka/ks, and gene expression were large and covered nearly the entire spectrum of recombination rates . the exception to that was that the subset of genes belonging to the sg group had a higher average recombination rate when compared to all sg . sample sizes available to study polymorphisms data were limited, and genes were sampled from regions of high recombination rates , thereby restricting our ability to compare the effect of gene constellation with the effect of recombination rates.

examination of codon usage bias  revealed the expected relationship with recombination rate , and thus, was not indicative of a strong effect of gene constellation on cai. 5pi-ei genes were the exception in that their recombination rates were not significantly higher than those of solitary genes, but the cai was increased. however, during multivariate analysis, in addition to x- versus autosomal linkage, gene function, and recombination rates, a significant effect of gene constellation on cai was detected . however, the impact of gene constellation on cai was two to one order of magnitudes lower  when compared to the effect of gene function and recombination rates, respectively .

asubset of properties chosen from table  <dig> whose effects on the evolutionary dynamics of genes commonly appreciated

bc.f. table 2

cka and ks analyzed separately 

dθw and θπ analyzed separately 

contrary to expectations ka/ks did not increase with increasing recombination rates . during multivariate analysis, protein function and gene constellation groupings emerged as significant model properties . the relative effect of gene constellation on ka/ks was weak  of the effect that gene function has on ka/ks .

we were unable to identify a fitting model for ks, even though higher recombination rates appeared to be associated with higher ks . the analysis of ka indicated that exon-overlap and 5-prime overlap are correlates of low non-synonymous nucleotide site evolution . multivariate analysis on ka supported a model that involved x- versus autosomal linkage, gene function, and gene constellation .

none of the properties studied had an effect when we analyzed θω and θπ as genetic polymorphism estimators of the african population, the population thought to be closest to mutation-drift equilibrium  <cit> . for the american population, x- versus autosomal linkage emerged as a property significantly affecting θω  and θπ . multivariate analysis identified gene constellations as a model feature affecting θπ in the american population of d. melanogaster . analysis of tajima's d identified recombination rates and gene function as significant properties in the african d. melanogaster population . finally, no relationship between fst and gene constellation was supported, but x- versus autosomal linkage emerged as a significant property . thus, in terms of its effect on population genetic parameters, gene constellation generally had no effect. the fact that genes were collected originally for genomic regions representing a rather narrow range of high recombination rates explains why recombination generally did not emerge as an important variable. finally, the complexity of interpreting results at the level of population genetic parameters, as well as the low sample size, may have hampered these analyses.

finally, increasing recombination rates were associated with lower levels of gene expression differentiation between drosophila populations , but multivariate analysis did not support any significant model.

relevance of observations to hypothesis testing
we showed that gene constellation groupings are correlated to a number of genomic, functional and evolutionary properties . the effect during multivariate analysis was about 1- <dig> orders of magnitude weaker than genomic and functional properties . our observations are relevant to datasets that are biased in their representation of various gene constellations, as they may also be biased in their evolutionary properties, therefore potentially leading to type i or type ii errors.

as an example, male reproductive genes in drosophila tend to evolve at higher ka/ks than the genomic average, and datasets used to test this hypothesis tend to consist of small to medium sized collections of genes. we chose two representative studies, chosen owing to their high quality of data and their comprehensive analyses. we tested for compositional bias in terms of gene constellations sampled, and calculated how this could bias the biological hypothesis tested .

the relative composition in terms of gene constellations amongst  <dig> genes with male biased gene expression patterns  <cit>  was uneven . we found a deficiency of genes belonging to group 5pp and an excess of genes belonging to group cos . similarly, a dataset of  <dig> acp  genes  <cit>  was characterized by a deficiency of 5pp genes and an excess of cos genes . these compositional biases with regard to gene constellations could have biased the ka/ks upwardly, since the overrepresented gene constellation  and the underrepresented gene constellation  tend to have higher and lower ka/ks, respectively .

5
2
a. genes with male biased expression  <cit>  and b. acp  genes  <cit> . in a * indicates the significant deviation  of the observed number of genes from the expected number of genes in each gene constellation. in b ‡ indicates the significant over-/under- representation of genes  with respect to the numbers of genes found in the genome.

multivariate analysis applied to the dataset of  <dig> acp genes  <cit>  showed that gene constellation was a significant yet low-effect model feature for ka/ks, in addition to the function of genes as acp proteins . for the analysis of ka, x- versus autosomal linkage was supported as an additional model feature. however, no model could be fitted to the ks data. using the published ka/ks values  <cit>  we observed that the average ka/ks  of the underrepresented 5pp genes was lower than the average ka/ks  of the overrepresented cos genes, suggesting the ka/ks in the whole dataset could be biased in an upward direction due to the compositional bias of gene constellations sampled. as the authors suggested that the molecular evolutionary rates of acp genes evolve at rates faster than the genomic average; this bias could result in a type i error in these studies.

asubset of properties chosen from table  <dig> whose effect on the evolutionary dynamics of genes commonly appreciated

bc.f. table 2

discussion
post-genomic studies now consider the multiple biological dimensions of genes or groups of genes  <cit> . the results of such studies are becoming increasingly informative, but the task of conducting the research is also becoming increasingly complex. clearly, numerous genomic and functional properties of genes are direct determinants or mere correlates of their evolutionary dynamics, and properties may auto-correlate with one another, as shown comprehensively by, e.g.  <cit> . this insight that the evolution of genes is affected by an array of potentially interacting  properties suggests that any study focusing on a particular biological dimension needs to also consider an array of other factors.

in essence, genome biologists face the challenge of determining the relative influences of numerous biological facets of a gene in order to understand its most important features. simply identifying new previously overlooked features that merit investigation should be considered an achievement of the post genome era; even if these features emerge as weak effectors, they may provide insight into the biology of individual genes, groups of genes, or the genome as a whole. moreover, quantification of the effects of previously overlooked features is important to gauge the bias these may introduce to studies if ignored.

the list of biological properties that should be considered during studies is not standardized, even though it has long been good practice to consider, for example, x- versus autosomal linkage and recombination rates. other properties also commonly considered include gene duplication and sex-specific expression. the recently published compilation of properties affecting the evolution of genes in drosophila provides guidance to such multidimensional studies  <cit> . however, the absence of a discussion on gene constellations prompted us to examine if this property deserves consideration also, and if the study of gene constellations would add to the understanding of the complex biology of genes, or adversely, if studies that ignore this property would show bias.

relative abundances of gene constellations
our classification scheme, which considered transcriptional territories but minimized their spatial extent, suggests that the stereotypical single gene architecture should be considered as the exception, rather than the rule, in the drosophila melanogaster genome. our reference to the rarity of the stereotypical gene is conservative because if higher distances were applied to account for transcriptional territories, their number would be reduced further . however, as stated, our reference to the rarity of the solitary gene depends on the acceptance of transcriptional territories as a biological reality  <cit> . thus, our statement needs to be interpreted in light of their relevance to any particular study. if transcriptional territories were ignored as a genomic feature, or deemed irrelevant in a particular study context, the number of solitary genes would be as high as ~50% .

our discovery of the rarity of the stereotypical solitary gene  might be of relevance to the design of molecular evolution and population genetic studies and to the possibility that previous studies ignoring this genomic property suffered from bias. conceivably, researchers would pick solitary genes for analysis, because intuitively, overlapping genes would seem a poor choice. chromatin-clustering genes would also be less favored in an attempt to avoid the effect of correlated expression patterns of co-clustered genes  <cit>  or to space genes along the chromosome to avoid correlations in recombination rates  <cit> . such a study design would likely end up with a collection of stereotypical solitary genes, which, according to our results, can differ from other genes e.g. in terms of codon usage bias and ka/ks. thus, such a collection of stereotypical genes may not be representative of the overall genome.

we feel that the classification and resulting enumeration of 5pp, ee, and 5pi-ei genes are unlikely to be contentious, except that the distance between promoter/enhancer overlapping genes may be varied . chromatin clustering genes cos and css are defined from previous results describing transcriptional territories, but this is also subject to other uncertainties. these uncertainties refer to the relevance of such transcriptional territories to any particular study context. moreover, the number of genes that co-cluster in transcriptional territories varies as a function of the distances applied to classify them.

a second concern regards the distinction of 5pp and ee genes. the 5-prime region of a gene may overlap with the 5-prime region of another gene located in its 5' end on the opposite strand , but may also overlap with the coding region of another gene located in its coding region . this conflict in classification results in an overestimate of the number of 5pp genes and an underestimate of ee genes, and in part, might explain the similarity of 5pp and ee genes during analyses. overall, by using our priority scheme, the risk of overestimating gene numbers in each group decreases in the order 5pp, ee, 5pi-ei, cos and css.

with these caveats in mind, we suggest that any given random sample of genes likely contains mostly genes that deviate from the stereotypical gene architecture, thereby potentially affecting studies on codon usage bias and substitution rates if the data used are enriched or devoid of genes belonging to particular constellations. for example, the enrichment of datasets with overlapping genes of type 5pp and ee would bias codon usage in an upward direction, whereas substitution rate estimates  would be biased downwardly. thus, even though schemes used to classify genes may be varied, we suggest that our classification provided a reasonable framework to illustrate the fact that gene constellations can affect the functional and evolutionary properties of genes, and thus, attention should be paid to this property.

quantification of the constellation effect
studies continue to reveal genomic and functional properties of genes as correlates of their evolutionary dynamics  <cit> . given the increasing number of potentially important biological facets of genes, there is a need to quantify their relative effects on the evolutionary dynamics of genes to enable the identification of those most relevant to genome evolution and those most confounding to evolutionary analyses if ignored  <cit> .

from the results of our multivariate analyses, which were not exhaustive, we deduce that the known effect of recombination rates on codon usage bias was about five times  more pronounced than the effect of gene constellation . in addition, during multivariate analysis, the effects of x- versus autosomal linkage and gene function on codon usage bias emerged as greater than one order of magnitude more pronounced than the effect of gene constellation . similarly, in examining ka/ks values, we estimated that the expected importance of gene function during multivariate analysis is at least ten times more relevant than the effect of gene constellation . we expect that these contrasts between the relative effects of genomic properties that are broadly embraced as important to the evolution of genes and the new property 'gene constellation' examined by us are reasonably informative. this is because these analyses were based on large numbers of genes representing a range of recombination rates .

when analyzing genetic polymorphism data the effect of gene constellation that was observed was absent or subtle . this could be due to limited data availability and/or because the effect truly is weak or nonexistent. analyses of genetic polymorphism data require immense care and power to distinguish the generally subtle effects of, for example, recombination and demographics. thus, whether future polymorphisms analyses that are based on more comprehensive samples of genes would be able to uncover subtle effects of gene constellation remains to be seen in our view, and we would expect these to be at least 1- <dig> orders of magnitudes smaller than the effect of recombination rates.

thus, despite the fact that the list of potentially interesting evolutionary properties examined was not exhaustive, and the fact that our study should be considered a first-pass analysis of this feature, we showed that gene constellation might factor into some of the functional properties of genes examined . however, the effects on evolutionary properties of genes we were able to detect generally were as weak  or much weaker as we had expected . we did not correct for multiple testing because our intention was to identify those properties that might be most relevant in this study context. we therefore placed more emphasis on the relative quantification of the effects than on formal significance.

implications for hypothesis testing
we examined whether gene constellation might be a genomic property that should be considered more routinely during molecular evolutionary and population genetic studies. results of multivariate analyses were consistent with a significant influence of gene constellation on a subset of the evolutionary properties studied. however, the effect was weak when expressed in terms of the relative contribution of model features during multivariate model fitting . thus, the practical relevance of ignoring the confounding effects of gene constellation is questionable.

we showed that two data sets were biased in their representation of gene constellations . the bias observed is expected to result in a type i error, in that the compositional bias would result in inflated ka/ks. this is of concern, because this bias is in the direction of the alternative hypothesis, which in this context posits that male reproductive genes tend to evolve at accelerated rates  <cit> .

results of multivariate analysis showed that gene constellation was important during the study of male reproductive genes. however, the effect did not confound the main conclusion of the study, as the biological function of a gene as a male accessory gland protein was two orders of magnitude more important  compared to gene constellation. the authors' examination of ka/ks values suggested that such genes evolved rapidly , however, unbalanced sampling of gene constellation groups appears to have biased the estimation of ka/ks in an upward direction, as predicted from the positive effect of the model feature gene constellation . thus, while the conclusion that male reproductive genes evolve at ka/ks above the genomic average remains valid, we would predict that the rates reported for acp genes are somewhat inflated.

CONCLUSIONS
application of our classification scheme, or slight variations thereof, shows that the stereotypical solitary gene should be considered an exception in the drosophila genome, rather than the rule. even when transcriptional territories are deemed irrelevant  the solitary gene accounts for only 50% of all genes; indicating that the remaining 50% of genes physically overlap in some way.

the rarity of the solitary gene is worth stating because, firstly, gene constellation has not been discussed in the otherwise complete examination of properties affecting gene function and evolution in drosophila  <cit> .

secondly, as we show for the drosophila genome, some gene constellations deviate in their functional or evolutionary properties from the genome average or from the average of solitary genes.

moreover, gene constellations emerged as a model feature during multivariate analysis alongside variables known to influence the evolution of genes.

however, the effects were weak, particularly for the evolutionary properties studied, and thus, depending on the biological aspect studied and the types of analyses conducted, this factor appears to be of comparatively small significance or concern. nevertheless, we suggest that our classification scheme, or some variations thereof, may warrant consideration when results of evolutionary analyses are interpreted.

