BACKGROUND
systems biology is an indispensable approach to study the complex mechanisms of any disease or disorders. after post-genomic era the accumulation of genomics and proteomics data are widely flooded. however, there is an unrealized opportunity remains in the understanding of detailed molecular mechanisms of several neurological disorders  <cit> . thus, the molecular diagnosis of most of the neurological disorders remains difficult and mostly carried out by neurological examination  <cit> . the current molecular connectivity approaches of systems biology are mainly focusing on building large protein networks without probing the interaction mechanisms specific to disorders or disease condition  <cit> . hence, the possibility of finding successful biomarkers through systems biology approach is intricate. in order to gain a better understanding of molecular mechanism, disease relationship and biomarkers, the genes implicated within similar disorders are need to be focused.

the systems biological concepts of disease interaction were usually made by collecting signature genes of genetically heterogeneous hereditary diseases and investigating the different mutations in a same gene  giving rise to different disorders  <cit> . similar, trends are followed for differentially regulating genes and linking them to various diseases  <cit> . here, we had taken an integrated approach of mutated and differentially regulating genes and exploring diseasome network that corresponds to the neurological and psychiatric diseases. such integrative approach will improve the confidence of finding specific markers for diseases. the reasons that we choose an integrative approach on neurological disorders are two-fold. first, the understanding of neurological disorder is considerably less, because of difficulty in obtaining brain tissue for many cases. second, there is an increasing prevalence rate  <cit>  and lack of molecular diagnosis for most of the neurological disorders  <cit> .

in this study, we propose an integrative, network-based model of mutated and differentially regulating genes of  <dig> neurological and  <dig> psychiatric diseases , that identifies the neurological and psychiatric relationship and their association with aging. furthermore, this network model helps to understand the common mechanism between diseases through common pathway network . overall, our findings highlight the importance of integrating the gene/protein data of neurological diseases into future molecular biomarkers and drug target discovery.

RESULTS
in this study, we developed a novel computational framework  to build disease-protein network  , disease-disease network   and common pathway molecular network  . our approach of integrating mutated and differentially expressed diseases genes allow us to validate the neurological and psychiatric relationships with aging. in addition, this approach helps to predict the disease specific biomarkers for the potential diagnosis. we showed that this approach was effective in constructing a statistically significant molecular connectivity map of  <dig> diseases with  <dig> proteins. this work pointed out a new direction for biomedical researchers to investigate the molecular interaction network with the known dysfunctional genes to identify disease relationship. the results of disease-disease connectivity map constructed from disease protein interactions helps to guide the hypothesis for generation of biomarkers for neurological and psychiatric diseases.

we used omim and literature mining to generate the initial list of  <dig> seed genes for  <dig> diseases. using string, we expanded  <dig> seed genes/proteins to  <dig> human proteins with  <dig> proteins as enriched set. of  <dig> proteins, most of the proteins were associated to one or more diseases showing the possibility of successful interactions between the diseases. these records were further mapped to hgnc database to obtain a unique gene symbol, to avoid false interactions. as explained in the methodology, the disease protein network  was constructed to have  <dig> proteins with  <dig> interactions . in addition, we included the  <dig> ageing genes to the dpn, to make a valid correlation of aging within the analyzed diseases. these aging genes were presumably more interesting to determine the association of aging with neurological and psychiatric diseases. this final dpn containing  <dig> proteins with  <dig> interaction  was important to generate the disease-disease relationship , common disease pathway network  and disease biomarker network . in figure  <dig>  we showed the curated view of seed and enriched set of proteins interactions including aging genes/proteins. all proteins were shown as nodes; the seed and enriched proteins are colored yellow and the aging genes were colored as red. similarly, in figure  <dig>  nodes indicate disease and edges indicate the link between diseases. the disease-disease interaction was comprehended but the reliability of the ddn depends on dpn. therefore, the overall proteins involved in the dpn were validated by analyzing its significance by a random sampling method. for instance, the protein sub-network  of parkinson's disease contains  <dig> proteins, in which psen <dig> is highly connected protein, showed  <dig> interactions in its network. therefore, the index of aggregation was calculated as  <dig> . the random sampling method was carried out as described in the methodology. only seven runs out of  <dig> resulted in an index of aggregation value greater than  <dig>  . therefore, the p-value of the observed index of aggregation of the parkinson's disease network was  <dig> . similar trends were followed for all the diseases and geometric mean for overall p-values was calculated as  <dig> . with the significance of disease-protein interaction data, the ddn was generated in order to determine the relationship between the diseases. two diseases were connected by a link if same proteins/genes were implicated in both the diseases. these identified disease-disease interactions were further validated by interaction score. this process generated a total of  <dig> positively scored disease-disease interactions . in these identified interactions,  <dig> neurological and  <dig> psychiatric diseases were shown to have a strong association with aging  . further, the analyses of  <dig> neurological diseases revels  <dig> diseases were shown to have relationships with any of the analyzed psychiatric diseases. for example,  <dig> neurological diseases provide the common association with both major depressive disorder and manic depressive psychosis, suggesting the role of depressive state in these  <dig> diseases . to access the reliability of these connections, we mapped the connected disease pair onto mesh term. of  <dig> positively scored disease-disease links excluding aging interactions,  <dig>  pair shared common disease term , . for example, alzheimer's and parkinson's disease were present in the neurodegenerative disease section of the mesh tree. the remaining  <dig> disease pairs were not located in the same branch of mesh tree. however, these positively scored disease connections that located in different branches of mesh tree was particularly interesting, because they provide novel disease relationships that were primarily relying on gene similarity instead of phenotypic classification. for example, parkinson's disease has been connected to rem sleep behavior disorder, not surprisingly, many studies indicate the association of rem sleep behavior disorder with parkinson's disease  <cit> . however, they were not explicitly in same disease branch according to mesh. for better understanding of common mechanism between the diseases, the proteins/genes that commonly associated between each disease pairs were mapped to nci-nature pathway interaction database  <cit> . this process generates  <dig> associated pathways between the disease pairs . further, analyses of these pathways may guide for the drug target discovery. for instance, our study showed the association of glucocorticoid receptor regulatory network between alzheimer's and major depressive disorder. supportive to this result, previous study of filippo et al., suggests glucocorticoid receptor can be the common drug target for both alzheimer's and major depressive disorder  <cit> .

biomarkers are the most interesting part of any biomedical research, and it is essential for neurological and psychiatric diseases because most of these diseases lack diagnostic markers. every disease was expected to have its own fingerprint, which subsequently helps in detection of diseases. though, we analyzed  <dig> diseases, only  <dig> diseases were shown to have a disease specific biomarkers   while, others may have shared their fingerprint with their related diseases. interestingly, few of our identified biomarkers were previously reported. for instance, our previous study suggests that pyruvate dehydrogenase lipoamide beta  and neuropeptide ff-amide peptide precursor  are the biomarkers for parkinson's disease  <cit> . however, this approach provides the additional information that pdhb is not only associated with parkinson's disease but also associated with athetosis and friedreich ataxia, whereas npff was found unique to parkinson's disease, suggesting the possibility as biomarker. the significance of these disease specific biomarkers was validated by enrichment score based on gene ontology with a threshold of  <dig> . all the identified disease biomarkers passed the threshold and confirmed its significance to its diseases. furthermore, the identified biomarkers of each disease was scored based on the feasibility of diagnosis from biofluids, this analysis would be of marginal interest to researchers focusing on diagnosis of these  <dig> diseases from biofluids. each parameter such as house keeping genes and biofluids circulating proteins were assigned a value  to generate the overall diagnostic score. in comparison with other biofluids, urine has two characteristics feature that makes it a preferred high m-score value of  <dig>  for feasible diagnosis. first, urine can be obtained in large quantities using non-invasive procedures. this allows repeated sampling of the same individual for disease surveillance. second, the urinary protein content is relatively stable probably due to the fact that urine "stagnates" for hours in the bladder  <cit> . however, the reliability of diagnostic biomarkers in csf is high because, it has direct contacts with the extracellular space of the brain, making it as a unique medium in detecting biochemical changes in the central nervous system. however, obtaining the csf samples is difficult thereby it was assigned to a least diagnostic m-score of  <dig> . considering the feasibility of both urine and csf, the average m-score of  <dig>  was assigned to biomarkers presence in blood plasma. of  <dig> identified biomarkers proteins,  <dig> were found to be present in any one of the biofluids and three biomarkers were identified to be circulating in all the biofluids . further comparison of biomarkers with house keeping genes, showed six biomarkers proteins were encoded by essential genes, which enhances the possibility of diagnosis in any tissue. though, we suggest these top scored proteins as feasible diagnostic markers  , further studies are need to be carried out to determine its significance as biomarkers.

the biomarkers of  <dig> diseases were indicated along with their diagnostic score. the biomarkers that are shown to be specific to neurological and psychiatric diseases in comparison with gwas database are indicated in bold.

cross-validation of network
to validate our computational approach, the results obtained from this study were compared with the results of goni et al and goh et al approaches  <cit> . our result was in agreement with goni et al studies showing the successful interaction between alzheimer's disease and multiple sclerosis. in addition to our result, several other studies also confirm the molecular relationship between alzheimer's disease and multiple sclerosis  <cit> . however, similar interaction trend was not been achieved with goh et al approach. this is because goh et al approach of molecular connectivity was carried out on mutated genes, while our approach uses both differentially expressed and mutated disease genes for the generation of ddn. hence, our approach confirms the effectiveness of integrating differential and mutated genes for reliable disease-disease relationships. on the other hand, the proposed biomarkers of our study were cross-validated using genetic association database   <cit>  to confirm its disease specificity in context to neurological or psychiatric diseases. in our identified  <dig> biomarkers, only  <dig> biomarkers were shown to have disease association information, while the information of  <dig> biomarkers was not available in gwas database. this is because the genetic associations of few diseases were not been included in gwas database. however, the precision rate  was calculated only on these  <dig> biomarkers. all  <dig> biomarkers were confirmed to be specific to its diseases in context to the analyzed disorders. hence, the ppv was calculated to be 100%.

limitations
though, our present approach provides good accuracy in determining the disease-disease interaction and biomarkers, it has limitation in the aspects of biomarkers detection. in medicine, biomarkers are the molecules, specific to its pathological condition. since, our study is focused on neurological and psychiatric diseases the obtained biomarkers are specific to its diseases of neurological and psychiatric disorders. however, there is a possibility for these  <dig> biomarkers to have an association with other disorders irrespective neurological and psychiatric diseases. such limitation can be avoided by including all the disorders in a network and implementing our biomarker strategy for detection of biomarkers. however, with the available information of these  <dig> biomarkers, we validated across gwas database. the results confirm that  <dig> biomarkers are specific to its disease and have no association with any other disorders .

CONCLUSIONS
in conclusion, the disease-disease relationships are of great interest because such knowledge not only enhances our understanding of disease mechanisms, but also accelerates many aspects of biomarker and drug target discovery. these results can be interesting to neurologists, and our method can be generalized to other disease biology areas for systems biological investigation. we believe our approach to understand the mechanism involved in neurological disease has given a valuable insight into the relationship of aging and psychiatric illness. moreover, these combined efforts resulted in identification of biomarkers that will greatly improve in diagnosis of neurological and psychiatric diseases.

