BACKGROUND
an ontology is a formal way for the representation and sharing of knowledge in a certain domain by describing the concepts  in that domain and the relationships between them. an ontology formalizes the meaning of concepts, or terms, by a set of assertions and rules that characterize them and connects them to other terms within the ontology  <cit> .

the gene ontology , a widely used bio-ontology, is used to describe genes and gene products from numerous organisms  <cit> . go is constructed from three separate ontologies which capture the three main biological areas of knowledge regarding gene products. these ontologies are: molecular function, biological process and cellular component. thanks to relentless efforts of the gene ontology consortium  <cit> , go includes a very large number of terms. as of february  <dig>  it contained approximately  <dig>  terms. these terms are interrelated via five relatively simple types of relationship: is-a, part of, regulates, positively-regulates and negatively-regulates. since terms can have more than one parent, the structure of the ontology can be represented as a directed acyclic graph , in which the terms are the nodes and their relationships are the edges.

one common use of the gene ontology is the functional annotation of the results of high throughput experiments, such as transcription profiling arrays  <cit> . in such cases, association is sought between go terms and genes or gene products that are affected by a particular treatment. such terms allow the changes in gene expression to be generalized, providing a list of go terms that characterize the response to a treatment rather than a list of genes.

the fact that go covers most of biological knowledge related to gene functions may complicate functional analysis. for any given studied system, many terms may be completely unrelated yet are still considered during analysis. this dilutes the number of actual hits, increasing the likelihood of falsely reported enrichment and complicating the interpretation of the resulting list of terms. consider, for example, the use of the term 'sperm motility'  when studying systems such as brain aging or eye diseases. including this term in the enrichment analysis will increase the number of terms considered in the analysis, in turn reducing the statistical power of the enrichment analysis by requiring more rigorous multiple testing correction, while in most likelihood contributing very little to the interpretation of the results.

this problem may be overcome by constructing a domain-specific ontology. such an ontology can be constructed from scratch by defining all the domain-specific terms and linking them to all those genes that can be defined by these terms. however, this approach is highly demanding and largely overlaps with the massive efforts of the go consortium.

an alternative approach is to create a subset of go, choosing terms pertinent to a specific task. taking this course, existing go terms  are selected from go rather than defining new terms. this approach is extensively used in generating go 'slims', which are frequently used for creating a birds-eye view of the results, allowing the results to be summarized and compared  <cit> . slimming of go is achieved by choosing high level terms from each of the three major component gene ontologies: cellular component, biological process, and molecular function. the resulting go slim typically involves a small number of annotations, and separates gene products into very broad categories such as 'metabolism' or 'signaling'. however, while useful for achieving a high level of generalization, the massive loss of resolution greatly reduces the ability of go-slims to pinpoint relevant processes. a second approach to creating go subsets uses a method that describes each go term according to the amount of information it holds. thus, top-level terms which are more general are assigned a lower 'information score', while more specific terms are assigned a higher score. by describing go terms in this manner, go subsets  containing terms with consistent information content  can be created  <cit> . although this approach allows creation of subsets that contain go terms at any level of specificity by setting a desired threshold of abstraction, many of these terms may still be biologically irrelevant for the analysis of a specific dataset.

we propose that domain-specific gene ontology subsets that contain only terms relevant to specific systems can be created by clipping irrelevant terms from the ontology, while maintaining the ontology consistency i.e. maintaining the relationship between terms as defined in go . we hypothesize that by considering terms from all levels, better and more comprehensible results for functional analysis of microarray data may be achieved, with minimal loss of resolution. we test this hypothesis by developing a go subset specializing in the neural and immune systems of human, mouse and rat, and comparing the performance of the resulting clipped go with that of the full go and a generic go-slim. we show that enrichment analysis using the resulting neural-immune go  gives better and more interpretable results than the full go when considering relevant experimental systems, but not in unrelated systems.

RESULTS
the neural/immune gene ontology 
a neural/immune-specific gene ontology  was created by clipping those go terms that are not associated to any gene in human, rat and mouse, and by clipping terms not found to be relevant to the neural and/or immune domains using a 5-step filtration process . the lists of go terms removed by each filter can be found in the supplementary material . for the cellular component section of go, only organism-based clipping was performed, since attempts to decide whether terms from this section of go contribute to the analysis of neural/immune-related datasets were found to be exceptionally difficult and eliminated only a small number of terms. we elected to create a domain specific subset of go that includes both the neural and immune domains since our interest lies in annotating microarray studies which exploit both these systems.

the clipping process led to a 5-fold decrease in the number of terms, from  <dig>  to  <dig>  . most of the terms were removed through organism-based clipping, which left a total of  <dig>  terms,  <dig>  that were kept since they were directly associated with one or more human/mouse/rat genes, and  <dig>  terms that were kept for being parental to these terms. organism-based clipping was performed mainly to reduce the burden associated with manual reviewing steps. clipping according to biological relevance further reduced the ontology by 50%, leaving a total of  <dig>  terms, of which  <dig>  terms were deemed relevant to the neural/immune systems and  <dig> terms were parental.

comparative analysis of nigo, go and go-slim
nigo was developed based on the hypothesis that a domain-specific subset of go will perform better in detecting interesting terms in that domain. in order to test this hypothesis, the performance of nigo in functional analysis of microarray data was compared to the full gene ontology. the performance of each ontology was compared for nine neural and/or immune related microarray data sets and, as a control, three non neural/immune data sets . enrichment analysis was performed for each experiment using the gsea algorithm  <cit> , chosen for its simple interface that provides the option of uploading user defined gene annotations in the form of gene sets, and for its lack of arbitrary thresholds which need to be separately tuned for each experiment.

the results of this analysis  show that functional analysis of neural/immune related microarray experiments with nigo improved the false discovery rate  values of relevant go terms in comparison to the full go with minor loss of relevant terms for the related experiments, but not for neural/immune unrelated experiments.

 enrichment in genes with up-regulated expression in hippocampus treated with fluoxetine, based on geo profile gse <dig>  all terms passed fdr >  <dig>  and state the fdr values.  geo profile gse <dig>  all terms passed fdr <  <dig>  and state the fdr values .  geo profile gse <dig> all terms passed nompval <  <dig>  and state the fdr values . 'not found' indicates that the term was not detected by the analysis. * indicates the best fdr value for that term. a indicates terms retained in nigo to keep the consistency of the graph's structure. † indicates terms that were not included in the nigo subset.

for three geo expression profiles, the results of the analysis are described in detail . in the analysis of the gse <dig>  in which the effect of chronic fluoxetine treatment on hippocampal gene expression was examined  <cit> , eleven terms passed statistic filtering with nigo and not with the full go, out of which  <dig> were directly related to neural/immune functions or processes . four of the eleven terms were retained in nigo due to the graph structure. in addition, nigo improved fdr scores for terms that were also significant by the full go . only one term that is included in the full go but not in nigo passed the statistic cutoffs but this term  was functionally irrelevant and contributed very little to the analysis.

for the geo profile gse <dig>  in which astroglial gene expression program elicited by fibroblast growth factor- <dig> was examined, four terms relevant to neural/immune systems passed statistic filtering with nigo and not with the full go . these include the terms 'regulation of cell growth', 'immune response', 'mhc class i protein complex' and 'antigen processing and presentation' which are functionally relevant to the tested system. in addition, two terms passed statistical thresholds with nigo and were retained due to the graph structure. furthermore, nigo improved fdr scores for the term 'nucleus' that was also significant by the generic go slim subset but not with the full go. the term 'mhc class i protein complex' received a fdr value of  <dig>  when analysis was conducted with nigo and a fdr value of  <dig>  when analysis was conducted with the full go. this is an example of how without the use of nigo one would have to raise the cutoff to at least  <dig>  in order for this term to appear in the analysis results.

functional analysis of gse <dig> with nigo also revealed statistically significant terms that were missed when using the full go. this experiment involved microarray expression profiling designed to explore the effect of ru <dig>  a synthetic steroid compound  on lps-induced gene expression in the cns  <cit> . three relevant terms were revealed by nigo but not detected with the full go . these include the terms 'viral envelope', 'viral infectious cycle' and 'viral capsid'. in addition, two terms that were kept in nigo due to the graph structure rather than their direct relevance to the neural/immune systems were also reported with nigo but not with the full go. intriguingly, two terms that were retained in nigo  passed the statistical cutoffs only for the full go and not with nigo. both of these terms were functionally irrelevant, and both had p-values that are marginally significant for the full go and generic go slim , and marginally insignificant for nigo . this suggests that the difference in analysis stems from the stochastic nature of gsea, and not from differences in the performance of nigo and the full-go. one term passed the statistical criteria both using nigo and the full go, in which case the fdr value observed with nigo was lower than the fdr value obtained with the full go. the generic go slim performed very poorly in this analysis, with only one enriched term being noted, namely 'structural molecule activity', which also passed the significance criteria for nigo with a lower fdr value.

we noticed that some terms, included both in nigo and the full go, received higher fdr values when nigo was used , contrary to our expectations from the impact of reducing the ontology size. for example, in the analysis of gse <dig> in which gene expression analysis was conducted using trib1-deficient macrophages treated with lps as compared to lps-treated wild-type macrophages  <cit> ,  <dig> out of  <dig> terms  had lower fdr values with the full go. since nigo only effects multiple testing correction, we hypothesized that the lack of improvement in fdr values when using nigo is partially due to the stochastic nature of the gsea algorithm. to test this hypothesis, the same analysis was repeated three times with each of the ontologies for gse <dig>  fdr values were averaged and a comparison of analysis results was performed based on these averaged fdr values. in accordance with our hypothesis, the averaging of fdr values improved the apparent performance of nigo. out of the terms that passed the statistical cutoff with nigo and the full go, averaged fdr values of  <dig> terms were lower with nigo, while analysis with the full go received lower averaged fdr values for only three terms .

the enrichment analysis results of gsea, providing the full go, nigo or go-slim as the sole source of gene sets, are compared for neural/immune-related  and unrelated  studies. a statistical cutoff was chosen for each analysis such that at least five terms were found to be significantly enriched in any of the analyses. studies are identified via their geo accession. the number of terms that passed the statistical cutoff inclusively for each subset are provided , together with the number of terms that are not included in the nigo subset out of the total number of terms that passed the statistical cutoff only with the full go or generic slim . the number of terms that passed the statistical cutoff with nigo and at least one additional go subset  are also shown for each term , with the number of terms with the lowest fdr values for each subset given in separate columns. *to test the effect of stochasticity, the analysis of this profile is based on 3-fold averaged fdr values from three independent gsea analyses. a profile gse <dig> involves rat tissue, and was not analyzed with the mouse go-slim.

three non-neural- or immune-related datasets were used to test the performance of nigo in functional analysis of microarray data in comparison to the full go and the generic go slim subset. these datasets included the geo expression profile, gse <dig>  in which gene expression in heart tissue with cardiac specific over-expression of sirt <dig> was examined  <cit> , the geo expression profile, gse <dig>  in which the gene expression profile of mammary glands from pregnant mice was compared to that of mammary glands from lactating mice  <cit> , and the geo expression profile, gse <dig>  in which gene expression in testis from sertoli cell-selective androgen receptor knockout mice was examined  <cit> .

in all three of the neural/immune-unrelated datasets, nigo did not reveal any terms that did not pass the statistical cutoff when conducting the analysis with the full go or the generic go slim subset . terms that passed statistic filtering with the full go or the slim subset include the terms 'atp binding', 'mrna cleavage', 'nucleotide binding', 'integrase activity' and 'positive regulation of mrna 3'-end processing', none of which are included in the nigo subset. in addition, multiple terms with marginal significance were detected with the full go but not nigo due to the stochastic nature of gsea . due to its reduced size, those terms that were identified with nigo and the full go and/or the generic go slim often received lower fdr values in nigo.

these results were further supported by analyzing the same expression profiles with ontologizer  <cit> , which uses a modified fisher exact test, to test deterministically for over-representation of each go term, given two groups of genes, and using the benjamini-hochberg method to control for the false discovery rate. most terms that passed the statistical threshold for both the full go and nigo had lower adjusted p-values when analysis was conducted with nigo . however, in the case of two non-neural- or immune datasets, some terms received lower adjusted p-values with the full go than with nigo. careful examination of the data suggests that this is the result of the multiple testing correction method, as the distribution of p-values shifts when terms are omitted, leading to differences in the adjusted p-value assigned to the remaining terms. thus, ontologizer gave results that partially reproduce the phenomena observed with gsea, both in terms of improved sensitivity of the analysis with nigo over the full go and in the occasional lower p-value estimate  for the full go when non-neural/immune datasets are analyzed.

enrichment analysis results from ontologizer, providing the full go, nigo or go-slim as the go subset to be used are compared for neural/immune-related  and unrelated  studies. studies are identified via their geo accession. the number of terms that passed the statistical cutoff inclusively for each subset are provided , together with the number of terms that are not included in the nigo subset out of the total number of terms that passed the statistical cutoff only with the full go or generic slim . the number of terms that passed the statistical cutoff with nigo and at least one additional go subset  are also shown for each term , with the number of terms with the lowest p-values for each subset given in separate columns. a profile gse <dig> involves rat tissue, and was not analyzed with the mouse go-slim.

these results, together with the analysis of five additional neural/immune-related experiments not described in table  <dig>  are summarized in table  <dig> .

discussion
we present here an approach for generating domain-specific subsets of go, via an editing method we call 'clipping'. we show that the use of a clipped subset of go can improve functional analysis of microarray data relevant only to the domain of the clipped ontology. we present nigo, a clipped subset of go directed at nervous and immune systems. evidence that the immune system affects neuronal processes, such as neuronal maintenance and repair, is accumulating. it was recently shown, for example, that mice lacking both t- and b-cell populations  show impairment in neural precursor cell proliferation and differentiation into mature neurons  <cit> . we thus chose to create a neural and immune subset of the gene ontology since we were specifically interested in annotating microarray experiments which link the two systems. even though the design of the subset is aimed for the annotation of such experiments, nigo is also useful for the annotation of expression studies which investigate only one of these two biological systems. we show that nigo outperforms the full go or a generic go-slim in finding relevant terms that are enriched in genes with varied expression in these systems. nigo revealed go terms, from all hierarchical levels of the ontology, that were relevant to the experimental system used to create the microarray data and that did not pass the statistical cutoff when conducting the analysis using the full go. in addition, nigo improved the statistical scores assigned to many neural/immune-relevant go terms that passed the statistical cutoff for the full go.

it is important to stress the fundamental difference between a clipped subset of go and a slimmed subset. while a slimmed subset will also achieve improvement of statistical scores assigned to the enriched terms, theses terms will be general top-level terms that will reveal a lot about the nature of the biological differences between two sets of samples, but little regarding the specific responses. the power that lies in a clipped subset of go is not only in improvement of statistical scores but also in enrichment of terms from all hierarchical levels which reveals more about the biology underlying the study. in this work, we used a generic slim subset which contains  <dig> top-level go terms. while a neural/immune specific go slim could have performed better than a generic slim, it would most likely not include specific terms, such as 'antigen processing and presentation of exogenous peptide antigen via mhc class i' and 'positive regulation of t cell mediated cytotoxicity' which are located  <dig> and  <dig> steps away from the root, respectively. such terms proved to be important for the interpretation of a relevant microarray dataset  and thus demonstrate how a clipped subset of go could outperform even a specific slimmed subset.

in one study, the use of nigo actually allows the formulation of hypotheses that are otherwise missed when using the full go. in studying the effect of chronic fluoxetine treatment on hippocampal gene expression, miller et. al. compared expression patterns in the hippocampi of mice with or without treatment with the antidepressant, fluoxetine, for  <dig> days  <cit> . nigo revealed several immune-related terms that were not identified with the full go. these include go terms such as 'antigen processing and presentation of peptide antigen via mhc class i', 'mhc class i protein complex', 'positive regulation of t cell mediated cytotoxicity', and 'defense response' furthermore, this group of terms was not found to be significantly enriched in the original analysis of this dataset.

the hypothesis that can be derived from this finding, namely that treatment with fluoxetine alters immune-related processes in the brain via the mhc-class i pathway, is in agreement with previous knowledge. chronic stress and depression are widely known to down-regulate the immune system and several lines of evidence indicate that some antidepressants can reverse this impairment by producing various immunomodulatory effects  <cit> . interestingly, it was shown that uptake of serotonin 5-hydroxytryptamine  is impaired by fluoxetine, a process which may interfere with mechanisms of immune regulation  <cit> . moreover, rats treated with fluoxetine demonstrated reduced cd4+ cell number, increased number of cd8+ cells and elevated levels of cytokines such as il <dig> and il <dig> in vitro  <cit> . the nigo-based finding thus coincides with the observed increase of cd8+ cells since the term 'positive regulation of t cell mediated cytotoxicity' was found by nigo to be enriched in the dataset. furthermore, most cytotoxic t cells express t-cell receptors  that recognize a specific antigenic peptide bound to class i mhc molecules. accordingly, go terms related to mhc class i antigen presentation were also found by nigo to be enriched in this dataset. this line of evidence suggests that fluoxetine, and possibly other antidepressants, exert their effects, at least partially, via modulation of cd <dig> t cell's activity. these results further demonstrate that analysis with nigo can enhance interpretation of functional analysis results produced for relevant microarray datasets.

in the analysis of the gse <dig> expression dataset, three relevant terms passed the statistical cutoff with nigo but not with the full go. these terms, 'viral envelope', 'viral infectious cycle' and 'viral capsid' are all terms related to mouse genes involved in viral infection. it was previously shown that for this dataset, clustering of the go nodes revealed that the go term 'response to virus' was enriched in genes down-regulated by lps treatment  <cit> . several lines of evidence show a connection between mifepristone and viral infection. for example, it was shown that mifepristone can increase target cell sensitivity to retroviral infection  <cit> . though the analysis of this dataset with nigo did not reveal any new biological knowledge, detecting and interpreting the 'response to virus' related terms was made much easier.

in several cases, terms were detected by the full go but did not pass the same cutoff when conducting functional analysis with nigo, even though these terms were included in the nigo subset. such terms received fdr or p-values that were very close  than the cutoff values used. this is partially explained by the stochastic nature of the gsea algorithm. indeed, for one set , we compared the raw results with averaged fdr values. averaging dramatically decreased the number of such terms. furthermore, we conducted a similar functional analysis using the fisher exact test and found that while this method included no stochastic element, several of terms that were found by both the full go and nigo  had lower adjusted p-values when conducting the analysis with the full go .

out of nine neural/immune-related expression datasets used to evaluate the performance of nigo in comparison to the full go, nigo revealed terms that did not pass statistical cutoff with the full go for five. for two of the four datasets in which nigo did not reveal new terms, this ontology improved the fdr values for over half of the terms that passed the statistical cutoff with the full go. hence, for approximately 77% of the datasets used, nigo outperformed the full go either by revealing new terms or improving fdr values for more than 50% of the terms that passed the statistical cutoff with both ontologies. for neural- or immune unrelated microarray studies, on the other hand, nigo did not outperform the full go or the generic go slim. these results are well in agreement with the design and purpose of nigo.

alternative approaches may lead to the creation of domain-specific subsets from the go. one approach involves the selection of terms that are descendant of the go term or terms that are most pertinent to that domain. in the case of nigo, this would mean choosing all those terms that are direct descendants of the terms 'immune system process'  or 'neurological system process' . we believe that this approach would lead to many relevant terms being omitted, since not all pertinent terms are necessarily defined in go as a neural or immune system process/function. for example, the term 'muscle hypertrophy'  is not defined in go as a neurological system process but was found to be linked to the neurological system by the umlstermfinder . it is highly likely that not all of the information linking biological processes to these systems have been incorporated into the gene ontology. it is our opinion that by adding knowledge from the literature and from other biomedical ontologies , terms that are not directly associated with these biological systems can still be included in nigo, or any other domain-specific subset. another possible approach is to create a domain-specific slim. while this approach will probably create a highly compact ontology, setting some threshold of abstraction, which is the declared purpose of go slimming, would necessary lead to loss of information. in this study, for example, it is hard to imagine a go slim that would go so far down the go graph as to include the terms 'antigen processing and presentation of exogenous peptide antigen via mhc class i' and 'positive regulation of t cell mediated cytotoxicity' without defeating the purpose of the slimming process. yet these two terms were found to be enriched in gse <dig>  and are crucial for generating a hypothesis based on the expression profile. this shows that go slims may be complemented by small, yet fully detailed domain-specific subsets of go.

nigo is obviously not a perfect representation of all knowledge related to neural/immune-related gene function. due to the massive use of human-based curation of go terms used for the production of nigo, wrong judgment calls have most likely lead to some erroneous inclusion or exclusion of terms. the use of the core gene set  may lead to errors of commission due to the multifunctional nature of genes. thus, the use of the subset in analyzing high-throughput experiments may lead to some loss of information and may include irrelevant terms. error of commission only leads to a slight degradation of the statistical power of analysis as long as the fraction of falsely included terms is small. since the results must be interpreted by someone versed in the domain to be useful, the inclusion of a small fraction of non-specific terms would do little to degrade the usefulness of the results. errors of omission, on the other hand, may more significantly degrade the results. in theory, it is sufficient that one important term be missing to blind the interpreter from seeing the true biological meaning of the results. nevertheless, our analysis of actual microarray data demonstrates that even in its current form nigo allowed interesting enrichments to be identified that were otherwise missed. however, to overcome the impact of errors of omission, at least in part, we recommend that in addition to using nigo , one should conduct a parallel analysis using the full go. this will ensure that the domain-specific go subsets could do no harm - the interpretation of the results using both full and clipped go cannot be less informative than interpreting the full go alone.

the approach we present here for constructing domain-specific go clipping can be applied to other fields. it is possible, for example, to divide nigo into immune-specific and neural-specific sets. it should also be possible to generate specific subsets that are relevant to other domains, although significant work is involved in the process, especially in the step involving a domain expert's review of a significant fraction of all go terms. it is possible that this step can be largely replaced by automatic procedures, or that the pipeline described here can be improved to reduce the number of decisions that require an expert's opinion. furthermore, the five-step filter used to decide upon nigo inclusion/exclusion could be altered to include more steps, such as searches of other knowledge sources. improved automation, or alternatively a major community effort, could lead to the creation of a library of domain-specific clipped go subsets, which could, in turn, enhance the interpretability of many microarray experiments. improved automation could, in principle, be obtained by reversing the logic of our nigo evaluation, domain-related go terms can be picked by examining the go terms that are associated with expression profiles deemed by domain experts to be related to some domain.

another challenge in developing high quality go subsets is their maintenance. the gene ontology is constantly growing, with new terms and annotations to genes being regularly added. it is thus important to continually update go subsets, such as nigo. nigo could be updated by periodically reviewing new terms and annotations that have been added to the go, subjecting them to the filter system developed to find relevance of terms to the neural/immune systems and adding the relevant terms, along with their parental terms, to the subset. assuming no dramatic increase in the rate of growth of the go, this can be achieved with modest effort as the number of new terms is much smaller than the number of existing terms.

further research into the automation of domain-specific ontology clipping and/or community efforts may lead to the emergence of multiple domain-specific derivates of go that will improve the interpretability of high-throughput gene-related analyses.

CONCLUSIONS
we developed nigo, a clipped subset of the gene ontology directed at the neuronal and immune systems. nigo was validated by showing that it indeed improves the functional analysis results of neural/immune related expression profiles. moreover, in the analysis of at least one dataset nigo allowed generation of a hypothesis which would otherwise have been missed. we thus propose that clipped domain-specific go subsets can produce clearer functional analysis results and help generate meaningful hypotheses.

