BACKGROUND
when an antisense dna oligonucleotide forms a heteroduplex with an mrna molecule, it triggers a response from rnaseh, which cleaves the heteroduplex  <cit> . the sequence-specificity of this posttranscriptional process makes it theoretically possible to inhibit the expression of any given target gene without inadvertently inhibiting other nearby genes. such a tool is invaluable for genetic researchers trying to understand the complicated regulatory mechanisms that govern genetic processes. studies of possible target sites for antisense suppression have shown that not all oligonucleotide sequences are effective in inducing suppression, with many sequences not inducing suppression at all. this kind of exhaustive experimental screening is prohibitively expensive and time consuming, which makes a computational model that relates oligonucleotide sequence to suppression activity desirable. many computational experiments have been performed to help develop such models  <cit> . when developing these models, it is critical to know which features to include so the model has enough power, but also to know which features not to include because they don't contribute to the classification power of the model. past studies have tried to associate properties of the antisense oligonucleotide sequence with suppression activity, including the base sequence itself. a small number of subsequence motifs have been identified as associating significantly with antisense activity  <cit> , but a broad survey over motifs of different lengths using a publicly available dataset has not been performed until now. for this task, we have used a randomization procedure to assess the association of a large number of motifs with antisense activity.

previous studies have used several different computational methods to determine which features to include in a model, including t-test correlation analysis, mutual information content, and svm-based recursive feature elimination  <cit> . however, none of these studies implemented a randomization procedure such as the one described in this paper. also unlike their experiments, this paper will be using publicly available datasets instead of private experimental results supplied by industry. antisense activity has been correlated to several different properties, including thermodynamic properties of the antisense oligonucleotide sequence  <cit> , oligonucleotide secondary structure, structure and accessibility of the mrna target region  <cit> , and motif sequences in the oligonucleotide  <cit> . only a small number of such motifs have been studied, and the intent of this study is to survey a wide range of motifs to determine their association with antisense activity. we hypothesize that the thermodynamic properties of the motifs significantly associated with effective antisense suppression will be similar to those previously discovered as effective  <cit> , with a similar hypothesis for motifs associated with ineffective antisense suppression. that is, we would expect the motifs associated with effective antisense activity to have lower gibbs free energy  than those associated with ineffective antisense activity. also, while several studies have looked into the association between motif presence and sequence activity, we will attempt to deepen this by analysing the possibility of association between the location of a motif within an antisense sequence and that sequence's activity.

RESULTS
the activities of the antisense sequences ranged from  <dig>  to  <dig> , where an activity of  <dig>  indicates complete inhibition of the target gene and  <dig>  is no difference in target activity when compared to the appropriate control. as expected, the distribution of activities is skewed , with fewer sequences having activities near  <dig> , as well as highly platykurtic , with fewer sequence activities near the mean than when compared to a normal distribution. even if we remove the  <dig> sequences that had an activity of  <dig> , the remaining  <dig> sequence activities were skewed , as well as platykurtic, . the base composition of the sequences is nonuniform, containing slightly more instances of g and slightly fewer instances of a . thermodynamically, the gibbs free energy  of the effective sequences  was significantly less  than that of the ineffective antisense sequences . the empirical densities of these thermodynamic distributions are given in figure  <dig> 

after applying our randomization method to the dataset, we found  <dig> motifs that associated significantly with effective antisense suppression and  <dig> motifs that were significantly associated with antisense activity, which are presented in tables  <dig> and  <dig>  one of the most striking differences between these two sets of motifs is in their base compositions. motifs that associate with effective antisense suppression are composed of nearly half g, with the remaining percentage split relatively evenly between the remaining bases . those motifs significantly associated with poor antisense activity are quite different, composed of almost no g, but rather dominated by a's and c's . this difference in base composition contributes to a marked difference in the thermodynamic properties of these sequences. the average value of dg was significantly more negative  for those motifs associated with effective antisense  than for those associated with poor activity . we also find that the average dg of "good" motifs is significantly more negative  and the average dg of the "bad" motifs significantly less negative  than the average dg of the entire population of possible sequence motifs . the thermodynamic distributions of the "good" and the "bad" motifs are given in the top graph of figure  <dig> 

when examining the relationship between motif position and antisense effectiveness, we note that of the  <dig> contingency tables calculated for motifs associated with antisense effectiveness,  <dig> of them had sufficiently large entries for the chi-square test. of these  <dig>  only two  had large enough values of the chi-square statistic to reject the null hypothesis of independence between the axes of the table . similarly, of the  <dig> motifs associated with ineffective antisense activity,  <dig> had large enough table counts, only one  of which had a significant value for the t-statistic . when the bonferronni correction for multiple comparisons is applied to these p-values, none of them remain significant.

another feature of the set of significant motifs found by our method was the subword structure of the motifs found. many of the significant motifs discovered were contained in longer motifs that were also found to be significant. this is illustrated by the directed graphs given in figure  <dig> and figure  <dig>  when looking at the subword makeup of the significant motifs, we found that of the  <dig> motifs associated with effective antisense activity,  <dig> of them contained submotifs that were associated with ineffective antisense activity. conversely, of the  <dig> motifs associated with ineffective antisense activity,  <dig> contained submotifs that were significantly associated with effective antisense activity. when looking at the remaining population of subword-unique motifs associated with effective and ineffective antisense activity, we see the expected differences in thermodynamic properties. thermodynamic distributions of the subword-unique motifs are shown in the bottom graph of figure  <dig>  the subword-unique motifs associated with antisense effectiveness  have a significantly more negative dg  than those associated with antisense ineffectiveness . furthermore, while there was no significant thermodynamic differences between the subword-unique good motifs and the entire population of good motifs, the subword-unique motifs associated with antisense ineffectiveness had significantly larger values of dg compared to the entire population of motifs associated with antisense ineffectiveness . this can likely be attributed to the removal of motifs containing 'gc' and 'cg' as submotifs, thus making the average dg values for the motifs less negative.

support vector regression tests were carried out in two forms: training and testing on the entire dataset and 10-fold cross validation, with correlation and mse results presented in table  <dig>  when the svr was trained on the entire dataset and used to predict the entire dataset, the correlation induced by the feature set of all possible motifs significantly outperformed all other feature sets. however, when 10-fold cross validation was applied, the set of significant motifs outperformed the other feature sets, including the set of all possible motifs. the values of the t-statistic and the associated p-values for the pairwise comparisons of correlation coefficients are given in table  <dig> and table  <dig>  respectively.

an additional set of svr models were constructed to test the hypothesis that antisense is a primarily thermodynamically driven process. the previously mentioned thermodynamic calculations were made using nearest-neighbour thermodynamic parameters. these parameters correspond to motifs of length two, so we hypothesized that if these thermodynamic values were the driving factor in antisense efficacy, then an svr model using only these length two motifs would have strong predictive power, and the inclusion of longer motifs would reduce predictive power and increase overfitting. to test this, we trained 10-fold cross-validated svr models on the set of all motifs, the set of all 2-mers, the set of significant motifs, and the set of significant 2-mers. the values for the correlation coefficient and the mse of these predictions are given in table  <dig>  and t-statistics and p-values for the comparison of those correlations are presented in table  <dig> 

discussion
in order to complete our desired task of determining motifs that significantly associate with antisense effectiveness/ineffectiveness, we developed a monte carlo randomization procedure to systematically determine if a wide range of motifs were overrepresented in either effective or ineffective antisense sequences. using this method, we were able to confirm the association of several previously discovered motifs with antisense effectiveness, such as tccc  <cit> , ccac, actc, and gcca. however, the motif ctct, which had been previously identifies as associating significantly with antisense effectiveness, was not determined to be significant by our method. in addition, our method confirmed the association of sequence motifs such as gggg, taa, and aaa with antisense ineffectiveness  <cit> . the motif actg, which had been found to associate significantly with antisense ineffectiveness  <cit> , was not found to significantly associate by our method. in addition to these previously discovered significant motifs, we uncovered hundreds of motifs that appear to associate significantly with antisense activity.

this seemingly large number of new motifs could be the result of the "wide net" cast to determine which sequences were considered effective and ineffective. by classifying all sequences with activity below  <dig>  as effective and all those above as ineffective, we are conflating both very effective and only moderately effective sequences. similarly, we are conflating the totally ineffective sequences with those that do show some noticeable knockdown activity. this may lead to common motifs in the moderately active  sequences being associated significantly with either positive or negative antisense activity. we predict that a modification of the randomization method classifying only very active  and very inactive  sequences will result in a set of significant motifs that is a subset of the one presented here, and that that those motifs that are overrepresented in only the moderately effective antisense sequences  would not appear in this refined set of significant motifs. we theorize that once these statistical/mathematical artefacts are accounted for, the resulting sets of significant motifs will have even greater thermodynamic differences than those presented here, reinforcing the hypothesis that antisense suppression is heavily driven by probe/target thermodynamics.

also, due to the correlation between local target secondary structure and suppression efficacy, we are concerned that the association of motifs with effective antisense suppression is driven by bias in local target structure. to determine if this were the case, we could perform our randomization method on the regions of our targets where secondary structure promotes or inhibits binding. if target secondary structure were driving sequence activity, we would expect to find the complements of our significant motifs overrepresented in these regions.

it appears that the population of motifs that associate significantly with antisense activity are not chosen at random, as there are similarities in both thermodynamic properties and subword-structures. this is to be expected since biological systems are certainly not constructed randomly, but it does seem to indicate that these statistical methods can identify physical properties that may be important factors in antisense effectiveness. it is worth noting, however, that while statistical significance may help us to identify physical properties, it may not directly imply biological relevance. we have found significant association between antisense activity and the thermodynamic properties of the motifs composing an antisense sequence, which is consistent with previous studies associating sequence thermodynamics and antisense activities. however, the thermodynamic analysis of the motifs identified by our method may lend us more information about the nature of the link between activity and thermodynamics. the difference in dg between the ineffective motifs and the overall motif population is approximately  <dig>  times the difference between the dg of effective motif sequences and the overall population of possible motifs. this may indicate that the key factor in thermodynamic design of antisense sequences may lie more in the avoidance of motifs with poor thermodynamic characteristics rather than intentionally choosing motifs with favourable characteristics.

surprisingly, we have also found that the positions of effective motifs within an antisense sequence do not have any significant statistical association with antisense activity. this may also serve to indicate that the specific motifs may not be as important to antisense activity as having thermodynamically helpful motifs uniformly distributed across an antisense sequence.

one limitation of our monte-carlo method is that it does not address the nature of the subword structure of the motifs found to associate with antisense activity. any time a motif is found and counted in our method, any submotif of that motif will by definition be counted as well. however, we showed that there were instances of effective motifs containing submotifs that associate with ineffective sequences. when a motif is determined to be overrepresented in the empirical dataset for a particular iteration, it is not necessarily the case that a given submotif will also be overrepresented, as the random dataset could have many instances of the submotif while having few instances of the original motif. future work using our method may include modifications to include calculations that will determine if there is any connection between the significance of submotifs and the significance of motifs comprised of these submotifs.

in the svr regression tests, the large drop in correlation under cross-validation for the "all motifs" feature set indicates that the high performance seen initially is likely the result of overfitting, whereas the relatively consistent performance of the set of "significant motifs" leads us to believe it is a better feature set to use for modelling the activity of unknown antisense oligos. also of note is the drop in effectiveness for the split feature sets "gsig", "bsig", "gusig", and "busig". this seems to indicate that basing a model on motifs associated exclusively either with positive or negative activity is not sufficient for modelling the entire population of both effective and ineffective antisense sequences, and that both types of significant motifs should be used in the model.

when comparing the performance of svr regression using only 2-mers as features to those using significant motifs of length  <dig> to  <dig>  we find that the feature set of significant motifs vastly outperforms the set of 2-mers  as well as the set of significant 2-mers , while the set of 2-mers and significant 2-mers were not statistically different from one another . this leads us to conclude that while thermodynamics is certainly driven by nearest-neighbour thermodynamics, the increased predictive power of longer motifs in the svr model suggests that there are biological mechanisms other than thermodynamics contributing to the efficacy of sequences. we suspect that this may be related to the size of the region of the dna-rna duplex that rnaseh interacts with while bound to the duplex.

CONCLUSIONS
this paper describes a monte-carlo method for analysing the association of a broad range of sequence motifs to antisense suppression activity. we have discovered a collection of previously unstudied sequence motifs that associate significantly with antisense activity, thus giving researchers a larger pool of features from which to base motif-driven sequence-activity models for antisense suppression. this allows flexibility in effective antisense design, and gives researchers more opportunity to design oligonucleotides containing motifs that were previously not known to increase antisense activity and use targets that were not known to be effective binding regions for antisense suppression. our results confirm previous notions of the relationship between oligonucleotide thermodynamics and antisense suppression efficiency, but also extend them, as thermodynamics alone are unable to explain the increased predictive power of longer motifs. we have also illustrated the independence of motif position with antisense activity, allowing for simpler sequence-activity models that can run more efficiently and risk less overfitting due to feature redundancy.

when we apply our results to an svr model, we see examples of the overfitting displayed by models using too many features as well as significant improvements in prediction correlation when using our set of significant motifs is used as the base for the svr model. since we used a cut-off value to classify our original data, we hope to improve results for svr by using different cut-off values for high and low activity sequences before applying our randomization procedure, as described earlier. this may lead to a feature set associated with only very high activity sequences, as opposed to those associated with only marginally active sequences.

