BACKGROUND
bifurcations in a phylogeny can be explained by two modes of allopatric speciation: vicariance  <cit>   and founder dispersal  <cit>  . although most biogeographers consider both vicariance and founder dispersal to be important causes of cladogenesis, speciation as a result of dispersal is sometimes rejected or considered irrelevant noise on the basis of its sporadic nature. it is argued that in the majority of cases in which dispersal has been invoked, it is considered to have affected only individual species rather than the entire fauna of a particular region  <cit> .

cladogenesis as a result of founder dispersal may be more important in seahorses  than in many other marine organisms studied to date, because of their life-histories and means of dispersal  <cit> . seahorses use a prehensile tail to hold on to objects that may serve as rafts, such as floating seaweed  <cit> . as macrobenthic prey tends to be abundant on these rafts  <cit> , displaced seahorses are likely to survive for a considerable amount of time. in most species, pregnant male seahorses can have brood sizes of up to 100– <dig> individuals  <cit> , suggesting that a sufficiently large number of closely related individuals may arrive simultaneously at a new habitat to establish themselves. as additional recruitment from the source population is unlikely , lack of gene flow coupled with genetic drift may eventually result in speciation. the combination of seahorses rarely dispersing through the open ocean, but surviving well in it and having a high potential of successfully founding new populations, makes them interesting models for studying the relative importance of vicariance and founder dispersal in marine organisms that disperse by means of rafting.

molecular dating of marine organisms' phylogenies
recent advances in the field of model-based analyses have considerably improved the level of confidence in time estimates obtained from molecular data  <cit> . variations in evolutionary rates can be accounted for, and uncertainties with regard to calibration points can be incorporated by specifying upper and/or lower limits for a particular divergence event. nonetheless, in recent reviews of molecular biogeography and molecular dating, heads  <cit>  criticized studies whose results supported cladogenesis as a result of founder dispersal on the basis of questionable molecular dating. molecular dating can be performed using three methods of calibration: a) dating of the root of the phylogeny of a particular taxon by using the age of the taxon's oldest known fossil; b) dating of the age of a taxon present on a volcanic island by using the age of the island and c) dating of the cladogenic event that gave rise to two lineages present on either side of a geological barrier by using the time when the barrier formed. heads  <cit>  rejected the first two methods for the following reasons. firstly, new fossils are often found that are considerably older than the previously known oldest fossil of a particular taxon, and it is thus impossible to be certain whether the oldest fossil of a particular taxon has indeed been found. the method can be considered particularly problematic in the case of shallow water marine organisms, whose fossil record is often fragmented  <cit> . seahorses present a case in point, because their fossils are known from only two sites in the northern mediterranean  <cit> . secondly, dating by means of the age of volcanic islands can be problematic because such islands are located on subduction zones where new islands are created and old ones disappear continuously, suggesting that an extant species occurring on a volcanic island may be older than its habitat.

molecular dating using vicariance events
two major types of vicariance events are potentially useful to calibrate molecular clocks of marine organisms: seaway closures and continental break-up. the best documented vicariance event that impacted on the biogeography of marine species is the closure of the central american seaway. the rising of the isthmus of panama during the pliocene isolated the tropical western atlantic and eastern pacific oceans  <cit>  and resulted in the divergence of formerly continuously distributed species, many of which have remained morphologically similar and are thus readily recognizable as sister taxa. for that reason, the majority of studies on marine species have used the closure of the central american seaway as a calibration point  <cit> . however, the utility of such geminate species for calibrating molecular clocks can be nonetheless be problematic. firstly, some of the species that have been identified as sister taxa may have diverged prior to the final closure of the central american seaway , which results in overestimates of mutation rates  <cit> . such earlier divergence may have been the result of the oceanographic changes associated with the rising of the isthmus before final seaway closure, or originations resulting from changes in carbonate levels as a result of seaway constriction  <cit> . secondly, incomplete taxon sampling may result in the wrong species being identified as sister taxa  <cit> .

few studies on marine organisms have sampled lineages with circumglobal distributions  <cit> . for these, additional seaway closures could be used as calibration points, which may result in greater precision of molecular dating. the closure of the tethyan seaway, which once connected the atlantic ocean with the indo-pacific via the mediterranean, has been used comparatively rarely to date phylogenies  <cit> . the reason for this may be that the occurrence of both tectonism and climate change  makes dating of the vicariance event that severed the link between the mediterranean and the indo-pacific problematic, and the exact date of this seaway's final closure is disputed. drooger  <cit>  considered it to have taken place during the late oligocene , adams et al.  <cit>  suggested a late early miocene closure , and rögl and steininger  <cit>  argued for a temporary re-opening during the middle miocene  followed by complete closure  <dig>  –  <dig>  mya. adams et al.  <cit>  rejected the evidence for both the late oligocene and middle miocene closures on the basis of questionable dating. the middle miocene date for a temporary re-opening of the seaway  <cit>  is nevertheless widely accepted, although some marine organisms from the indian ocean do not seem to have dispersed through the tethyan seaway during this time  <cit> .

recent genetic work identified the existence of marine sibling species associated with the indian and pacific oceans, respectively, whose distributions sometimes overlap in indonesia  <cit> . the divergence between some of these has been attributed to temporary closure events of the indonesian throughflow, which presently connects the indian and pacific oceans. complete and long-lasting closure events were estimated to have taken place during the middle miocene  and during the late miocene . a further closure of the indonesian seaway took place during the pliocene . lastly, tectonic uplifts and lowered sea level during pleistocene glaciations resulted in restricted exchange between indian ocean and west pacific ocean faunas  <cit> .

in addition to distribution patterns that may have arisen as a result of the three seaway closure events, the presence of sister species on either side of the atlantic ocean could be interpreted as being the result of continental break-up. rosen  <cit>  attributed such patterns to sea-floor spreading and widening of the atlantic ocean, following the separation of africa and south america no later than approximately  <dig> mya  <cit> .

the relative importance of vicariance and founder dispersal
in the present paper, we investigated the relative importance of vicariance and founder dispersal as modes of allopatric speciation that may have impacted on the phylogeny of a circumglobally distributed seahorse lineage , while accounting for the abovementioned uncertainties regarding molecular dating of the phylogenies of marine organisms. this particular lineage was chosen because its wide distribution may either indicate ancient vicariance or large-scale dispersal, and because it may have been affected by more than one vicariance event. exact phylogenetic relationships are not fully understood, but all species associated with this lineage have been identified using molecular methods  <cit> , ensuring complete taxon sampling. other seahorse lineages are less useful for this purpose, because they have more restricted distributions, phylogenetic relationships are comparatively poorly resolved, and a recent increase in species descriptions makes it likely that not all species have yet been identified  <cit> .

without knowledge of divergence times, the distribution patterns of several pairs of lineages within the circumglobal clade could be interpreted as being the result of vicariance. these include eastern pacific vs. atlantic species , indian ocean vs. west pacific species , atlantic vs. indo-pacific species  and amphi-atlantic species pairs .

vicariance biogeographers have objected to founder dispersal hypotheses because the sporadic nature of such events does not make them falsifiable  <cit> . although the establishment of ocean currents has in some cases resulted in repeated directional long-distance dispersal  <cit> , whether or not a species becomes established in a new habitat depends considerably on its dispersal abilities and life history characteristics. even if a large number of species share a pattern resulting from founder dispersal, it is unlikely that they all would have colonized a particular habitat contemporaneously, and molecular dating using founder dispersal is thus less precise than molecular dating using vicariance events. however, if vicariance hypotheses can be rejected, then founder dispersal should be supported by default  <cit> . in this study, we estimated the ages of divergence events of seahorse lineages with geminate distribution patterns by using the well-documented closure of the central american seaway as a primary calibration point. vicariance biogeographic interpretations of these are challenged if a) divergence time estimates are significantly different from the dates of vicariance events suggested in the literature and b) divergence events in different positions in the phylogeny that have resulted in the same distribution patterns of sister lineages have occurred at different times.

RESULTS
phylogenetic reconstructions
a maximum likelihood phylogenetic tree reconstructed from sequence data of three mitochondrial and two nuclear markers recovered six major clades that were each associated with a distinct biogeographic region . a congruent tree was recovered with bayesian inference, and most nodes were supported by significant posterior probabilities. the most parsimonious tree, on the other hand, did not recover some of the lineages, but none of the nodes that differed from the other two phylogenies had high support . when a parsimony tree was constructed using the two most rapidly mutating markers only , then node a was also recovered.

the distribution patterns of several lineages in the phylogeny indicate that they could be the result of seaway closures or spreading of the atlantic ocean . in several cases, the same distribution patterns were recovered in different positions in the tree. firstly, a split into an atlantic and an indo-west pacific lineage was recovered twice. the first event  resulted in a split into an atlantic ocean group comprising hippocampus hippocampus, h. erectus, h. zosterae and h. guttulatus, and a group whose basal split resulted in an indo-west pacific lineage comprising h. spinosissimus and h. kelloggi and a lineage comprising all remaining species . the fact that indo-west pacific species are present in both of the latter lineages suggests that this group may have originated in this region. the second event that resulted in an atlantic ocean and an indo-west pacific lineage is the split defined by node c, resulting in the divergence of h. capensis  and the atlantic/eastern pacific group comprising h. ingens, h. fisheri, h. reidi and h. algiricus. amphi-atlantic distribution patterns were recovered three times, the most basal being a split between the eastern atlantic h. guttulatus and a group including the western atlantic species h. erectus and h. zosterae , followed by a later amphi-atlantic split between h. erectus and h. hippocampus . the divergence between h. reidi and h. algiricus resulted in a further amphi-atlantic distribution pattern .

molecular dating
to explore the feasibility that the seahorse lineages present on either side of the isthmus of panama diverged as a result of central american seaway closure, we compared pairwise genetic distances between them with genetic distances between other geminate teleost lineages present on both sides of the isthmus of panama . we hypothesized that if the divergence of the seahorse lineages was linked to the final closure of the seaway, then the pairwise distance between them should be among the lowest of all the teleost lineages investigated. pairwise distances were also calculated for pairs of teleost lineages that could have arisen as a result of the other three vicariance events relevant to the circumglobally distributed seahorse lineage by virtue of their distribution patterns. using relative rate tests, it was found that only one of the teleost genera whose species have distribution patterns identical to those of the geminate seahorse lineages was characterized by a significantly different rate . the rate of 16s rrna of a number of genera could not be compared with the seahorses, because a different portion of this marker had been sequenced. pairwise distances between these and the seahorses, as well as those of lethrinus and albula  and the seahorses, are nonetheless shown in fig.  <dig> and are indicated with asterisks.

comparisons of mean k2p distances between pairs of seahorse lineages that may have diverged as a result of vicariance events with those of other teleosts having congruent distribution patterns indicate that the seahorse lineages defined by node a in fig.  <dig>  diverged comparatively recently. we considered this to be evidence for a pliocene divergence of this lineage as a result of the final closure of the central american seaway, an event that is considered to have occurred no earlier than  <dig>  mya. the mean genetic distance among cytochrome b sequences of the lineage defined by node b  was slightly lower than that of the lineage defined by node a, whereas the genetic distance among 16s rrna sequences was distinctly lower. k2p distances among control region sequences  were also slightly lower for indonesian seaway divergence than for central american seaway divergence , indicating that this event may have taken place during the late pliocene or early pleistocene. present-day distribution patterns of several pairs of lineages in the seahorse phylogeny could be interpreted as having resulted from the remaining two vicariance events . mean pairwise k2p distances between these differed considerably, as did distances between other teleost lineages having the same distribution patterns.

divergence time estimates among seahorse lineages were obtained using a relaxed molecular clock method  <cit> . when the final date for the closure of the central american seaway  is accepted as the date when the transisthmian seahorse lineages diverged, based on the considerations in the previous paragraph, then only two divergence estimates of nodes defining species pairs whose distribution patterns indicate that they could have resulted from vicariance events, matched the dates suggested in the literature . firstly, the indian ocean and west pacific lineages of h. kuda  were estimated to have diverged  <dig>  ±  <dig>  mya, which indicates that this cladogenic event may have resulted from the closure of the indonesian seaway  <dig> –  <dig> mya  <cit> . secondly, the species defined by node d were estimated to have diverged  <dig>  ±  <dig>  mya, which matches the temporary re-opening of the tethyan seaway during the middle miocene  followed by complete closure  <dig>  –  <dig>  mya  <cit> . however, confidence intervals for this estimate are comparatively large , and the earlier date of  <dig>  –  <dig>  mya  <cit>  must also be considered feasible.

divergence times were estimated using the program multidivtime  <cit>  under the assumption that the closure of the central american seaway  resulted in the divergence of two sister lineages associated with the eastern/central pacific  and atlantic oceans , respectively. phylogeographic distribution patterns may have been the result of the following vicariance events. node b : closure of the indonesian seaway. nodes c and d : closure of the tethyan seaway. node e, f and g : continental break-up and spreading of the atlantic ocean. three possible calibration ranges for the closure of the central american seaway were specified. comparisons of the species affected by this vicariance event with other teleosts having similar distribution patterns  indicate that the seahorses were among the last to diverge. this suggests that their cladogenesis was associated with the final closure of the seaway, i.e. no earlier than approximately  <dig>  mya . divergence time estimates are indicated as mean ± s.d. . suggested dates of vicariance events: central american seaway closure:  <dig>  –  <dig>  mya ;  <dig>  –  <dig>  ;  <dig>  –  <dig>  mya ; indonesian seaway closure:  <dig>  –  <dig>   <cit> ;  <dig> –  <dig> mya  <cit> ;  <dig> –  <dig> mya  <cit> ;  <dig> –  <dig> mya  <cit> ; tethyan seaway closure:  <dig>  –  <dig>  mya  <cit> ;  <dig>  –  <dig>   <cit> ;  <dig>  –  <dig>   <cit> ; complete separation of the land masses on either side of the atlantic ocean:  <dig> mya  <cit> .

the establishment of the amphi-atlantic distribution patterns all post-dated  <dig> mya, irrespective of the calibration range used for the closure of the central american seaway. this suggests that these were not the result of continental break-up during the mesozoic. because of this, and because 95% confidence intervals of the divergence dates of nodes that have resulted in the same distribution patterns did not overlap when a calibration range of  <dig>  –  <dig>  mya was specified for the closure of the central american seaway , interpretations of the seahorses' present-day distribution patterns based exclusively on vicariance biogeographic hypotheses are not well supported.

as divergence time estimates are more precise when multiple calibration points are specified  <cit> , we chose a combination of vicariance events that are likely to have impacted on cladogenesis in the seahorse phylogeny to date all other nodes in the phylogeny. the selection of these was based on the assumption that the divergence event that resulted from the closure of the central american seaway occurred no earlier than  <dig>  mya, and that the closure of the indonesian seaway  <dig> –  <dig> mya resulted in the divergence of the lineages defined by node b. we also included node d as a calibration point, assuming that the atlantic ocean vs. basally indo-pacific distribution of its species resulted from the closure of the tethyan seaway. although the timing of this divergence event is comparatively vague, mean divergence times ± s.d. estimated when only node a  and only node b  were used as calibration points fell within the ranges of the two most reliable dates for this event suggested in the literature . a phylogenetic tree scaled to geological time was constructed by specifying divergence times for the three seaway closure events  is characterized by the largest number of divergence events having taken place during the pliocene . the 95% confidence intervals of older divergence events are large compared to most of the more recent events, as we allowed for a wide calibration range for the root node.

discussion
seaway closure events as calibration points
in studies of marine organisms that employ molecular dating, it is common practice to apply the most recent dates suggested in the geological literature to date divergence events considered to have resulted from the closure of a seaway  <cit> . as the evolutionary histories of geminate species pairs may be more complicated than is generally acknowledged, we avoided overconfidence in calibration points by firstly determining which vicariance events were most likely to have resulted in present-day biogeographic patterns of seahorse species associated with the circumglobal clade, and secondly, by specifying upper and lower bounds for each calibration point to account for uncertainties concerning the exact dates of vicariance events. comparisons with other teleosts showed that the amphi-panamaic distribution pattern arose comparatively recently, and is thus likely to have been linked to the final closure of the central american seaway. as the four seahorse species affected by the closure of the seaway all occur in shallow water  <cit> , this conclusion is supported by the hypothesis that divergence events among species occurring in the nearshore habitat or in freshwater are linked to the final closure of the central american seaway, whereas species with significant marine phases are likely to have diverged earlier  <cit> . estimates of the vicariance event that resulted in the basally indo-pacific vs. atlantic ocean distribution pattern defined by node d  were less certain than those of the other two vicariance events. however, our estimates indicate that this basal cladogenic event in the phylogeny is likely to have occurred some time during the late early to middle miocene, which is supported by geological estimates of the timing of the closure of the tethyan seaway  <cit> .

comparisons with other pairs of geminate teleost species present on either side of the isthmus of panama indicate that k2p distances ~ <dig>  for cytochrome b, ~ <dig>  for control region , and ~ <dig>  for 16s rrna may indicate that the lineages under investigation are likely to have diverged as a result of the final closure of the central american seaway. assuming a conservative estimate of  <dig>  –  <dig>  mya for the divergence of these lineages, these values correspond to approximately  <dig> –  <dig> % ,  <dig>  –  <dig> %  and  <dig>  –  <dig> %  sequence divergence per million years, and are thus lower than the commonly used value of 2% per million years for animal mtdna  <cit> . our results indicate that the closure of the indonesian seaway may also be useful for calibrating molecular clocks. in this case, a k2p distance of ~ <dig>  for cytochrome b, ~ <dig>  for control region, and a distance below  <dig>  for 16s rrna may indicate that the lineages under investigation diverged as a result of pliocene closure of the seaway.

causes of other dichotomies in the phylogeny
apart from the three seaway closures, there are no obvious vicariance events that could have resulted in any of the other dichotomies. none of the divergence events resulting in sister lineages with amphi-atlantic distributions could be linked to continental break-up  and spreading of the atlantic ocean on the basis of molecular dating, even when the unlikely upper bound of  <dig>  mya was specified for the closure of the central american seaway. this date represents the time when the constriction of the seaway and the associated increase in carbonate-content in southern caribbean deep-sea sediments resulted in originations in reef corals and carbonate-associated benthic foraminifera, which is unlikely to have affected shallow-water seahorses. a vicariance biogeographic interpretation of these distribution patterns is further weakened by fossil data: the oldest known fossil of the family syngnathidae  is less than  <dig> my old  <cit> .

we suggest that the presence of recently diverged sister-species on both sides of the atlantic ocean , is the result of founder dispersal. divergence time estimates for these two lineages fall into the late miocene/early pliocene and late pliocene/pleistocene, respectively. teske et al.  <cit>  hypothesized that the ancestor of h. hippocampus colonized europe from the americas, as both its sister species  and the next basal species  occur in the caribbean. a late miocene/early pliocene divergence estimate confirms that this colonization may have been facilitated by an intensification of the gulf stream that culminated  <dig>  mya  <cit> . as this change in ocean circulation was the result of the gradual closing of the central american seaway, the founder event that gave rise to h. hippocampus is thus likely to be the indirect result of tectonic changes.

the other east atlantic species, h. algiricus, is also likely to be the product of long-distance dispersal in an eastward direction, as its sister species, h. reidi, occurs on the east coast of the americas, and the next basal lineage comprises eastern pacific seahorses. the divergence event that gave rise to this amphi-atlantic geminate species pair took place more recently . there are numerous examples of such recently established amphi-atlantic distributions in the literature, and in many cases, the lineages in question are morphologically and genetically so similar that they are considered to be single species  <cit> . even the oldest amphi-atlantic divergence event in the phylogeny, that between the european species h. guttulatus and the lineage comprising basal american species , is unlikely to be the result of vicariance following the expansion of the atlantic ocean, as divergence of this lineages was estimated to have occurred during the miocene. lastly, vicariance models invoked for the presence of species on hawai'i suggest that because of the geological history of the pacific plate, endemic hawai'ian taxa should have sister taxon relationships with taxa in the indo-west pacific  <cit> . however, many teleost species present in the central pacific have sister taxon relationships with east pacific species, and there is evidence for sporadic dispersal events in either direction  <cit> . our finding that the hawai'ian seahorse h. fisheri is closely associated with american/west african seahorses provides a further example of westward dispersal from the americas, an event that was estimated to taken place after the closure of the central american seaway.

CONCLUSIONS
since the validation of plate-tectonics theory and the development of cladistic methods, vicariance events have been primarily invoked to explain disjunct species distributions throughout the world. however, improvements in molecular dating techniques have resulted in increased support for recent dispersal hypotheses over more ancient vicariance events, as in many cases, molecular divergences were considered too small to be explained by vicariance  <cit> . despite these developments, heads  <cit>  rejected dispersal hypotheses in favor of vicariance hypotheses, and considered studies on the phylogeographic history of cichlid fishes  <cit>   to be exemplary in terms of their convincing conclusions . given that long-distance dispersal between continents is impossible for obligate freshwater fishes, vicariance hypotheses are appropriate to explain observed distribution patterns of freshwater organisms. however, this is completely different in marine organisms, many of which can readily disperse in the oceans over great distances  <cit> , and to whom the barrier is thus not absolute. heads  <cit>  acknowledged that many marine organisms can readily reach far outside their established ranges, but argued that they do not establish themselves because of competition from congeneric vicariants already established in such habitats. likewise, briggs  <cit>  suggested that competition may prevent the colonization of high diversity habitats. the "competitive exclusion principle"  <cit>  is now considered to be controversial  <cit> . although a number of recent experiments do support the notion that high diversity may increase a community's invasion resistance  <cit> , its effect may be difficult to discern from other factors such as predation, inappropriate climate and disease  <cit> . nonetheless, the successful establishment of a founder population may be inhibited to some degree by the presence of interspecific competition  <cit> , or facilitated by a lack of resource competition , as the available resources allow the founders to rapidly increase their numbers. this may explain why a) the lineage defined by node a  is absent from the species-rich west pacific, despite the high dispersal potential of its species and b) the colonization of west africa and hawai'i  was possible for h. algiricus and h. fisheri, respectively. the european species h. guttulatus and the more recent arrival h. hippocampus are sympatric, but they do not compete directly because of different microhabitat preferences  <cit> . the establishment of human-introduced marine species in new habitats is well documented  <cit> , and it seems unreasonable to reject the notion that such colonization events may occur naturally, albeit at a lower rate. both vicariance and founder dispersal thus have to be considered plausible in marine organisms, and our study indicates that molecular dating is a useful tool to determine when a divergence event is likely to have occurred and what may have caused it.

even if one does not consider genetic differentiation of molecular markers to be at least roughly correlated with time, one must nonetheless concede that the establishment of the same phylogeographic patterns in clades nested within each other in the same phylogeny cannot have occurred simultaneously. hence, if the divergence of h. guttulatus vs. h. zosterae, h. erectus and h. hippocampus was the result of continental break-up and spreading of the atlantic ocean , then the split between h. erectus and h. hippocampus must have been caused by subsequent long-distance dispersal. this is further supported by the fact that even if the unlikely upper limit of  <dig>  mya is specified for the closure of the central american seaway, the upper 95% confidence limit for the divergence of h. erectus and h. hippocampus postdates even the most recent estimate for the spreading of the atlantic ocean. likewise, if the atlantic biome clade comprising the above species and the basally indo-pacific clade comprising all other species diverged as a result of tethyan seaway closure, then node a cannot define a western tethyan lineage that arose at the same time . furthermore, the fact that the basal split in the seahorse phylogeny into an atlantic ocean lineage and a basally indo-pacific lineage predated all of the divergence events resulting in amphi-atlantic distribution patterns  suggests that none of the amphi-atlantic distribution patterns are the result of vicariance. as none of the pairwise genetic distances between amphi-atlantic sister lineages of other teleosts investigated were substantially greater than the distance between the two most divergent pair of seahorse lineages, we conclude that these did not diverge as a result of vicariance either. our results thus support other recent studies on atlantic ocean marine organisms that identified long-distance dispersal as the cause for the establishment of amphi-atlantic sister lineages  <cit> .

the impression that vicariance hypotheses are increasingly being invoked to explain biogeographic patterns in the sea  <cit>  may to some extent have been created by the increased use of molecular dating in genetic studies of marine organisms, which relies on well-documented vicariance events to use as calibration points. founder dispersal events are less useful for this purpose, but we conclude that in the circumglobally distributed seahorse lineage, divergence events that resulted from founder dispersal are likely to outnumber divergence events that resulted from vicariance. we hypothesise that founder dispersal is thus of particular importance in species that disperse by means of rafting.

