BACKGROUND
aging is an inevitable part of life and unfortunately poses the largest risk factor for cardiovascular diseases. the limited success of medical community in dealing with complex diseases and the increasing population of aging patients with cardiovascular diseases led to rapidly increasing costs of health care that most economies cannot sustain. advances in personalized medicine and the biology of aging are two important steps towards overcoming the escalating health care costs on the way to a better understanding and treatment of such complex diseases  <cit> . cardiac aging is characterized by a continuum of cardiac structural and functional alterations involving left ventricular hypertrophy, diastolic dysfunction, increased risk of atrial fibrillation, valvular degeneration and fibrosis, and decreased maximal exercise capacity. apparently, the decline in function provoked by the longevity associated changes make the aged heart more susceptible to stress, leading to a high prevalence of cardiovascular diseases and heart failure  <cit> . as such, in order to extend lifespan, current drug development strategies design anti-aging drugs that delay the implicated age-related diseases or vice versa  <cit> .

in the road for exploring the underlying aging etiology many studies were directed towards discovering age-dependent genes/proteins  <cit> . more recently, other works  <cit>  characterized several micrornas  as center players in cardiac aging process and in the development of multifarious heart diseases, such as heart hypertrophy, arrhythmia, acute myocardial infarction, and heart failure. recent estimations count around  <dig> mirnas in the human genome that modulate various biological processes ranging from proliferation, differentiation to senescence and apoptosis  <cit> . moreover, the small amount of mirnas is able to regulate a large number of genes through synergism, in which multiple mirnas work synergistically to regulate individual mrnas  <cit> . despite the advances, the underlying mechanisms are still far from known and the next step towards featuring aging is systems-level analyses that will reveal pathways - instead of individual proteins or mirnas - responsible for transducing stress, mechanical and neurohormonal stimuli into gene expression changes  <cit> .

to this end, approaches from the network perspective capture the complex regulatory mechanisms between mrnas and mirnas in a more comprehensive manner. as such, network-based methods to study aging have evolved in parallel with the concept of “omics” and the explosion of high-throughput data. managbanag et al.  <cit>  suggested that proteins linked through shortest paths in the protein interaction network with established age-related genes were more likely to be aging regulators. budovsky et al.  <cit>  showed that hub proteins in the protein-protein interaction network connecting human homologs of lifespan modifiers were significantly linked to age-related diseases. also, the work of xue et al.  <cit>  depicted the modularity  of the aging network and contextualized the transcriptional changes during lifespan through a small number of network modules. moreover, the study of li et al.  <cit>  explored the regulatory effect between mirnas and mrnas in the developmental and aging process of the human brain by integrating mirna and mrna expression profiles in the form of a bipartite mirna-mrna regulatory network and identified modules showing mirna synergism. we relegate the reader to the review of hou et al.  <cit>  for an extensive view of the network-based methodologies on the study of aging. nevertheless, the number of network-based studies that deal with the unraveling of mammalian tissue-specific aging mechanisms is small  <cit>  and even smaller when the role of microrna synergism is the question  <cit> .

this integromics network-based meta-analysis study offers the first systemic view of cardiac aging molecular mechanisms and sketches the path for identifying robustly many more other involved molecular components than those already reported in literature. motivated by recent findings that identified various heart-specific mirnas as aging modulators, we tested their reproducibility facilitated by the availability of transcriptome, micronome and proteome data in the mouse model. since a single study often has small sample size and limited statistical power, combining information across multiple studies is an intuitive way to increase sensitivity  <cit> . as such, we show that integrating information extracted from multiple independent microarray experiments along with mouse interaction data can produce more accurate cardiac aging signatures in the form of multi-omics subnetworks . through modularity we revise the role of recently implicated mirnas and proteins and suggest that their impact on aging is realized via their neighborhoods. in addition, we investigate the mirna synergism on the modular level and propose mirnas whose lifespan disturbances generate collaboratively profound biological effects. for this, we developed a synergy score which can be used to assess the nature and scale of mirna synergy, and considers both the incorporative contribution of mirna co-regulation on the same biological process  as well as on different biological processes . the proposed method offers a theoretical framework and guideline for multi-target combinational mirna therapy of age-related cardiovascular diseases.

RESULTS
our integromics meta-analysis method can be summarized into the following steps:  collection of diverse interaction data  from many databases and prediction tools ;  construction of a multi-layer network with two types of nodes  and three types of relations . we denote that the terms ‘gene’, ‘mrna’ and their encoded ‘protein’ are used interchangeably in this paper. also, the hypergeometric distribution was employed to define mirna-mirna relations based on significantly functionally associated mrna targets ;  aggregation of mrna and mirna independent cardiac-specific expression datasets from various mouse strains; also, a human mrna expression experiment was included;  design of two adapted weighting schemes that integrate the expression information onto the respective interaction network layer; notably, a separate weighted network was constructed for each of the  <dig> possible combinations of mrna and mirna experiments in the mouse model ;  application of a module-detecting algorithm on each weighted network that efficiently identified modules substantially altered during lifespan ;  use of meta-analysis method to identify consensus modules across multiple mouse weighted networks and then across organisms;  evaluation of micronome synergism based on an in-house designed synergy score and employment of borda voting scheme as meta-analysis method to rank the mirna pairs.figure  <dig> 
methodology workflow for detecting integromics modules.
a. construction of the mirna-mrna multi-layer regulatory network based on interaction databases and hypergeometric distribution . b. two adapted weighting schemes were employed to integrate the mrna/mirna expression information onto the corresponding network layer so as to create the integromics network. c. the integromics network was the input to the dmsp module-detecting algorithm and statistically significant modules  were identified based on a permutation strategy on the expression data.



topological analysis of the unweighted multi-layer network
we examined the degree distribution of the unweighted multi-layer network both at each separate layer  as well as whole. we observed that the mrna-mrna and mirna-mrna layers followed a power law and an exponential distribution  =  <dig> , mirna-mrna: slope = − <dig> , r2 =  <dig> , mirna-mirna: slope = − <dig> , r2 =  <dig> ). moreover, the networks displayed scale free characteristics indicating so that there exist core sets of organizing principles in its structure. moving further, we tested the degree distribution of the nodes participating in the consensus modules relative to the complete set of nodes in the initial network. as observed, the modular nodes exhibited significant variance in degree values  along with higher mean degree value . based on the degree metric we ranked all nodes and, after setting a cutoff at the top 15%,  <dig>  mrnas were defined as hubs and  <dig> of them were included in the consensus modules. similarly,  <dig> mirnas were characterized as hubs and  <dig> of them were included in the consensus modules. we denote that mrnas and mirnas were treated separately due to the fact that mirnas exhibit much higher degree values and in other case the degree sorting would be biased in favor of the mirnas. we observed that the hub nodes  were over-represented in the consensus modules  suggesting so that the majority of independent expression experiments corroborate to the involvement of hub nodes in the longevity mechanisms of cardiac tissue.figure  <dig> 
degree distribution, weight distribution and topological analysis. a) degree distribution of nodes ; blue refers to the complete set and red to the fraction of nodes included in the consensus modules. the variance of modular nodes was significantly different  and with higher mean value, which is translated into more hub nodes favored during module construction. b) calculation of the characteristic path length  of the complete network, of the network after removing the  <dig> age-dependent nodes, of the network after removing the  <dig> consensus modular nodes, of the network after removing the top  <dig> hub nodes and of the network after removing randomly  <dig> nodes . if the nodes removed are important mediators for network communication cpl will increase. c) weight distribution of the complete multi-layer network with bars representing the mean edge weight value as calculated from all combinations of mrna/mirna expression experiments and error bars depicting the confidence intervals. each bar represents a value range named after the upper limit. all weight values were adjusted to ‘1-weight value’ due to the fact that dmsp algorithm constructs modules by promoting edges with weights closer to zero. as shown, with cutoff value ≤  <dig> , only 8% of the complete interactome  changed substantially during lifespan d) weight distribution of the edges included in the final consensus modular topology. with cutoff value ≤  <dig> ,  <dig>  edges were included in the consensus modular topology which represent the 24% of the total age-related relations .



to test whether the age-dependent nodes , consensus modular nodes or hub nodes are important to the multi-layer network stability, we used an established test for network structure stability — recording the changes in characteristic path length  in the largest connected component of the network after selective node removal . if the nodes removed are important mediators for network communication, the route from one node to another within the network will be a longer path and the cpl of the resulting network will increase. this is an important network statistic and represents closeness and consequently how quickly information can be transferred in a network  <cit> . targeted removal of nodes according to degree metric is also called ‘attack’  <cit> . attacking hubs in the network, as expected, increases significantly the cpl whereas random removal of nodes from the network maintains the initial cpl values. it is evident from figure 2b that removal of the consensus modular nodes – nodes involved in modules voted by the majority of coupled mrna/mirna expression experiments – affected the stability more than attacking age-dependent nodes  and less than hub nodes. this finding can be interpreted byway; on one hand, modules have higher discriminative potential than independent differentially expressed age-related nodes to describe the transitions from young to old state, and on second hand, hub nodes participate in the network integrity but in fact only a fraction  is truly responsible for the aging process. in more detail, the consensus modules were significantly enriched in age-dependent proteins  and moreover, our method contextualized them into specific neighborhoods . we note that the consensus modules were not significantly enriched in age-dependent mirnas.

longevity attacks a small fraction of the cardiac interactome
towards evaluating the scale of longevity effect upon interactome topology, we examined the edge weight distribution of the multiple weighted networks — created based on all possible combinations of mrna/mirna expression datasets in the mouse model. after selecting weight value cutoff lower than  <dig> , only 8% of the complete interactome  changed substantially during lifespan . this observation disagrees with the results of  <cit>  that showed that environmental stimuli like heat shock disintegrate significant proportion of the yeast interactome and decrease the weight structure. our suggestion is that gradually developing cumulative processes like aging affect a small proportion of the interactome, which has been proved to be organized into smaller scale highly inter-connected communities. on second level, we zoomed into the edge weight distribution of the  <dig>  edges included in the consensus modular topology so as to ensure that consensus modules are both reproducible across independent datasets and at the same time include a significant amount of age-related edges. interestingly, our method captured, based on the same cutoff value,  <dig>  edges which represent the 24% of the total age-related relations  . this finding secures to a great extent that the consensus modules can serve rightfully as signatures of cardiac aging and potential multi-targets for the treatment of age-related heart diseases.

mirna synergy in mouse model
with the use of an in-house designed metric, we evaluated all mirna pairs in terms of synergism  first based on the modular result of each weighted network and second after applying a borda voting meta-analysis scheme to determine the final rank of each mirna pair based on all modularized weighted networks . we categorized mirna pairs into two types:  those pairs which ranked in the upper quartile of the complete set of mirna relations  and participated in the final set of  <dig> consensus modules and  those pairs which ranked in the upper quartile but are not included in the consensus modules. the latter case leaves room for further exploration in advent of more time expression series experiments on cardiac aging and more interaction data, where the specific mirnas would probably get re-contextualized. in tables  <dig> and  <dig>  we report for each type the borda rank for each pair, the human disease-related information for each mirna ) as well as literature-extracted evidence that relates each mirna with cardiac pathophysiology or aging  <cit> . also, in figure  <dig> an overview of the mirna synergistic network is provided containing all mirna relations in the upper quartile of the borda ranking.table  <dig> 
mirna synergism results relative to consensus modules



mirna a
mirna b
borda rank
disease a
disease b
literature a
literature b
mir-152

mir-152
mir-152

mir-135a

mir-135a
mirna synergism results for the consensus modules according to borda voting scheme. each line reports the borda rank of each mirna pair identified in the final consensus modules, disease-related information of the human orthologs as recorded in mir2disease database  and evidence related to aging or cardiac pathophysiology provided by recent literature. we denote that in many cases each member of the reported mirna pair can participate in a different module. bold mirnas are age-dependent based on linear regression analysis.
mirna synergism results beyond consensus modules



mirna a
mirna b
borda rank
disease a
disease b
literature a
literature b

mir-106b
mir-17

mir-19a
mir-19b

mir-363
mir-92b
3

let-7d
let-7f
mir-27b

mir-106a

mir-34a
mir-34b-5p
mir-466d-5p
mir-19a

mir-34a
mir-449b
mir-29a
synergism results for mirna pairs that ranked in the upper quartile according to borda voting scheme but not incorporated in the consensus modules . each line reports the rank of each mirna pair, disease-related information of the human orthologs as recorded in mir2disease database  and evidence related to aging or cardiac pathophysiology provided by recent literature. bold mirnas are age-dependent based on linear regression analysis. we also added mirna pairs with high rank yet not related to aging or cardiac pathophysiology .
mirna-mirna synergistic network. this network incorporates the mirna relations that ranked in the upper quartile  of the borda voting scheme. blue colored nodes represent mirnas involved in mouse consensus modules. edges with larger width highlight the relations included in consensus modules. red colored nodes represent age-dependent mirnas as estimated by linear regression analysis. red colored mirnas with blue border are both age-dependent and participate in consensus modules. nodes with orange colored border represent mirnas associated to human cardiac pathophysiology as reported in mir2disease database. purple edges highlight the  <dig> top scoring mirna relations.



we note that  <dig> mirnas associated to human cardiac diseases, according to mir2disease database, were found in the upper quartile of the borda rank and  <dig> of them also involved in the  <dig> consensus modules. we initially zoom onto mir-34a motivated by the study of boon et al.  <cit>  which named it as cardiac aging biomarker . our results support the involvement of this mirna in cardiac aging since it was both characterized as age-dependent and included in consensus modules; nevertheless its synergism effect was not substantial . further, mir- <dig> was suggested as cardiac aging biomarker by the work of jazbutyte et al.  <cit> . our analysis failed to identify this mirna in the consensus modules and its synergism impact is not substantial . the explanation behind this observation lies both in the experimental settings of the original study as well as in the later fold-change-based method to detect differentially expressed molecules. on one hand, when the original mirna expression dataset was combined with other mrna expression datasets mir- <dig> was radically repositioned relative to its targets and their expression profiles. moreover, the fold-change method by definition excludes molecules with moderate differential expression yet important players in longevity mechanisms. second, standard statistical methods to define differentially expressed molecules fail to incorporate dependencies among molecules and more importantly how the dependencies – instead of single entities – change during aging.

nevertheless, the same study identified mir- <dig> as age-dependent but - as stated by the authors - it was not chosen for validation experiments. on the contrary, our results indicate that the synergistic effect of this mirna and its partner mir-125a-5p is much higher . also, we comment on the mir-200c/- <dig> pair . the works of sataranatarajan et al.  <cit>  and schraml and grillari  <cit>  suggested their involvement in kidney aging but to our knowledge no association to cardiac tissue aging has been reported.

interesting are the observations regarding the mirna-mirna edges that failed to be incorporated in the consensus modules yet their synergism was substantial based on borda meta-analysis results. we denote that synergy results are meant to be evaluated separately from the consensus modular results based on the different scopes and on the different meta-analytic schemes employed. on one hand, the consensus set was defined after majority voting among modularized networks while meta-analysis on synergy aimed at pinpointing edges with substantial macroscopic effect on the topology across datasets but without considering their involvement into reproducible modules. the reason is that there were many cases where specific mirna edges affected multiple pairs of modules which in turn were not always sufficiently reproducible, as pairs, across datasets, i.e. involved in the consensus set. however, we account for the synergistic effect of these edges since the majority of expression experiments agree on their substantial impact. we comment on the mir-106b/- <dig> pair which acquired the first rank. age-related evidence for mir-106b is found in the work of brett et al.  <cit>  which associated it with neural stem cell proliferation and differentiation during aging. with respect to mir- <dig> we relegate the reader to the review of mogilyansky and rigoutsos  <cit>  which links this mirna to a variety of diseases such as cardiovascular and aging. the same study validates the presence of mir-19b in the mir-19a/-19b pair which ranked second and both mirnas were defined as age-dependent. moreover, the work of van almen et al.  <cit>  linked mir-19a and mir-19b with age-related heart failure. further, we comment on mir-27b  which was shown to be up-regulated to different degrees in the old versus young adult heart and was induced during early hypertrophic growth in response to pressure-overload  <cit> . similar synergism hypotheses can be derived for the rest of mirna pairs reported in tables  <dig> and  <dig>  which are supported in terms of aging or cardiac pathophysiology by recent literature evidence.

consensus mouse modular signatures
in order to produce highly reproducible modular signatures, we constructed and modularized multiple weighted networks based on all possible combinations of mrna/mirna expression experiments so as to reduce the effect of different mouse strains, platform arrays, laboratory effects and gender. the consensus set included  <dig> modules  identified in at least  <dig> out of the  <dig> combinations . the consensus modular topology contained  <dig> mirnas and  <dig> mrnas. we checked the genes for statistically significant gene ontology  terms with david functional tool  <cit>  and the enriched biological process terms were: ‘generation of precursor metabolites and energy’ , ‘electron transport chain’ , ‘cell cycle phase’  and ‘organelle fission’ . the respective go terms highlight processes commonly reported in cardiac aging studies  <cit> ; they also provide feedback that the integromics meta-analysis approach is efficient in zooming out and providing the broader view around genes/proteins well-associated to cardiac aging - as individual molecular components - but not relative to their interactors.figure  <dig> 
mouse consensus modules. layout of the  <dig> consensus modules. the topology includes  <dig>  edges among  <dig> mirnas and  <dig> proteins. the multi-layer modules are visualized in two levels, i.e. micronome and proteome. nodes in many cases are multi-colored  in a pie-chart-like form so as to visualize the participation of a node in multiple modules. blue dotted edges highlight mirna relations not included into consensus modules yet exhibited significant synergy.



when genes were grouped into modules only  <dig> modules were significantly enriched  with go biological process terms . also,  <dig> longevity-associated genes according to genage database were identified in the consensus modules: bub1b ), ercc <dig> , slc25a <dig> , ucp <dig> , mcm <dig> ) and eps <dig> .table  <dig> 
analysis of mouse consensus modules



module index
count
gene ontology term
percentage
fisher exact p-value
age-dependent mirnas
age-dependent genes
genage genes
summary of the  <dig> consensus modules. count: the number of module members; gene ontology  term: statistically significant go terms based on david tool ; percentage: the percentage of modular genes characterized by the specific go term; fisher exact p-value: modified fisher exact p-value  as provided by david ; age-dependent mirnas: age-dependent mirnas based on linear regression analysis; age-dependent genes: age-dependent genes based on linear regression analysis; geneage genes: longevity-associated genes according to genage database. n/a: not available.



human cardiac aging modular signatures
the mouse consensus modules were mapped with the use of ncbi's gene and homologene resources against the human modules  <cit>  and the node overlap was estimated only with respect to genes due to the lack of human mirna expression experiments. nevertheless, the overlap threshold  was lowered to  <dig>  due to the absence of mirnas and the insufficiency of homologs. the matching procedure revealed three human modules that matched the mod_ <dig>  mod_ <dig> and mod_ <dig> . the first human module matched to mod_ <dig> was characterized by the ‘electron transport chain’ go term  similar to the mouse corresponding one. the second human module was significantly enriched in the ‘signal transduction’, ‘actin cytoskeleton organization’ and ‘programmed cell death’  terms relative to mod_ <dig> where no statistically significant terms were found. the third human module was enriched in the ‘protein metabolic process’ term relative to the mouse mod_ <dig> where no statistically significant terms were found. also, we checked the  <dig> human modular proteins for heart disease terms and  <dig> proteins were found to be associated  .figure  <dig> 
homology-based human modules. layout of the three human modules descending after the homology-based matching between human and mouse consensus modules. module a displayed significant node overlap relative to mouse mod_ <dig>  module b to mod_ <dig> and module c to mod_ <dig>  pink nodes highlight the homologs.
disease annotation data for proteins included in human modules



gene
gene name
disease name
cardiovascular disease annotation data for  <dig> proteins participating in the human modules. data was obtained from disgenet database.



age-related mrnas/mirnas
although the goal of this study is to detect age-related modules, we employed conventional statistical tests for identifying age-dependent mrnas/mirnas so as to explore later their place into modules. using a linear regression model ,  <dig> mirnas and  <dig> mrnas were identified as age-dependent , whose expression level was significantly altered with age. gene ontology  biological process enrichment analysis with the use of david functional tool revealed the following terms  for  <dig> out of the  <dig> genes: ‘positive regulation of defense response’, ‘regulation of growth’, ‘regulation of developmental process’, ‘regulation of binding’ and ‘regulation of response to stress’. we comment on the ‘stress’ and ‘defense’ related terms which characterize the rate of aging and the appearance of age-related pathology which are modulated by stress response and repair pathways that gradually decline, including the proteostasis and dna damage repair networks and mitochondrial respiratory metabolism  <cit> .

in table  <dig> we report the age-dependent mrnas/mirnas as well as highlight the  <dig>  mrnas and  <dig>  mirnas that were identified in the final consensus modules. the age-dependent mirnas, included in the consensus modules, have been reported to be related to aging or specifically to cardiac aging based on recent studies: mir-34a  <cit> , mir-466d-3p  <cit> , mir- <dig>  <cit>  and mir-135a  <cit> . similar literature evidence support  <dig> age-dependent genes/proteins included in consensus modules: g0s <dig>  has been related to cardiac hypertrophy  <cit> ; hadh  involved in fatty acid oxidation is associated to cardiac hypertrophy  <cit> ; ndufa <dig>  and ndufv <dig>  are involved in oxidative phosphorylation and associated to cardiovascular diseases  <cit> ; rhou  is responsible for changes in cytoskeleton and cell shape during aging  <cit> ; ier <dig>  is involved in heart failure  <cit> ; rpl <dig>  and rpl <dig>  reflect the decline in ribosomal activity in the aging heart  <cit> ); rpa <dig>  mediates critical dna transactions throughout the genome  <cit> ; eef <dig>  is involved in the slowing down of protein synthesis during cardiac aging  <cit> .table  <dig> 
age-dependent mrnas/mirnas



list of age-dependent mirnas f-test 
list of age-dependent genes f-test 

mir-135a

mir-152

mir-342-3p

mir-34a

mir-466d-3p

mir-374

mir-466c-5p

mir-466f-3p

mir-468

mir-574-5p

mir-677
using a linear regression model and two-tailed f-test,  <dig> age-dependent mirnas and  <dig> age-dependent mrnas were identified . bold indicates mirnas and mrnas included in the consensus modules. italics indicate mirnas with insignificant synergistic effect.



our suggestion is that age-dependent molecules, as derived by classic statistical tests and/or supported by one independent study, are of little value on their own. alternatively, age-dependent molecules gain value within the boundaries of modules that as a whole change significantly during lifespan even if their neighbors display moderate differential expression and thus have a lower discriminative potential. under this notion, the modular approach filtered the differentially expressed molecules, as derived from classic statistical tests, to a smaller more reliable set and more importantly contextualized them into neighborhoods. from the synergism perspective, we deescalated the value of several mirnas descending from classical differential expression analysis; we showed that differential expression is not synonymous or indicative of synergism.

discussion
accumulating evidence shows the broad impact of mirnas in modulating complex physiological or disease phenotypes. a cohort of recent studies has stressed out the pervasive role of mirnas in the analysis of cardiovascular diseases and shifted the interest to mirnas as rational drug targets and, as such, mirna-based therapy represents an essential and promising trend in the future  <cit> . moreover, aging is the predominant risk factor for cardiovascular diseases and contributes to a significantly worse outcome in patients with acute myocardial infarction  <cit> . in this orientation, this work is motivated by recent findings revealing novel cardiac aging biomarkers at the level of individual proteins and mirnas in the mouse model  <cit> . however, there is still no meta-analysis study to assess the validity and reproducibility of these observations and even less is known about the functional association and interactions among molecular components. we address this challenge and integrate cardiac tissue mirna and mrna expression profiles from multiple independent studies with various interaction data and constructed multiple integromics networks that served as the basis for defining consensus communities  as cardiac aging signatures. unlike conventional clustering or classification methods, network-based methods can implicate proteins with low discriminative potential  if such proteins participate in a community whose overall activity is discriminative  <cit> . such proteins can arise within a significant community if they are essential for maintaining its integrity, that is they are required to interconnect many hub proteins.

an important aspect of our network analysis is the construction of the mirna-mirna interaction network and the identification of extensive synergies that affect profoundly the aging process and decline of cardiac tissue. previous studies have inserted the term ‘synergy’, in the context of mirna regulation, to describe pairs of mirnas that significantly co-regulate at least one functional module  <cit> . moving a step forward, we developed an integrated parameter synergy score which can be used to assess the complex nature and scale of mirna synergy in the genome. this unique scoring system measures the contribution of a mirna pair both to a specific process  and to multiple processes . initially, we re-address and complement to the findings of recent studies that identified mirnas involved in heart tissue aging process. the work of boon et al.  <cit>  suggested that mir-34a inhibition reduces cell death and fibrosis following acute myocardial infarction and improves recovery of myocardial function. we support the longevity-associated role of mir-34a since it participated in the consensus modules, yet showed no substantial involvement in synergism. the associated modular genes were: cuedc <dig> , fcgr2b , accn <dig> , hcn <dig> , padi <dig> , 4930453n24rik , pnoc  and p2ry <dig> . hcn <dig> has been suggested to be involved in cardiac aging and decline since it is the pacemaker and modulates activity in the contractile myocytes  <cit> . also, the relation of mir-34a with pnoc has been reported in brain aging as proposed by somel et al.  <cit> .

moving forward, mir- <dig> was shown to be involved in age-related cardiac fibrosis, whose overexpression contributed to cellular senescence and migration of cardiac fibroblasts  <cit> . our findings do not add value to its involvement in aging process  and its synergy impact was not substantial . nevertheless, mir- <dig> proposed as aging biomarker by the same study - but not further experimentally validated – was shown to have significant synergy effect on aging process  and was incorporated in consensus modules. the module around mir- <dig> included, among others, proteins such as cbs , mmp <dig>  and neu <dig> . damage on cbs has been shown to lead to decreased h2s production and concentration during aging  <cit> . the work of  <cit>  has suggested that the differential regulation of mmps is associated with aging and hypertension in the rat heart. neu <dig> has been proposed to participate in the elastin degradation during vascular aging and provoke atherosclerosis  <cit> .

another previous study showed that the members of mir-17- <dig> cluster, including mir-18a, −19a, and -19b, were differentially expressed in failure-prone heart of aged mice as well as in cardiac biopsies of idiopathic cardiomyopathy patients at old age with severely impaired cardiac function  <cit> . we corroborate to this observation since the mir-19a/-19b and mir-18a/-18b pairs scored high in terms of synergy  despite not participating in the consensus modules. in summary, the mirna synergy analysis provided a list of new candidate mirna pairs both included and not included in the consensus modules. after reviewing the literature we found evidence that link most of the top-scoring mirna pairs  to aging and cardiovascular diseases and consider them reliable for further validation.

most importantly, our analysis revealed a modularized view of the aging process in cardiac tissue and established the ground for a more holistic perspective of the complex regulatory processes taking place in cardiac tissue during lifespan. initially, we comment on the scale of longevity effect upon the interactome. our results showed that only a small fraction of the network edges is affected during lifespan in contrast to other studies that evaluated the effect of heat shock on yeast interactome and observed global disintegration  <cit> . however, we argue that such global changes are probably prominent in cases when the biological system is severely under attack like in heat shock; aging is a gradual cumulative process and should probably be evaluated on a smaller scale and through perturbations on specific areas of the interactome.

moving forward, the set of  <dig> consensus modules descended from various independent mrna and mirna expression studies along with the applied weighting schemes increased the homogeneity of the module compositions and ensured a high probability of identifying members with both correlating and anti-correlating profiles during age transition from young to old; thus, the derived observations can be regarded as more confident and realistic. the topological analysis suggests that modules affect more profoundly the stability of the network compared to individual age-dependent nodes and less when compared to hub nodes. this observation stresses out an important advantage of module-based analysis into describing aging process; it allows the resulting communities to display mixed features like hubness, include proteins placed in the periphery - which in other cases would be neglected - and contain both differentially expressed nodes and insignificantly differentially expressed nodes which however affect longevity. the go enrichment analysis of modules elucidated well-established cardiac age-related terms like: ‘generation of precursor metabolites and energy’, ‘electron transport chain’, ‘cell cycle phase’ and ‘organelle fission’. we relegate the reader to the work of houtkooper et al.  <cit>  which exemplifies that metabolic dysfunction is a common hallmark of aging.

moving further, considering that modules regulating aging in model systems may not be related to human aging, mouse consensus modules were matched against human based on homologs. the comparison revealed three mouse consensus modules displaying significant overlap with the respective human. gene ontology analysis on the corresponding human modules elucidated terms like ‘electron transport chain’, ‘signal transduction’, ‘actin cytoskeleton organization’, ‘programmed cell death’ and ‘protein metabolic process’. we comment on the term ‘actin cytoskeleton organization’ which has been suggested to be linked to downstream signaling events that further modulate cellular activity, and which can determine cell fate, the regulation of programmed cell death, the maintenance of homeostasis and the process of cellular aging  <cit> . in yeast, for example, it has been shown that the level of damage sustained by the actin cytoskeleton under oxidative stress is directly related to apoptosis. further evidence descends from observations that actin-based propulsion mechanisms are required for the inheritance of mitochondria and anti-ageing factors into newly formed cells. in addition, actin is known to directly influence the formation of protein aggregations  <cit> . moving forward, the proteins participating in these modules are mainly nadh dehydrogenases involved in the respiratory chain, mitochondrial atp synthases involved in oxidative phosphorylation, cytochrome oxidases, ras superfamily gtpases and ribosomal proteins. nadh dehydrogenases have been suggested to associate with heart aging  <cit> , atp synthases are linked with the changes in atp supply in advanced age  <cit> , decrease of cytochrome oxidases mrna transcripts during aging has been reported in the rat heart  <cit> , the association of ras superfamily with longevity has been implicated in the work of borras et al.  <cit>  while declining ribosomal activity may be a feature of aging in the heart  <cit> . further, we explored the hypothesis that genes/proteins related to cardiac pathophysiology do not necessarily influence the aging process in cardiac tissue. our results suggest that this is partially true since  <dig> out of the  <dig> proteins included in the human modules are related to various cardiac diseases. at this point we relegate the reader to the review of north and sinclair  <cit>  which summarizes how the genetic pathways that regulate aging in model organisms influence the cardiovascular health state.

there are some limitations in our study. first, the platform differences at probe-level among experiments and the genome-scale coverage reduced significantly the intersecting genes among experiments and thus the size of the protein interaction graph under study. in this sense, many other consensus modules could appear if the protein network expanded in size. also, the small number of publicly available mouse and human expression experiments recording the age phases of cardiac tissue affects the impact of our results. more value will be added to our methodological framework in advent of more comprehensive data. despite these limitations, our study still provides a new insight into the synergism of mirnas in cardiac aging and offers a more reliable pool of multi-layer aging signatures for further experimental validation.

CONCLUSIONS
this works offers the first systemic view of cardiac aging mechanisms well known to be highly interconnected with many cardiovascular diseases. for this, we propose a meta-analysis network-based methodology that integrates proteome and micronome interaction data along with transcriptome expression data from multiple independent studies to produce robust modular signatures of longevity mechanisms, in contrast to the individual molecular components proposed by each transcriptome study separately. moving a step forward, we explore the micronome synergism from the modularized network perspective and propose mirna pairs with profound collective action during cardiac aging. the meta-analysis findings revise the role of several recently implicated molecules and re-contextualize them into communities with high reproducibility across datasets and organisms. the proposed methodological framework can be applied in a wide range of complex cellular processes and diseases, and can subvene combinational multi-target mirna therapy of age-related cardiovascular diseases.

