BACKGROUND
the availability of whole genome sequences and the development of high-throughput technologies have enabled global or genome-wide measurements of gene expression. the complete genome sequence of arabidopsis thaliana  <cit>  is available and this plant serves as an important model for gene expression research. a number of high-throughput technologies have been developed, such as the widely used microarray technologies  <cit>  and tag- or sequence-based technologies  <cit> , that measure the abundance of many different mrna transcripts within a biological sample. several microarray platforms have been developed with probe sequences based on the sequenced arabidopsis genome. some of the most recent generation of commercially-produced arabidopsis microarrays represent more than  <dig>  genes: affymetrix  <cit>  and agilent technologies.  <cit> . the affymetrix microarray contains sets of 25-nucleotide probes per gene, while agilent utilizes a single 60-nucleotide probe per gene on the microarray.

hybridization signal intensities can be used to generate relative or abundance measurements that correspond to the amount of target mrna that has hybridized to a specific probe, but relative measurements are determined by a comparison of two samples. tag-based technologies measure the expression level of a gene by counting the abundance of a specific transcript in a sample. this count provides an abundance measure of each gene's expression level within the sample. until recently, only two tag-based technologies have been widely used: sage   <cit>  and mpss  technology  <cit> . both sage and mpss produce short  sequence tags that are derived from a defined position in a mrna molecule. a significant advantage of the mpss technology relative to sage is the large number of distinct signatures  that can be identified in a single analysis. therefore, mpss potentially provides a greater coverage of the transcriptome than sage.

previous studies have compared different gene expression measurement technologies to determine how well they correlate with each other and/or to use one technology as a benchmark for another  <cit> . some early studies, comparing different microarray platforms, showed that commercial microarrays were typically more consistent than non-commercial microarrays  <cit> . the study of kuo et al.  <cit> , which compared data from ten different microarray platforms for mouse, found that results were more similar between laboratories using the same platform than across platforms, that one-dye platforms were typically more consistent than two-dye platforms. recently, some studies have compared microarray and mpss technology, showing that there is moderate correlation between the two platforms but that one technology will often detect expression for some genes that are not measured by the other platform  <cit> . oudes et al.  <cit>  therefore suggested that using a combination of transcription profiling technologies would provide more complete coverage of gene expression measurements. liu et al.  <cit>  provided a comparison between many different microarrays and mpss technology using mouse tissues but they did not consider as broad a range of biological samples for comparison as in our study.

in a preliminary study, coughlan et al.  <cit>  compared microarray and mpss data from arabidopsis thaliana. here, we extend this preliminary work by carrying out a more detailed data analysis and by including data obtained with the affymetrix platform. we compare transcript abundance measurements obtained with two types of microarrays  and with mpss. these data were generated from the same set of mrna samples extracted from a variety of arabidopsis thaliana tissues, mutants and treatments. we investigate the consistency of transcript abundance measurements across the three technology platforms using comparison of abundance expression levels and expression level ratios. we discuss factors which may affect the measured abundance and contribute to variation in measurements across different technology platforms. this study uses a broad range of samples in order to assess these different platforms.

RESULTS
comparison of gene expression data obtained from mpss and microarrays
we believe that there should be some biologically meaningful relationships among different samples from different technology platforms. for example, samples from same tissues with different condition/treatment are expected to have higher correlation than samples from different tissues, and the same samples measured by different technology platforms would be expected to have higher correlation than others. to test our hypothesis, we make comparisons of abundance expression level and comparisons of expression level ratios.

comparison of abundance expression levels
we wanted to compare the abundance of transcripts as measured by the expression data from mpss, affymetrix and agilent technologies . it is important to note that not all genes were measurable with all three technologies , therefore our analyses focused on the subset of genes that were represented on both microarray platforms and contained a dpn ii site detectable by mpss . the mpss data showed a wider dynamic range than affymetrix and agilent data . the standard deviations for mpss data were greater than those for affymetrix and agilent data.

the eleven rna sources and corresponding platform or sample codes used in this paper.

code names:

first two letters of the code: m-mpss; af-affymetrix; ag-agilent

middle letters of the code: tissue/treatment

last letter of the code: a/b-technical replicates

std represents the standard error of the mean.

to make the data directly comparable, we rescaled the normalized data into normalized expression unit  values , which we used for abundance expression levels comparison. we calculated the pearson's correlation and spearman's rank correlation of logged neu normalized expression data for  <dig>  genes in mpss, affymetrix and agilent  and "present" calls determined by the affymetrix software), and we performed hierarchical clustering using these data . the neu normalization did not affect the correlation statistics for the logged expression measurements since it corresponds to a shift in the mean for logged data. the within-technology correlations across the tissues and mutants were greater than the inter-technology correlations of identical rna samples . the patterns of clustering and correlation among the samples were similar within technologies, although not identical, when based on either mpss, affymetrix or agilent measurements. different tissue samples in within-technology comparisons exhibited similar patterns: root was mostly correlated with callus; silique was primarily correlated with flower and secondarily correlated with leaf. the treated leaf samples were clustered together, as were the mutant flower samples.

the upper triangle represents the pearson's correlation while the corresponding p-values are all smaller than  <dig> . the correlation values greater than  <dig>  are shown in bold; values between  <dig>  to  <dig>  are shown in italics. all genes had measurable abundance values greater than  <dig> tpm in all mpss samples and were detected as present in affymetrix.

when comparing the same rna samples across technologies, the highest correlations were observed for mpss versus affymetrix microarrays  and for affymetrix microarrays versus agilent microarrays  while the lowest correlations were exhibited for agilent microarrays versus mpss  . the correlations among different tissues within the mpss data were lower than the correlations among different tissues measured by affymetrix and agilent microarrays. the correlation values among mpss expression data ranged from  <dig>  to  <dig>  while the same measurements using affymetrix or agilent microarrays ranged from  <dig>  to  <dig>  and  <dig>  to  <dig> , respectively. additional analyses using different affymetrix and agilent technical replicates also showed that each pair of technical replicates were closely correlated together, as expected .

we next assessed the neu levels from mpss and affymetrix technologies in a gene-by-gene comparison of  <dig>  genes, which were selected because their mean mpss abundance across eleven samples was greater than  <dig> tpm and they were detected as present in the corresponding affymetrix microarrays for the eleven rna samples. there were numerous transcripts for which abundance was measurable with the affymetrix microarrays, but for which no or very little expression was measureable in the mpss analysis .

comparison of expression level ratios
in our comparison of the mpss, affymetrix and agilent normalized abundance data, we observed that the rna samples exhibited higher correlations within the technology platform used to measure rna abundance rather than expected similarities due to the biological nature of the samples. although mpss and, in principle, affymetrix data can be used to estimate abundance expression levels it is likely that probe-specific effects and other technological biases will have a large effect on the estimates. in practice, practitioners often focus on differences in expression between samples. thus, we decided to use expression ratios of pairwise sample comparisons to reassess the data correlations. nine samples were selected for this analysis: callus, inflorescence, leaf, root, silique, ap <dig>  ap <dig>  s <dig> and s <dig>  we used the following eight pairs of samples for calculation of ratios: silique/inflorescence, silique/ap <dig>  silique/ap <dig>  ap1/ap <dig>  callus/leaf, root/leaf, leaf/s <dig> and leaf/s <dig>  for each technology platform, we computed the pearson's correlations and spearman's rank correlations between the ratios across pairs of samples. the hierarchical clustering of the correlations  showed that the samples were more closely clustered according to their biological nature than the technology platform. therefore, the ratios were a more biologically meaningful measure to use for cluster analysis than abundance measurements of gene expression.

we next used a contour matrix plot  <cit>  on expression ratios to assess the correlations among the different technology platforms . the affymetrix and agilent data were most similar to each other , indicating that the two microarray platforms were more consistent with each other in terms of detection of differential expression than with mpss. the correlation values using the same tissue pairs for affymetrix/agilent and mpss ranged from  <dig>  to  <dig>  while the values for agilent and affymetrix ranged from  <dig>  to  <dig>  . we also found that ratios comparing the inflorescence tissue within the different mutants  or within leaf tissue from different treatments  were not correlated as closely as those between mutants/tissues within the same technology platform . this indicates that comparisons of ratios are not always consistent enough across technologies to identify more subtle differences in a sample. however, there was sufficient consistency to distinguish ratios at a more coarse level . also, the ratio data obtained from the agilent microarrays which were non-self microarrays  with two channels showed higher correlations than the ratio data from self-self microarrays  treated as single-channel microarrays. for example, the pearson correlation between afrole and agrole was  <dig>  while the correlation value between afrole and agrolez was  <dig> . additional analyses using different affymetrix and agilent technical replicates also showed that each pair of ratio data from technical replicates were closely correlated as expected .

probe-position effects in affymetrix and tag-position effects in mpss
the position of the microarray probe or mpss signature within a given transcript may impact the measurement of transcript abundance due to the use of different polyadenylation sites or technical biases  <cit> . therefore, we compared the effects of the probe position on the affymetrix microarray data and the effects of the tag position on the mpss data. this type of analysis may be useful to distinguish differences in the measured transcript abundances that arise from biological causes in the mrna sample from those that come from technological biases.

first, we investigated the relationship between the primary tag position and the measured rna abundance in mpss. since mpss tags are captured via the poly tail and anchored by a four base restriction enzyme recognition site such as gatc, the primary tag was defined as the 3'-most tag in an annotated gene, which was determined based on an analysis of dpn ii sites. we analyzed the mpss data considering the distance of the primary tag from the 5' and 3' ends. we found that primary tags closer to the 3' end tended to have lower measured transcript abundances . with increasing distance of the primary tag from the 5' end of the gene, there was a decrease in the mpss-measured transcript abundance .

next, we investigated the relationship between the probe position and perfect match  probe values in the affymetrix microarrays. the probe positions were determined relative to the annotated 5' and 3' ends of each gene. we found that the measured transcript abundances correlated with the position from the 3' end such that probes close to the 3' end tended to have lower pm values , but the variation was smaller than for mpss tags. there was not as strong an association between the measured abundance and distance from the 5' end for the affymetrix probes compared to mpss.

based on the analysis of probe position in the affymetrix microarrays and the tag position in mpss samples, we found that both probe position and tag position, as measured from the 3' end, demonstrated a consistent trend. with the increase in probe position or tag position from the 3' end, the pm value and tag-abundance tended to increase then plateau. one reason for this tendency could be that there are many alternative transcripts for some genes which are not correctly annotated in the current arabidopsis genome which could be alternative splice products or transcripts utilizing alternative polyadenylation sites. in fact, some probes and tags that we used for this analysis were not located within the most recently annotated genome  <cit> . to check whether this tag- or probe-position bias is not merely a consequence of alternative splicing, we were able to obtain similar results when only single exon-containing genes were included .

CONCLUSIONS
our study indicated that the mpss platform may be more variable in measuring rna abundance than affymetrix and agilent platforms. our analysis showed that the microarray and mpss technologies did not correlate well on a quantitative basis for transcript abundance measurements, although within-technology clustering of samples was largely consistent. expression ratio comparisons were more comparable and consistent across the platform technologies, and ratios for sample pairs involving different tissues were found to correlate quite well across technologies. therefore, for the purpose of hierarchical clustering of global data sets, the ratios were a more biologically meaningful measure to use for cluster analysis than abundance measurements of gene expression. however, when the difference between the ratios was subtle, as in the case of ratios involving the same pair of tissues but with one derived from a different mutant or treatment, then technological differences often overwhelmed the underlying biological signal. moreover, the two microarray technologies  were more consistent with each other than with mpss.

the position of the probe or tag in the transcript has previously been shown to affect the measured transcript abundance  <cit> . our analysis demonstrated that there exists a probe-position effect on the abundance measured by affymetrix, consistent with a similar tag-position effect observed in mpss data. specifically, affymetrix probes and mpss tags closer to the 3' end of the transcript showed a lower average abundance. the fact that this trend was observed using both technologies suggests that it may reflect an inherent characteristic of the rna sample. the majority of probes and mpss tags were within coding regions, and we confirmed that the trend also exists for genes that are annotated as containing only a single exon. this seems to exclude the possibility of alternative splicing as an explanation, unless a significant number of the current gene models are incorrect. one possibility is variation in the polyadenylation site within the 3' utr. other possible explanations may be bias in the rna sample, a misannotation of the coding regions, or a coincidental technological bias shared by affymetrix microarrays and mpss.

