BACKGROUND
the fine-tuned mechanisms of cell cycle have always been in the focus of cancer research resulting in a better understanding and optimization of the action of several chemotherapeutic agents . both posttranslational modifications of proteins  and altered transcriptional activity of specific genes contribute to the tightly controlled regulation of the cell cycle  <cit> . analysis of mrna transcripts expressed in a cell cycle dependent manner using high-throughput screening methods have identified numerous genes used for differentiating malignant tumors from benign lesions . these correlations were presumably due to the possibility that cell cycle dynamics accelerate in malignant tumors, resulting in a larger proportion of cells residing in s and g <dig> phases  <cit> .

former approaches for detecting transcripts expressed in a cell cycle dependent manner used several synchronization techniques for arresting the cell cycle at a certain point. among others, serum starvation, double thymidine block, and thymidine-nocodazole block halted the cell cycle in cultured cells at g <dig>  early s and m phases, respectively . after removal of the synchronizing agent, time-course gene expression data followed by adequate bioinformatics analysis were used for identifying the cell cycle regulated transcripts . however, several conflicting arguments have been raised concerning the usage of these synchronization procedures  <cit> . statistical re-examination of a former study  <cit>  surprisingly revealed that randomization of time-course gene expression data showed the same strong periodicity in the expression patterns as those obtained from the original synchonization experiment. moreover, synchronization procedures in general  <cit> , and dna replication inhibitors such as thymidine in particular, result in the perturbance of cell cycle machinery, producing growth imbalance and unscheduled expression of cyclins  <cit> . additionally, cells may lose their synchronization relatively soon after the release from the synchronizing agent  <cit>  and only a subset of cells reenter the cell cycle after arrest  <cit> . therefore, a set of criteria has been introduced for the analysis of cell cycle dependent transcripts  <cit> . accordingly, the expression pattern of a certain gene can be introduced as cell cycle dependent if  no inhibition or starvation method was used for synchronization,  results are reproducible over several experiments  results of additional methods other than microarrays  support the findings  expression patterns are confirmed in non-synchronized experiments  and  statistically robust analysis supports the results  <cit> .

the regulation of the cell cycle in general and the cell cycle dependent transcriptional program in particular is the consequence of the precise interactions between cyclin-cyclin dependent kinase complexes and an oscillating network of transcription factors  <cit> . additionally, epigenetic mechanisms as microrna-mediated regulations contribute to proper cell cycle regulation. micrornas  are short, ~22 nt long noncoding rna molecules regulating gene expression on the post-transcriptional level targeting the 3’ untranslated regions of mrnas  <cit> . extensive complementarity results in mrna degradation, whereas in the case of short complementarity, transcriptional silencing is achieved by transcriptional repression  <cit> . among other physiological functions, the importance of mirna-dependent gene regulation has been confirmed in several key members of the cell cycle machinery , contributing to mirna-dependent cell cycle changes  <cit> . altered expression of cell cycle-controlling mirnas has been reported in neoplasms of various tissues  <cit> . additionally, dynamic mirna expression changes have been observed during exit from quiescent state due to serum reintegration into the culture medium of serum starved cells  <cit> . in particular, elevated expression of e2f <dig> and e2f <dig> in response to mitogenic stimuli have been shown to enhance the expression of its transcriptional targets: hsa-let- <dig> and hsa-mir- <dig> family members  <cit> . moreover, e2f <dig> has been shown to enhance hsa-mir- <dig> expression, which inhibits cyclin e, one of the key transcriptional targets of e2f <dig>  <cit> . accordingly, it has been proposed that such feed-forward loops encompassing the e2f transcription factors, mirnas and cyclins contribute to the fine-tuning of cell cycle regulation  <cit> . however, the potential dynamic mirna expression changes between the cell cycle phases of actively cycling cells without any synchronization or serum shock procedures have not been thoroughly investigated.

here, for the first time, we show that gene expression signature obtained from unperturbed cells sorted by fluorescence activated cell sorting  based on their dna content at different phases of the cell cycle correlate well with former gene expression studies using synchronization methods. in addition to lower expression of cell cycle genes in different cell cycle phases, dynamic mrna expression changes were found to be of greater amplitude in primary, untransformed fibroblasts as compared to those detected in cancer cell lines, reflecting the more precise cell cycle regulation in untransformed cells with lower proliferation characteristics. using numerous high-throughput mirna-screening methods, mirna expression, unlike mrna expression, was found to be quite stable throughout the cell cycle progression in various human cells.

RESULTS
an optimized cell cycle sorting method successfully differentiates cell cycle phases in various cells
our optimal cell cycle sorting was able to differentiate cells residing in various cell cycle phases in all of the three cell types used  . the purity of cell cycle sorted populations varied between cell types and cell cycle phases , but based on facs reanalysis, these sorted cell populations were still more homogenous than cells obtained after synchronization procedures  <cit> . g <dig> phase was sorted most efficiently in all cell types with more than 95 % of purity in all cells. in nci-h295r and hela cells, s phase cells showed more homogenous population as compared to cells in g <dig> phase.fig.  <dig> fluorescence activated cell sorting  analysis of stained cells and validation of cell cycle sorted populations in hdfa, nci-h295r and hela cells. panels a-c: facs analysis shows cell cycle distribution of stained cells before  and after sorting to g <dig>  s and g <dig> phases  were defined to gate g <dig>  s and g <dig> phases, respectively. panels d-e: western blot analysis confirms the high efficacy of cell cycle sort . density values of phospho-cdc- <dig> were first normalized to β-actin loading control and were further normalized to g <dig> phase 



optimization of the cell cycle sort was needed for the sake of achiveving high purity in sorting without damaging or perturbing physiological cell functions. in particular, the determination of upper limit of sorting time, the use of a specialized sort medium and the immediate re-analysis of sorted cells contributed to our results.

protein expression change confirms the successful sorting
tyr <dig> phosphorylation of cdc- <dig> protein is a tightly controlled event in cell cycle progression  <cit> , thus the respective amounts of phospho -cdc- <dig> provide a general hallmark for each phase. western blot analysis performed on protein extracts of sorted nci-h295r and hela cells showed the well known phosphorylation patterns of cdc- <dig> , confirming the purity of cell cycle sorting on protein level as well.

gene expression profiling detects cell cycle regulated transcripts in facs-sorted cells
the quantity and quality of isolated rna from sorted cells were sufficient to perform high throughput gene expression screening . gene expression profiling, followed by rigorous statistical analysis detected  <dig> mrna transcripts in nci-h295r cells  and  <dig> mrna transcripts in hela cells  to be expressed in a cell cycle dependent manner. note that the majority of detected gene expression changes share a common manner: expression rises as cell cycle proceeds. additionally, clustering showed that s and g <dig> phases’ expressional patterns are closer to each other than to g <dig> phase. statistical analysis of hdfa microarray data failed to detect genes with significantly altered expression, however, the functional bioinformatics analysis of the gene expression changes of greater than a twofold change  supports the concept that these changes strongly influence cell cycle progression. moreover, the successful qrt-pcr validation of the chosen fc >  <dig> genes  and the significant correlation of gene expression changes of cell cycle sorted with former synchronization-based experiments in primary fibroblasts  further confirm the relevance of our approach.fig.  <dig> high throughput gene expression profiling, qrt-pcr validation and functional bioinformatics analysis of cell cycle dependent transcription in hdfa, nci-h295r and hela cells. panels a-b: heat map of mrna transcripts with significantly different expression between cell cycle phases . above the heat maps, hierarchical clustering upon differently expressed genes are also shown . panels c-e: qrt-pcr validation of six genes chosen upon microarray analysis . in each case Δct value was normalized to g <dig> phase  and was subjected to fc = 2-ΔΔct transformation. error bars show standard deviation. asterisks mark statistical significance . panels f-h: molecular and cellular functions concerned by gene expression alterations in cell cycle phases. Δ gene expression changes of significantly differently expressed genes  or genes with fold change >  <dig> expression  were subjected to ipa core analysis. in each cell, the five most significantly concerned networks are shown. significance threshold  corresponds to –log =  <dig> . for additional molecular and cellular functions see additional file 2: figure s2

fig.  <dig> comparison of cell cycle dependent gene expression observed by cell cycle sort and synchronization experiments and analysis of gene expression dynamics during the cell cycle in various cell types. panel a: venn diagram of cell cycle dependent genes detected in cell cycle sorted primary fibroblasts , in synchronized primary fibroblasts , in cell cycle sorted hela cells  and in synchronized hela cells . intersections present the number of commonly found genes. for gene lists see additional 1: table s <dig>  panels b-c: correlation analysis of gene expression differences using normalized expression values obtained from microarray experiments. pearson’s correlation coefficient was calculated from Δ expression changes detected by cell cycle sort and former synchronization experiments in primary fibroblasts  and hela  cells. correlation coefficients are displayed. asterisks mark statistical significance . for additional correlation calculations see additional 2: figures s <dig> and s <dig>  panels d-e: analysis of normalized gene expression values of different cell types. normalized gene expression of  <dig> cycling genes exported from microarray data  and  <dig> cycling genes exported from qrt-pcr data  were analyzed. note the lower Δct values mean higher expression values. error bars show standard deviation. asterisks mark statistical significance . panels f-g: analysis of mean gene expression fold change between cell cycle phases of different cell types. absolute values of fold change of  <dig> cycling genes exported from microarray data  and  <dig> cycling genes exported from qrt-pcr data  of cell cycle sort experiments were analyzed. error bars show standard deviation. asterisks mark statistical significance 



gene expression changes observed by qrt-pcr experiments of six genes chosen upon microarray analysis confirmed the microarray results in all of the three cells . specifically, all the six genes chosen for the qpcr validation were present in the significant  or fc >  <dig>  lists. moreover, arhgap11a, kif <dig> and gtse <dig> were previously found to be expressed in a cell cycle dependent fashion in primary fibroblasts  <cit>  and hela cells  <cit> , while aspm and ska <dig> genes were found to be cell cycle regulated in primary fibroblasts  <cit> . the successful validation of these well-known cell cycle genes in all three cell types analyzed here further confirms our cell cycle sorting method.

functional bioinformatics analysis was used to detect altered pathways based on our microarray results. as a further confirmation of our method, ”cell cycle” ”cellular assembly and organization” and ”dna replication, recombination and repair” were the molecular and cellular functions most concerned by gene expression changes in all three cells .

comparison of cell cycle dependent expression between cell cycle sort and former synchronization based data
several conflicting arguments arose on the applicability of synchronization procedures to define transcripts with cycling expression in unperturbed cells  <cit> . therefore we aimed to compare expression changes between cell cycle phases detected by gene expression profiling in synchronization and cell cycle sort based experiments. because synchronization based time course gene expression data in adrenocortical cell line have not been previously published, comparisons were made with primary fibroblasts and hela cells. pearson’s method showed significant correlation between gene expression changes observed in synchronization based and cell cycle sort based experiments, confirming previous synchronization experiments by a synchronization-free method in unperturbed cells .

additionally, gene ontology  term analysis was performed on the hela cell cycle dependent transcriptional program to analyze the possible difference in biological processes affected by cell cycle sort and synchronization procedures. as both of cell cycle sort-based and synchronization-based results are only applicable in hela cells, we performed the analysis on three gene lists: genes unique to the hela cell cycle sort experiment , genes unique to the hela synchronization experiment  and the overlap between these two lists. all three lists were enriched with cell cycle-related processes; however, the overlap between the two experiments presented the most significant enrichment of cell cycle-associated biological processes, cross-validating important cell cycle genes detected by both the synchronization-based and cell cycle sort-based procedures. all the go terms detected in the unique hela sort list were detected in the overlap list, however, interestingly, five out of eight go terms detected in the unique hela synchr list were unique to this list of genes, not being present in the analysis of the unique hela sort or overlap gene lists .table  <dig> go term analysis of the cell cycle dependent transcriptional program of hela cells


go term
gene count
p-value
bonferroni-corrected p-value
dna metabolic process
dna repair
response to dna damage stimulus
dna replication
cellular response to stress
gene lists from the venn diagram  and additional file 1: table s <dig> were subjected to gene ontology term analysis. genes unique to hela sort experiment , unique to hela synchr experiment  and the overlap between these two lists  were the input gene lists, respectively

gene count represents the number of genes from the input list being present in the corresponding go term. gene symbols are shown in additional file 1: table s <dig>  only statistical significant  go terms are presented. bold lettered go terms correspond to unique go terms found only upon the analysis of either unique hela sort or unique hela synchr gene lists



magnitude of gene expression alterations during cell cycle progression in untransformed and cancer cells
qrt-pcr validation of microarray experiments  indicated that gene expression changes might be characterized by different amplitudes in primary vs. cancer cells. therefore, we analyzed the expression profiles and cell cycle dynamics of genes displaying altered expression between cell cycle phases in both primary untransformed  and transformed cancer  cells . significantly lower expression values were found in primary untransformed compared to cancer cells in g <dig>  s and g <dig> phases as well . for the analysis of mrna dynamics during cell cycle in untransformed and cancer cells, differences in mean fold changes of expression of genes commonly altered in hdfa and hela cell cycle sort experiments were calculated and evaluated . among several significant alterations, a robust difference in mean fold change of gene expression was observed in g1/s transition between primary fibroblasts and cancer  cells based on both microarray and qrt-pcr results. during the cell cycle, cycling genes had lower basal expression, but they demonstrated expression changes of significantly greater amplitude in primary non-transformed fibroblasts, than in transformed cancer  cells.

high-throughput screening of mirnas differently expressed during the human cell cycle
three high-throughput platforms  of mirna expression were used to detect cell cycle dependent mirna expression . among them, microarray  displayed the lowest dynamic range and was unable to detect mirnas of altered expression between cell cycle phases in hdfa and nci-h295r cells. taqman low density array  performed on rna isolated from sorted nci-h295r cells detected  <dig> mirnas of altered expression between cell cycle phases , however qrt-pcr validation of selected mirnas failed to confirm the results . among the three platforms used in our study, small rna sequencing was found to have the largest dynamic range in detection of mirna expression alterations . still, statistical analysis detected only  <dig> mirnas with altered expression in hela cells, of which only four mirnas  had fc >  <dig> expression change between cell cycle phases. qrt-pcr measurements, similar to that of tlda validation attempt, failed to validate differential expression in nci-h295r and hela cells . for further validation four other mirnas showing stable expression in different cell types and cell cycle phases based on the high-throughput data were selected for qrt-pcr control analysis, which confirmed the stable expression pattern .fig.  <dig> analysis of cell cycle dependent mirna expression by high-throughput screenings methods and individual qrt-pcr in hdfa, nci-h295r and hela cells. panels a-d: fold change  of mirna expression in s/g <dig>  g2/s and g2/g <dig> phases observed by microarray , taqman low density array  and illumina small rna sequencing . grey background corresponds to fold change ≤  <dig> between cell cycle phases. colored squares represent mirnas with significantly different expression in cell cycle phases obtained by statistical analysis of high-throughput data. colored circles represent some members of the hsa-mir- <dig> family, if available. for further high-throughput data of nci-h295r cells  see additional 2: figure s <dig>  for qrt-pcr measurement data see additional 2: figure s <dig>  panels e-g: qrt-pcr measurements of hsa-mir- <dig> family members hsa-mir- <dig>  hsa-mir-15a and hsa-mir- <dig> in hdfa , nci-h295r  and hela  cells. in each case Δct values were normalized to g <dig> phase  and were subjected to fc = 2-ΔΔct transformation. error bars show standard deviation. asterisks mark statistical significance 



among several cell cycle regulator mirnas, members of the hsa-mir- <dig> family were found to display dynamic changes in expression between serum-starved g <dig> and actively proliferating state  <cit> . therefore, we analyzed expression changes of the hsa-mir- <dig> family members: hsa-mir- <dig>  hsa-mir-15a and hsa-mir- <dig> in our high-throughput data  and performed qrt-pcr analysis as well . in the case of hsa-mir-15a, small rna sequencing detected two-fold alteration in expression in nci-h295r and hela cells as well and qrt-pcr analysis further confirmed some small, but significant expression changes in all three cell types.

discussion
with the advent of high-throughput transcriptional profiling, the precise analysis of the cell cycle transcription program became possible. time course gene expression data after various synchronization procedures were used for gene expression profiling on microarray platforms  which demonstrated the cell cycle transcription program in various cell types including untransformed primary  <cit>  and transformed cancer cells  <cit> .

however, questions were raised on the applicability of synchronization procedures in the analysis of cell cycle dependent transcriptional profiling  <cit> . in fact, growth imbalance and unscheduled expression of key cell cycle factor cyclins were demonstrated due to synchronization procedures  <cit> . additionally, cells failed to retain their synchronization relatively soon after depriving the synchronization agent from growth medium  <cit> . a rigorous set of criteria was introduced by shedden and cooper concerning the analysis of cell cycle dependent gene expression  <cit>  and, therefore, novel methods satisfying these criteria were needed. centrifugal elutriation  <cit>  and cell cycle sort  are two synchronization-free methods satisfying the shedden and cooper criteria without perturbing the cell cycle machinery. however, to our knowledge no detailed study using these methods to determine cell cycle dependent gene expression in human cells has been published to date. upon centrifugal elutriation, cells are differentiated upon the size of each cell  <cit> , while during cell cycle sorting by facs the amount of dna in each cell is used for separation  <cit> . both methods achieved efficient separation of cell cycle phases . although proper segregation of cell cycle phases by cell cycle sort may be optimal in cells lacking aneuploidy, cells presenting aneuploidy may as well be introduced to cell cycle sort until proper further confirmation of cell cycle sort  supports the results. in our results, dynamic changes of tyr- <dig> phosphorylation of cdc- <dig> in hela show as great variability as in nci-h295r cells, confirming successful segregation of cell cycle phases in hela cells as well.

here, using the cell cycle sort method, we report a comparative analysis of the cell cycle dependent gene transcriptional profile of human untransformed primary  and cancer  cells. functional bioinformatics analysis revealed cell cycle related molecular and cellular functions to be mostly concerned with these transcriptional alterations. as time-course gene expression data from previous synchronization-based studies regarding primary human fibroblasts  <cit>  and hela cells  <cit>  were available, we performed a re-analysis of these data to compare synchronization-based and cell cycle sorting-based results. upon the significant correlation between our data and these earlier results, we conclude that data obtained from cell cycle sort experiments confirm earlier results demonstrating cell cycle dependent gene expression in human cells, as well as it satisfies the rigorous criteria described above  <cit> .

moreover, go term analysis was performed to assess biological processes related to the hela cell cycle dependent transcriptional program. the overlap between hela cell cycle sort and hela synchronization experiments showed a robust enrichment of cell cycle-related go terms, cross-validating the key players of the cell cycle dependent transcriptional program. additionally, cell cycle-related biological processes were enriched in both the unique to hela cell cycle sort and the unique to hela synchonization gene lists. however, interestingly, the majority of go terms detected in the unique hela synchronization gene list were absent from the overlap gene list, indicating some specific mechanisms related to synchronization procedures. the specific presence of ”response to dna damage stimulus” and ”cellular response to stress” and the induction of ”dna repair” go terms confirms the replication stress as a consequence of synchronization procedures  <cit> . these analyses further confirm that our synhronization-free method of cell cycle sort charactherises more specifically the cell cycle of unperturbed cells than the synchronization-based methods.

we also investigated the eventual difference of cell cycle regulated transcriptional program in human untransformed and cancer cells. whitfield et al. demonstrated that genes exhibiting cell cycle regulated expression were overexpressed in malignant tumors reflecting the malignancy signature of neoplasms  <cit> . this was explained by the fact that tumors contain more cycling cells  <cit> . cell cycle dynamics alter disproportionally during malignant transformation  <cit> : activation of oncogenes hras, src, myc, ccnd <dig>  ccne , and loss of tumor suppressor genes as pten  <cit>  shortens g <dig> phase  <cit> , while loss of key m phase regulators lzts <dig> and lats <dig> results in m phase shortening  <cit> . these alterations lead to a relatively larger portion of cells residing in s and g <dig> phases. additionally, certain gene clusters were confirmed to exhibit cell cycle dependent expression in either primary untransformed or transformed cancer cells  <cit> , differentiating cells upon malignant transformation.

our results contribute to the notion of different transcriptional regulation in untransformed and cancer cells. since we have analyzed only three human cell types of different tissue origin, we can not draw a definitive conclusion universal to the cell cycle effects of malignant transformation. however, based on our analysis we may hypothesize that genes displaying universal cell cycle dependent expression in untransformed and cancer cells display altered expression in each phase and dynamic changes of different amplitude . mrna expression was found to be higher in g <dig>  s and g <dig> phases as well, therefore, in addition to altered cell cycle distribution, basal, phase-independent up-regulation of these cell cycle genes may as well constitute to the well observed higher expression in malignant cancers. dynamic mrna expression differences between g <dig> and s phases were of greater amplitude in untransformed primary cells than in cells undergoing malignant transformation. this may be explained by the longer and more tightly controlled g <dig> phase and g1/s transition observed in untransformed, primary cells  <cit> , as it reflects the more precisely regulated cell cycle machinery in untransformed cells. moreover, myc amplification stimulates e2f expression in cancer cells, facilitating the commitment to cell division  <cit> . this facilitated regulation of the g1/s transition may as well contribute to smaller expression changes of the cell cycle dependent transcriptional program.fig.  <dig> schematic presentation of the hypothesis concerning expression dynamics of mrnas and mirnas during the cell cycle phases in primary untransformed and cancer cells. relative expression changes in g <dig>  s and g <dig> phases of a representative cell cycle gene and mirna in untransformed primary  and transformed cancer  cells. relative expression changes of mrnas exhibiting cell cycle dependent expression  and cell cycle associated mirnas  are shown. blue double arrows mark the amplitude of dynamic expression range in cell cycle phases. note the different phase-specific expression values and the different dynamic expression range in the two cell types. upon our results, genes exhibiting cell cycle dependent expression profile in untransformed cells are characterized with lower expression levels throughout the cell cycle, however they possess greater variance in expression levels than in transformed, cancer cells. mirnas, however, do not display cell cycle dependent expression



mirnas have a well established role in the regulation of the cell cycle  <cit> . oncogenic  and tumor-suppressor  mirnas were confirmed as modifiers of key cell cycle agents, accelerating or decelerating cell cycle progression  <cit> . long-term mirna-mediated cell cycle changes contribute to malignant transformation in a variety of neoplasms . additionally, the role of mirna-mediated regulation has been confirmed in the transition from quiescent state to actively proliferating state  <cit> . in particular, mitogenic stimuli enhances cell cycle progression by stimulating key transcriptional factors of the e2f family, which in turn enhances members of the hsa-let- <dig> and hsa-mir- <dig> families  <cit> . these well-known ts-mirs target key cell cycle cyclins as cyclin e, fine-tuning the proper cell cycle progression  <cit> . however, the proposed cell cycle dependent mirna expression pattern  <cit>  has not been thoroughly investigated, as according to our knowledge only one synchronization study identifying some cell cycle regulated mirnas has been published to date  <cit> .

our study aiming to detect mirna expression changes between cell cycle phases included the application of mirna microarray, qpcr-based tlda and illumina small rna sequencing. microarrays are widely used for high throughput mirna profiling and produce results which can be validated in high percentage by qpcr  <cit> . however, obtaining negative results prompted us for further analysis using qpcr-based tlda and illumina small rna sequencing. the latter approach has larger dynamic range of detection allowing us to successfully detect smaller, but significant alterations  <cit> . qpcr-based tlda results however can be most successfully validated by single tube individual mirna-specific qpcr as primer sequences used in tlda does not differ.

analysis of the three human cells  on three high-throughput mirna expression platform in our study revealed that mirna expression profile throughout the cell cycle phases was quite stable . surprisingly, our systematic study using multiple high-throughput platforms indicated the lack of validable cell cycle dependent mirna expression, and also showed that fold change differences are of small amplitude, especially in the light of the robust and explicit changes observed in mrna expressions of the very same cell stage samples. more than 50 % of mirna genes are located in cancer-associated genomic regions or in fragile sites, being continuously downregulated or deleted in cancers  <cit> . therefore, the loss of ts-mirs and the activation of onco-mirs are specifically involved in the long-term malignant transformation. moreover, with the loss of genetic regions containing mirna genes, the possibility of their dynamic regulatory functions throughout the cell cycle is lost as well  <cit> . additionally, mirna-dependent gene regulation was found to be a much slower process than previously thought, due to certain bottlenecks related to the complex biogenesis and maturation processes or delays of mirnas loading into argonaute proteins  <cit> . accelerated turnover was proposed to be necessary for certain mirnas to be possibly involved in dynamic cell cycle regulation  <cit> . such accelerated turnover has been confirmed in the case of the hsa-mir- <dig> family  <cit> . this family has been identified as a cluster of ts-mirs  <cit> , downregulated in various types of cancers  and associated with quiescent state  <cit> . our results indicated some minor mirna expression changes, especially in the case of hsa-mir-15a, however, expression changes were not fully congruent in the three cell types studied, suggesting that the well known, cell type specific expression of mirnas may contribute to this phenomenon.

finally, it is of utmost importance to address the limitations of our study. firstly, upon the analysis of three human cell types of different tissue origin we can not draw a general conclusion concerning the difference of the expression dynamics of the universal cell cycle genes. secondly, although different culture conditions may have some effect on the observed cell cycle differences, our method has much less effects on cell cycle alterations compared to previous serum shock-based or inhibitive synchronization-based processes.

CONCLUSIONS
in conclusion, successful utilization of cell cycle sort as a novel method for the analysis of cell cycle transcriptional program in our study confirmed the previously identified cell cycle transcriptional regulation. different phase-dependent and phase-independent mrna expression dynamics of cell cycle genes in human untransformed and cancer cells were revealed, reflecting the altered cell cycle machinery in cancer cells at the transcriptional level. perhaps more interestingly, the application of various high-throughput platforms  for mirna profiling showed that mirna expression dynamics are unaltered during the active cell cycle at the g1/s and s/g <dig> transitions.

