BACKGROUND
microarrays have been demonstrated to be a powerful technology capable of successfully identifying novel taxonomies for various types of cancers  <cit>  and gene expression signatures could also be associated with clinical outcome  <cit> . those findings indicate that the data from different microarray assays are comparable enough to identify biological heterogeneity between distinct tumor types. moreover, it has recently been demonstrated that, under properly controlled conditions, it is feasible to perform tumor microarray analysis, at multiple independent laboratories  <cit> . in addition, it has been shown that sample preparation by different operators did not impair the robustness of so-called diagnostic gene expression signatures  <cit> . to avoid possible sources of variation in the data, individual laboratories developed standardized protocols involving all the various steps of the sample preparation procedure, starting from tumor sample collection, through sample processing, total rna isolation, cdna synthesis, crna synthesis and labeling, target fragmentation, microarray hybridization, to washing and staining protocols. users are recommended to use specific rna isolation protocols, since one of the major concerns in microarray technology is the quality of starting material and various studies helped in a better understanding of the pre-analytical factors influencing gene expression signatures in peripheral blood and bone marrow  <cit> . however, until now, no fundamental information has been available about the degree of variation in the leukemia gene expression profiles resulting from different rna extraction procedures although it is recognized that different rna stabilization and isolation techniques will introduce varying amounts of analytical noise into the data  <cit> .

here we present a comparative study of the microarray data using three different rna isolation and purification techniques . we have performed standardized experiments with total rna extracted from pediatric acute leukemia patients to investigate whether different extraction protocols  result in comparable gene expression data from the same sample source . moreover, we assessed the variability between gene expression levels arising from multiple technical replicates of the same sample . leukemia gene expression signatures have been studied by numerous laboratories and have been proposed to have an application in a routine diagnosis workflow  <cit> . however, it is not clear, to what degree the various rna isolation protocols impact the gene expression signatures due to method-related changes. we comprehensively addressed the question of rna preparation for microarray analysis in leukemia and suggest a technique for introduction into routine laboratory diagnosis of pediatric acute leukemia by gene expression profiling.

RESULTS
assessment of data quality
in this study we first monitored data quality parameters. all gene expression profiles passed the quality filter and met our criteria for inclusion into further data analyses . in detail, the crna yield was higher than  <dig>  μg, the percentage of present called probe sets represented on the hg-u <dig> plus  <dig>  microarray is greater or equal to  <dig> %, the scaling factor is below  <dig>  the ratios of intensities of exogenous bacillus subtilis control transcripts from the poly-a control kit  are greater or equal to  <dig>  and the intensity ratio of the 3' probe set to the 5' probe set for the housekeeping gene gapd is less than  <dig> . four samples showed a higher 3'/5' gapd ratio  but had otherwise acceptable quality parameters.

as illustrated in figure  <dig> the preparations of total rna by qiashredder homogenization followed by rneasy purification  resulted in acceptable crna yields and very reproducible low 3'/5' gapd ratios. preparations of total rna by trizol  yield slightly higher amount of crna, generate a lower image background as measured by q value, but have a higher 3'/5' gapd ratio. when the total rna was prepared by trizol followed by rneasy purification  the crna yield was high, the background low, with the 3'/5' gapd ratio being a little bit higher than for preparations of total rna by qiashredder homogenization followed by rneasy purification. all three preparation methods generated an acceptable range of present calls on the whole genome microarray.

total rna quality can also be indirectly assessed by a so-called rna degradation plot analysis as implemented in the "simpleaffy" bioconductor analysis package  <cit> . the sample degradation was consistently more severe in gene expression profiles when total rna was processed for microarray analysis directly after isolation with trizol only  . this might reflect that in method b more impurities such as phenol, salts, or residual ethanol are present in the starting total rna as compared to method a or method c. these impurities influence the sample preparation reactions' efficiency, e.g. by inhibiting enzyme activities during cdna synthesis or in vitro transcription reaction, and thus impair the microarray data generated with method b.

comparability of gene expression profiles
to assess the comparability of global gene expression data between samples isolated with different preparation methods it is useful to examine the overall signal distribution of all probe sets as density curve for each microarray experiment. outlier experiments would be detected by their different behavior of the density curves. as shown in figure 3a no substantial curve shifts in the microarray signal distribution are observed among samples representing different leukemia subtypes. the density curves are also overlapping when the signal distribution is plotted according to the total rna preparation method .

unsupervised data analysis
we next investigated the consistency of gene expression measurements of leukemia samples when using different total rna extraction methods by performing an unsupervised hierarchical clustering analysis. expression data have been normalized using the pqn algorithm  <cit> .  <dig> genes were selected using the interquartile range  as filtering criteria. the resulting dendrogram  clearly grouped the samples first by patient replicates using three different extraction methods and secondly separates the leukemias by lineage origin in b lineage all , t lineage all  and aml . in 22/ <dig> of the patient replicates samples processed by qiashredder homogenization followed by rneasy purification  cluster next to the two trizol-based purifications . in 5/ <dig> of triplets method a and c clustered next to method b . in no case did methods a and b together cluster next to method c. within each lineage dendrogram the samples from the same leukemia subclasses are linked to each other. within the b lineage cluster two patients with c-all with t are linked together as well as two patients with hyperdiploid karyotype. also,  <dig> patients with c-all with t are linked in the same sub-branch. patient samples with c-all-preb with dna-index di =  <dig> and negative for recurrent translocations are distributed over the three sub-branches of the b-all cluster. the latter may be interpreted as an illustration of the known heterogeneity within this subclass of acute leukemia. the group of t-all samples is not further subdivided. the cluster of myeloid leukemias is divided into two branches: aml with t/mll and aml with normal karyotype or other abnormalities. this clearly demonstrates that the underlying biology and not the rna extraction protocol accounts for the biggest source of variation in the data. also, in an unsupervised principal component analysis  two distinct types of aml are clearly separated from t lineage all and from b lineage all and the three total rna preparation methods for each patient sample can be found in close proximity next to each other .

supervised data analysis
a supervised analysis was performed to assess the potential impact of the use of different total rna extraction methods on a leukemia classification approach. an all-pairwise t-test analysis identified differentially expressed genes that would distinguish between the  <dig> classes of pediatric leukemias that are represented in our dataset. a gene set of  <dig> differentially expressed probe sets was then examined by three-dimensional pca. as shown in figure 5a this gene set clearly separates the various leukemia lineages  from each other. in the aml group t/mll positive samples are separated from aml with a normal karyotype or other abnormalities. in the b lineage all group subclusters can be identified for all with the recurrent translocations t, t, t, or t. importantly, figure 5b demonstrates that the three preparation methods for each patient sample can be found in close proximity next to each other. this again indicates that the data variability due to different preparation methods is less influential in the gene expression profiles than the leukemia subclass.

as shown in figure 1b three patients had been analyzed with three technical replicates. to further assess the influence of total rna preparation methods on a potential leukemia classification approach, an one-way analysis of variance  was performed separately for these technical replicates. for each method a, b, and c the absolute number of differentially expressed genes was identified using the following filtering strategy:  filtering by present calls, followed by  filtering by fold-change, and  filtering by false discovery rate . in detail, in the first filtering step for every probe set of  <dig> microarrays at each anova at least  <dig> microarrays called the probe set as "present". in the second filtering step for every probe set at each comparison, i.e. # <dig> vs. # <dig>  # <dig> vs. # <dig>  and # <dig> vs. # <dig>  the fold change is at least  <dig>  fold. in the third filtering step the fdr cutoff was set as a threshold of  <dig> . then, the number of differentially expressed genes that are overlapping between the three methods was summarized. the analysis results are summarized in figure  <dig>  figure 6a represents the fdr curves for the three different methods. at a fdr of  <dig> % it can be observed that the absolute number of differentially expressed genes between the various leukemia subclasses is the highest when method a is performed . the second highest number of differentially expressed genes is observed with method b . the lowest number of differentially expressed genes is observed with method c .

we next investigated the percentage of overlapping genes that are found to be differentially expressed between the three methods used when analyzing the various leukemia subclasses in a supervised way. the percentage of overlapping genes is another suitable parameter to address the impact of the use of different total rna extraction methods on a leukemia classification approach. figure 6b represents a venn diagram visualization of the absolute number of differentially expressed genes that are overlapping between the three methods at a chosen false discovery rate  of  <dig> %. in detail, n =  <dig>  genes are found to be consistently differentially expressed between the various leukemia subclasses when comparing all three methods. overall, comparisons of absolute numbers of differentially expressed genes of method a showed a greater overlap to the other methods than comparisons based on method b or method c, respectively. this can also be examined by percentages of overlapping differentially expressed genes between the three methods . again, at a chosen fdr of  <dig> % the highest percentage of overlap is observed for method a. in detail,  <dig> % of differentially expressed genes between the  <dig> leukemia subclasses are overlapping in the comparison of method a to method b.  <dig> % of genes are commonly detected to be overlapping in the comparison of method a to method c. the second highest overlap is identified in the comparison of method b to method a  and to method c . only  <dig> % of differentially expressed genes are overlapping in the comparison of method c to method a, and  <dig> % are overlapping in the comparison of method c to method b. interestingly, n =  <dig>  genes are exclusively found to be differentially expressed when using method a. an analysis where these  <dig>  genes were annotated according to their biological function revealed that the top biological functions associated with these genes were cancer, cell cycle, cell signaling, dna replication, recombination, and repair, gene expression, or rna post-transcriptional modification .

additionally, to further illustrate the assay performance, a statistical power analysis for the rna preparation methods a, b, and c is performed based on the bioconductor package "ssize". the power analysis is used, for statistical comparison of identical leukemia samples, to assess the precision of technical replicates obtained from different rna preparation methods. the data sets generated based on the preparations of total rna following the methods a and b have greater average statistical power than the microarray data set based on method c .

in summary, these analyses indicate that preparation of total rna by qiashredder homogenization followed by rneasy purification is a robust sample preparation method for microarray experiments that outperforms other procedures for isolation of total rna.

reproducibility and precision of different sample preparation methods
as three patients had been analyzed with three technical replicates  we therefore were further able to assess the technical reproducibility and precision of gene expression data using the different total rna extraction methods by examining squared correlation coefficients , box plots, scatter plots, and coefficient of variation  assessments. these analyses included all  <dig> probe sets represented on the hg-u <dig> plus  <dig>  microarray.

as shown in figure  <dig>  the mean values and interquartile ranges  of probe set level signals  are highly comparable within the technical replicates as well as across three sample preparation methods. furthermore, a pairwise scatter plot analysis demonstrates that gene expression data are well correlated within the three sample preparation methods . the squared correlation coefficients r <dig> range from  <dig>  to  <dig>  for preparations of total rna by qiashredder homogenization followed by rneasy purification ,  <dig>  to  <dig>  for trizol isolation , and  <dig>  to  <dig>  for trizol followed by rneasy purification . between the three different sample preparation methods the mean value of r <dig> is  <dig>  and standard deviation is  <dig>  for method a versus method b,  <dig>  mean value and  <dig>  standard deviation for method a versus method c, and  <dig>  mean value and  <dig>  standard deviation for method b versus method c, respectively.

analysis of coefficient of variation is a useful way for assessment of reproducibility and precision of the gene expression profiles generated from three different total rna sources. the box plots demonstrate the variability in gene expression measurements within the three technical replicates using different sample preparation methods . the data demonstrate that the sample replicates prepared with qiashredder homogenization followed by rneasy purification  are tighter and more consistent across the three different subtypes of pediatric leukemia samples than those obtained with the other two rna isolation methods. also, it can be seen that microarray data generated with qiashredder homogenization followed by rneasy purification is least varied, most reproducible and precise. supplementary figure  <dig>  represents the slopes in the scatter plots of the standard deviation versus the mean ps intensity signals calculated for each probe set on the hg-u <dig> plus  <dig>  microarray, referred to as robust cv . mean value and standard deviation of the slopes are  <dig>  and  <dig>  for method a,  <dig>  and  <dig>  for method b,  <dig>  and  <dig>  for method c.

discussion
recent investigations successfully applied gene expression microarrays to classify known tumor types and also various hematological malignancies  <cit> . the increasing amount of data supports the concept that microarray analysis could be introduced soon into the routine classification of cancer  <cit> . however, several questions about the multitude of sources of variation in gene expression data have not been addressed and therefore continue to leave doubts about the performance of gene expression microarrays in clinical laboratory diagnosis. here, for the first time, we present a study focused on analyzing the impact of different rna preparation procedures on gene expression data for different subtypes of pediatric acute leukemias. the sample preparation and purification methods analyzed here are not only the three currently most used protocols for isolation of total rna in laboratory diagnosis analyses but are also used by many laboratories working with different microarray platforms. the protocols examined are method a: lysis of the mononuclear cells, followed by lysate homogenization, which reduces viscosity caused by high-molecular-weight cellular components and cell debris, using a biopolymer shredding system in a microcentrifuge spin-column format, followed by total rna purification; method b: trizol rna isolation, and method c: trizol rna isolation followed by a total rna purification step using selective binding columns. the rna purification step, based on selective silica-membrane, purifies all rna molecules longer than  <dig> nucleotides consequently increasing the amount of mrna. these three methods were analyzed in triplicates for each of  <dig> samples. moreover, for an additional three samples triplicate technical replicates were performed for each protocol. the main purposes of this investigation were to address to what extent distinct total rna template isolation techniques impair the precision and reproducibility of gene expression data from the same sample and secondly, whether the underlying characteristic leukemia-specific gene expression signatures are affected by the rna preparation procedure. we finally aimed to identify the most robust sample preparation method for microarray experiments and, at the same time, a technique that could be introduced into daily routine laboratory practice.

after a first analysis of the quality of our microarray data, we could assert that since in all cases the quality parameters met our criteria, each of the three preparation methods is able to generate acceptable gene expression profiles of pediatric leukemias. we found that samples representing different leukemia subclasses and extracted using different rna preparation methods are characterized by a high comparability of gene expression data thus demonstrating that sample preparation procedures do not impair the overall probe set signal intensity distribution. importantly, even though yielding lower amounts of crna if compared to trizol  and trizol followed by rneasy  protocols , the isolation of total rna using qiashredder homogenization followed by rneasy purification  resulted in a better quality of starting material as demonstrated by the a260/ <dig> ratio of crna , by very reproducible low 3'/5' gapd ratios, and by consistently lower scaling factors . this was then further examined by a so-called rna degradation plot analysis as implemented in the simpleaffy bioconductor analysis package  <cit> . this analysis, although being an indirect approach for assessing the sample quality, demonstrated that the overall quality was consistently lower for microarray data when total rna was processed for microarray analysis directly after isolation with trizol only . while agilent bioanalyzer measurements showed acceptable total rna quality profiles for all three methods the rna degradation plot analysis might be a good way to indirectly identify poor quality samples via their global gene expression signatures on a probe level. the reason that total rna samples prepared using method b demonstrate poor quality is probably due to the fact that impurities such as salts or residual amounts of phenol or ethanol are carried over in the sample preparation assay and subsequently impair enzymatic reactions.

next, an unsupervised hierarchical clustering as well as unsupervised principal component analyses demonstrated that samples are grouped first by each patient's replicate method conditions, then by leukemia type, and finally by leukemia lineage. in fact, the b lineage all samples are all clustered together and separately grouped from t-all and aml. moreover, inside each lineage-cluster leukemias with the same diagnostic features – e.g. recurrent translocations – are linked to each other. this finding is the demonstration that the variation in sample preparation method is a secondary effect, and that the major splits in the clusters reflect true underlying biological differences between leukemias.

these findings are then confirmed by a subsequent supervised analysis of gene expression data. considering only the  differentially expressed genes between the nine distinct leukemia categories that we studied here, all samples are clearly separated by leukemia lineages and without being influenced by the total rna isolation method. furthermore, aml with normal karyotype is separated from the two patient samples with aml with t/mll demonstrating an intra-lineage distinction within the aml group. the same separation can be observed in the b lineage all group where samples with the chromosomal aberrations t, t, t, or t are split into distinct groups. as such, this is also an independent confirmation of the clustering organizations as presented in recent gene expression profiling studies of acute lymphoblastic leukemias  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
the first conclusion we draw from this study is that underlying biological characteristics of the pediatric acute leukemia classes are quite significant and largely exceed the variations between different total rna sample preparation protocols. having shown that at a chosen false discovery rate of  <dig> % method a is producing a higher number of differentially expressed genes as compared to method b and method c, we would propose that lysis of the mononuclear cells, followed by lysate homogenization  and total rna purification  is the more robust total rna isolation procedure for gene expression experiments using microarray technology. the importance of this new data is further strengthened by the analysis of the technical replicates. in fact, the gene expression data obtained with method a show the lowest degree of variation and are more reproducible, as compared to the alternative methods we tested for the isolation of total rna. finally, all these evidences, combined with the standardized microarray analysis protocol that we followed for this study let us conclude that the initial homogenization of the leukemia cell lysate followed by total rna purification using spin columns is currently the optimal protocol available with respect to the robustness of gene expression data and that this method is practical for a routine laboratory use. here we limited our microarray study to pediatric leukemia, but certainly these statements could also be applied to similar cohorts of adult leukemias.

