BACKGROUND
the world health organization has recently identified antimicrobial resistance as one of the three most important problems facing human health. the most common and serious multidrug-resistant pathogens have been encompassed within the acronym “eskape”, which stands for enterococcus faecium, staphylococcus aureus, klebsiella pneumoniae, acinetobacter baumannii, pseudomonas aeruginosa and enterobacter spp.  <cit> . acinetobacter baumannii is an important opportunistic nosocomial pathogen that is often associated with epidemic outbreaks of infection. this organism is frequently pandrug-resistant and is capable of causing substantial morbidity and mortality in patients with severe underlying disease, both in the hospital and in the community  <cit> . acinetobacter baumannii is an uncommon but important cause of community-acquired pneumonia, which appears to be a unique clinical entity occurring predominantly in tropical climates. this community-acquired pneumonia appears to be characterized by a fulminant course, with acute onset of dyspnea, cough and fever followed by rapid progression to respiratory failure and shock. the mortality rate is high   <cit> . nosocomial pneumonia is the most important infection caused by a. baumannii and is particularly associated with the application of mechanical ventilatory procedures  <cit> . the crude mortality rate associated with nosocomial acinetobacter infections has been reported to range from  <dig> to 45 %  <cit> . a prospective study of  <dig> a. baumannii infections showed that > 90 % of infections were nosocomially acquired and that only 4 % were community acquired; moreover, respiratory track infections were the most common   <cit> . acinetobacter baumannii has a propensity to cause outbreaks, probably because of its ability to survive desiccation and its multidrug resistance, amongst other reasons  <cit> . although a. baumannii is only rarely isolated from soil, vegetables, animals, humans and inanimate surfaces that are often in contact with humans  <cit> , the natural habitats of a. baumannii remain to be established  <cit> . in the community, a. baumannii is a rare colonizer of human skin in temperate climates, although skin carriage is more common in tropical environments  <cit> . in australia, wet-season throat carriage of a. baumannii was found in 10 % of community residents with excess levels of alcohol consumption  <cit> . the bacterium is ubiquitous in the hospital setting   <cit> . furthermore, a. baumannii is found to persist as a contaminant of the hands, gloves and gowns of healthcare workers  <cit> . this bacterium can survive on inanimate objects for long periods, even after exposure to dry conditions  <cit>  and is also capable of resisting physical and chemical disinfection, often by forming a biofilm  <cit> . it has a remarkable ability to up-regulate or acquire resistance determinants, making it one of the most important microorganisms threatening the current antibiotic era  <cit> . numerous outbreaks of pandrug-resistant a. baumannii have been documented in asian and middle east hospitals. resistance to both tigecycline and polymyxin b  already exists in these regions  <cit> .

the first genome of an acinetobacter spp. to be sequenced was that of the highly transformable acinetobacter spp. strain adp <dig> in  <dig>  <cit> . the first completed a. baumannii genome was reported for strain atcc  <dig> in  <dig> and included a considerable number of the island-containing genes  implicated in virulence, indicating that several of the microorganism’s genes are devoted to pathogenesis. the largest island contains elements homologous to the legionella/coxiella type iv secretion apparatus. type iv secretion systems have been demonstrated to be important for virulence in other microorganisms and are thus likely to help mediate the pathogenesis of a. baumannii  <cit> . several extracellular proteins of a. baumannii, grown in vitro, have been identified by the use of different proteomic approaches  <cit> . such approaches have been used for membrane and cytoplasmic proteomic analysis of a. baumannii grown in vitro . comparative proteomic analysis has been performed with cells at three different stages of in vitro growth: exponential, late stationary phase and as biofilms  <cit> . comparative proteomic analysis of a multidrug resistant strain with a drug-sensitive strain has also been performed  <cit> . in vitro culture conditions may stress bacteria . however, simulated in vitro environments do not accurately reflect the protein profile within the lung, because a. baumannii must adjust to the environment inside the host lung  to be able to cause pneumonia.

the goal of this study was to improve our knowledge of the pathogenesis and virulence of a. baumannii by considering how the bacterium adapts to its host. in order to obtain an overview of host-pathogen-interactions during a. baumannii infections, we used, for the first time, a proteomics approach to compare the ex vivo proteomes of a. baumannii grown under different that mimic the physiological conditions that bacteria must face during in vivo host infection.

RESULTS
the objective of this study was to improve our knowledge of the pathogenesis and virulence of a. baumannii and to investigate how this bacterium adapts to its host. for this purpose, a. baumannii cells were cultured in lb  medium with or without balf  and in dulbecco’s modified eagle’s medium  medium with or without raw  <dig>  cells . the proteome composition of the a. baumannii cells in both models was analyzed in parallel, by using itraq labelling and lc-maldi-tof/tof to investigate the response of a. baumannii to exposure to macrophages/balf .

acinetobacter baumannii caused consolidated pneumonia
balf contains lipids, nucleic acids, secretomes of macrophages, lymphocytes, neutrophils, eosinophils, epithelial cells, pneumocytes, monocytes and basophils. moreover, infection is capable of causing changes in concentrations, ratios and numbers of proteins detected in balf. therefore, to simulate conditions in the respiratory tract in response to a. baumannii infection, rats were inoculated with the bacterium and balfs were obtained 21 h later. for histological assessment of a. baumannii infection of the airway, lung specimens were stained with haematoxylin and eosin and examined microscopically. abscess formation, with extensive infiltration of polymorphonuclear leukocytes was noted .

quantitative  data analysis
in the balf model, a. baumannii was incubated simultaneously in lb and in lb supplemented with balf  for 21 h at 37 °c and 5 % co <dig> without shaking, in order to study the a. baumannii responses to soluble balf components at the protein level by itraq labelling and lc-maldi/tof analysis. changes in the proteome of a. baumannii in response to soluble balf components were examined. the rate of false positive results was estimated to be less than 1 %  as the search was conducted in parallel with a decoy database using the “pspep on” mode, suggesting a high degree of confidence in the reported protein identifications. to evaluate the reproducibility and effectiveness of the itraq experiments, we compared the proteins identified in each itraq set. overall,  <dig>  unique peptides and  <dig> distinct proteins were detected with more than 95 % confidence in both itraq sets. in biological replicate one,  <dig> proteins were identified and in biological replicate two,  <dig> proteins were identified. only about  <dig>  % of the proteins were identified with a single peptide. in total,  <dig> proteins  were identified in both biological replicates, and only  <dig> proteins  were unique for a single itraq experiment. these results indicate the reliability of the itraq identification of  <dig> proteins in all data sets. compared with the control group,  <dig> identified proteins displayed significant changes in expression. in total,  <dig> proteins tended to be over-expressed  and  <dig> proteins tended to be under-expressed  relative to the control group .table  <dig> differentially expressed proteins under ex vivo conditions in balf model

the protein profiles produced by a. baumannii grown in modified balf were performed using itraq reagents and lc-ms/ms. differential expression was defined by a relative abundance ratio > <dig>  and < <dig> 


asecretion prediction are based on , phobius , predisi , tatp  <dig>  , tatfind  <dig>  , secretomep  <dig>  , tmhmm , das-tmfilter , lipop  <dig>  , dolop , and lipo )


baverage relative protein expression level ratio in sample and control, with the standard deviation in parentheses, quantified by protein pilot  <dig>  software .


cdetermined by student’s t test. values of less than  <dig>  are considered significant



in the macrophage model, infection of macrophages was induced with a. baumannii . control and infected cells were incubated simultaneously for 21 h at 37 °c and 5 % co <dig>  without shaking, in order to study the a. baumannii responses to immune system cells at the protein level by itraq labelling and lc-maldi/tof analysis. changes in the proteome of a. baumannii in response to raw  <dig>  cells were also examined. in comparison with the control group,  <dig> identified proteins displayed significant changes in expression. a total of  <dig> proteins displayed increased expression levels  and  <dig> proteins displayed decreased expression levels  relative to the control group .table  <dig> differentially expressed proteins under ex vivo conditions in macrophage model

the protein profiles produced by a. baumannii grown in the presence of macrophages were performed using itraq reagents and lc-ms/ms. differential expression was defined by a relative abundance ratio > <dig>  and < <dig> 


asecretion prediction are based on , phobius , predisi , tatp  <dig>  , tatfind  <dig>  , secretomep  <dig>  , tmhmm , das-tmfilter , lipop  <dig>  , dolop , and lipo )


baverage relative protein expression level ratio in sample and control, with the standard deviation in parentheses, quantified by protein pilot  <dig>  software .


cdetermined by student’s t test. values of less than  <dig>  are considered significant



overall,  <dig> differentially expressed proteins were identified in both models.  <dig> proteins were modulated in the balf model and  <dig> proteins were modulated in the macrophage model. in the balf model,  <dig>  % of the differentially expressed proteins were over-expressed. in the macrophage model,  <dig>  % of the modulated proteins were over-expressed. of the  <dig> modulated proteins,  <dig>  %  were differentially expressed in both models,  <dig>  %  were overexpressed,  <dig>  %  were underexpressed and  <dig>  %  were opposite  .fig.  <dig> venn diagram showing the number and relationship between a. baumannii proteins that were differentially expressed in comparison of  <dig> ex vivo models. circles represent the set of over-expressed proteins  and under-expressed proteins  in the macrophage model and the set of over-expressed proteins  and under-expressed proteins  in the balf model. the number of proteins differentially expressed is indicated in each set or subset

the protein profiles produced by a. baumannii grown in modified balf and in the presence of macrophages were performed using itraq reagents and lc-ms/ms. differential expression was defined by a relative abundance ratio > <dig>  and < <dig> 


asecretion prediction are based on , phobius , predisi , tatp  <dig>  , tatfind  <dig>  , secretomep  <dig>  , tmhmm , das-tmfilter , lipop  <dig>  , dolop , and lipo )


baverage relative protein expression level ratio in sample and control, with the standard deviation in parentheses, quantified by protein pilot  <dig>  software .


cdetermined by student’s t test. values of less than  <dig>  are considered significant



analysis of modulated proteins
according to their predicted biological functions, the differentially expressed proteins were divided into  <dig> groups . the largest groups consisted of proteins involved in translation , followed by the proteins involved in energy production and conversion  and by proteins involved in pathogenesis and virulence . most of the proteins over-expressed in the balf model were involved in translation , followed by pathogenesis and virulence , and energy production and conversion . in the macrophage model, most were involved in translation , followed by energy production and conversion , and pathogenesis and virulence . most of the proteins that were under-expressed in the balf model were involved in energy production and conversion  and in the macrophage model most were proteins of unknown function .fig.  <dig> distribution of differentially expressed proteins in a. baumannii following ex vivo incubation according to functional categories. the stacked bar chart shows the number of over-expressed proteins  and under-expressed proteins  in the macrophage model and the number of over-expressed proteins  and under-expressed proteins  in the balf model in each functional category



of the  <dig> proteins differentially expressed in both models, most were involved in translation , followed by pathogenesis and virulence  and by unknown function . most of the over-expressed proteins were involved in translation, whereas most of the under-expressed proteins were proteins of unknown function, and  <dig>  % of opposite proteins were associated with metabolism .

rt-pcr
we selected some proteins for validation of the proteomic data by rt-pcr analysis. the candidate proteins, nfua-like, yjjk, csuc, ompw, ompa, clpx, dna repair, paaa and ppia were selected on the basis of their differential expression as representative of pathogenesis and virulence, cell wall/membrane/envelope biogenesis and other functional categories.

balf model
rt-pcr analysis was applied to  <dig> genes coding for differentially expressed proteins to confirm the findings of the proteomic analysis. expression of most, but not all, of these genes paralleled expression of the corresponding proteins revealed by proteomic analysis. four  of the six selected genes were over-expressed at the transcriptional level in the sample relative to the control which is consistent with the results of protein expression. however, there was a slight inconsistency between the translational and transcriptional levels of ompa and clpx. expression of ompa and clpx mrna revealed similar patterns in the sample relative to the control, despite the increased levels of the respective mrnas .fig.  <dig> rt-pcr analysis of different genes coding for differentially expressed proteins in controls and samples . all expression results were normalized relative to rpob by the 2−ΔΔct method. for all genes, relative mrna expression is presented as a fold-change value relative to the control



macrophage model
rt-pcr analysis of  <dig> genes coding for differentially expressed proteins was performed to confirm the results of the proteomic analysis. expression of most, but not all, of the genes paralleled the expression of the corresponding proteins revealed by proteomic analysis. five  of the seven selected genes were over-expressed at the transcriptional level in the sample, relative to the control, which is consistent with the results of protein expression. however, there was a slight inconsistency between the translational and transcriptional levels of ompa and an inconsistency between the translational and transcriptional levels of csuc. the mrna expression of ompa revealed similar patterns in the sample, relative to the control, despite the increased levels of the respective mrnas. the mrna expression of csuc was  <dig>  times higher and the protein abundance was more than six times lower in the sample than in the control , probably because of post-transcriptional regulation  <cit> .fig.  <dig> rt-pcr analysis of different genes coding for differentially expressed proteins in controls and samples . all expression results were normalized relative to rpob by the 2−ΔΔct method. for all genes, relative mrna expression is presented as a fold-change value relative to the control



comparison of the results obtained by itraq labelling-lc-maldi/tof and rt-pcr showed that the changes observed in protein abundance between samples of both ex vivo models and controls were also reflected in the mrna levels.

discussion
the host activated response to acinetobacter baumannii is not well understood. some studies have described changes in a. baumannii gene expression under in vivo-mimicking conditions. however, most of these studies focused on transcriptional changes of one or a few genes of interest, mostly under iron limiting conditions . a microarray study defined the expression properties of a. baumannii during growth in human serum and demonstrated significant over-expression of iron acquisition systems, of genes associated with epithelial cell adherence, dna uptake and of numerous putative drug efflux pumps  <cit> . at the protein level, comparative analysis of total lysate and outer membrane fractions isolated from a. baumannii cultured under iron-rich and iron-chelated conditions led to identification of  <dig> modulated proteins  <cit> . there remains an alarmingly large gap in our knowledge of the pathogenesis and nature of a. baumannii virulence. a better understanding of the adaptation of a. baumannii to the host and its molecular pathogenesis is essential for the development of new therapeutic and diagnostic methods. research studies that address the a. baumannii proteome in vivo and the proteome that is produced in the presence of fluid or host cells are lacking. in contrast to the numerous proteomic studies of a. baumannii cultivated in vitro laboratory settings, only one microarray study has been carried out ex vivo, and no ex vivo or in vivo proteomic studies have been performed. this is because of technical limitations, which severely limit the number of recovered bacteria, and the potential contamination of sample preparations by host cell nucleic acids or proteins.

to identify putative pathogenesis and virulence factors that mediate a. baumannii pathogenesis, we used  <dig> ex vivo models and a quantitative proteomics approach. we provide evidence that expression of  <dig> a. baumannii proteins is affected by the host. comparison of both models showed that 83 % of the proteins detected were grouped in the same category in both models  and that most of the proteins were unmodulated, which indicates that the host proteins may target and regulate a specific small group of a. baumannii proteins. the modulated proteins possess diverse functions , which suggests a complex interaction between the bacterium and the host. thus, in the balf model,  <dig> of the proteins identified were over-expressed, whereas  <dig> were under-expressed. some of these functional groups are clearly over-expressed for functioning in cell wall/membrane/envelope biogenesis, nucleotide metabolism and transport and cell cycle control and mitosis. other important biological processes, such as pathogenesis and virulence and translation, were mainly over-expressed. however, other metabolic proteins involved in, e.g., amino acid metabolism and lipid metabolism were under-expressed. in the macrophage model,  <dig> of the proteins identified were over-expressed, whereas  <dig> were under-expressed. some of these functional groups are clearly over-expressed for functioning in translation, transcription and energy production and conversion. other important biological processes, such as pathogenesis and virulence and nucleotide metabolism and transport, were mainly over-expressed. however, other functional groups involved in lipid metabolism were under-expressed. although both models yielded generally similar results, some differences in the findings are not surprising, for the following reasons. first, different rodents species were used as hosts. moreover, some of the major influencing factors identified in the balf model include nutritional differences between samples  and controls  and stress resulting from host inflammatory response . however, in the macrophage model, these factors may compete with macrophages for available nutrients and stress resulting from interaction with a single host cell type.

proteomic comparison of the levels of protein expression in the models revealed that  <dig> proteins were only modulated by balf,  <dig> proteins were only modulated by macrophages and  <dig> proteins were modulated by both. of these  <dig> proteins,  <dig> were over-expressed,  <dig> proteins were under-expressed and  <dig> proteins were opposite . interestingly,  <dig>  % of opposite proteins were associated with metabolism . this is probably due to differences in the concentration of available nutrients in both models and to competition with macrophages for available nutrients in the macrophage model. over-expressed amino acid catabolism was also observed in the macrophage model and under-expressed amino acid catabolism in the balf model , indicating that amino acids constitute a major source of nitrogen for a. baumannii in the macrophage model. the availability of amino acids is probably also partly due to uptake of oligopeptides. thus, the oligopeptidase a was over-expressed in the macrophage model and under-expressed in the balf model. moreover, csuc and csua were over-expressed in the host cell-free model  and under-expressed in macrophage model, because these proteins are involved in initial attachment to abiotic surfaces but not in the mechanism of adherence to biotic surfaces. nevertheless, the explanation is not as obvious in the case of the modulation of dna-directed rna polymerase subunit beta’.

in the macrophage model,  <dig> predicted outer membrane proteins were over-expressed . in the balf model,  <dig> predicted outer membrane proteins were over-expressed . in the macrophage model,  <dig> predicted secreted proteins were also over-expressed  and  <dig> were under-expressed . in the balf model,  <dig> predicted secreted proteins were over-expressed  and  <dig> were under-expressed . the modifications that a. baumannii undergoes as a result of host-induced stress include changes in membrane and secretome composition; these changes were greater in the macrophage model than in the balf model  probably due to pathogen-host cell interactions. we conclude that the outer membrane and secretome are changed by the host cells and host secretome.

interestingly, we found that the udp-n-acetylmuramate-l-alanine ligase  protein was strongly over-expressed in both ex vivo models . we also observed that udp-n-acetylglucosamine 1-carboxyvinyl transferase  was over-expressed in the balf model, but not significantly over-expressed in the macrophage model . in peptidoglycan synthesis, uridine-diphospho-n-acetylglucosamine is converted via mura and murb to udp–n-acetylmuramic acid, to which alanine is added by murc. these are essential steps in cell wall biosynthesis in bacteria  <cit> . moreover, mura is required for full virulence in listeria monocytogenes  <cit> . in this context, mura has previously been suggested as a potential drug target, and effective inhibitors of this protein have been identified  <cit> . detection of murc polypeptides in humans could provide a method for diagnosis and/or prognosis of an infection. levels of murc polypeptides could be determined using assay techniques such as include antibody detection, elisa assays, antibody sandwich assays and western blot analysis. monoclonal antibodies against a. baumannii murc similar to those generated by zoeiby et al. could be used to detect murc polypeptides. zoeiby et al. used purified p. aeruginosa murc protein to develop monoclonal antibodies against murc. moreover, zoeiby et al. suggested that a specific inhibitor designed against p. aeruginosa murc may display universal activity against all bacteria  <cit> . however, other authors have observed that c- <dig>  a competitive inhibitor of atp binding to the murc enzyme, was equally effective at inhibiting murc from e. coli, klebsiella pneumoniae and proteus mirabilis, but that murc enzymes from more distantly related gram-negative species such as acinetobacter baylyi, pseudomonas aeruginosa and haemophilus influenzae were not inhibited  <cit> . more recently, murc enzymes from escherichia coli and pseudomonas aeruginosa have been found to be inhibited by a novel class of pyrazolopyrimidines  <cit> .

putative virulence-associated factors
several putative virulence factors were modulated in both ex vivo models. blast analysis   <cit>  revealed significant alignment between the nucleotidyl transferase , which was found to be over-expressed in the macrophage model  in the balf model) and utp-glucose-1-phosphate uridylyltransferase  . the galu gene encodes for production of utp-glucose-1-phosphate uridyltransferase, an enzyme that catalyzes the formation of udp-glucose and is known to have a key role in biosynthesis of cell-envelope-associated carbohydrates  in a variety of bacterial species. in many gram-negative pathogens, mutations in galu lead to attenuated virulence, mainly because of changes in lps or capsular structures. formation of these polysaccharides is critical to bacterial virulence because this enables the bacteria to evade attack by the host immune system. the galu gene has also been found to be important for pathogenesis of e.g. pseudomonas aeruginosa and francisella tularensis .

bacteria and their hosts are involved in competition for available iron. in the host, iron is sequestered by ferritin, transferrin, haemoglobin, myoglobin, haptoglobin and haemopexin, thus decreasing the availability of free iron to concentrations below those needed for bacteria to persist in the environment. therefore, bacteria must survive by competing with the host for iron through the expression of iron acquisition systems. these systems produce high affinity iron chelators known as siderophores, which are secreted into the extracellular milieu  <cit> . lipocalin- <dig> is secreted by the lingual glands, sweat glands, prostate, and secretory glands of the tracheobronchial tract, as well as by the nasal mucosa into balf, sweat, saliva, tear, sputum and nasal fluids. lipocalin- <dig>  which is secreted by neutrophils, macrophages, dendritic cells and exocrine glands into trachea, lung, sputum, bal, stomach, small intestine, pancreas, kidney, prostate, thymus and plasma, interferes with siderophore-mediated iron-uptake. lipocalin- <dig> binds to different bacterial siderophores, including bacterial catecholate-type  and hydroxamate-type  and mixed citrate-hydroxamates . lipocalin- <dig> binds to different bacterial siderophores, including enterobactin-type bacterial siderophores and carboxy-mycobactins. to defend themselves against the host, some bacteria use countermeasures to subvert the iron-withholding effects of lipocalin- <dig>  for example, salmonella and klebsiella spp. glycosylate enterobactin, whereas m. tuberculosis modifies its carboxymycobactins. both mechanisms sterically impair the ability of lipocalin- <dig> to bind these siderophores . nfua-like has multiple functional roles related to iron-mediated stress. nfua-like is involved in intracellular iron metabolism and, as demonstrated in an infection model, it also plays a role in the virulence of a. baumannii by protecting infecting bacteria from oxidative responses rather than providing iron to bacteria grown under iron—limited conditions imposed by cultured human alveolar epithelial cells and g. mellonella larvae  <cit> . in the present study, we observed that in both models, proteins involved in biosynthesis of the siderophore aerobactin were not significantly modulated , probably because lipocalin- <dig> binds to aerobactin. we also observed that one of the under-expressed proteins  in the balf model) is associated with biosynthesis of the siderophore achromobactin . this may be because although achromobactin is an efficient hydroxycarboxylate siderophore at low ph , achromobactin could not compete with stronger siderophores such as catecholates at physiological ph  <cit> . in both models, nfua-like was also over-expressed , in the macrophage model). altogether, these results suggest a third system for iron acquisition in a. baumannii strain abh12o-a <dig>  but which is not identified by current bioinformatic analysis. in a recent study, the structures of six novel siderophores termed fimsbactin a-f have been elucidated and the biosynthesis gene clusters for fimsbactin production have been identified in a. baylyi adp <dig> and a. baumannii strains , although blast analysis showed that the fimsbactin gene cluster is not present in a. baumannii strain abh12o-a <dig>   <cit> .

in the macrophage model, we observed increased expression  of the tig factor in the ex vivo samples. de novo protein folding in escherichia coli is mainly orchestrated by the chaperone trigger factor and by dnak and groel. the ribosome-bound trigger factor is the first chaperone to interact cotranslationally with nascent polypeptides. it has been suggested that a trigger factor homologue in streptococcus mutans is a key regulator of stress tolerance, genetic competence and biofilm formation, all of which are critical virulence properties of this bacterium. in listeria monocytogenes, a trigger factor homologue is involved in the stress response and associated pathogenicity .

we observed increased expression of the dnak suppressor protein, which was significant  in the balf model, but not in the macrophage model. this protein plays an important role in the virulence of salmonella and escherichia coli  <cit> .

in the balf model, expression of the clpx protein increased  in the macrophage model). clpx is required for virulence, biofilm formation and intracellular replication in staphylococcus aureus  <cit> .

initial attachment to abiotic surfaces is the first step for colonization and subsequent biofilm formation on e.g. ventilator tubing and catheters. in a. baumannii  <dig>  the type i pili encoded by csua/babcde appears to be involved in this process  <cit> . in our host cell-free model , the proteins ompa , csua and csuc were over-expressed, suggesting biofilm activation by the host secretome that defends a. baumannii against host on medical devices. another critical step in the pathogenesis of a. baumannii is the ability to adhere to eukaryotic cells, although the mechanisms of adherence are different for abiotic and biotic surfaces. it has been demonstrated that ompa acts as a virulence factor in a. baumannii and has an important role in cell death through both mitochondrial and nuclear targeting  <cit> . the ompa of a. baumannii  <dig> also plays a partial role in biofilm formation on plastic, but is essential for attachment to biotic surfaces such as c. albicans and human alveolar epithelial cells. interestingly, the absence of these cell appendages also favours bacterial attachment and invasion of epithelial cells. this may be due to greater exposure of other unknown bacterial adhesion and biofilm factors in the absence of pili  <cit> . in our macrophage model, ompa  was over-expressed and both csua and csuc were under-expressed. together these results suggest that contact between a. baumannii cells and macrophages may be an important factor determining underexpression of the csua/ babcde protein. elucidation of the complex interactions between a. baumanniiand both abiotic and biotic surfaces is important for a better understanding of the pathobiology of a. baumannii and also for identification of novel targets for the development of new antimicrobial strategies.

in the macrophage model, we observed increased expression of the paaa protein in the ex vivo samples, but we did not observe significant  repression of the paaz protein. in contrast, in the balf model, we observed repression of paaz protein but no modulation  of the paaa protein. in the catabolism of phenylacetic acid by some bacteria, paaa encodes part of the phenylacetic acid—coenzyme a ring hydroxylation system, and opening of the aromatic ring may be performed by paaz. in burkholderia cenocepacia, paaa insertional mutants were attenuated for virulence and interruption of increased virulence of paaz  <cit> .

the success of a bacterial infection greatly depends on the ability of the bacteria to use external nutrients. therefore, the proteolytic and lipolytic activities of extracellular proteins may play key roles in the establishment of a. baumannii infection  <cit> . in general, in the macrophage model, proteins with proteolytic activity were over-expressed, and in the balf model, this type of protein was under-expressed. this may be due to continuous production of host proteins in the macrophage model but not in the balf model as well as to over-expressed amino acid metabolism in the macrophage model and under-expressed amino acid metabolism in the balf model.

we identified a cyclophilin  , which was over-expressed in the macrophage model and not modulated in the balf model. it has been established that ppiases may play a role during bacterial survival against macrophage attack, and it has been suggested that ppiases may act as virulence factors by interacting with some proteins from the host cell membrane, thus helping render the host cell more susceptible to penetration via conformational changes through cis-trans isomerization of peptidyl-prolyl bonds  <cit> . these types of proteins have been reported to affect the phagocytosis of streptococcus pneumoniae by macrophages  <cit> .

in both models, the uncharacterized abc transporter atp-binding protein yjjk was over-expressed. the precise role of yjjk, encoding a putative atp binding protein of an abc transporter, is not yet known. however, yjjk is required for the entry and survival of porphyromonas gingivalis in gingival epithelial cells  <cit> . it has also been suggested that yjjk is involved in francisella tularensis virulence  <cit> .

eighteen genes have been identified in a. baumannii as being involved in growth on human ascites and shown to be essential for growth and survival during infection  <cit> . in the present study, we found 53 % of these essential proteins:  <dig> of these were over-expressed ,  <dig> were un-modulated  and acee was under-expressed. the present findings are only partly consistent with those of the aforementioned study  <cit>  as spsc is not contained in the abh12o-a <dig> genome and we did not detect <dig> of the proteins. however, these differences may be due to the undetected proteins occurring in amounts below the detection/identification level or to differences in the host microenvironment.

when a. baumannii infects the host airway, it is present in multiple locations, including in the interstitium between cells, embedded in mucus in the lumen, inside and adhering to macrophages and epithelial cells. therefore, a. baumannii must adapt to multiple microenvironments and may express different proteins, depending on the microenvironment. we examined  <dig> ex vivo models of infection: a host cell-free model in which a. baumannii interacts with soluble host components present inside the infected lung, and an immune system cells model, in which a. baumannii interacts with macrophages. one limitation of the study is that we only simulated some conditions in the host airways and a. baumannii is present in many other microenvironments. caution must therefore be used in extrapolating results of the present study to the human disease because a. baumannii populations that colonize the human airways are probably a mixture of a. baumannii from different microenvironments.

the abh12o-a <dig> strain yielded over-expressed ‘hypothetical proteins’. induced expression of hypothetical proteins strongly indicates that a. baumannii generates host resistance by unknown mechanisms. these genes are obvious candidates for subsequent functional characterization and for research aimed at determining their function within infection processes.

CONCLUSIONS
this study is the first comprehensive overview of the ex vivo proteome of the multidrug resistant microbial pathogen a. baumannii and provides some insight into the potential role of putative virulence proteins in vivo. the ex vivo behaviour of a. baumannii was compared, for the first time, under different infection conditions—in balf and in the presence of macrophages—as well as under in vitro conditions. a rapid enrichment technique was successfully used, together with ms/ms analysis, to characterize the ex vivo proteome of a. baumannii and showed that the proteome is significantly different from that of bacteria cultured in vitro. the changes in the proteome observed for the strain a. baumannii abh12o-a <dig> indicate a response to stress resulting from interaction with host and modification of cell wall synthesis. we identified  <dig> over-expressed virulence-associated proteins with > <dig> peptides/protein in both ex vivo models , which appear to be essential for pathogenesis and virulence in the airways. overall, the data suggest that a. baumannii can use a variety of virulence mechanisms that enable it to adapt to and survive in vastly divergent environments. these data are helpful for elucidating the molecular mechanisms associated with the interaction between a. baumannii and host and represent an important step towards identification of diagnostic biomarkers, novel drug targets and potential vaccine candidates in the fight against pneumonia caused by a. baumannii.

