BACKGROUND
protein complexes carry out the majority of biological processes within a cell. correctly identifying protein complexes in an organism is useful for deciphering the molecular mechanisms underlying many cellular functions. recent advances in proteomics technologies such as two-hybrid system and mass spectrometry has allowed enormous amount of data on protein-protein interactions  to be released into the public domain  <cit> . as the amount of global high throughput protein interaction data keeps increasing, methods for accurately identifying protein complexes from such data become a bottleneck for further analysis of the resulting interactome.

there is a large body of research on computational methods for de novo protein complex detection in ppi networks. these methods can be roughly divided into three categories. methods in the first group define explicit complex criterion such as dense connectivity within a complex. a heuristic search strategy is then employed to identify complexes  <cit> . in contrast, the second group of methods also define a complex criterion but use complete enumeration to find all complexes that satisfy the criterion  <cit> . instead of using local search strategy, the third group of methods are based on global graph partitioning techniques  <cit> . for instance, maximization of the modularity  measure proposed by newman and girvan  <cit>  has been successfully applied to ppi networks  <cit> . however, the global modularity measure has an inherent resolution limit for detecting small sub-networks  <cit> , such as protein complexes whose median size is fewer than  <dig> proteins per complex. the reason for this resolution limit is that global modularity uses the entire network to compute the expected connectivity within a set of proteins, which may not be an appropriate measure of the background around protein complexes. muff et al.  <cit>  introduced a local version of the modularity measure  by only considering the immediate neighbors of a complex instead of the entire network. applying it to the ppi network of e. coli, they showed that lq was better at identifying small but biologically meaningful protein complexes.

q and lq represent two extremes of the neighborhood measure used to estimate background connectivity in a random network. neither may be optimal for a given ppi network. in this study, we introduce a tunable parameter into the original formulation of modularity to help determine the optimal neighborhood size in calculating expected connectivity of a set of proteins. another drawback of the previous lq approach is that the computationally expensive optimization technique, simulated annealing, was used to maximize lq, which is not feasible for large ppi networks such as yeast or human networks although it was proven useful for the smaller e. coli ppi network.

in this paper we introduce a novel algorithm to infer protein complexes by combining a parametric local modularity measure and a greedy search strategy. we evaluate our approach on the yeast ppi networks using two reference sets of protein complexes and additional functional annotations of yeast proteins. compared to four existing methods, our algorithm achieves a significantly performance improvement in terms of f-measure and biological relevance of predicted complexes. by applying our method to two large-scale ppi networks, we predict a set of  <dig> novel protein complexes in the baker's yeast s. cerevisiae that warrant future experimental characterization.

RESULTS
local modularity with coarseness parameter improves complex prediction
previously, global   <cit>  and local modularity   <cit>  have been proposed as a measure to detect protein complexes in large ppi networks. however, both measures have their drawbacks. the global modularity measure has an inherent resolution limit for small sub-networks such as protein complexes  <cit> . the local modularity measure only considers first neighbors of a sub-network, which might not provide enough information for estimating the true background connectivity pattern of a random network. in this paper, we propose a new local modularity measure, lqa  for inferring protein complexes in large ppi networks. to compare how effective the three measures are to detect protein complexes, we first implemented three complex detection algorithms using a common greedy search strategy and each of the three modularity measures as the scoring function. we used the yeast full ppi network from the dip database  <cit>  and two sets of gold standard protein complex annotations . as shown in figure  <dig>  lqa performed the best in terms of f-measure when evaluated using both gold standard sets. note that q and lq have no coarseness parameter to set and the sets of predicted complexes are the same for the two sets of known annotations. for lqa we set the coarseness parameter to yield the best f-measure for each set of known complexes.

the number and average size of the predicted complexes are listed in table  <dig>  as expected, q found a very small number of complexes with a large number of members, which caused a low recall rate and f-measure. lq further resolved those large sub-networks into a number of smaller ones. however, the average size of the predicted complexes  was still much larger than the average size of known complexes . in contrast, lqa found a reasonable number of complexes in the same size range as the known complexes.

q, global modularity defined by newman and girvan  <cit> ; lq, first-neighbor local modularity defined by muff et al.  <cit> ; lqa, parametric local modularity defined in this study.

putting all together: the mipalm algorithm
we introduce a novel algorithm, mipalm , for inferring protein complexes from large-scale protein interactome data. the input to mipalm consists of an un-weighted ppi graph and two parameters, α and δ. the algorithm has three major steps. algorithmic details of each step and the corresponding pseudo-code are described in the methods section. we briefly describe the major steps of the algorithm here. first, from the input ppi network, mipalm identifies a set of triangle seeds using topological overlap measure. a pair of nodes in a network has high topological overlap if they are both strongly connected to the same group of nodes . therefore, the use of topological overlap measure serves to exclude spurious or isolated connections in the network. second, from each seed, the algorithm uses a greedy search to expand it into candidate complex. local modularity is used as a scoring function to assess the quality of a candidate complex. the parameter α is used to control the background neighborhood size around a candidate complex. finally, a filtering step is performed on the set of candidate complexes based on their density scores which is controlled by the parameter δ. the complete algorithm for complex prediction is shown in algorithm  <dig> 

performance comparison with existing methods
next, we compare the performance of our algorithm with four representative algorithms for protein complex prediction, mcode  <cit> , mcl  <cit> , coach  <cit> , and dme  <cit> . mcode relies on the concept of k-core  and greedy search. mcl is a global graph partitioning algorithm that works by simulating stochastic flows in a graph. coach is conceptually similar to mcode. it first identifies the core of a candidate complex  and then expand the core by including additional nodes if more than 50% of their edges are shared with the core. dme detects all node subsets that satisfy a user-defined minimum density threshold in a greedy fashion. of the five algorithms, mcl cannot detect overlapping complexes whereas mcode, coach, dme, and mipalm can. additionally, mcl is a global graph partitioning method whereas the other four are based on seeding and local search.

we tested the performance of all five methods using two sets of known complexes in the baker's yeast, s. cerevisiae. cyc <dig> is a set of protein complexes manually curated from published small-scale studies  <cit> . since most small-scale studies tend to be biased towards complexes involved in a limited number of cellular processes, to complement this set, we also used the yhtp <dig> set of protein complexes  <cit> . it was constructed by analyzing two recent and most comprehensive genome-wide protein complex screens based on affinity purification coupled with mass spectrometry experiment  <cit> .

for performance comparison we determined the optimal parameters for each algorithm to achieve the highest f-measure, given a gold standard set . the comparison results are presented in figures  <dig> and  <dig> and table  <dig>  for each method, we report the precision, recall, and f-measure. as can be seen in figure 2a, both coach and mipalm achieved a much higher f-measure compared to the other three methods. the average f-measure was  <dig> ,  <dig> ,  <dig> ,  <dig> , and  <dig>  for coach, mipalm, mcl, mcode, and dme, respectively.

total number and average size of gold standard sets are shown in parenthesis. the series of three numbers for each set of predictions are total number of predictions, number of predicted complexes that overlap with known complexes, and average size of predicted complexes. optimized parameters for each algorithm are shown in parenthesis following prediction numbers.

although f-measure is a popular metric for evaluating the performance of a complex predictor, it is not the only one. biological relevance is also an important indicator of the quality of predicted complexes. accordingly, we next conducted go term enrichment and co-localization analyses to determine the biological relevance of the predicted complexes. genome-wide protein localization data has been reported for baker's yeast using fluorescent imaging  <cit> . for each predicted complex, we calculated a log-odds score that measures the extent to which members of the complex co-localize to the same sub-cellular compartments . compared to the f-measure that relies on an incomplete gold standard set, both go term and co-localization annotations used here are more comprehensive and thus complementary to the f-measure.

at a p-value of  <dig> , our set of predictions had the highest fractions of complexes with enriched functional categories . compared to the second best performer , the average increase in the fraction of enriched complexes was  <dig> % across the two gold standard sets of complexes. for complex member co-localization, our predictions had an  <dig> % average increase compared to the second best performer, dme .

taken together, our benchmarking analyses demonstrated that mipalm achieved the second highest f-measure  when evaluated using known complexes. on the other hand, mipalm outperforms all other algorithms by a large margin  when evaluated using functional annotations of complex members.

novel complex predictions using large yeast ppi networks
next, we applied mipalm to discover novel protein complexes in two large-scale yeast ppi networks based on interactions obtained from the biogrid database  <cit> . the first network consists of all yeast interactions in the biogrid database. the majority of interactions are derived from high throughput experiments. the second network consists of high-confidence interactions derived by filtering the biogrid interactions based on their lines of supporting evidence  <cit> . for brevity's sake, these two networks are termed biogrid and hc networks in this paper. the biogrid network contains  <dig> proteins and  <dig> physical interactions and the hc network contains  <dig> proteins and  <dig> physical interactions. by studying two networks with different amount of noise, we can assess the robustness of our method on noisy data.

to predict complexes, we set the coarseness parameter α to be  <dig>  that gave the highest f-measure as described in the performance comparison section.

in total, mipalm predicted  <dig> and  <dig> protein complexes from the biogrid and hc network, respectively. the respective f-measures for the two sets of predictions are  <dig>  and  <dig>  . as expected, predictions using hc network has a higher f-measure due to the higher quality of the input data. nevertheless, as shown in figure  <dig>  the two sets of complexes overlap by  <dig> % . to assess the significance of the overlap, we also used the other four methods in the benchmarking study to predict complexes in the biogrid and hc networks. we used the same optimized parameters for each method as described in the performance comparison section. the two sets of complexes predicted by coach had the highest overlap of  <dig> %. the average overlap for the four methods was  <dig> %. as an additional check, we considered mipalm predictions using the dip networks as input. the average overlap between the three sets of predictions is  <dig> % . taken together, the high level of overlap between mipalm predictions suggests that it is fairly robust against noisy data.

after merging overlapped complexes, we ended up with  <dig> predicted complexes from the two networks. two hundred thirty two of these complexes  are enriched for at least one go term , suggesting many of them are true protein complexes. examined separately,  <dig>  biogrid and  <dig>  hc predictions are enriched for at least one go term, respectively .

biogrid and hc ppi networks were used as the input. go, gene ontology.

to further corroborate our predictions, we next used a genome-wide protein localization data set to examine if members of our predicted complexes tend to co-localize in the same sub-cellular compartments. for each of our predicted complex, we calculated a co-localization log-odds score that compares the member co-localization probability of a predicted complex to the probability of the same number of random proteins in the ppi network . for the set of  <dig> predicted complexes,  <dig>  are enriched for at least one sub-cellular compartments . examined separately,  <dig>  biogrid and  <dig>  hc predictions are enriched for at least one sub-cellular compartment, respectively .

to identify new complexes in our prediction, we used the union of cyc <dig> and yhtp <dig> as the set of known complexes. after filtering those complexes matching any of the known complexes, we were left with  <dig> novel protein complexes. to evaluate the quality of these novel protein complexes, we computed the fraction of complexes that have enriched go functional terms or are co-localized to the same sub-cellular compartments. eight five  of the novel complexes were enriched for at least one go terms and  <dig>  complexes were enriched for at least one sub-cellular compartments . the fraction of go term enriched complexes was comparable to known complexes. remarkably, the fraction of co-localized complexes in our prediction was much higher than those of the two gold standard sets . these results provide further evidence that the set of novel complexes are true protein complexes. information about the complete set of predicted complexes with supporting evidence is reported in additional files  <dig>   <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> 

discussion
the global modularity measure proposed by newman and girvan  <cit>  identifies clusters  in a network by comparing the observed fraction of edges inside a cluster to the expected fraction of edges in the cluster. in doing so, it assumes that connections between all pairs of nodes in the network are equally probable, which reflects all connectivity among all clusters. however, in many molecular interaction networks, most sub-networks are only connected locally. for instance, in metabolic networks, major pathways occur as clusters that are sparsely linked among each other  <cit> . the same observation can also be made on protein complexes  <cit> .

in this study, we introduced parametric local modularity as a new measure for the quality of clusters in a network. it takes into account local cluster connectivity and overcomes global network dependency. as an analogy, the coarseness parameter functions as the resolution dial of a microscope. by changing the value of the coarseness parameter, we can adjust the size of the cluster neighborhoods when calculating the expected fraction of edges within a cluster. since different biological networks might have distinct neighborhood connectivity, a tunable local modularity measure allow us to best estimate the local neighborhood connectivity by changing the size of the neigbhorhood under consideration.

protein complexes are dynamic molecular entities. depending on the cellular states, membership of a protein complex could change and different complexes could have shared members  <cit> . our algorithm can detect overlapping complexes if during the seed expansion step seeds of different candidate complexes are close enough.

the f-measure used for performance evaluation is a popular approach. a drawback of f-measure is that it cannot distinguish whether a predicted complex overlap with just one or multiple known complexes and vice versa. it has been argued that predictions that overlap with fewer known complexes should be regarded as having a higher quality  <cit> . to further evaluate the methods using this criterion, we use the separation metric introduced by brohee and van helden  <cit>  which takes into account the observation above. as shown in figure s <dig> , mipalm again outperforms the other methods. therefore, it is unlikely that the performance improvement by mipalm is due to a bias in the benchmarking metrics used.

in summary, using three alternative performance measures , our benchmarking analysis demonstrate that mipalm achieve an overal best performance among the five algorithms compared. the performance measures of the methods using three input interaction networks are summarized in additional file  <dig>  tables s <dig>  s <dig>  s <dig> 

the proposed algorithm can be naturally extended to handle weighted networks by using edge weights for local modularity calculation. edge weights can be calculated based on topological features of the ppi network and domain-specific information from other omic data, such as microarray gene expression, genome-wide association study, and genome-wide sequence mutation data . integration of functional genomic data into mipalm will enable us to find context-dependent sub-networks that are active under specific growth conditions.

CONCLUSIONS
using several performance measures , we have demonstrated that mipalm achieved an overall improvement over previous algorithms. mipalm combines the strength of three key features, triangle seed identification using topological overlap measure, parametric local modularity as a cluster quality measure, and recursive greedy search. by including functional genomic data as edge weights, mipalm can be extended to identify context-dependent gene modules that can in turn be used to assist in network comparison and classification tasks.

