BACKGROUND
an overwhelming majority of species in nature exhibit some level of phylogeographic structure and this structure is very often shown to correspond to major landscape features born out of paleo-environmental processes. the phylogeographic revolution  <cit>  has promoted a paradigm, especially in europe, whereby mountain ranges, peninsulas, and for freshwater organisms, river catchments are a priori landscape units expected to correspond to some level of genetic subdivision within a species. to the extent that studies support these expectations, the evolutionary significance of this non-biological source of genetic structure remains controversial  <cit> . moreover, broad-scale phylogeographic studies of european fishes almost invariable invoke complex within-drainage or between drainage lineage structure, which is presumed to be the result of paleo-hydrological re-arrangements of river networks or for some managed species, the result of human-mediated transport and release. several studies support a clear distinction between genetic lineages of cold-tolerant fishes across adjacent headwater regions of the rhine and danube catchments such as for telestes souffia <cit>  and european grayling thymallus thymallus <cit> , but a comparably low level of distinction for cottus gobio <cit> . in contrast, lineage sharing between the danube and rhine catchments presumably based on natural colonization patterns has been demonstrated in european perch perca fluviatilis <cit>  and european chub leuciscus cephalus <cit>  and between the danube and vistula drainages for barbus carpathicus <cit> . the pre-molecular view of the ponto-caspian  basin in aquatic zoogeography was that it served as the major refuge for the post-glacial re-colonization of central and northern europe  <cit> . while molecular studies highlight the evolutionary importance of the ponto-caspian basin in terms of genetic diversity, there is often little evidence or a lack of clarity concerning its role as a source of post-glacial expansion for specific species. none of the above studies were explicitly aimed at investigating the danube/rhine/elbe headwater region with respect to these considerations. moreover, the population-level knowledge base of the investigated species does not approach that of the brown trout.

the brown trout was one of the first non-model vertebrates to attract the attention of population geneticists in europe  <cit>  and subsequently one of the first organisms to be analyzed with molecular markers for a pan-european phylogeographic structure  <cit> . five major mtdna lineages of the species were identified corresponding to four major catchment areas  with the fifth lineage associated with the marbled phenotype found in the adriatic basin. this structure has proliferated in the literature as the “five major evolutionary lineages” of the species  <cit> . subsequent studies based on intensive sampling deliver a more complicated perspective than that of major mtdna lineages associated with major river basins . an ancient split within the atlantic lineage was reported  <cit>  and described as a sixth  major mtdna lineage  <cit> . the allopatric origin of the mediterranean lineage was questioned  <cit> , and the “adriatic” lineage was considered a misnomer  <cit>  as it is extensively distributed from iberia to turkey, with no evidence that its origin is in the adriatic. although the marbled trout phenotype is limited to portions of adriatic drainage , the so-called marble trout mtdna lineage has been found in albania  <cit> , central italy  <cit> , greece  <cit>  and corsica . thus, the mtdna lineage appears to have an independent origin with respect to the taxon’s phenotypic divergence.

in central europe, the notion of a danube lineage of brown trout has been well-established and unquestioned within management and conservation circles. the lineage, however, exhibits extensive life-history diversity and stretches across the entire ponto-caspian basin, exhibiting its deepest split across the tigris-euphrates catchment  <cit> , leaving some uncertainty about where the lineage actually arose as well as its meaning related to evolutionary or taxonomic debate. recently, populations of the upper danube basin have been assigned a new name salmo labrax <cit> , although it is unclear what the distribution of this taxon should be, or on what basis if any it should be genetically delineated. weiss et al.  <cit>  reported on the extensive sympatric occurrence of atlantic and danube lineage mtdna in austrian and bavarian streams of the upper danube, and argued that although introduced hatchery strains may account for much of this pattern, the statistical distribution of atlantic lineage mtdna suggests a degree of natural occurrence on the north slopes of the alps. watershed patterns of alleles at the ldh-c <dig> locus reflected some known river capture events across adjoining headwater tributaries of the rhine and danube in baden-württemberg  <cit> . a review of molecular genetic data including extensive allozyme studies  <cit>  concluded that there is no modern genetic signal of brown trout gene flow from the ponto-caspian basin into north draining river systems of central europe , despite the generally accepted zoogeographic model of this basin serving northern post-glacial expansion and the fact that the danube basin has repeatedly lost  area to the north-flowing rhine and elbe systems over the last few ice ages  <cit> . nonetheless, no study to date has systematically evaluated the genetic structure of brown trout across the danube/rhine/elbe interface.

in this paper we characterize the population genetic structure in the upper danube in the alpine and sub-alpine regions of austria and bavaria including comparison to samples from adjacent areas of the rhine and elbe drainages . this study was broadly designed to: 1) evaluate the hypothesis of  <cit>  and  <cit>  suggesting that the upper danube in austria and germany may have been naturally colonized by the atlantic lineage; 2) identify pure danubian lineage populations for conservation purposes, and 3) to question the utility of river basin-based phylogeographic expectations versus biological hypotheses for explaining the extant distribution of genetic variation across large-scale aquatic landscapes. more specific hypotheses concerning the potential hybrid origins of groups of populations are presented below.

RESULTS
mtdna and ldh-c <dig> analysis
atlantic lineage mtdna was fixed in the rhine and elbe drainages and there was a general decreasing trend in its mean occurrence from west to east  within the danube basin ranging from a high of  <dig> % in the bavarian danube to a low of  <dig> % in the austrian drau, south of the alps . although the percentage of atlantic mtdna varied widely among sample sites within the danube catchment, in our data only previously glaciated regions within the austrian mur and drau drainages revealed some populations  fixed for danubian mtdna . an analogous west–east trend in decreasing mean frequency was seen for the atlantic basin ldh-c <dig> 90* allele , with near fixation in the elbe  and rhine  basins and the lowest occurrence in the austrian drau . the alternate ldh-100* allele was fixed in five  of the  <dig> populations  that were fixed for the danubian mtdna lineage, but nowhere else . fixation of the ldh-c <dig> 90* allele was found in only two populations in the danube catchment , and both were fixed for atlantic mtdna . there was a highly significant correlation  between the frequencies of atlantic mtdna and the ldh-c <dig> 90* allele across all populations. correcting for multiple testing, there was no deviation from hwe at the population level for the ldh-c <dig> locus. for some comparisons in the text we will refer to populations fixed for danube mtdna as “pure danubian”.

populations from  <cit>  are shown in bold italics. listed is the drainage hierarchy, geo-political region , geographic coordinates , n = number of individuals,  mtdna percentage of atlantic mtdna,% ldh-90* percentage of the ldh-90* allele, mgt management level , masl meters above sea level, glac previously glaciated . pure danubian populations in carinthia with low samples sizes  have all been recently validated with increased sample sizes .

microsatellites
the mean allelic richness across all loci at the population level ranged from  <dig>   to  <dig>  . this richness was significantly different  among drainages with the highest values found in the austrian danube  and the lowest in the austrian drau . there was a highly significant difference  in mean allelic richness between populations fixed for danubian mtdna  and the remaining danubian populations of the mur and drau drainages . he likewise ranged widely across populations  and showed wholly analogous patterns of statistical significance within and among major basins . there was a significant positive correlation between he and the percent occurrence of atlantic basin mtdna across populations in the austrian mur  and the austrian drau  drainages supporting the influence of recent admixture; in contrast, no such correlation was found across populations in the bavarian or the austrian danube.

most populations  showed no deviation from hwe, not considering table-wide corrections for multiple testing. the remaining samples that showed significantly negative fis-values stem either from hatcheries or small headwater streams. samples that showed significantly positive fis-values are known to be either moderately or heavily managed. after correcting for multiple testing only a single heavily managed population  deviated significantly from hwe, with a positive fis-value, presumably reflecting the presence of both wild and hatchery-origin fish.

the global fst across all  <dig> populations was  <dig>  indicating a moderate level of differentiation among populations. among drainage  differentiation was considerably lower  while within drainage differentiation varied widely with the lowest values revealed among populations within the bavarian rhine  and elbe , and the highest values found among populations within the mur  and drau  where pure danubian populations were found. a maximum fst value of  <dig>  was observed among pure danubian populations, presumably reflecting long periods of isolation relative to other among population comparisons within the global data set.

using analog f-statistics , the amova drainage model  revealed  <dig> % of the genetic variance distributed among drainages , 10% among populations within drainages , and  <dig> % within populations , all of which were highly significant . the portion of among drainage variance  rose to  <dig> % when using r-statistics reflecting the influence of mutation on the among drainage variance. a higher  value  was seen based on a reduced model for differentiation between native danube and remaining danubian populations reflecting the relatively high divergence of pure danubian populations within the global data set.

the allele size permutation test further supported the influence of mutation on phylogeographic structure  for global comparisons  as well as those involving among population differentiation of the native danube populations . in contrast, non-mutational mechanisms  were presumably dominant in comparisons involving bavarian populations, supporting a surprising lack of geographic structure across the sampled sites of the three major drainages  in this region.

the principal component analysis of populations based on microsatellites revealed one axis  generally reflecting population differentiation corresponding to the two mtdna  lineages . populations fixed for, or revealing high percentages of danubian mtdna occur to the right along the x axis, whereas those with very low frequencies are to the left. the second axis  tends to distinguish among populations within the atlantic mtdna lineage; hatchery populations are at the low end of the axis, whereby bavarian populations  are at the high end and austrian danube populations  are generally intermediate . the location of the obe  population from the drau drainage at the low end of this axis is concordant with fixation of atlantic lineage mtdna despite its south alpine location. subsequent to our genetic screening of this population, local authorities told us that this river stretch was fishless  and was stocked by an unknown source. our data imply that the source of stocking was a pure atlantic hatchery strain. all additional pca factors reflected only minor portions of variance in the data set, and were neither biologically or geographically interpretable at the global scale .

two of the ten hatcheries  have an intermediate position. the first is known to be supplemented with locally caught fish, while the second is of czech origin and presumed to be founded with fish from the elbe drainage. a few austrian danube populations, all north of the danube , are located intermediate along the x-axis, suggesting some admixture with pure danube-lineage fish. a large number of austrian danube populations are found around the center of both axes potentially reflecting admixture between one or more lineages.

structure analysis revealed three main clusters primarily corresponding to:  bavarian populations irrespective of drainage;  the so-called pure danubian populations from the mur and drau; and  remaining populations primarily from the danube catchment . however, only the pure danubian populations showed a high mean proportion of self-assignment   . within other geographic groups, the population-level q-values  varied widely, and some individual populations were assigned to groups outside of their region. for example, several austrian populations north of the danube could be assigned to the bavarian group . likewise, a number of bavarian populations, including one from the elbe  could be assigned to the third cluster representing hatcheries. while k =  <dig> showed the highest delta k, k =  <dig> also revealed a biologically meaningful group consisting of five austrian populations  all from the granitic regions  north of the danube, thus providing some level of distinction from bavarian populations.

standard deviations are shown in parentheses and the highest value for each drainage is shown in bold.

statistically significant but weak isolation-by-distance signals were seen for bavaria , the austrian danube  and pure danubian populations  as well as the drau drainage alone , suggesting that natural as opposed to anthropogenic mechanisms are still operative, if not dominant, in determining among population differentiation. the population tree highly supported both the distinction of bavaria relative to danube populations , and the two members of a south alpine group in the danube drainages . in addition, it provided moderate support for a group containing the rhine and elbe catchments . a weak but statistically significant signal for demographic expansion was seen for the rhine basin , as well as the rhine and elbe basins combined  using the within-locus k test. this test is noted for being more sensitive to recent as opposed to ancient expansion events compared to the inter-locus g test, which did not reveal any statistically significant signal.

global patterns of admixture
to generate hypothetical sources of admixture, we simulated six different crosses between four population groups : 1) hatcheries, 2) pure danubian, 3) bavarian, 4) northeast austrian granitic group . there were three presumably admixed population groups of interest: 1) the austrian danube, 2) the mur, and 3) the drau. for each of these three groups, we applied bayesian clustering tests to each of the simulated hybrid crosses, resulting in  <dig> tests. across all  <dig> tests, the posterior probably of individual assignment to an f <dig> hybrid was negligible  . however, meaningful levels of individual assignment to subsequent classes  were seen for the austrian danube group  as well as the mur and drau . the percentage assignment to a post-f <dig> class for austrian danube individuals reached  <dig> and 29% for the two simulated crosses involving hatcheries and other austrian population groups . for the mur and drau individuals, assignment to a post-f <dig> class reached a high of 53% for the simulated cross between hatcheries and the pure danubian populations .

discussion
multiple marker systems  strongly support the natural occurrence of the atlantic lineage of brown trout throughout large areas of the upper danube catchment, whereas there is no evidence of the danube lineage in the sampled populations of the bavarian rhine and elbe catchments and very little trace  of the danube-lineage in the sampled portion of the bavarian danube. the cause of this large-scale pattern is natural, reflecting the admixed faunal character of the upper danube established over both geological and glacial time scales  <cit> . these results are largely concordant with the distribution of the atlantic lineage of brown trout in czech and slovakian tributaries of the upper danube  <cit> , but these authors did not argue for natural colonization. while the timing and colonization corridors of especially north-to-south colonizing fish taxa  are poorly understood, it is clear that the genera salvelinus and coregonus <cit>  have arrived in the upper danube relatively recently during the last  or penultimate  ice age. as divergence for brown trout across the rhine/danube/elbe contact zones are minimal to non-existent, we presume the species arrived in the upper danube from the north during these ice age transitions. however, we emphasize that described river capture events are primarily in the opposite direction , and this corresponds well with the paleo-hydrological perspective that the danube basin has been continuously loosing area to the rhine and elbe basins across the ice ages  <cit> .

while a relatively clear gradient of increasing danube-specific alleles is found with increasing distance downstream  in the danube catchment, the source of admixture displays a geographic as well as glacial pattern. hatchery atlantic strains appear to be the source of admixture in glaciated regions, especially south and southeast of the alps, whereas natural sources of atlantic lineage colonization from the upper bavarian danube appear to be the primary source of admixture north and northeast of the alps, especially in unglaciated regions. nonetheless, the influence of stocking in the region can be evaluated at a population level, as hatchery and wild atlantic genotypes can be distinguished, but the overall presence and dominance of atlantic genotypes is based on natural colonization.

regardless of the orientation of the alps, pure danube lineage populations are exceedingly rare and appear limited to isolated high elevation populations in previously glaciated areas. this inference is further supported by an earlier study reporting 72% danube lineage mtdna and nine populations  fixed for danube-lineage mtdna in the upper inn, lech, salzach and drau drainages in austria  <cit> . curiously, all occur within previously glaciated areas and all over  <dig> meters above sea level  . the distribution of populations with 100% danube-linage mtdna form a peri-alpine ring that is difficult to explain based on either purely anthropogenic influence or any simple natural mechanism of colonization. since the analysis of this data set, three additional pure danubian-lineage populations have been identified, all on the south slopes of the alps in carinthia, and all over  <dig> masl .

brown trout undoubtedly occupied large areas of austria even during the height of the würm glaciation, as glaciers did not reach the danube from the south. no real glaciation occurred either north of the danube or across large areas east and southeast of the alps. in the mountainous region of salzburg, for example, glaciers reached a maximum extension of about 5– <dig> masl approximately 24– <dig>  years ago  <cit> . based on accessibility, it is assumed that cold-tolerant fish re-colonized the salzach river catchment post-glacially from the danube and its tributaries to a maximum extent ca. <dig>  year ago  <cit>  during the early holocene warm period. between  <dig> and  <dig>  years ago depositional and erosional processes created numerous impassible barriers isolating cold-tolerant fishes, namely brown trout and sculpin  in some river reaches found between  <dig> and  <dig>  masl today. we assume that this scenario was similar for many other glaciated river valleys of the austrian alps. thus, pure danubian lineage brown trout are primarily, if not exclusively found in headwater tributaries that were accessible in the early holocene, but are now physically isolated from downstream colonization.

for regions south and southeast of the alps, atlantic lineage trout apparently exist exclusively through human-mediated mechanisms. that the admixture in these regions is more recent than to the north is strongly supported by the elevated levels of allelic diversity in the presence of both mtdna strains in the mur and drau compared to the lack of such a correlation in the north. however, elsewhere the existence of pure danubian lineage brown trout in isolated headwater systems means that they colonized these systems in the early stages of the current interglacial in the absence of the atlantic lineage. this is difficult to explain as the atlantic lineage not only dominates brown trout stocks in the upper danube in bavaria, but also reveals no signal of recent  expansion and thus must have been available for post-glacial colonization of the alps. there is also no indication of a breeding barrier between danubian and atlantic lineages. thus, the post-glacial expansion into alpine rivers of only one of these two co-existing lineages strongly implies some level of pre-glacial physical separation within the upper danube. interestingly, some authors have considered the atlantic lineage brown trout stocks in the region as salmo trutta, but the danubian linage brown trout stocks in the upper danube as salmo labrax admitting a hybrid zone in the upper danube  <cit> . regardless of one’s taxonomic viewpoint, we postulate that the danube lineage of brown trout must have existed in numerous small-scale peri-alpine refugia and were the initial colonizers of at least some alpine streams following glacier retreat. such a scenario begs the question of whether the danube lineage is more adapted to steeper gradient or glacially influenced habitats. increasing attention is being paid to finer than basin-scale local adaption of brown trout  <cit> . keller et al.  <cit>  investigated the possibility of an elevation gradient being associated with outlier loci showing some signs of divergent selection within drainages but the association with elevation were weak, and the danube lineage was essentially not involved in their work. the existing isolated populations of the pure danubian lineage in high elevation habitats of austria provide an intriguing source of material for future experiments on their potential for adaptive advantage compared to the atlantic lineage. in contrast, one could pose the hypothesis of whether or not the atlantic lineage has an adaptive advantage over the danube lineage in the lower elevation river courses.

regardless of such experimental avenues, it is apparent that a phylogeographic paradigm for european brown trout is failing to provide both researchers and managers with the proper framework for providing biological insights. from a purely management standpoint, the identification of a “danubian” or an “atlantic” genetic lineage is useless if not misleading in many  areas of the danube basin, because the so-called atlantic lineage is the dominant native trout lineage in much if not all of the bavarian danube and overlaps extensively in many drainages of austria as well. moreover, a homogeneous view of the danubian lineage for management purposes might very well be counter-productive if strong selective mechanisms are operative in higher elevation populations. indeed, elevation as a proxy for specific environmental conditions may turn out to be an important functional characteristic at the population or meta-population level for conservation purposes. discarding or lumping admixed populations might also be counter-productive if some regions have arrived at this admixture through human-mediated events, while others have been admixed for thousands of years, representing unique and well-adapted gene pools. our results and baseline data allow us to distinguish not only between native and anthropogenic introgression within the atlantic lineage, but also the relict status of peri-alpine danubian populations providing a valuable resource for future conservation planning.

the initial naming and description of five major mtdna lineages in brown trout  <cit>  was a breakthrough for european phylogeographic studies. numerous subsequent studies have added detail and some controversy as to the origin of these lineages, but to date no study has provided a single biologically relevant character that is fixed or even predominant in one or more of these so-called lineages. considering the high-level of physical fragmentation of all brown trout populations, it may be time to question the usefulness of the mtdna phylogeographic lineages in management schemes, but also in the logical construction of basic science research programs. the universality of this concern related to other phylogeographically circumscribed lineages of plants and animals can be debated, but for highly fragmented species with large ranges it might indeed be broadly applicable, as recently suggested for european grayling  <cit> , another pan-european salmonid species.

CONCLUSIONS
the atlantic lineage of brown trout is native to large areas of the upper danube in bavaria where it predominates, but also in numerous drainages of the austrian danube. the lineage has been a very successful post-glacial invader of river courses of the austrian danube, but to date there is no evidence of natural occurrence south and southeast of the alps in the provinces of styria and carinthia. pure danubian lineage populations are found primarily in previously glaciated regions at higher elevations, in a peri-alpine distribution implying that the lineage colonized headwater river courses post-glacially ahead of the expansion of the atlantic lineage. the distribution pattern of these two lineages is difficult if not impossible to describe without invoking strong biological mechanisms, meaning that a purely phylogeographic paradigm for these lineages fails to explain their distribution in the upper danube basin. more recently, anthropogenic activities have aided the spread of the atlantic lineage and there is no clear evidence of niche segregation or a breeding barrier where the two lineages are found in sympatry today.

