BACKGROUND
the effective assimilation and utilisation of nitrogen are challenges shared by all bacterial species. the mechanisms of regulation of nitrogen metabolism vary greatly but in most organisms overall control is mediated by a global transcriptional regulator  <cit> . glnr is one such transcriptional regulator belonging to the ompr winged helix-turn-helix family. it plays a key regulatory role in the expression of genes involved in nitrogen metabolism in several actinomycetes, including streptomyces coelicolor  <cit> , amycolatopsis mediterranei  <cit> , mycobacterium smegmatis  <cit>  and the human pathogen mycobacterium tuberculosis  <cit> .

glnr was first identified in s. coelicolor by its ability to restore wild-type growth to a glutamine auxotroph  <cit> . it was subsequently shown to activate expression of genes involved in ammonium assimilation, including glna and glnii that encode glutamine synthetase isoenzymes gsi and gsii, respectively, and amtb that encodes an ammonium transporter  <cit> . co-transcribed with amtb are glnk and glnd, which encode an unusually modified  pii protein and its partner adenylyltransferase, respectively  <cit> . a second ompr-like regulator, highly similar to glnr, is encoded by glnrii, which lies adjacent to glnii. glnrii binds to the same promoter sequences as glnr, but its role in nitrogen metabolism is not known  <cit> .

the range of genes regulated by glnr in s. coelicolor was extended by the work of tiffert et al.  <cit>  initially using a bioinformatic approach. by searching for promoters containing a consensus glnr-binding sequence and verifying glnr binding activity in vitro, they identified  <dig> new glnr targets. these included genes involved in the utilisation and assimilation of various nitrogen sources, such as nitrite and urea, as well as multiple genes with uncharacterised functions. recently s. coelicolor nasa, encoding nitrate reductase, was also found to be regulated by glnr through an interaction with a promoter sequence somewhat different from those previously association with glnr binding  <cit> . thus while a predictive bioinformatic approach can be extremely powerful, and has indeed provided considerable insight into the glnr regulon of s. coelicolor, it is by no means comprehensive. the existence of unusual glnr binding sequences, such as that found upstream of nasa, implies that there may be other, as yet undiscovered, glnr target genes. the recent demonstration that the expression of glnr and of some of the glnr-regulated genes of s. coelicolor is subject to repression by phob, the response regulator component of the phosphate sensing system  <cit> , highlights the cross-talk that can occur between regulatory systems involved in the global co-ordination of primary metabolism. thus, the regulatory effects of glnr may extend beyond primary nitrogen metabolism, and indeed a recent proteomic analysis of the glnr-mediated response to nitrogen limitation in s. coelicolor also came to this conclusion  <cit> . interestingly, the glnr orthologue of a. mediterranei is involved in the regulation of rifamycin production and its heterologous expression in s. coelicolor had marked effects on secondary metabolism, causing precocious production of undecylprodigiosin and inhibiting actinorhodin production  <cit> . such observations suggest that glnr may play a role in the regulation of secondary metabolism in other actinomycetes. intriguingly, in streptomyces venezuelae chloramphenicol production is influenced by the availability of both nitrogen and carbon  <cit> .

the aim of this study was to apply a global in vivo approach to the identification of glnr and glnrii-regulated genes. global transcriptional profiles of glnr and glnrii mutants were compared to that of the wild-type strain during growth in varying conditions of nitrogen availability to identify changes in gene expression dependent on either regulator. in addition, global analysis of glnr-dna interactions was performed using chromatin immunoprecipitation coupled to microarray analysis of enriched target sites .

s. venezuelae was chosen for this study for several reasons. it grows in a diffuse and homogenous manner in a variety of liquid media, and in some sporulates to near completion  <cit> . such growth characteristics reduce the physiological heterogeneity inevitably associated with the irregularly sized mycelial clumps observed in most actinomycete liquid cultures. this, together with the availability of s. venezuelae microarrays suitable for both transcriptional and chip-chip analyses, made this organism an extremely attractive system for such physiological studies.

RESULTS
glnr and glnrii in s. venezuelae
the s. venezuelae genome sequence  encodes predicted homologues of glnr and glnrii, both of which occur in regions with a high degree of synteny with the respective chromosomal locations in s. coelicolor. s. venezuelae glnr and glnrii show  <dig> % and 67% identity, respectively, to their s. coelicolor homologues.

defining conditions for induction of the glnr regulon
to aid in the accurate interpretation of global transcriptional data, a minimal evans medium  <cit>  was used that precisely defined the sources of all nutrients, providing a clear physiological perspective for data analysis. s. venezuelae showed reproducible, vigorous growth in evans medium containing  <dig> mm ammonium chloride as nitrogen source. a maximum growth rate of  <dig>  h- <dig> was achieved during exponential phase and consistently dispersed mycelium throughout growth was verified microscopically .

to determine conditions suitable for global transcriptional analysis, qrt-pcr was used to examine the effect of various growth conditions on transcription of the well-characterised glnr target amtb  <cit> . optimal induction of amtb occurred in response to a switch from mid-log growth in evans containing  <dig> mm ammonium chloride to evans medium completely lacking a nitrogen source for a  <dig> min period. this induction was almost entirely reversed by the exogenous addition of  <dig> mm ammonium chloride to the starved culture for a  <dig> min period. transcript levels of amtb, assessed by quantitative reverse-transcriptase polymerase chain reaction , were induced 53-fold by nitrogen starvation and this level was reduced 9-fold by ammonium addition .

global transcriptional changes in response to nitrogen status
rna samples harvested from three time points  were used to produce cdna for hybridisation to affymetrix genechips. three separate biological replicates of this experiment provided a global transcriptional profile of gene expression under conditions that had a marked effect on amtb expression. the microarray data confirmed the pattern of amtb expression measured using qrt-pcr, i.e. the gene was strongly induced  upon n starvation and was repressed  by exogenous addition of ammonium . to identify genes with a similar pattern of gene expression, data were filtered to include those genes that were both induced > <dig> fold in response to n-limitation and repressed by > <dig> fold in response to the exogenous addition of ammonium. in total  <dig> genes  fitted these criteria. a truncated list of the twenty genes showing the largest degree of induction upon n-starvation is given in table  <dig>  the fact that the majority of inductions observed are not equally matched by the repression following the re-addition of ammonium may be due to the persistence of mrna after transcriptional activation has been abolished. the majority of genes that are highly induced are so because the level of expression prior to induction is very low. therefore a relatively low number of persisting transcripts can have a large effect on the change in expression level when viewed in terms of a fold change.

full list of genes induced > <dig> are shown in additional file  <dig>  fold induction is calculated as the ratio signal t30/signal t <dig>  fold repression is the ratio signal t30/signal t <dig>  values given are the average of three hybridisations using cdna generated from three independent biological experiments. annotations taken from strepdb database 

this list includes a number of genes, e.g. amtb and glnii, previously demonstrated to respond to changes in nitrogen status in a glnr-dependent manner in s. coelicolor  <cit> . other genes that showed a similarly dramatic response upon microarray analysis, such as sven_ <dig> encoding a putative transcriptional regulator fused to a uroporphyrinogen iii synthase-like domain , were therefore also strong candidates for glnr regulation. however, the stringent n-limitation conditions used in these experiments could also have induced expression of genes responding to reduced growth rate or of those involved in general starvation responses. indeed this might be indicated by the induction of several uncharacterised transport systems . to identify responses that were glnr-mediated, a comparative transcriptional approach was taken using glnr and glnrii mutant strains.

construction and analysis of mutant strains
to identify which of the transcriptional changes occurring over the time-course were glnr- or glnrii-dependent, experiments were performed with mutant strains lacking each of the regulatory proteins. mutants were generated using pcr-targeting  <cit> , which replaced the entire coding region of each gene with an apramycin resistance cassette. phenotypic analysis of growth on solid evans media with ammonium, glutamine, glutamate, nitrate, asparagine or casamino acids as nitrogen source revealed no gross phenotypic differences between the wild-type and glnrii mutant strain m <dig> on any nitrogen source tested. the glnr mutant strain m <dig> showed a slight reduction in growth rate on each nitrogen source, but the only one on which it failed to grow entirely was nitrate, consistent with previous observations in s. coelicolor  <cit> .

effects of glnr or glnrii mutation on global transcription
of the  <dig> genes in the wild-type strain that showed a significant induction during n-starvation, and repression upon the addition of exogenous ammonium chloride ,  <dig> failed to respond to identical conditions in the glnr mutant . glnr-dependent genes induced > <dig> fold by n-starvation in the wild-type strain but not in the glnr mutant are listed in table  <dig> 

a full list of genes induced > <dig> fold is shown in additional file  <dig> 

in contrast to the major transcriptional changes observed in the glnr mutant, deletion of glnrii did not significantly perturb the expression of any genes noted previously to respond to changes in nitrogen availability .  <dig> genes showed a significant change in expression upon nitrogen starvation when the glnrii mutant was compared to the wild-type strain. however most of these genes exhibited considerably smaller fold changes than those caused by glnr mutation. only  <dig> genes showed a difference of greater than 5-fold, with the highest being a 13-fold increase in expression of sven_ <dig> encoding a putative integral membrane protein of unknown function. none of these genes were homologous to genes implicated in nitrogen metabolism in other systems. in an attempt to determine a physiological role for glnrii, we used the motif-finding program meme  <cit>   to search for a sequence motif within the upstream regions of genes whose transcriptional profile was altered in the glnrii mutant. no common feature was detected.

direct or indirect regulation by glnr
while the  <dig> genes in additional file  <dig> exhibited a marked glnr-dependent change in transcription in response to altered nitrogen status, these genes could be directly regulated by glnr or could be regulated by factors downstream of glnr in a possible regulatory cascade. such indirect regulation was also recently proposed by tiffert et al.  <cit> . of the  <dig> genes, eight encode putative transcriptional regulatory proteins and another encodes an rna polymerase sigma factor, and changes in the levels of these proteins would likely affect the expression of their target genes. equally, any changes in the levels of metabolites that occur during growth in the absence of glnr could post-translationally affect the activities of other transcriptional regulators and thereby also alter the transcriptional profile. this is a fundamental limitation of transcriptional profiling. hence, to identify genes directly regulated by glnr, i.e. by interaction of the protein with their promoter regions, a chip-chip approach was taken.

glnr chip-chip
for chip experiments, a construct was made in which glnr carried a c-terminal 3xflag-epitope tag. the construct  allows the expression of glnr-flag under the control of the native glnr promoter from a plasmid integrated at the phage φbt <dig> attachment site  <cit> . the construct was transferred into the glnr mutant m <dig> by conjugation to create m <dig>  detection of glnr-flag at all three stages of the time course experiment was confirmed by western blotting , and functionality of the fusion protein was confirmed by the restoration of growth of m <dig> on nitrate as sole nitrogen source .

immunoprecipitation  trials, followed by western blotting, demonstrated enrichment of glnr-flag protein following ip . dna eluted from the precipitated protein complexes was confirmed by pcr to include the promoter region of glnii, a defined glnr target, but not that of hrdb which encodes the major sigma factor of s. venezuelae and which did not respond to changes in nitrogen status in the microarray experiments . having confirmed enrichment of glnr target sequences, ip dna was labelled with cy- <dig> and hybridised to fully-tiled whole genome arrays of s. venezuelae . samples were taken at each of the three time points used for transcriptional analysis, and hybridised along with cy-5-labelled control samples of total dna from the same time point that had not been subjected to immunoprecipitation. plotting the cy3/cy <dig> ratio across the chromosome allowed identification of peaks corresponding to glnr-associated sites. peaks were considered significant when at least  <dig> consecutive probes had a cy3/cy <dig> ratio greater than  <dig>  standard deviations above the mean of all signals. this analysis was carried out in duplicate on separate biological samples. as a further control, immunoprecipitation was carried out using the wild-type strain carrying the empty flag vector  and therefore not making the glnr-flag fusion protein. peaks that were also present in this sample were considered to be artefacts. figure  <dig> shows an example of a glnr-dependent binding site located within the glnii promoter region.

glnr binding is promoted by nitrogen starvation, but is not abolished by ammonium addition
at time point t <dig> , representative of mid-log phase in the presence of  <dig> mm ammonium chloride, a single significant glnr-dependent peak was identified that corresponded to the promoter region of glna . this low level of binding at target promoters is consistent with the transcriptional data from both microarrays and qrt-pcr analysis that shows low transcriptional activity from glnr-target promoters under conditions of nitrogen sufficiency. binding to the glna promoter at this time is also consistent with relatively higher levels of glna transcription at t <dig> and lower levels of induction upon nitrogen starvation when compared with other target genes, such as glnii or amtb. such regulation correlates well with a role for gsi as the "house-keeping" glutamine synthetase, which is active during times of nitrogen sufficiency, whilst gsii is induced during conditions of starvation. expression of gsii-type isoenzymes in low nitrogen levels has also been demonstrated in plant symbiotic rhizobia species  <cit> .

after  <dig> minutes of nitrogen starvation  many more glnr peaks were observed. the most highly enriched regions were those containing the glna and glnii promoters. the amtb promoter was also highly represented in the ip material. this coincides with the maximal levels of expression of these genes during the time course. however, by t <dig> exposure of the starved cultures to exogenously added ammonium chloride did not abolish the glnr binding detected at many promoter sites during n starvation, despite the fact that by t <dig> many of these genes, most notably glnii and amtb, showed a marked loss of transcriptional activity. this unexpected phenomenon was observed consistently for nearly all target genes identified, and in duplicate biological experiments. therefore a simple model, in which nitrogen starvation leads to an increased affinity of glnr for its target promoters, which is reversed by sufficient levels of nitrogen, does not adequately explain the observed binding activity. to investigate further, an extra chip experiment was carried out  <dig> min after addition of ammonium chloride . however, even at this time point, glnr was still associated with all target sites identified at t <dig>  it would therefore appear that glnr assumes different forms during the time course. at t <dig>  glnr is present  but does not associate with its target promoters, with the exception of glna. at t <dig>  glnr assumes a form with increased affinity for target sequences and association occurs, along with activation of gene expression. at t <dig>  dna binding is unaffected, but transcriptional activity from target genes is abolished, indicating that a transcriptionally inactive form of glnr is associated with target promoters for at least  <dig> min after addition of ammonium chloride . as glnr is a member of the ompr winged helix-turn-helix family of transcriptional regulators, whose activities are classically modified via phosphorylation  <cit> , it may be that phosphorylation states of glnr account for the differently active forms. however, many atypical members of the ompr family that do not undergo phosphorylation have also been characterised  <cit> . an alternative explanation is that transcriptional activity may still persist at the t <dig> and t <dig> time points but stability of target gene mrna may be severely reduced, leading to a drop in the measured transcript level.

promoters enriched in glnr immunoprecipitates
all of the reproducible glnr-binding sites  were located within intergenic regions. a total of thirty six such peaks were identified and table  <dig> lists the genes located immediately downstream of the binding sites. five of these genes; glna, glnii, amtb, urea and sven_ <dig> , are known to be regulated by glnr in s. coelicolor  <cit> . however, none of the promoter regions of the eight other s. venezuelae genes that are homologous to glnr-regulated genes in s. coelicolor was enriched in this study.

gttaccgtcgggtcac
gtaaccggtcggtaag
gtgaccgctgagtagc
peaks were called as present when two or more consecutive probe signals were greater than  <dig>  standard deviations above the mean. duplicate biological experiments were performed for each time point, with independent hybridisations. peaks listed were present in at least two independent samples. sections of sequences in bold and underlined are those that match the proposed glnr consensus sequence.

the conserved glnr binding sequence
the identification of a consensus glnr binding site has proven to be of great value in identifying glnr-regulated genes  <cit> . to identify conserved sequences within the promoter regions found to be glnr-associated in vivo in s. venezuelae,  <dig> bp sequences of each promoter region were aligned and a consensus sequence  was derived using meme  <cit> . matches present in each promoter sequence are indicated in table  <dig>  of the  <dig> peaks identified,  <dig> have strong candidate sites from which the meme motif was derived; however, nine promoter regions lacked a consensus sequence. one such promoter region is that of sven_ <dig> encoding a putative transcriptional regulator. despite lacking the conserved motif, the gene is highly regulated in response to nitrogen availability  in a manner that is exquisitely glnr-dependent  and glnr is associated with the promoter region in vivo. emsa experiments with purified glnr  revealed retardation of dna sequences upstream of glna, glnii, amtb and sven_ <dig>  all of which contain the conserved glnr binding motif. mobility of the promoter region of sven_ <dig> was unaffected in the presence of glnr.

discussion
in this study we combined transcriptomic and chip-chip analyses to investigate the genetic control of nitrogen regulation in s. venezuelae. we identified a large number of genes within the glnr regulon but, like others  <cit> , we could not identify a role for the glnr homologue glnrii in nitrogen regulation.

the genes identified here can be divided into four categories: i) those that responded to nitrogen availability in a glnr-dependent manner and where glnr was associated with the promoter region; ii) those that responded in a glnr-dependent manner, but showed no glnr interaction at the promoter and are potentially modulated through another regulatory protein iii) those that responded to nitrogen status independently of glnr, and iv) those glnr targets identified by chip-chip that showed no response to nitrogen status under the conditions studied. for categories i) and iv), we identified  <dig> in vivo binding sites on the s. venezuelae chromosome for the nitrogen responsive transcriptional regulator glnr, and these cover three major aspects of nitrogen metabolism.

primary nitrogen metabolism
as expected, genes that encode proteins known or likely to be directly involved in nitrogen metabolism are highly represented among the glnr targets. such functions include the assimilation of nitrogen, either from ammonium  or from alternative n sources such as urea or nitrate . glnr also regulates production of n-acetyl-glutamate synthase, which, as part of the arginine biosynthesis pathway, synthesises n-acetyl-glutamate from glutamate and acetyl-coa and whose activity is dependent on cellular nitrogen levels  <cit> . all of these genes are regulated directly, and possibly solely, by glnr under the conditions used in these experiments. two other genes that fall in category i) but have no known function are sven_ <dig>  encoding a small  protein, and sven_ <dig>  encoding a protein with homology to a winged helix-turn-helix motif at the c-terminus and to uroporphyrinogen iii synthase at the n-terminus. based on the regulatory profiles of these genes, they too may be directly involved in primary nitrogen metabolism, and provide interesting targets for future study.

nitrogen scavenging
several genes downstream of glnr-binding sites  are predicted to encode periplasmic binding protein  components of abc transport systems with substrates such as amino acids and small peptides, suggesting roles in scavenging of alternative nitrogen sources during starvation. other glnr-targets encode predicted secreted proteins involved in the degradation of various macromolecules, such as the predicted glycosyl hydrolases, sven_ <dig>  encoding a xylanase, and sven_ <dig>  encoding a β-glucosidase, involved in the degradation of plant cell wall polysaccharides  <cit> , a predicted peptidase , and a predicted lipase . production of an array of degradative enzymes upon nitrogen starvation may be an attempt to release nitrogen and/or other nutrients, either from plant material or other organisms co-habiting the soil environment in which streptomyces species have evolved.

many of the genes encoding secreted proteins and pbps fall into category iv), i.e. glnr targets in chip-chip experiments that were not identified as nitrogen responsive in the transcriptional studies. however, the absence of a nitrogen-dependent transcriptional response may reflect the starvation conditions used in this study. the proteins encoded by these genes are not involved directly in nitrogen metabolism, but may, in some circumstances, perform useful roles under nitrogen-limited conditions. therefore, for optimal induction, these systems may require additional input signals in addition to nitrogen limitation, such as substrate-dependent induction, that were absent in our experimental conditions.

secondary metabolism
glnr binds to the intergenic region between the divergently transcribed jadr <dig> and jadr <dig> genes, which encode transcriptional regulators that activate and repress, respectively, expression of the jadomycin biosynthetic genes  <cit> . microarray data suggest that transcription of jadr <dig> is activated by glnr. expression of jadr <dig> is induced  <dig> -fold in response to nitrogen starvation in the wild-type strain and this level is repressed  <dig>  fold upon ammonium addition. consistent with this, levels of jadr <dig> transcription in the glnr mutant during nitrogen starvation are  <dig> -fold lower than in the wild-type strain . given the antimicrobial activity of jadomycin b  <cit> , glnr regulation may facilitate induction of expression as a response to nitrogen limitation caused by the presence of competing microorganisms. none of the other genes comprising the jadomycin b gene cluster show any significant changes in expression in response to nitrogen limitation, neither in the wild-type nor the glnr mutant, indicating that increased expression of jadr <dig> alone is not sufficient to activate expression of the cluster. lack of induction may be due to the action of the repressor jadr <dig>  which is only deactivated upon stress treatments such as heat or ethanol shock  <cit> .

glnr binding sites were also identified upstream of sven_ <dig> and within the intergenic region of sven_ <dig> and sven_ <dig>  these uncharacterised genes are located within regions that have been annotated as potentially encoding non-ribosomal peptide synthetase -like gene clusters. all three were down-regulated in response to nitrogen limitation, but their expression, and that of adjacent genes, was not significantly altered in the glnr deletion strain.

comparisons with the s. coelicolor glnr regulon
many of the genes responsive to changes in nitrogen availability in s. venezuelae are also regulated by glnr in s. coelicolor. of the  <dig> genes identified as glnr targets in s. coelicolor  <cit> ,  <dig> have strong homologues in s. venezuelae . four of these  <dig> genes, namely the amtb-glnk-glnd operon and glnii, were among the twenty genes showing the largest induction upon n-starvation . a further two targets, urea encoding the γ-subunit of urease and sven_ <dig>  encoding a small protein of unknown function, also responded significantly . the remaining seven s. venezuelae genes whose homologues are glnr-regulated in s. coelicolor did not pass the filtering criteria, although one, glna, only narrowly failed, being induced  <dig> -fold upon n-starvation and repressed  <dig> -fold by exogenous ammonium. as observed in s. coelicolor  <cit> , induction of glna was notably lower than that of glnii .

the lack of a marked response to n-starvation by some candidate genes could reflect species differences in the glnr regulon, or differences in experimental conditions. in this study with s. venezuelae, n-starvation was achieved by complete removal of any n-source, whereas in s. coelicolor n-starvation was achieved by a switch from growth on ammonium to growth on nitrate. s. venezuelae nirb, encoding a nitrite reductase subunit, did not respond to n-starvation but the gene was induced in a glnr-dependent manner in s. coelicolor. hence the presence of nitrate/nitrite may be required for nirb induction. similarly, whereas the complete absence of nitrogen induced urea in s. venezuelae, s. coelicolor urea was repressed upon n-starvation, perhaps indicating a preference for nitrate over urea as a nitrogen source in the latter species. we have not investigated the in vivo promoter binding activity of s. coelicolor glnr and there is no published data on this. so it is currently unknown whether s. coelicolor glnr also binds to target promoters in vivo under conditions in which transcriptional activation does not occur.

the glnr binding site consensus sequence
the meme algorithm identified a common motif present in twenty-seven of the thirty-six glnr target regions identified by chip-chip, in some cases in multiple copies . the motif identified was similar to that proposed for s. coelicolor but with some significant differences. the binding site  proposed by tiffert et al. contained an "a-site"  located  <dig> bps upstream of a "b-site" , giving a consensus sequence of gtnac-n6-gaaac  <cit> . interestingly, recent work by wang and zhao  <cit>  identified a novel binding site configuration in the promoter region of s. coelicolor nasa . glnr recognition of the nasa promoter is mediated by two gtaac "a-sites" separated by  <dig> bps, leading the authors to suggest that a "b-site"might not be obligatory. the motif we identified in s. venezuelae, gtnac-n6-gtnac , is essentially two copies of the "a-site" separated by  <dig> bps. hence the distinction between the "a" and "b" sites is less well defined in s. venezuelae where, although there are several examples of ganac occupying the "b-site", gtnac is much more common .

tiffert et al.  <cit>  suggested that glnr binding may follow the ompr model, such that the more highly conserved "b" site has a higher affinity for glnr, whilst the less well conserved "a-site" has a lower affinity. however the sequence derived in their study was based initially on alignments of the strongly glnr-regulated promoters of amtb and glna , and may be biased towards a higher affinity "b-site". the promoters of amtb and glna in s. venezuelae both contain a "b-site" with the sequence gaaac, and both have two tandem copies of the minimal binding sequence , an arrangement suggested to be the predominant glnr-binding site in s. coelicolor  <cit> . this tandem arrangement with a preponderance of gaaac in the "b" position may be indicative of strong glnr regulation. however, it is not representative of the majority of glnr binding sites observed in vivo in s. venezuelae, where a single occurrence of gtnac-n6-gtnac is the most common motif.

promoters lacking an identifiable glnr box
nine of the thirty-six regions identified in chip-chip experiments do not contain a glnr binding motif. transcription factors binding to non-consensus sequences are a common observation in chip-chip studies . examples include well-studied transcription factors such as fnr of escherichia coli  <cit>  and ctra of caulobacter crescentus  <cit> . likewise, studies of bacillus subtilis spoa  <cit>  revealed many in vivo binding sites that were not bound in an in vitro assay. local changes in dna topology, or the co-operative interactions of multiple transcriptional factors in vivo, may reduce the requirement for the consensus sequence  <cit>  and facilitate binding to non-consensus sites.

as discussed for nasa of s. coelicolor, glnr is capable of binding to two distantly separated copies of the gtnac motif. inspection of promoter regions that do not contain the full consensus sequence reveals several that possess multiple copies of the gtnac motif. for example, the sven_ <dig> promoter region contains three separate copies of gtnac separated by regions of thirty nine and thirty three base pairs. further work is required to establish their possible role in facilitating glnr binding.

CONCLUSIONS
glnr is the global nitrogen regulator in actinomycetes and plays a key role in regulating the assimilation and utilisation of nitrogen. this study has extended our knowledge of the glnr regulon in streptomycetes. it has also indicated a possible link between glnr and transcription of jadr <dig>  the pathway specific regulator of the jadomycin b cluster, as well as secreted degradative enzymes and several proteins with functions relating to transport. application of chip-chip has provided fresh insight into the dna sequences to which glnr binds in vivo and has shown that glnr is able to associate with target promoters in both transcriptionally active and inactive forms.

