BACKGROUND
an estimated  <dig>  million persons are living with human immunodeficiency virus /acquired immunodeficiency syndrome   in the united states  <cit> . with the use of antiretroviral therapy , hiv is now a chronic disease with higher incidence of associated non-aids defining illnesses. plwha have a higher prevalence of alcohol use disorders  than the general population  <cit> . chronic heavy alcohol consumption accelerates the progression of hiv/aids and contributes to comorbid pathologies seen in plwha  <cit> . among the different pathophysiological comorbidities that enhance the progression of the disease, decreased muscle mass/function remains a strong and consistent predictor of mortality, with the frequency of low skeletal muscle  mass detected at a much younger age in plwha compared to that of the general population  <cit> .

chronic heavy alcohol consumption and hiv both result in significant skm derangements such as atrophy, weakness, and dysfunction . however, there are few reports that describe the comorbid effects of chronic alcohol consumption and hiv on skm biology . our previous studies provided evidence that chronic binge alcohol  administration accentuates metabolic derangements  <cit> , leading to a marked decrease in skm mass  and dysfunctional skeletal muscle phenotype, thereby accelerating the time to end-stage disease in siv-infected macaques  <cit> . decreased mass and dysfunctional skm phenotypes are associated with changes in gene expression levels — changes that were functionally correlated to the generation of an inflammatory milieu, dysregulation of components of the ubiquitin proteasome system, increased proteasomal activity, depletion of skm anti-oxidant capacity, and an increased expression of pro-fibrotic genes  <cit> . in subsequent studies we further demonstrated the relevance of these observed gene expression changes by showing that cba impairs the differentiation potential of myoblasts to form myotubes, suggesting that skm regeneration is adversely affected  <cit> . taken together, our studies provide strong evidence that cba accelerates the loss of skm mass and impairs regeneration potential, which we predict would decrease quality of life and increase morbidity and mortality among plwha.

in order to understand the underlying genetic and molecular mechanisms that contribute to cba-dependent skm wasting at end-stage siv, we previously examined the pattern of dysregulation of several key genes involved in biological processes required for skm homeostasis  <cit> . although these studies were informative, they provided only part of the larger picture, since cba/siv produces multi-systemic and dynamic changes that disrupt finely tuned and highly integrated global gene regulatory networks. these networks include multiple molecular processes, including the initiation of transcription and epigenetic mechanisms such as methylation of promoters and the post-transcriptional regulation by micrornas. therefore, the global analysis of the transcriptomic and epigenomic profiles from tissues derived from cba/siv whole animal studies was considered to be invaluable for understanding how cba disrupts the interaction, integration, and function of these global gene regulatory networks to contribute to skm wasting at end-stage siv infection.

in this study we utilized high-output microarray gene analysis using rna and/or dna isolated from skm tissue derived from cba-administered rhesus macaques at end-stage siv infection to determine cba-dependent changes in mrna expression, mirna expression, and promoter methylation status. our results provide a model that describes the impact of cba on global transcriptional and epigenetic networks that disrupt the complex interplay between biological functions, thereby disrupting normal skm function. in addition to the previously described changes in expression of genes that promote a pro-inflammatory environment and impair the integrity and composition of the extracellular matrix   <cit> , our results showed changes in gene regulatory networks that disrupt calcium and ion homeostasis, neuromuscular junction , satellite cell growth and survival, “universal” functions of the cell  and protein homeostasis. this is the first report to describe the effects of cba on skm gene regulatory networks, providing a more comprehensive picture of the genetic and molecular mechanisms underlying cba-dependent skm wasting at end-stage siv infection.

RESULTS
chronic binge alcohol-dependent mrna expression changes
a total of  <dig> genes were significantly increased and  <dig> genes were significantly decreased in a cba-dependent manner. functional enrichment analysis was performed using gsea as described in methods. in the cba/siv group, there were  <dig> gene sets that were upregulated among  <dig> gene sets. of these  <dig> gene sets  <dig> were significant at a false discovery rate  < 25 % and of these,  <dig> gene sets are significantly enriched at a p-value <  <dig> . . pathways associated with transcription, programmed cell death, response to stress, protein kinase cascade and others were enriched in the cba/siv group . in the suc/siv group, there were  <dig> upregulated gene sets among  <dig> total gene sets . however, there were no gene sets that were significantly enriched according to the fdr or p-value.fig.  <dig> functional enrichment of cba-altered mrnas at end-stage siv disease. a the enriched pathways analyzed by gene set enrichment analysis revealed significant association of genes of cba/siv group in fifteen main gene sets. b three representative plots of enriched gene sets in the cba/siv group. enrichment score  is the degree to which a gene set is overrepresented at the top or bottom of a ranked list of genes. nes is normalized enrichment score. nominal p-value  estimates the statistical significance of the enrichment score for a single gene set. false discovery rate  is the estimated probability that a gene set with a given nes represents a false positive finding



in addition to previously described changes in genes affecting the inflammatory response, oxidative stress response, ecm reorganization  <cit> , and enzymes involved in the ubiquitin mediated degradation of proteins and initiation of translation  <cit> , we found that cba altered the expression of genes in five additional distinct biological categories:  “universal” cellular functions,  protein homeostasis,  calcium and ion homeostasis,  muscle and neuromuscular junction  function, and  myogenesis, encompassing muscle satellite growth and survival.

“universal” cellular functions category
one hundred twenty three genes encoding enzymes that can be viewed as having “universal” cellular functions were significantly different in the cba/siv group. of these genes,  <dig> encode proteins important for the production of energy, including  <dig> of the upregulated genes required for the metabolism of alcohol and  <dig> of the downregulated genes involved in the glycolytic pathway and glycogen degradation, connecting glycolysis to the tca cycle and the respiratory pathway. cba also altered the expression of genes required for histone remodeling and modification , multifunctional transcriptional regulators , general kinases and phosphatases , lipid biosynthesis and degradation , mitochondrial function , along with other individual genes important for the general functioning of the cell.

protein homeostasis category
cba/siv altered the expression of  <dig> genes important for the synthesis of amino acids and nucleic acids, enzymes essential for the proper charging of trna and ribosome biogenesis, proteins utilized in the splicing and maturation of mrna, and multifunctional transcription factors that regulate the initiation of transcription . further,  <dig> genes required for the trafficking of proteins through the endoplasmic reticulum and golgi apparatus and the glycosylation of proteins in these cellular compartments had altered expression, suggesting that the effects of cba on protein homeostasis not only encompass the initiation of translation and ubiquitin-mediated protein degradation, but also involve all aspects from the generation of components required for synthesis to the proper post-translational modifications required for functional mature proteins.

calcium and ion homeostasis category
cba altered the expression of  <dig> genes important for calcium homeostasis and  <dig> genes that encode ion channels. we also found that cba increased the expression of two calcium-dependent cadherins, which are important for muscle development, and one calcium-dependent gene necessary for neuronal development.

muscle and nmj function category
among the  <dig> differentially expressed genes involved in muscle differentiation, one encoded a myogenic factor directly involved in promoting or inhibiting myogenic differentiation, myogenic enhancing factor 2c . a cba-dependent decrease in the expression of genes required for proper contractile function, cell structure and integrity, and cellular expansion was also observed . we found an increased expression of pinin desmosome-associated protein , a gene that reverses the expression of e-cadherin, an adhesion molecule required for muscle differentiation. consistent with increased collagen deposition and the pro-fibrotic environment in muscle wasting  <cit> , cba increased the expression of the gene encoding the transmembrane protein  <dig> , which drives the differentiation of myoblasts into osteoclasts, a cell type that promotes the deposition of collagen. cba altered expression of genes important for neuronal survival and regeneration, cns development, acetylcholine receptor expression, and neuronal organization and orientation, consistent with a cba-mediated alteration of nmj and normal muscle function.

muscle satellite cell growth and survival category
consistent with our previous findings that cba impairs skeletal muscle regenerative capacity, the results from this study showed that cba altered the expression of  <dig> genes that contribute to the growth, survival, and cell cycle regulation of cells. these include genes important for cell cycle progression, growth factor related signaling pathways, cellular survival and apoptosis, and additional genes  that mediate or contribute to cellular proliferation and/or survival. we previously published reports that demonstrate the functional relevance of many of these differentially expressed genes  <cit> .

chronic binge alcohol-dependent mirna expression changes
we identified  <dig> mirnas whose expression changed ≥ <dig> -fold in a cba-dependent manner. of these,  <dig> were downregulated and  <dig> were upregulated . functional enrichment of predicted target genes of differentially expressed mirnas was analyzed using mirsystem as described in the methods section. pathways associated with mapk signaling, insulin signaling, neuronal signaling, and focal adhesions were enriched . the  <dig> most enriched pathways that included ≥ <dig> differentially expressed mirnas, ≥ <dig> target genes, and had a score ≥ <dig> are shown in table  <dig>  target genes from additional pathways showed a higher representation of proteins important for essential enzymes or cofactors in ubiquitin-mediated degradation of proteins, genes involved in maintenance of the integrity or in the breakdown of the extracellular matrix and muscle contraction .fig.  <dig> functional enrichment of cba-altered mirnas at end-stage siv disease. a cba-dependent differentially expressed mirnas. b pathways enriched by predicted target genes of differentially expressed mirnas as determined by mirsystem. c qpcr confirmation of mirnas and target genes: relative mirna expression of mir-34a, mir-10b and mir- <dig> in the skeletal muscle of control , suc/siv , and cba/siv  macaques determined by qpcr. relative mrna expression of esr <dig>  bcl <dig>  and kras in the skeletal muscle of control , suc/siv , and cba/siv  macaques determined by qpcr. values are mean ± sem. *p <  <dig>  vs. control and suc/siv



expression values for  <dig> upregulated candidate mirnas  in the microarray were confirmed by qpcr . we observed significant cba/siv-dependent changes in mirna gene expression consistent with our microarray results. we also determined expression levels of  <dig> mrnas:  estrogen receptor-alpha , which demonstrated cba/siv-dependent changes in the microarray results and serves as a validated target of mir-34a and − <dig>   b-cell lymphoma- <dig> , a validated target of mir-34a, and  kirsten rat sarcoma , a validated target of mir- <dig>  we found significant changes in esr <dig> that were consistent with our microarray, and all mrna showed significant changes with the expected inverse correlation to mirna changes .

as described in the methods, we also analyzed biological functions of target genes of differentially regulated mirnas. genes targeted by downregulated mirnas are involved in inflammatory/immune response, general cellular functions, neuronal function, etc. frequently, a single gene was targeted by a mirna within each individual biological function. nearly 50 % of the genes targeted by upregulated mirnas are primarily associated with five biological functional groups including  regulation of cell cycle progression,  activation of the innate immune response upon viral infection,  control of neuronal survival and plasticity, cns development, and neuronal differentiation,  multifunctional receptors that mediate several cellular functions ; and  the wnt, mitogen activated protein kinase  and transforming growth factor  β signaling .

chronic binge alcohol-dependent methylation changes
a total of  <dig> genes had alcohol-dependent changes in promoter methylation of ≥ <dig> -fold  . eight of the genes with decreased methylation and  <dig> of the genes with increased methylation correspond to genes up- or downregulated, respectively, in the mrna gene expression array. the major bps that genes with differential methylation expression are involved in are transmission of nerve impulse, cell communication, ion homeostasis, glucose metabolism and cellular processes .table  <dig> cba-dependent alterations in promoter methylation at end-stage siv infection

count: number of genes involved in the term; %: percentage of involved genes/total genes; p-value: modified fisher exact p-value, ease score; benjamini: adjusted p-value using benjamini-hochberg procedure



examination of the genes in which an increase in promoter methylation was observed; which would be predicted to result in a decrease in gene expression, demonstrated that nearly 70 % of the genes affected belonged to five biological functional groups and some showed overlap. the genes altered are involved in transcription, rna processing, translation, and trafficking of proteins. additional genes are involved in pathways including the notch, tgfβ, wnt, mapk, nuclear factor kappa b , fibroblast growth factor  and insulin-like growth factor  signaling. other functions of genes that were altered included cellular adhesion, cell growth and survival, energy production, myogenic function, oxidative stress response, extracellular matrix proteins, and ubiquitin-mediated degradation.

as seen with the mirna results, most of the genes that could be affected by a decrease in methylation in their promoter are not involved in any one particular biological function . a small number  of genes affected by decreased methylation contribute to general cellular functioning, actin proteins, proteins of the extracellular matrix, energy metabolism, cellular adhesion, cell growth, and neural functioning. these results suggest that decreased gene promoter methylation minimally contributes to accentuated skm loss in cba/siv macaques.

discussion
we examined the skm transcriptional and epigenetic changes, including differential expression of mirna and promoter methylation profile, resulting from cba administration to siv-infected rhesus macaques. the results obtained were used to develop a gene regulatory network illustrating the principal sites of cba-mediated alterations associated with skm wasting at end-stage siv infection. our results show that cba disrupts complex gene regulatory networks that affect the interplay between transcriptional and epigenetic factors leading to altered expression of genes whose biological functions contribute to one or more of the physiological events important for normal muscle functioning, including muscle regeneration to repair injury, muscle contraction and tensile strength, protein homeostasis, and nmj function and development.

we and others previously focused on alcohol-mediated alterations in a single gene or class of genes involved in such biological functions of protein homeostasis  <cit> , responses to increased oxidative stress  <cit> , or immunological function  <cit> . using new, more affordable genomics techniques and bioinformatics analytical methods, our previous, more limited skm microarray analysis showed differential expression of genes-expression changes that were shown to be functionally involved in pro-inflammatory and ecm remodeling processes in skm of cba/siv macaques  <cit> . in the present study, we expanded the analysis of this microarray data set to obtain a more comprehensive understanding of how cba disrupts complex gene regulatory networks, thereby elucidating some additional underlying molecular mechanisms that contribute to cba-dependent accentuation of skm wasting at end-stage siv infection.

gene regulatory networks have both transcriptional and epigenetic components, including regulation of the initiation of gene expression through the action of transcription factors, the pre-transcriptional epigenetic regulation through promoter methylation, and the post-transcriptional regulation of mrna stability or translation through the action of micrornas . consistent with the interplay between these events, we identified several instances in which changes in methylation status , mirna expression , or both  are inversely proportional to our observed cba-dependent changes in mrna gene expression . however, the majority of genes with expression changes ≥ <dig> -fold  did not correlate with alterations in mirna or methylation. this suggests that the activation or repression of transcription initiation, that are independent of epigenetic modulation, are the most likely regulatory mechanisms responsible for these changes in gene expression. further, a majority of genes that are affected by promoter methylation or that are validated/predicted targets of mirna were not seen in our mrna data, suggesting that these epigenetic changes have more subtle effects on the expression of individual genes .fig.  <dig> venn diagram of cba-dependent alterations in gene regulatory networks at end-stage siv infection. the majority of differentially expressed genes  in the skm of cba/siv macaques  compared to skm of suc/siv macaques) did not correlate with alterations in mirna or methylation. however, some of the differentially expressed genes were epigenetically regulated: changes in methylation status , mirna expression , or both together  were inversely proportional to the observed cba-dependent changes in mrna gene expression. further, there were cba-dependent mirna  and methylation  alterations that were not found in the mrna data that potentially contribute to skeletal muscle wasting



the results from these studies identify four additional distinct biological categories in which gene regulatory networks are altered in a cba-dependent manner:  “universal” cellular functions,  protein homeostasis,  calcium and ion homeostasis, which affect the functioning of muscle and neuromuscular junctions, and  satellite cell growth and survival .fig.  <dig> schematic integrating the global effects of cba on gene regulatory networks important for normal muscle function at end-stage siv infection. normal muscle function requires functional muscle fibers and the ability to activate satellite cells to proliferate and differentiate and pre-synaptic neurons to form functional neuromuscular junctions. the blue ovals indicate the cell type or physiological function necessary for normal muscle function and integrity. the orange octagons indicate the general biological functions required to maintain the function and/or integrity of the cell type or physiological function. the yellow boxes indicate the specific biological functions affected by cba-dependent changes in gene regulatory networks. the number of mrna , microrna , or methylation  that are altered due to cba are indicated for each specific biological function



“universal” cellular functions
we found that 22 % of mrnas, 18 % of target genes of altered mirnas, and 21 % genes with promoters whose methylation status changed are involved with “universal” cellular functions. these universal functions include glycolysis and energy production, histone remodeling and modification, multifunctional transcriptional regulators, general kinases and phosphatases, lipid biosynthesis and degradation, multifunctional signaling pathways, maintaining dna and chromosome integrity, transport of large molecules, and general mitochondrial function. although seemingly diverse, and although each may not independently have a large biological impact, these changes combined as a whole would be expected to have a significant effect on the ability of any cell to function, regardless of the tissue of origin.

protein homeostasis
previous findings from our laboratory have demonstrated that cba may disrupt protein homeostasis through altered insulin signaling and increased ubiquitin-proteasome-dependent protein degradation  <cit> , possibly inhibiting protein synthesis by altering mtor signaling  <cit> , and affecting translation elongation  <cit> . consistent with these previous reports, we found changes in gene regulatory networks that affect all three of these biological functions. however, we also detected effects on gene regulatory networks whose functions contribute to additional aspects of protein homeostasis, including the biosynthesis of nucleotides and amino acids, the generation of charged trna, the formation of functional ribosomes, transcription, processing and editing of mrna, oligosaccharide biosynthesis, and trafficking of proteins through the endoplasmic reticulum and trans-golgi network. thus, cba impacts processes preceding transcription and culminating in the production of fully modified functional proteins or glycoproteins. interestingly, although methylation changes influence genes with varied biological functions, nearly 25 % of genes are involved with protein homeostasis, suggesting that the largest impact of changes in methylation is on finer modulation of genes important for the production of functional proteins.

calcium and ion homeostasis
the increases in intracellular calcium stores, mediated through the mobilization and influx of calcium, are essential for many aspects of proper muscle functioning, including contraction, nmj function, and differentiation. further, sodium and potassium channels contribute to proper muscle and nmj functioning by regulating muscle contractions and mobilizing intracellular calcium stores. the proper functioning of muscle fibers, along with the ability of satellite cells to fuse into functional muscle, requires the tight regulation of calcium influx, efflux, and intracellular calcium mobilization  <cit> . further, nmj, the critical neuromuscular link mediating contraction, requires calcium for acetylcholine release  <cit> . adding complexity to this process is the interplay between calcium and ion channels in which voltage-gated na+/k+ channels are essential to mediate signals originating in the central nervous system to induce calcium release in muscle cells, thereby facilitating contraction. our results show that cba/siv alters gene regulatory networks that affect genes important for calcium and ion homeostasis, either through direct expression, post-transcriptional regulation by mirna, or altered methylation status. these results suggest that cba may reduce the ability of nmj to transmit signals to skm fibers thereby affecting the mobilization of intracellular calcium stores, which would decrease the functionality of muscle contractions and the ability of muscle satellite cells to successfully fuse to form new tissue in response to muscle injury.

satellite cell growth and survival
moderate everyday skm use and injury trigger a cascade of events important for muscle repair  <cit> . as part of this response, the muscle stem cells  proliferate, enter the myogenic program, and fuse with existing muscle fibers. once expanded, satellite cells express and activate common myogenic factors, reorganize their cytoskeleton to mediate fusion, and interact with the ecm to not only repair the myofibers, but also to restore the interaction between myofibers and surrounding tissue environment. it was demonstrated that in the absence of satellite cells, there is excessive accumulation of ecm and this adversely affects the increase in muscle mass in response to muscle overload experiments  <cit> . our results indicate that at end-stage siv infection, cba negatively alters gene regulatory networks that affect genes important for cell growth and survival, cytoskeleton reorganization or ecm involvement, and regulation of myogenesis. the expression of a number of genes is affected, which when combined over long periods of time, may significantly impact skm regenerative capacity and contribute to skm wasting.

the primary objective of the study was to identify a global network of the transcriptomic and epigenomic profiles from skeletal muscle derived from cba/siv whole animal studies. we were able to confirm the differential expression of  <dig> selected upregulated mirnas and some of their target mrnas by qpcr. esr <dig>  a target gene for  <dig> of the upregulated mirnas , was downregulated in the gene microarray, showed increased promoter methylation in the methylation array, and decreased mrna expression as confirmed by qpcr in the skm of cba/siv macaques. esr <dig> is required for translocation of glut- <dig> receptors to the plasma membrane for glucose uptake. its role in development of insulin resistance has been demonstrated in esr <dig> knockout mice. esr <dig> is also required for satellite cell proliferation . thus, decreased esr <dig> expression in the skm of cba/siv macaques potentially contributes to impaired glucose homeostasis and satellite cell growth. there was also a significant decrease in the expression of bcl- <dig>  a target of mir-34a, in the skm of cba/siv macaques. bcl- <dig> promotes cellular survival  <cit>  and may be implicated in satellite cell growth and survival.

taken together, our results allow us to propose a model describing the cba-dependent global alterations in gene regulatory networks that contribute to muscle wasting in end-stage siv infection. in this model, normal muscle function requires functional contractile muscle fibers, as well as the ability to activate fusion of myoblast satellite cells to regenerate injured muscle tissue and the ability of pre-synaptic neurons to form functional neuromuscular junctions . the occurrence of each of these events depends on several subcategories of biological functions. for example, the proper contractile functioning of muscle cells requires cell and tissue integrity, proper protein homeostasis, and the presence of the mechanical components that drive contraction . each of these individual biological functions requires the finely balanced expression of specific genes, a balance regulated through transcriptional and epigenetic gene regulatory networks . adding to this finely balanced regulatory network, many specific genes and mirna contribute to multiple biological functions, such as calcium and ion homeostasis, which work in a finely coordinated manner to facilitate muscle contraction; nmj function and myoblast satellite cell fusion; as well as cytoskeletal integrity and ecm maintenance, which contribute to muscle regeneration and muscle tissue integrity.

cba administration promotes a persistent inflammatory skm environment resulting from increased expression of a myriad of genes important for immunological function, inflammatory responses, and ability to combat oxidative stress   <cit> . this persistent inflammatory state promotes changes in transcriptional and epigenetic regulation of hundreds of genes, either through direct effects on the initiation of transcription to alter the expression of genes and mirna, the post-transcriptional mirna regulation of mrna stability and translation, or the altered methylation status of gene promoter regions . these alterations produce subtle and significant effects on the expression of genes, which individually may not produce significant changes but when combined as a whole, work to disrupt the finely tuned balance required for normal muscle function and repair, thereby eliciting a gradual process of muscle wasting.

CONCLUSIONS
our results provide an integrated analysis of gene regulatory networks affecting skm wasting in cba/siv macaques that extends our previous observations on ecm  <cit>  and protein homeostasis  <cit> . alterations in calcium and ion homeostasis, nmj functions, deficiencies in growth, survival, and regenerative capability of myoblasts, “universal” cellular functions, and gene regulatory networks expand the scope of cba-mediated effects beyond those exclusive to maintaining protein homeostasis. together, these alterations create a global, interconnected, and integrated network that leads to a general loss of skm mass due to the inability of muscles to function, respond to, and repair damage and injury.

