BACKGROUND
recent intracranial self-administration studies have helped to define key brain structures involved in positive motivational processes involved in approach/seeking  <cit> . one such structure is the supramammillary nucleus , located in the posterior hypothalamic area, just dorsal to the mammillary body and anterior to the ventral tegmental area . the sum was initially implicated in reward-related processes by the finding that rats learn instrumental responses to obtain brief electrical stimulation in the vicinity of the sum  <cit> . we recently found that rats readily learn to lever-press for infusions of gabaa receptor antagonists, picrotoxin or bicuculline  <cit> , the excitatory amino acid ampa  <cit> , or nicotine  <cit>  into the sum, suggesting that activation of supramammillary neurons recruits approach-related motivational processes  <cit> .

we have also shown low systemic doses of dopamine receptor antagonists decrease rats' self-administration of picrotoxin or ampa into the sum  <cit> . these findings suggest that motivational effects of supramammillary manipulations depend on intact dopamine transmission. in addition, ampa administration into the sum increases extracellular dopamine concentrations in the ventral striatum as measured by microdialysis  <cit> . this result suggests that activation of supramammillary neurons appears to recruit activation of the mesolimbic dopamine system.

conversely, some manipulations that activate vta dopamine neurons appear to activate supramammillary neurons. one manipulation that supports robust self-administration is the cholinergic receptor agonist carbachol into the posterior vta  <cit> , which increases extracellular dopamine in the ventral striatum  <cit> , suggesting that this manipulation activates the mesolimbic dopamine system. the administration of carbachol into the posterior vta was found to robustly increase the transcription factor c-fos in the sum  <cit> . sum c-fos counts were positively correlated with locomotor counts increased by carbachol administration into the vta, suggesting that sum neurons participate in motivational effects triggered by posterior vta activation. these findings suggest that supramammillary neurons interact with the mesolimbic dopamine system.

although the sum appears to be functionally linked with the dopaminergic projection from the vta to the ventral striatum, connectivity between the sum and these regions is either absent or scarce  <cit> . additional connectivity analysis suggests that several regions that are reciprocally connected with the sum are also reciprocally connected with the vta  <cit> . these include the medial prefrontal cortex, septal area, preoptic area, lateral hypothalamic area and dorsal raphe nucleus. moreover, these efferent and afferent regions of the sum and vta appear to be closely interlinked. because these regions have also been implicated in reward-related processes, these brain regions, the mesolimbic dopamine system and sum may constitute a network module that mediates approach-related motivational processes  <cit> .

using c-fos as a marker for neuronal activation, we sought to address the following hypotheses: 1) the administration of gabaa receptor antagonist picrotoxin into the sum activates its' local neurons, because the gabaa receptor antagonist blocks tonic inhibition, leading to neuronal disinhibition; 2) picrotoxin administration into the sum activates the mesolimbic dopamine system; 3) picrotoxin administration into the sum activates the brain regions that are involved in motivational processes and reciprocally connected with both sum and vta: medial prefrontal cortex, septum, preoptic area, lateral hypothalamic area, and dorsal raphe nucleus.

in addition, we examined whether intra-sum administration of picrotoxin facilitates locomotor activity. positive motivational manipulations such as brain stimulation reward and drugs of abuse are known to acutely facilitate locomotor activity in rats  <cit> . because our previous studies show positive motivational effects of intra-sum picrotoxin, we hypothesized that this manipulation will facilitate locomotor activity in open fields. the present study focused on effects of acute intra-sum picrotoxin administration on locomotor activity and c-fos expressions in reward-related brain structures. therefore, the study emphasized on initial unconditioned processes, rather than conditioned processes, triggered by sum manipulations.

RESULTS
each rat unilaterally received picrotoxin or vehicle into the vicinity of the sum through a permanent guide cannula. after a locomotor activity test, each rat was killed for histological processes of c-fos expression and cannula placement. each rat's cannula placement was verified with microscopic examination and shown in figure  <dig> 

effects of sum picrotoxin administration on locomotor activity
unilateral administration of picrotoxin  into the sum immediately facilitated locomotion and rearing that then gradually decreased over the next  <dig> min . because rats that received artificial cerebrospinal fluid into regions just outside the sum showed similar locomotor/rearing counts as those receiving it into the sum, the data of both groups were combined together as vehicle control data. during the  <dig> min observation period, the rats that received picrotoxin into the sum traveled and reared approximately  <dig> times more than those that received vehicle. these observations were verified by mixed  <dig> ×  <dig>  anova/manovas. we found significant group × block interactions, f <dig>  =  <dig> , p =  <dig>  for locomotion and f <dig>  =  <dig> , p =  <dig>  for rearing. these results suggest that picrotoxin injections into the sum markedly facilitate locomotion and rearing. because the sum is closely connected with visceral and affective processing structures rather than motor processing structures and because previous studies suggest positive motivational role of this structure, it is tempting to suggest that locomotor activity triggered by intra-sum picrotoxin is secondarily facilitated through motivational processes, thereby reflecting unconditioned motivational processes of the manipulation.

effects of sum picrotoxin administration on c-fos in reward related structures
figures  <dig>   <dig>   <dig> show c-fos expression from the level of the prefrontal cortex to the level of midbrain raphe nuclei of representative rats. we also quantified c-fos in selected brain regions  and summarized data in table  <dig>  consistent with our hypothesis that picrotoxin administration into the sum disinhibits its local neurons, we observed robust c-fos expression in the sum after picrotoxin administration into the region . these findings fit with our previous interpretation that self-administration and conditioned place preference induced by intra-sum ampa or picrotoxin are mediated by the excitation of local neurons  <cit> .

notes: c-fos counts in bold indicate significant differences from respective counts for vehicle injections. blank space in the p-value columns indicates that the effect of region was not significant, following an anova/manova test. abbreviations: c, contralateral to injection site; i, ipsilateral to injection site; m, midline; n, nucleus

we observed the pattern of c-fos expression in the vta and the ventral striatum paralleled with the connectivity between the vta and ventral striatum. the posterior but not anterolateral vta had reliable increases in c-fos expression after intra-sum picrotoxin, while the medial nucleus accumbens shell had more reliable increases in c-fos counts than the accumbens core . these results parallel the projection pattern of dopaminergic neurons from the vta to the ventral striatum. the posterior vta has been shown to predominantly project to the medial part of the ventral striatum, including the medial shell, while the anterolateral vta largely projects to the lateral part of the ventral striatum, including the core  <cit> . in other words, there is mediolateral topography for dopaminergic neurons projecting from the vta  to the ventral striatum . this congruence between c-fos and structure suggests that sum picrotoxin activates the medial part of the mesolimbic dopamine system more reliably than the lateral part, and that the sum is functionally linked with the medial mesolimbic dopamine system more closely than its' lateral counterpart. because the medial mesolimbic dopamine system appears to mediate drugs' motivational effects more readily than the lateral portion of the system  <cit> , these findings are consistent with our hypothesis that the mesolimbic dopamine system and the sum interact for approach-related motivational processes.

in addition to the medial mesolimbic dopamine system, we observed increased expression of c-fos in other regions that are closely connected with both the sum and vta. picrotoxin administration into the sum increased c-fos expression in the septal complex, especially the intermediate and ventral parts of the lateral septal nucleus, the medial prefrontal cortex, the lateral preoptic area, the lateral hypothalamic area and the dorsal raphe nucleus. these regions, which are closely connected with both the sum and vta and expressed picrotoxin-induced c-fos, have been previously implicated in positive motivational processes. rats learn to self-stimulate these regions with brief electrical current  <cit> . injections of drugs into these regions are rewarding, including cocaine  <cit>  and nmda receptor antagonists  <cit>  in the medial prefrontal cortex, morphine and muscimol in the septal area  <cit> , morphine in the lateral hypothalamic area  <cit> , and the gabaa receptor agonist muscimol and gabab receptor agonist baclofen in the dorsal raphe nucleus  <cit> . picrotoxin administration into the sum tended to increase, without a statistical significance, c-fos in the medial preoptic nucleus, which is implicated in drug reward  <cit> . the same manipulation significantly increased c-fos expression in the lateral preoptic nucleus, which supports self-stimulation  <cit> , but has not previously been implicate in drug reward. because the preoptic nuclei are closely connected with the sum, vta and the above-mentioned regions that showed significant c-fos expression, these nuclei could play an important role in motivational processes initiated through the sum. thus, these findings generally support our hypothesis that these brain structures participate in motivational processes mediated through the sum.

c-fos expression following brain stimulation reward
we mentioned in the background section that carbachol administration into the posterior vta increases c-fos expression in the sum. similarly, increased c-fos expression has been found in the sum and other brain structures that we reported here following rewarding electrical stimulation delivered at the lateral hypothalamic area  <cit>  as well as vicinity of the dorsal raphe nucleus  <cit> . these previous and present findings are consistent, though not unequivocally, with the view that the sum is a component of a network module mediating approach-type motivational processes  <cit> .

limitations
to avoid interpreting the results beyond what they are, it is important to acknowledge limitations of our c-fos technique. c-fos expression is a correlate of manipulations and thus does not indicate any causal relationship. accordingly, the technique cannot discriminate between reward-related neurons and other activated neurons. thus, c-fos expression does not necessarily mean involvement in positive motivational processes. furthermore, c-fos may not necessarily be expressed in every activated cell. thus, the absence of c-fos does not indicate the absence of neuronal activation. finally, temporal resolution of the technique is poor. therefore, the technique does not show how neurons were activated. in particular, our observations suggest that c-fos expression can result from first-, second- or even third-order trans-synaptic activation. ipsilateral sides of regions that receive monosynaptic efferents from picrotoxin-affected part of the sum tended to have more c-fos expression than the contralateral sides of bilateral structures, including the medial prefrontal cortex, lateral septal area, diagonal band of broca, preoptic areas and lateral hypothalamic area . however, c-fos expression was generally observed bilaterally throughout the brain, including regions that do not receive efferents from the sum .

CONCLUSIONS
administration of the gabaa receptor antagonist picrotoxin into the sum, which was previously found to recruit positive motivational processes related to approach/seeking, facilitated locomotor activity and induced c-fos expression in extensive brain structures. the patterns of c-fos expression suggest that it disinhibits local neurons and recruits activation of the mesolimbic dopamine system, prefrontal cortex, septal area, preoptic area, lateral hypothalamic area and dorsal raphe nucleus. these brain structures may be involved in approach-type motivational processes triggered by activation of supramammillary neurons.

