BACKGROUND
androgen receptor  signaling is the key determinant of virilization in male external genitalia development  <cit> . its importance is highlighted in the androgen insensitivity syndrome , a virtual human ar "knock-out" due to inactivating mutations of the ar gene, and characterized by defects in virilization of  <dig>  xy individuals despite normal or elevated serum testosterone levels. the phenotype can range from normal female in complete ais , to lesser degrees of genital ambiguity in partial ais  in which the degree of virilization is related to the degree of ar function  <cit> . genital masculinization involves a comprehensive re-organization of genital anatomy in which androgens induce a permanent male developmental fate in the originally bipotent anlagen. for example, in response to embryonal androgen signaling, the labioscrotal swellings will develop into a scrotum and not into labia majora . these observations indicate the existence of androgen-mediated gene expression programs that are responsible for implementation and persistence of male-specific genital morphology and function. in general, distinguishing x- and y-chromosomal influences from hormonal influences on genital development has proven difficult  <cit> ; however, cais, in which all individuals possess an xy genotype, represents the ideal situation for focusing on the role of androgens.

in a previous study, we reported evidence for androgen-mediated programming of gene expression by comparing genital skin fibroblasts from normal males to those derived from cais individuals  <cit> . however, the demonstration that cultured fibroblasts show stable transcription signatures that reflect their site of origin in mature adult tissues   <cit>  raises the possibility that fibroblast transcript signatures might also reflect androgen-independent aspects of their developmental history. were that the case, the transcript signatures we had identified might be influenced both by androgen signaling during genital development and topology. even though the normal male and cais fibroblasts were both derived from the genital skin, their precise sites of biopsy differed both topologically and with regard to embryological origin. the normal male genital fibroblasts were grown from biopsies of the foreskin , while cais fibroblasts came from biopsies of the labia majora   <cit> . to better define the gene expression programs dependent only on developmental androgen actions, we analyzed gene expression profiles of fibroblasts derived from homologous embryonic structures: the labioscrotal swellings in  <dig>  xy males  and  <dig>  xy females . we validated the biological relevance of this approach by comparing the ability of this new gene expression set and the previous set to classify a large set of individuals representing the whole clinical spectrum of ais phenotypes based on gene expression profiles alone.

RESULTS
identification of a topology-independent, ar-dependent gene expression program
we had previously identified an ar-dependent gene expression signature by comparing normal male foreskin fibroblasts to those cultured from diverse sites in the genitals of patients with documented cais. subsequent reports that cultured fibroblasts retain topographic transcriptional memory  led to concerns that the ar-dependent gene expression signature we identified could have been affected by topological differences in the fibroblast samples used. to test for this potential confounder, we repeated microarray experiments on seven independent strains of normal male scrotal fibroblasts  and duplicate samples of four labia majora fibroblasts derived from  <dig>  xy individuals with cais due to proven inactivating mutations of the ar-gene. both fibroblasts were derived from identical anlagen: the labioscrotal swellings. the sam procedure revealed  <dig> transcripts representing  <dig> unique genes that differed significantly in expression level between the groups at a false discovery rate of  <dig>  .

the new topology-controlled data set showed some similarities to the ar-dependent gene set we had identified previously, with  <dig> unique transcripts found in both gene sets, including  <dig> transcripts that were up-regulated in normal male derived fibroblasts, and  <dig> up-regulated in the cais female-derived fibroblasts. genes up-regulated in normal male fibroblasts in both data sets included tbx <dig> , cbx <dig> , igfbp <dig> , and egfr  while several others were no longer identified as significantly different between the data sets, such as tbx <dig> , tbx <dig> , bmp <dig> , hoxa <dig> , wnt <dig> , and foxf <dig> . the significant change in the gene lists strongly suggested that topology influenced the gene expression signatures identified in our original series of experiments.

topology independent ar gene expression program classifies diverse ais samples
to evaluate the relevance of the topology-controlled, ar dependent gene list, we tested its ability to classify  <dig> microarray experiments performed on fibroblast samples derived from  <dig> individuals that included normal males, normal females, and individuals with pais and cais . ais samples were graded according to the system suggested by sinnecker  <cit>  wherein phenotypically male genitalia are scored ais  <dig>  while female external genitalia are scored ais  <dig> . stringent filtering conditions of the combined data sets reduced the number of transcripts from  <dig> to 259; however, altering the stringency of the filtering conditions and the number of transcripts used did not significantly change the clustering pattern of the individual samples .

fibroblast strains; microarray dataset in whichh they have been analysed ; ard or gs, patient strain-id; f, normal male foreskin fibroblasts; s, normal male scrotal fibroblasts. l-1- <dig> represent the only samples with a  <dig>  xx karyotype. n-st <dig> and n-ls <dig> are of extragenital origin. ard <dig> was derived from a  <dig>  xy male with ambiguous genitalia due to a 5α reductase type ii defect rather than ais. normal ranges for androgen  binding: bmax : 13– <dig> fmol/mg protein; kd :  <dig> – <dig>  nm.

clustering separated the  <dig> experiments into two major subgroups. the righthand major branch included predominantly patients with female external genitalia while most of the patients in the lefthand major branch had normal male or highly virilized external genitalia . all but one of the samples with cais  and a normal  <dig>  xx female clustered in the right  branch . interestingly, the one exception expressed a wild type ar in a portion of cells due to somatic mosaicism . two skin fibroblast samples from normal males derived from regions without an obvious androgen induced sexual dimorphism  also clustered in the right  branch. the left  major branch contained all genital skin fibroblasts derived from normal male controls and  <dig> of  <dig> microarry experiments reflecting patients with higher degrees of virilization due to partial ais . this cluster also included a fibroblast sample from an individual with 5α-reductase type ii deficiency, a defect which results in ambiguous genitalia due to lack of conversion of testosterone to dihydrotestosterone. this individual presumably possesses a wild-type ar, meaning that androgen signaling pathways remained intact. three of the four labioscrotal fibroblast samples from individuals with ais  <dig> phenotypes with significant genital ambiguity clustered in the "female" major branch and the remaining in the "male" one . of note, clustering did not appear to be influenced by array type or rna reference-type, indicating that normalization procedures did not influence data quality.

structure within the cluster dendrogram suggested that there was some residual influence of topology on gene expression in the samples. in the righthand "female" branch, fibroblast samples derived from ais gonads clustered separately from all skin-derived samples . similarly, the lefthand "male" branch showed a subcluster that contained all the foreskin-derived fibroblasts, including the ais  <dig> fibroblasts originating from the foreskin. interestingly, this branch also contained two strains of labia minora fibroblasts from two  <dig>  xx individuals, one of whom had ambiguous genitalia  due to 21-hydroxylase deficiency , while the other individual was a normal female. since the labia minora are analogous to the urethral folds that participate in penile morphogenesis, this finding suggests that topographic origin influenced expression within the selected set of genes of these two samples more than ar signaling. in some cases, the anatomic origin of biopsy was not well documented . this might explain why some samples did not cluster as expected  although other factors might have contributed to these findings.

we also wanted to reconsider whether the new topology-independent, ar gene list better classified samples than our previous gene list that did not control for the locations from which samples were harvested. after removing the microarray experiments that were used to define either the previous  <cit>  or the new gene set by sam, the remaining samples were clustered. as expected, in case of both gene lists the samples sorted into two main branches that separated primarily male and female samples . moreover, when we considered only topology-controlled samples originating from the labioscrotal swellings excluding the mosaic samples and those of insufficiently described biopsy localization, the mean ais-grades between the two branches differed significantly using both gene lists ;  <dig>  ±  <dig>  ; p <  <dig>  by t-test; previous gene list : ais-grades:  <dig>  +  <dig>  ;  <dig>  +  <dig>  ; p <  <dig>  by t-test). however, in contrast to the new gene set, the previous gene set that did not account for topology misclassified many individuals. it resulted in incorrectly female classification of most of the highly virilized individuals with ais  <dig>  and of a large fraction of the normal male scrotal fibroblast controls  . the new gene set misclassified only one individual with ais  <dig> .

biological processes in the ar-dependent gene expression program
we performed a systematic analysis for enrichment of genes belonging to defined biological processes and cellular pathways using the panther classification system  <cit> . panther classifies genes by their functions, based on published experimental evidence and on evolutionary relationships. the  <dig> significant transcripts corresponded to  <dig> named transcripts, of which panther recognized  <dig> unique gene ids. several related biological processes were significantly over-represented in the ar-dependent gene list including "control of cell proliferation and differentiation"  and "cell cycle control"  . analysis of cellular pathways also revealed several interesting signaling pathways including "angiogenesis"  and wnt-signaling"  . these processes and pathways were reflected in the major branches of the cluster dendrogram revealing differential expression in the phenotypically male and female samples . for instance, samples in the "male" branch showed high expression of ccn <dig> , ccnd <dig> , igf <dig> , igfbp <dig> , myc , maff , egfr , ptpn <dig> , met  and several other genes important in cell growth and proliferation . transcripts expressed at high levels in the "female" branch included anapc <dig> , fzd <dig>  and fzd <dig>  .

ar-dependent biological processes identified by panther   <cit>  as significantly over-represented in the sam-list compared to the ncbi human reference gene list 

ar-dependent cellular pathways identified by panther   <cit>  as significantly over-represented in the sam-list compared to the ncbi human reference gene list 

the ar-dependent gene set showed enrichment for a number of genes related to maintenance and modification of tissue shape and structural identity . genes that were up-regulated in the predominately male branch were sdc <dig> , fmod  and adamts <dig> . those up-regulated mainly in the female branch included adam <dig> , tnc , cspg <dig> , fbn <dig> , eln , col5a <dig> , ecm <dig> , dag <dig> , and spock .

confirmation of selected transcripts by rt-pcr
four transcripts were selected for confirmation of the microarray data by semi-quantitative rt-pcr: tnc , fzd <dig> , adam <dig> , and cspg <dig> . rna from the labia majora fibroblasts derived from cais affected individuals , as well as four samples of the normal male scrotal fibroblasts  were used for analysis. in agreement with the microarray data, tnc, fzd <dig>  adam <dig> and cspg <dig> show significantly higher expression in the labia majora fibroblasts compared to the scrotal fibroblasts .

discussion
we demonstrate reproducible, lasting differences in gene expression in cultured fibroblasts harvested from analogous structures in the genital tissues of normal males and  <dig>  xy cais females. this unique model system, in which samples were matched for genotype and topology, allows identification of gene expression programs predominantly influenced by ar signaling, likely during genital morphogenesis. by selecting fibroblasts derived from the labioscrotal swellings in normal and cais individuals, we were able to largely exclude androgen-independent mechanisms as a cause of systematic differences of baseline gene expression. while we had identified a related set of genes previously using fibroblast cells that had not been matched for site of origin, the significant differences between our previous and current gene sets implies that topology significantly influenced gene expression in our original set. this finding is instructive for future studies seeking to identify the effects of inactivating mutations of single genes in tissues or cells cultured from tissues. gene expression profiles can be influenced by obvious genotypic differences, such as the presence of an x or y chromosome  <cit>  but also by subtle differences including differences in topology  <cit> .

the transcripts we have identified appear to be highly relevant to male and female external genital morphogenesis. when used to classify an independent set of fibroblasts cultured from normal male, normal female, and pais-affected individuals, this gene set performed considerably better than our previous set in which we had not controlled for differences in topology. the observation that fibroblasts derived from the labia majora of normal female external genitalia clustered with ais derived samples from the same site demonstrates the primacy of developmental androgen actions in influencing gene expression in this set of genes, and possibly in external genital morphogenesis. furthermore, our findings suggest that gene expression profiling of genital fibroblasts might be correlated with phenotype in vivo and could serve as a diagnostic marker of the extent of developmental androgenization, although many more cases will need to be analyzed, and other analytic methods will need to be used to identify an ideal classifier.

chang and co-workers have demonstrated that fibroblasts cultured from different regions of the body retain position-specific expression signatures  <cit> . our work confirms the presence of lasting, topology-influenced differences in gene expression in human fibroblasts. controlling for the site from which genital fibroblasts were derived significantly altered the set of genes we identified as differing between normal and cais-derived fibroblasts. despite that control, signatures of topology remained in our new gene set. for instance, normal male fibroblasts and cais-derived gonadal fibroblasts each clustered as distinct entities in the "male" and "female" arms, respectively. thus, even in our stringently selected fibroblast samples and gene set, topology remains evident in the gene expression profile. although chang and co-workers have found that hox gene signatures account for much of the topological gene classifier, our gene list lacked hox genes, implying that traces of topology remain encoded in other sets of transcripts. together with the results of chang et al., our work demonstrates substantial heterogeneity in gene expression in cultured fibroblasts that can be influenced by topology and, in the case of our unique fibroblast samples, ar signaling. we suspect that other signaling pathways, possibly including other steroid hormones or growth factors, can program lasting changes gene expression in fibroblasts. whether these differences in gene expression can influence development of associated tissues in vivo remains to be elucidated. regardless, our data suggests one possible model system for teasing out the effects of mutations in single genes on global gene expression patterns in cells cultured from in vivo models.

the biological processes and the cellular pathways enriched in the ar-dependent gene set could provide some insights into the role of ar-mediated programming of fibroblasts in male and female external genital differentiation. for instance, activation of several growth signaling pathways in male derived fibroblasts and wnt signaling pathways in female genital fibroblasts, e.g., fzd <dig> , might signal their important roles in genital development. the same could be true for genes contributing to maintenance and modification of tissue shape and structural identity, e.g., versican, tenascin, and adam <dig> . it is unclear, however, whether expression of these genes in cultured fibroblasts reflects their expression in vivo, whether expression is necessary for maintenance of external genital structure, or whether these pathways are reactivated as a result of cell culture. moreover, it cannot be excluded that potentially higher cumulative estrogens during development and postnatal life in the ais patients until the time of genital skin biopsy may have had additional influences on gene expression. it is possible that the gene expression programs have little to do with genital development; however, the finding that many genes related to cell and tissue structure and integrity is tantalizing. we identified many genes of the cytoskeletal network  and of the surrounding extracellular matrix  in the ar-dependent gene expression data set  <cit> . additional in vivo work including strategies comprising early embryonal urogenital tissues will clarify whether genes identified using our approach are important in external genital morphogenesis.

CONCLUSIONS
our data demonstrate the existence of large-scale ar-dependent gene expression programs in fibroblasts cultured from human external genitalia. these programs are influenced neither by differences in sex chromosomes nor by the topographic differences between the genital tubercle and the labioscrotal swellings. improved classification of individuals with partial and complete androgen insensitivity syndrome with this gene list compared to a set we had identified previously suggests that androgen programming must have played a key role in establishing these programs. therefore, the detected genes represent valuable targets for unraveling human external genital differentiation and the role of androgen therein.

