BACKGROUND
various cell phenotypes and functions within multi-cellular organisms relate directly to genetic contents decoded from dna and rna during transcriptional and translational processes. inference of gene regulatory networks or maps for those intercellular processes plays significant roles in the further comprehension of underlying regulatory mechanisms. thus reconstructing such biological regulatory networks directly from gene profile datasets measured at different cell phases, types and even species becomes one of the foremost research topics recently.

due to capabilities of simultaneous measurement for multiple expression profiles with gradually increasing accuracy and decreasing costs of experiments, those advances in high-throughput microarray and chip assays techniques facilitate the corresponding learning and inference of the regulatory maps and even functionality of these genetic networks. during the past decades, manifold inference and learning methods have been proposed to integrate raw data to computational frameworks for network models, such as  boolean network and  bayesian network, systematic differential/difference equations  <cit> , information theory-based modelling  <cit> , graph and control theoretic approaches  <cit> .

furthermore, most of current biochemical networks are regarded as static descriptions of the inherent regulatory mechanisms in the sense that once the system models and parameters for those genetic networks are set, the regulatory processes are determined. while during genetic transcriptional and translational processes, real-world regulatory maps may undergo various perturbations from intercellular and intracellular signals and undiscovered factors. from this perspective, a single modelling mode may not be sufficient to characterize all kinds of possible structures of these networks, or even crucial ones for specific analysis purposes. the problems above solicit flexible mechanism designs to improve the present rigid methods for network inference.

within the following parts, we propose an integrative supervised learning method for the inference of time-delayed cell cycle regulatory mechanism based on information and signal processing theories. we firstly introduce definitions for those crucial concepts as correlation measure and mutual information; then we propose a novel associative quantity for the two kinds of dependency measures. with the proposed integrative metric and the p-values from the pearson correlation operations on all pairwise genes from the raw data pool, we may determine the dependency and connectivity among those pairwise candidates. such kind of integrative dependency metric improves the performance of above one-fold linear or nonlinear criterion since multiple-criteria may perform cross validation functions for measuring dependency within the test results.

moreover, from signal processing theory  <cit> , a phase-shift metric is introduced for measuring time delay of gene expression within pairwise candidates. the advantages of such a phase-shift metric lie in its flexible characteristics of determining the regulatory delay variation via dynamic thresholds of relevant transfer gains between pairwise candidates. since factual regulatory mechanisms possess multiple possibilities during biological processes and underlying regulatory delay effects may vary in the context of related courses. the phase-shift metric elucidates such possibilities underlying the regulatory mechanisms quantitatively via dynamic threshold of transfer gains.

the other advantage of the method includes its inherent capabilities of integrating existing biological knowledge as a priori. this kind of knowledge-based inference method avoids redundant false-positive connectivity within pairwise gene candidates. moreover, dynamic threshold for transfer gain facilitates its potential applicability to the majority of problems facing theoretic and experimental biologists. since regulatory connectivity underlying pairwise gene candidates may differ from each other at various tissues and sampling times, quantitative determination of these regulations with existing empirical and theoretical knowledge will act as much more effective roles, compared to most of current simplex computational approaches.

RESULTS
the supervised learning framework mainly covers two aspects, namely, it should characterize pairwise regulatory strengths and constrain subsequent computational redundancy. we utilize the proposed method for two real-world datasets, selected from the stanford microarray database. the both datasets are of different statistical characteristics, normalized and benchmarked in the recent literatures  <cit> .

analysis on the saccharomyces cerevisiae cell cycle microarray dataset
the first saccharomyces cerevisiae cell cycle microarray dataset was measured through the regulatory responses under the elutriation treatment, available at the stanford microarray database. the dataset has been benchmarked in the literature  <cit> . the log2-normalized expression profile of  <dig> genes from the regulatory network is plotted in the following figure  <dig> 

based on the definitions and concepts illustrated in the methodology part, we calculated the mutual information, correlation and p-values among pairwise genes for constructing regulatory activities. the mutual information matrix, correlation and corresponding p-values are given in the additional figure 1-a in additional file  <dig> and additional figure 1-b in additional file  <dig> 

as depicted in the lower sub-graph of the additional figure 1-b in additional file  <dig>  there are more than  <dig> pairs with their p-values not greater than  <dig>  , commonly adopted in most research fields. therefore around 60% or  <dig> hypothetic reaction edges are redundant and may be reduced for the further reconstruction of the regulatory network, and thus in this map, on average, every gene has direct or indirect relations with  <dig> to  <dig> other genes. the phenomena conform to the generally recognized viewpoints that most biochemical regulatory networks are sparsely constructed.

thus through dynamic thresholding of mutual information and correlation coefficient, we obtain the global distributions for three pair groups under dynamic metrics. the distributions for the classified pair groups are illustrated in figure  <dig>  

the supervised inference procedure starts from the respective centroids, i.e.  <dig>  and  <dig>  for mutual information and correlation coefficient. actually, from the heat maps illustrated in figure  <dig>  we may find the proximately-diagonal symmetries of the variations between mutual information and correlation coefficient, especially for the group apgs. such interesting phenomena facilitate detecting suitable initial thresholds and optimal iteration tracks.

also with the acquired knowledge, e.g. the genetic networks are sparsely constructed and their topologies normally follow the ‘small-world’ properties, the interactive computations halt at  <dig>  for mutual information and  <dig>  for correlation thresholds. at the terminated thresholds, the apgs, qpgs and upgs groups have  <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> candidates respectively.

thus, we might calculate the global phase-shift statistics for the apgs group, based on the signal processing theory defined in the methodology section. figure  <dig> illustrates the calculated global phase-shift statistics. the details of the statistics for the gene pairs in the apgs group are given in the additional figure 3-a in additional file  <dig> 

for this case, the gain threshold is set at  <dig> , see the additional figure 3-a in additional file  <dig>   the centroids for the mutual information and correlation coefficients within total available pairs are  <dig>  and  <dig>  respectively. the whole searching for optimal solutions stops with the mutual information , correlation coefficient  and p-value . thus we get valid links and concrete regulatory directions at the current conditions. figure  <dig> illustrates the reconstructed regulatory network.

as depicted, only the gene # <dig>  is isolated from the network structure, meaning that ydl056w might belong to other regulatory processes at the current situation. besides, the gene # <dig>  only has a single regulatory link, similar to the genes # <dig>  and # <dig> . while for such genes as # <dig> , # <dig> , # <dig> , etc., they have multiple regulatory links, indicating they undertake much more responsibilities during the underlying interaction and regulation processes.

since the above analysis is for the case of normal statistical characteristics, one may directly utilize the proposed methods. within the following part, we discuss another kind of microarray dataset of different statistical properties.

analysis on the dataset from a p <dig> pathway with multiple feedback loops
the profile dataset of the p <dig> pathway with multiple feedback loops is selected from the recent work  <cit> , concerning human leukaemia cell lines  with the functional protein p <dig>  the triplicate motl <dig> microarray experiments are implemented under irradiation from  <dig> to  <dig> hours at intervals of  <dig> hours, depicted in figure  <dig>  the additional figure 5-a in additional file  <dig> and additional figure 5-b in additional file  <dig> illustrate related mutual information matrix and correlation statistics of total gene pairs for the p <dig> pathway.

however, this kind of dataset does not satisfy the above network-constructing algorithm since there are only  <dig> pair candidates with their p-values below  <dig>  , see the additional figure 5-b in additional file  <dig>  therefore, it is impossible to construct a genetic network of  <dig> genes with just  <dig> suitable candidate links under the current situation. thus, before utilizing the pghc algorithm, it is necessary to modify the p-value threshold.

as the former case, 40%~45% of the total pairs as suitable candidates are needed for constructing genetic networks, then we lift the threshold higher enough, and derive necessary suitable pair candidates for composing the group apgs via the proposed pghc algorithm. for this case, we lift the p-value threshold to  <dig>  or so, and obtain the global statistical distribution for three groups through dynamic threshold of mutual information and correlation coefficient. the distribution plots for the classified pair groups are illustrated in figure  <dig> 

thus, we might calculate the global phase-shift statistics for the apgs group, based on the signal processing concepts defined in the methodology section. the calculated global phase-shift details are given in figure  <dig>  the additional figure 7-a illustrates the details of the statistics for the gene pairs in the apgs group.

within the following network-building procedure, we still choose the corresponding centroids of both metrics as the initial points for the iterative computation. the centroids for the mutual information and correlation coefficients for the totally available pairs are  <dig>  and  <dig>  respectively.

the searching for optimal solutions stops when the mutual information threshold backtracks to  <dig>  and the correlation coefficient takes  <dig>  and the p-value adopts  <dig>  for the whole iterative procedure. to testify the significance of gain to network topological structures, the gain thresholds take  <dig>  and  <dig> respectively. thus, we may derive valid links and concrete regulatory directions at the two gain thresholds from the additional figure 7-a in additional file  <dig>  and the reconstructed regulatory networks are plotted in figure  <dig> and the additional figure 8-a in additional file  <dig>  the detailed information for the related links within the apgs group is given in additional figure 8-b in additional file  <dig> 

discussion
the comparison with the currently-available inference methods
currently, there exist several inference approaches for the biochemical networks, e.g. probabilistic approaches, equation-based methods, etc. as depicted within the context, the proposed method tackles such key inference issues for integrating previously-acquired biological knowledge as a priori via dynamic threshold of multi-source information. thus compared with most computation-oriented methods, the proposed inference framework ameliorates inference accuracy and experimental achievements within a problem-oriented scheme.

secondly, the proposed method tackles one of most important problems from the perspective of signal processing theory, namely, the determination of regulatory directions between candidate gene pairs. the introduced metrics quantify those underlying regulatory strengths, directions between pair candidates globally and comparatively. thus, it facilitates the follow-up network-rebuilding procedure.

moreover, the proposed inference framework might illustrate in parallel multiple optimal or suboptimal potential regulatory maps, instead of the one computational solution for one problem scheme, since for most cases such solutions cannot explain convincingly so much inherent mechanism as expected. the proposed method might utilize the diverse knowledge available, either from concrete biochemical experiments or current literatures.

the current focuses of the proposed method and its future directions
although the proposed inference framework is validated with the real-world profile datasets, there are still several directions needing further refinement, depicted within the below section.

in practice, most available profile datasets are of high dimensions, particularly as those kinds of less-point and multi-sample profiles, together with unavoidable measurement noises, etc. thus, any suitable pre-processing is demanded for the kinds of subjects before further analysis. the indispensable pre-processing covers de-noise treatments, functional and hierarchical clustering and so forth, before the next-stage network reconstruction.

the second concern mainly relates to the biologically-functional analysis on relative network modules and motifs by quantitative means. the proposed framework deciphers genetic regulatory activities with a rich-information mode. thus, the inference results and related information between pairwise candidates have the potentials for those applications as succeeding identification of biological modules and motifs of particular interests.

the third focus might go to topological properties of inferred regulatory networks. quantitative analysis and comparison between diverse constructed topologies might reveal inherent coordination and organization mechanisms, which thus have potential applications in, to name a few, identifying target genes, and novel drug discovery, particularly for those subjects in computational systems biology.

CONCLUSIONS
within the work, we propose a combinatorial theory-based learning pattern for the inference and analysis of genetic networks from microarray time-series datasets.

for different kinds of microarray datasets gathered from multiple organisms and species, there still does not exist such an efficient solution applicable to most of current problems facing biological theoreticians and experimentalists. in consideration of previously-acquired knowledge, decision-makers’ preferences and practical constraints, the network inference might be transformed into a kind of multi-objective combinatorial optimization  problem.

compared with currently available methods for inferring biochemical networks  <cit> , the proposed approach renders the possibilities for biologists to incorporate concrete theoretic and empirical knowledge, and thus to construct regulatory networks with much more reliabilities and accuracy. secondly, different regulatory models should focus on specific perspectives and utilities adopted by the builders, thus the inherent complexity from the inference procedures and the necessity to optimize those results appeal such a kind of associative relevance metrics and multiobjective combinatorial optimization method.

to include specific nodes into or exclude them from reconstructed networks with sufficient confidence and previously-acquired knowledge, there exists several design approaches for such purposes within the proposed framework. within the work, we decipher the underlying design mechanisms of pairwise connectivity via dynamic threshold of linear/nonlinear relevance metrics, i.e. mutual information, correlation coefficient, and p-value; and determine regulatory orientations among genetic networks with signal processing metrics, i.e. phase shift and transfer gain.

with the inference procedure being transposed into a kind of moco problem, we might constrain the multiobjective iterative searching problems with reasonable terms from acquired knowledge, experimental conditions, and other computational considerations or decision-makers’ preferences.

we utilize the proposed method in analyzing two microarray datasets with different statistical characteristics. thus by quantitative means, we reveal the inherent design mechanisms for genetic networks, facilitating the further theoretic analysis and experimental design with diverse biochemical aims.

for the sake of simplicity, we testify the proposed approach on a few small-scale datasets; different clustering and classification methods are beneficial and necessary as pre-process purposes on some large-scale, say more than hundreds or thousands of gene/proteins within those kinds of datasets.

