BACKGROUND
conformational resemblance between proteins, whether remote or close, is often used to infer functional properties of proteins and to reveal distant evolutionary relationships between two proteins exhibiting no similarity in their amino acid sequences. traditionally, high-resolution structure determination succeeds the biological and biochemical studies of proteins to further provide mechanistic details of the function of proteins. the biological function of these proteins have usually been suggested prior to their structural studies by in vitro binding assays, in vivo gene knock-out experiments, and sequence homology with proteins of known function. however, with the completion of the sequencing of the genomes of human and other organisms, major structural biology resources have been harnessed to solve structures of large numbers of proteins encoded by the genomes in a high throughput but less specific fashion, under the name 'structural genomics'  <cit> . subsequently, large sets of protein structures are accumulated in the public domain databases for which we know little about their biological roles. this shortfall calls for the development of cost-effective computational methods to predict protein function based on three-dimensional structures, with the aim of providing preliminary information to guide biological experiments later.

in the post-genomic era, large amounts of new protein sequences are available for statistics-based recognition of their biological properties. it has been shown in many cases that with the help of elegant computational algorithms, amino acid sequence information alone can be used to successfully predict a protein's structural class  <cit> , sub-cellular location  <cit> , and even enzymatic activities  <cit> . these approaches, however, are often limited by sequence noise arose from natural mutations throughout the evolutionary path, in which proteins are structurally and functionally conserved, but divergent in amino acid sequences. it is a recurring theme in structural biology that proteins with completely different sequences can adopt very similar global fold. hence, incorporating structural information into functional genomics would potentially upgrade predictions to the next level of accuracy. owing to the rapid technical advances in x-ray crystallography and liquid-state nmr spectroscopy, protein structure determination becomes more routine than before. it is reasonable to predict that full-scale structure determination can be the first step towards characterizing the biological role and mechanism of a newly sequenced protein. in the  <dig> -large protein structure database , there are only approximately  <dig>  different folds represented in the pdb, with a fold/structure ratio of approximately 1/ <dig>   <cit> . therefore, given a new protein structure determined experimentally, chances are high that its topological arrangement of secondary fragments already exists in pdb either as an individual protein, or as a domain within a larger protein.

structure comparison is traditionally based on coordinate rmsd  <cit> . while the rmsd approach is effective in comparing two close topologic structures with similar chain length, it fails when proteins are of different shapes or lengths. one outstanding example is calmodulin, a ubiquitous ca2+ binding protein that plays a key role in numerous cellular ca2+-dependent signaling pathways  <cit> . the backbone rmsd between the ca2+-bound and apo states of individual calmodulin domain  is as large as 4Å, despite the fact that they are the same molecules with the same topology. when using the ca2+-bound structure as a starting model, a homology based nmr residual dipolar coupling  refinement scheme, which relies heavily on the model having the correct topology, is able to converge the model to an accurate apo structure using rdcs measured for the apo state  <cit> . there are numerous proteins with similar secondary element arrangements in the 3d space yet acquire different overall shapes. clearly for these proteins, algorithms different from the rmsd must be used to reveal their topological similarities. another well-known software called matching molecular models obtained from theory  is a sequence-independent protein structural alignment method  <cit> . it compares an experimental protein structure using an arbitrary low-resolution protein tertiary model. the distance defined in mammoth is quite different from our approach. there are also many other methods of protein structure comparison, such as  <cit> . note that all of the aforementioned methods used sequence based comparison. in contrast, our method adopts secondary structure based comparison and focuses on extracting invariant topological features.

in our study, we measure structural similarity between proteins by correlating the principle components of their secondary structure interaction matrix. in this method, referred here as the principle component correlation  analysis, the symmetric matrix for an individual protein is constructed with relationship parameters between secondary elements that can take the form of distance, orientation, or other relevant structural invariants. it is first demonstrated that the maximum eigenvalues of these interaction matrices can be effectively used to group structurally or topologically homologous proteins. then by taking into account both maximum eigenvalues and their corresponding eigenvectors, a more refined pair-wise structure comparison is performed, which is able to differentiate structures of similar shape but different topological backbone traces. it is also shown that the results of pcc analysis are highly comparable to those given by the scaled gauss metric  calculations  <cit>  for the data sets studied. we believe the ppc method is flexible in adopting various structural parameters for pair-wise structure comparison.

RESULTS
materials
a total of fifty-six protein structures, grouped into  <dig> different sets according to cath  <cit>  are used to test our algorithms. proteins in structure set i belong to the "mainly alpha" class, including mostly apoptosis regulators in the bcl-xl super family as well as others with remote conformational resemblance; all have the "orthogonal bundle" architecture. the atomic coordinates were retrieved from pdb with accession codes 1a4f, 1a6g, 1col , 1ddb , 1f <dig> , 1g5m , 1gjh , 1maz, 1mdt , and 2bid , where  means chain a. set ii is also "mainly alpha" and has the same architecture as set i, including structures 1ck <dig> , 1cxw , 1e8b , 1e <dig> , 1j7m , 1ks <dig> , 1pdc, and 2fn <dig>  however this set consists of dna helicase domains that have vastly different topology from set i. set ii is used here to test the ability of our method to separate proteins that are in the same class of secondary structure but have different topologies. set iii belongs to the "mainly beta" class and has the barrel architecture, consisting of acid protease structures 1a5t, 1bvs , 1cuk, 1dv , 1f4i , 1g4a , 1g <dig> , 1hjp, 1im <dig> , and 1jr <dig> . set iv consists of the "alpha/beta" class proteins with the roll architecture, including structures 1fm <dig> , 1d4b , 1c <dig> , 1lm <dig> , 1ndd , 1ubq, 1ibq , and 1ip <dig> . the structures in set iv all have the ubiquitin-like topology. set v consists of the "mainly alpha" with the alpha/alpha barrel architecture, including 1c <dig> , 1cb <dig> , 1egu , 1f1s , 1f9g , 1hm <dig> , 1hm <dig> , 1hmu , 1hmw , 1hv <dig> , 1i8q , and 1qaz . the structures in set v all have the glycosyltransferase topology. set vi consists of the "mainly beta" with the ribbon architecture, including 1aiw, 1e6n , 1e6p , 1e6r , 1e6z , 1e <dig> , 1ed <dig> , and 1goi . the structures in set vi have the seminal fluid protein pdc- <dig> .

clustering of structurally similar proteins by smec method
one of the goals of this study is to compare and identify structurally or topologically similar proteins. in other words, given a new experimentally determined protein structure, the proposed method is expected to rapidly place the structure into a group of structurally or topologically similar proteins in the database, thereby aiding in correlating topological similarity with functional similarity. to illustrate the application of the smec approach, we compute the scaled eigenvalues of pd and pid interaction matrices . figure 2a shows the plot of scaled λ <dig> versus λ <dig>  calculated using the pd matrix, for all proteins in the four data sets. figure 2b shows the plot of λ <dig> of pid matrix versus that of pd matrices. the different symbols represent different structural groups. these plots were used to resolve clusters of structurally similar structures.

pair-wise structural comparison by pcc method
in addition to correlating the maximum eigenvalues, the pcc method described in section methods, which compares both eigenvalues and eigenvectors, was tested for the four selected data sets. using the pair-wise distance matrix defined in section methods, the difference metric r defined in eq.  <dig> between all pairs of protein structures in the four data sets were calculated and shown in tables 1- <dig>  additionally for the same data sets, writhing numbers computed using the sgm method were presented in the same corresponding tables. the r values between a few selected proteins from different groups were also shown to provide a negative control .

discussion
the concept of principle component analysis  is widely used in mathematics and pattern recognition to simplify a data set. in mathematical terms, it is a transform that chooses a new coordinate system for the data set, such that the greatest variance by any projection of the data set comes to lie on the first axis , the second greatest variance on the second axis, and so on. because of the large amount of information stored along the first axis, the maximum eigenvalue itself can be characteristic enough to represent structural features of a protein. figure 2a plots eigenvalues λ <dig> versus λ <dig> derived from the pd matrices of all four sets of structures under study. clearly λ <dig> values alone are distinct enough from each other for grouping most of the structures into their known conformation sets. the same plot also illustrates that the second largest eigenvalue λ <dig> is generally not powerful enough to accomplish the grouping. it is therefore expected that smaller components of interaction matrices are not effective for this purpose. similarly, when using the first number computed with the sgm algorithm, the four structure sets can be resolved .

in addition to the pd matrix, pid matrix defined above was used to provide further separation between clusters of eigenvalues. this was demonstrated in fig. 2b, in which the plot of λ <dig> of pid matrices versus that of pd matrices achieves a much better grouping of the four structural sets in the vertical dimension as compared to the plot in fig. 2a. this further emphasizes the importance of the maximum eigenvalues and variations in the definition of the interaction matrix that provides independent structural information. it does not escape our notice that even better resolution can be achieved by correlating λ <dig> with three or more different types of interaction matrices in a multi-dimensional plot. the caveat, however, is that definitions of invariant relation constructing the matrices should not be redundant as there are a limited number of independent invariants in a protein structure. nevertheless, the results here show that the pca method using secondary interaction matrix is highly flexible in adopting various structural parameters as a means of structure comparison. we also investigate how much the first eigenvalue captures the eigenvalue spectrum in the bcl-xl family. we found that the first eigenvalue captures  <dig> % of the sum of the  <dig> eigenvalues. that indicates that more eigenvalues could be helpful in protein structure classification in our future work.

a more elaborate method built on pca is explored in this study to utilize the directional information contained in the eigenvector corresponding to λ <dig>  named here as the pcc analysis as described in section methods. this method is particularly suited for the pair-wise structural comparison. using the simple pd matrix definition , the pair-wise difference metrics, r, are all small  within each of the four known structural sets –). the sgm score in figure  <dig> is defined as the absolute difference between the sgm values of two proteins. the symbol 'o' denotes that the r score is smaller than sgm score, and the '*' denotes the r score is bigger than sgm score. furthermore, as a negative control, r values between structures from different sets are much larger, typically greater than  <dig>  ). based on the r values in table  <dig> and figure 5– , we found empirically that by setting the cutoff r value to  <dig> , the pcc method can faithfully place all structures in their designated groups.

to provide a more in-depth view of the pcc method, the analysis of data set i is described here in detail. this set consists of mainly α helical structures having the "orthogonal bundle" architecture. proteins 2bid, 1f <dig>  1g5m, 1gjh, 1maz, and 1ddb are apoptosis regulators of cell-death pathways associated with mitochondrion. since mitochondria originated from prokaryotes, these proteins are believed to have evolved from the same ancient design. although they differ substantially in amino acid sequence as well as in shape, the overall scaffold and topology are similar. as expected, the r values among them are all less than  <dig>  . other proteins in this set, including bacterial toxins that are capable of forming membrane pores  and myoglobin , have remote conformational resemblance with the bcl-xl proteins. the r values between these structures and the apoptosis regulators are also less than  <dig>  and are comparable to those found within the bcl-xl family. it is interesting to note that although 1mdt and 1col are not related to the bcl-xl proteins in terms of physiological roles, they do share a similarity with the bcl-xl members other than topology; that is, they all are able to form large pores when inserted into cellular membrane.

in summing the results of table  <dig> and figure 5–, the r values within individual sets are on average very small, with a mean of  <dig>  and standard deviation of  <dig> . this is expected because the structures have been manually examined and pre-grouped into topologically similar sets. the comparison results from pcc analyses are generally comparable to that of sgm for the data sets under study –). however, in a few isolated cases, the difference in the scaled writhing numbers within the same structure set can exceed the threshold of  <dig>  that governs similarity ,  in table  <dig>  and protein pairs , , and  in figure  <dig>  this is because the pcc analysis using the pd matrix emphasizes more on spatial separation and orientation of secondary segments. it must be mentioned that the pd matrix alone is not expected to detect pure topological similarities. the results for structure sets with predominately β strands and mixed α/β proteins show similar r values  and 5), indicating the generality of this method in protein structure comparison. we also tested these six data sets using mammoth, it can also separate the six classes well.

another variation of the pd matrix definition is to take into account the n – c terminal sense, in attempt to further emphasize protein topological features. a good example is the comparison between structures 1col and 1ddb in data set i. a visual examination of the two structures reveals that they share similar shape, but are considerably different in topological arrangement of helices  <dig> and  <dig>  in protein 1col, the first and third helices are anti-parallel, whereas they are parallel in 1ddb . this is not identified by the pcc analysis using the pd matrix as r =  <dig> . the great similarity in shape prevailed in the comparison. however, by applying the pds matrix defined in section methods, the r-value considerably increases to  <dig> , clearly highlighting the difference in backbone topological traces. finally we also would like to pint out that the definition of r could be improved by introducing more eigenvalues.

CONCLUSIONS
pcc analysis of secondary interaction matrix is a conceptually simple method that yields results highly comparable to the sgm method. both are able to distinguish protein conformations based on the more subtle topological features. while the sgm method compares structures in a more topological sense, the outcome of pcc analysis is more dependent on the definition of the interaction matrix. with the pd matrix, the pcc analysis puts more weight on the detailed structure and shape, while it is also capable, to a certain extent, of distinguishing different topological traces. in certain cases of pair-wise comparison, such as that between 1col and 1ddb, protein shapes can overwhelm their topological features in the analysis; yet the pcc analysis of the pds matrix is able to completely differentiate between 1col and 1ddb. owing to the flexibility offered by the new method, a more effective definition of interaction matrix can be explored to provide a more efficient structure comparison. there exist many invariants in each protein. some invariants are important for protein classification, but some are not. hence, our future work will further explore feature selection, automated classification of pdb, modeling and statistical learning, as well as protein domain matching.

