BACKGROUND
the mediterranean fruit fly, ceratitis capitata  is a polyphagous insect of great economic importance. native to africa, this fly is now distributed worldwide, with established populations in southern europe, the mediterranean region, africa, australia and some south american countries  <cit> . c. capitata was introduced to hawaii in  <dig> and considered established by  <dig>  <cit> . it represents a major and ongoing threat to the continental united states, particularly in the agriculturally rich regions of florida and california. each year, detections of c. capitata are made, and efforts are ongoing to eliminate invasive populations in order to prevent further establishment and spread in the mainland. for example, each week, over  <dig> million sterile male mass reared flies are released in california to disrupt establishment of invasive populations. despite this effort, a recent analysis of historical capture patterns suggested that c. capitata, along with other tephritid pests, is already established in california  <cit> . establishment of c. capitata in areas despite mass reared sterile males release suggests a weakness or failure of this approach, possibly rooted in the quality of the mass reared flies.

the sterile insect technique  is a very important and useful tool for the control of the mediterranean fruit fly. it makes use of laboratory reared sterile males which are released in large numbers to compete with wild invasive males for fertilizing females. in rearing flies for sit programs, the presence of females in release colonies is undesirable as it reduces the number of males that can be reared from a set amount of diet. additionally, release of female flies along with sterile males would confound the sit approach through additional fruit damage caused by oviposition, and through competition with wild females for mating with the sterilized male flies  <cit> . for these reasons, to improve the efficiency and reduce the cost of sit implementation, several genetic sexing strains  were developed that allow for the selection or elimination of females early in the rearing process. gss traits include pupal color, differential development time, and temperature sensitivity  <cit> . current gss systems in c. capitata are based on a translocation that links the selectable trait with the y sex chromosome. among these gss, the temperature sensitive lethal mutants  allow for the elimination of female eggs through incubation at elevated temperature. the tsl trait is often linked with a white pupal trait , which allows for straightforward visual confirmation of presence of the trait during the pupal stage. mutants carrying these traits have been developed by researchers at the international atomic energy agency in vienna austria  and thus the c. capitata tsl strains are named “vienna”; several independent lines have been developed from independent transformation events, with newer lines attempting to reduce trait breakdown by creating breakpoints closer to the sexing traits   <cit> .

an important factor that determines the success of sit is the competitiveness of the mass-reared sterile males with the wild males. sterilization of males is achieved by gamma-irradiation in doses up to 145 gy . irradiated males are known to be at a mating disadvantage in terms of attractiveness to wild females, courtship behavior, or acceptance of the courtship by females  <cit> . the process of irradiating flies may not only render fly males sterile, but ionizing radiation may potentially cause multiple unknown mutations in the genome. additional disadvantages in fly quality can arise from long term inbreeding of colonies reared on highly artificial environments  <cit> . insects growing in captivity for several generations would likely adapt to confinement conditions and experience inbreeding depression through changes in the frequencies and allele state of mutations present in the population, reducing the genetic diversity and fitness in the wild  <cit> . other factors such as shipping to the target program location and handling of irradiated pupae may also reduce the quality of flies.

together, these factors bring to question the overall efficiency of mass-reared sit flies, and demonstrate the importance of investigating differences between mass reared flies and their wild counterparts from alternative perspectives. by cataloguing and quantitatively assessing these differences at the genome and transcriptome levels, measurable change can be determined, helping to understand why mass reared flies may be outperformed in the wild. in the present work the transcriptome of c. capitata was constructed from adult and pupal males, and the transcript expression profiles were compared between a wild c. capitata strain found in hawaii and the mass-reared gss vienna- <dig> utilized in the mediterranean fruit fly exclusion program by the california department of food and agriculture , reared in their facility in waimanalo, hawaii. analyses were done with the aim of providing a basic landscape of c. capitata transcriptome, as well as to shed light on the effects of long term mass rearing of the vienna- <dig> line, as well as effects of gamma-irradiation. the hypothesis is that through long-term mass rearing, selection, and irradiation, there will be consistent changes in expression patterns in vienna- <dig> derived flies that are indicative of reduced quality of these flies when compared to their wild counterparts. overall, comparative analysis of expression and genetic changes that arise through mass rearing will provide insight into developing more competitive mass reared flies in sit programs.

RESULTS
sequencing and quality filtering
for rna-seq analysis, approximately  <dig> million paired 76 bp reads were obtained from illumina hiseq  <dig> sequencing, totaling over  <dig> gb of data . these reads were evenly distributed between all of the libraries sequenced. all raw reads were submitted to the ncbi sequence read archive under accession numbers samn <dig> – samn <dig> associated with bioproject prjna <dig>  from  <dig> , <dig> raw read pairs, filtering and normalization reduced the read abundance to  <dig> , <dig>  reads used as input into the trinity assembly, greatly reducing the computational requirements for assembly and avoiding complicating de bruijn graphs with low quality or overabundant sequences.

de novo transcriptome assembly, assembly filtering and gene prediction
the raw assembly of the c. capitata transcriptome was constructed using the trinity assembly pipeline with all filtered reads from all eighteen libraries pooled into one dataset. this assembly yielded  <dig>  contigs, with an n <dig> contig size of  <dig>  bases,  <dig>  contigs greater than 1000 bp, and a transcript sum of  <dig>  mb. while not all contigs produced by trinity were likely to represent true transcripts in c. capitata, this contig set was used as a starting point for defining the transcriptome present in our sample. filtering based off of read abundance and component isoform percentage removed  <dig>  sequences, leaving  <dig>  remaining. further filtering through identification of likely coding sequence based on orf prediction identified a total of  <dig>  transcripts across  <dig>  unigenes, with an n <dig> transcript size of  <dig>  bp and transcript sum of  <dig>  mb. this filtered assembly is considered a high quality transcript set, and was used for downstream analysis.

gene annotation
transcripts and genes identified in the final filtered assembly were annotated using public databases as described in methods. more than 90% of the translated transcripts had homologs in the uniprot database  . the resulting annotated transcript sequences were submitted to ncbi as transcriptome shotgun assembly sub <dig>  under bioproject .

pfam abundance
from the  <dig>  unigenes identified in the assembly,  <dig>  had a pfam annotation based on translated sequence. these annotated genes belonged to one of  <dig>  unique pfam families. forty six percent of these families could be placed into a pfam clan, for a total of  <dig> unique pfam clans. the abundance of tmm normalized reads on each protein family was calculated to assess the global transcriptome composition . the protein family most abundant across unigenes was pf <dig> , followed by pf <dig> . the protein family with the highest read counts was pf <dig>  annotated as chitin-binding proteins, representing structural proteins likely part of the insect cuticle; this family was over-represented in all pupae libraries of vienna- <dig> and wild type. interestingly, the second and fifth protein families with the highest read abundance corresponded to viral sequences: pf <dig> , and pf <dig> . these viral-related families showed very high counts in the vienna- <dig> libraries as opposed to the wild type flies, making for up to 43% of the normalized counts in one of the irradiated libraries.

to better visualize the protein family makeup of the c. capitata transcriptome, the two top viral protein families were removed to overcome expression bias due to viral infection. also, a family of peptidases  with the sixth most abundant count numbers was removed as 98% of the counts were derived from a single library, clearly representing an outlier of a single replication. the absolute abundance of each of the top  <dig> pfams is shown in figure  <dig> together with the total of normalized counts for that family across all the libraries. the pbp_gobp , a family of olfactory receptors was the second most abundant family after chitin-binding proteins.

a cluster based on spearman rank-based correlation coefficients was created to group similarly expressed protein families . the heatmap representing the clustering showed marked grouped differences between the wild hawaiian colony and vienna- <dig>  differences between adults and pupae were also visible and perhaps more abundant, these subclusters are shown in figure  <dig>  derived subclusters with pfam annotations are presented in additional file 2: figure s <dig> and additional file 3: figure s <dig>  figures  <dig> and  <dig>  a second clustering was run using only untreated flies from both the artificially reared colony and the wild hawaiian population at either adult or pupal stage. these clusters show that at least 50% of the protein family composition differs in abundance between both types of flies at both stages tested . finally, irradiated and non-irradiated fly libraries  were clustered together, using the same algorithm; most of the segregation was observed between the growing stages, while differences between irradiated and non-irradiated samples were minimal and mostly concentrated in the pupal stage . in addition, in this last clustering, we observed that the differences in protein family abundance between irradiated and non-irradiated samples were inconsistent across replication, pointing to the randomness of the irradiation effects on the genome.

differential gene expression
fold change
a statistically based measurement is necessary to identify the most potentially differentially regulated genes between repeated sequenced mrna libraries. the overall differences between the two types of flies , between adults and pupae, and between irradiated and non-irradiated flies from the vienna- <dig> colony were tested. for these three effects a total of  <dig>  unigenes were identified as statistically differentially regulated in at least one of the comparisons . not surprisingly, the comparison between adults and pupae yielded the highest number of differentially regulated transcripts , followed by the comparison between the wild and vienna- <dig> . the comparison between irradiated and non-irradiated flies showed only  <dig> genes significantly differentially regulated. additionally, six independent pair wise comparisons between replicated libraries were tested ; each of these yielded a range of differentially expressed genes, varying from  <dig> genes  to over four thousand genes .

gene ontology term enrichment of differentially expressed genes
gene ontology  classification coupled with term enrichment analysis was used to group statistically differentially regulated genes by biological function allowing for a better understanding of the biological differences between the flies used in the experiment. the term enrichment results for the comparison between adults and pupae showed highly significant enrichment on up-regulated genes with terms related to primary metabolism, including amino acid, carbohydrate, lipid and general anabolism and catabolism processes . genes with down-regulation in the adults vs. pupae comparison  showed very high term enrichment in cell adhesion processes  and development including general anatomical, respiratory, and epithelium development . the top  <dig> up- and down- regulated go terms are shown in additional file 4: table s <dig> with their respective expected values and significance p-values.

the term enrichment for the comparison between flies from the translocated vienna- <dig> flies vs. wild-type flies showed an over-representation of nucleic acid processes in the artificially reared vienna- <dig>  also, terms related to viral life cycle were present in this group . signaling, sensory, and neurological-related processes were more abundant in the wild-type colony than in vienna- <dig>  . to better understand the differences between colonies, go term enrichment was also run on the list of significantly differentially regulated unigenes obtained from the separate pair wise comparison between vienna- <dig> pupae only and wild pupae only  and between vienna- <dig> adults only and wild adults only . vienna- <dig> pupae compared to wild pupae showed several stress-related terms with higher abundance in the vienna- <dig> flies, including response to cold , disease response , and oxidative stress -related terms . in addition, several viral-related terms were present, four of them in the top  <dig> most significant terms, with an additional “gene silencing” term . terms with less abundance in the vienna- <dig> pupae than in the wild corresponded to those in signaling and neurological processes  . comparing adults between both colonies showed more abundance of a vast amount of nucleic acid metabolism, dna replication and cell cycle-related terms in the vienna- <dig> colony . interestingly, the wild-type colony showed a distinctly high enrichment in terms related to response to light stimuli including phototransduction processes, rhodopsin signaling, detection of visible light and the like. a term related to perception of chemical stimulus was also found among the top highly significant go terms, suggesting impact on both the visual and olfaction systems. this last comparison also showed higher abundance of motility-related terms in the wild fly compared to vienna- <dig>  these terms including muscle cell differentiation, striated muscle cell development and differentiation, locomotion and motility .


up-regulated genes

down-regulated genes

up-regulated genes

down-regulated genes

up-regulated genes

down-regulated genes
the term enrichment for the overall comparison between irradiated and non-irradiated samples in the vienna- <dig> colony showed high significance for terms related to hormonal synthesis and related compounds in up-regulated genes , suggesting an increased activity of these pathways as a result of irradiation. on the other hand, genes with higher expression values in the non-irradiated samples resulted in a term enrichment of high significance for several viral-related terms  <dig> . because of our special interest in the effects of irradiation on the vienna- <dig> colony, the differential expression between irradiated and non-irradiated samples from adults and pupa were separated and the go term enrichment for these pairwise sample comparisons were analyzed. terms related to virus/transposon sequences were found enriched only in the down-regulated irradiated vs. non irradiated pupae dataset, suggesting that irradiation somehow affects the presence of virus or transposon mobility in the vienna- <dig> colony, but only when applied to pupae. additionally, two go terms related to reproduction were among the top  <dig> found down-regulated in pupae irradiated vs. non-irradiated flies , perhaps pointing to the desired sterilization results expected from the treatment . up-regulated terms in irradiated vs. non irradiated pupae samples were highly enriched for dna repair-related mechanism , suggesting dna damage . in adults, irradiation effects seemed to be very random, with biological processes affected ranging from ion transport to amino acids metabolism .

discussion
whole transcriptome analyses are of growing importance for the understanding of biological processes that take place in organisms of interest. we have generated a de novo transcriptome assembly of the pupal and adult stages of male mediterranean fruit fly, c. capitata, using paired-end rna-seq analysis. the assembly identified  <dig>  transcripts and  <dig>  unigenes which were annotated and used for a descriptive and comparative analysis of the mrna composition of hawaiian wild flies and mass reared gss vienna- <dig> flies at adult and pupae stages, before and after ionizing radiation treatment. with the data, we were able to delineate a general protein family-based composition of c. capitata, as well as identify specific genes and protein families present in specific libraries. in addition, we have built and made public extensive data obtained from the sequencing. this data can be used for generation of new hypotheses regarding different aspects on the biology of this important pest as well as a resource for developing assays for assessing the quality of mass reared flies.

differences between adults and pupae across both types of flies showed that several developmental processes were significantly overrepresented in pupae as compared to the adult. also, the four most significantly enriched go terms were related to cell adhesion, a process which is known to play a key role in development and tissue morphogenesis  <cit> . while these results are not surprising, they provide a means of verification on the quality of the experiment and the data analysis performed.

grouping absolute expression values by pfam and clustering the data, we noted considerable differences between the artificially reared colonies and the wild hawaiian flies. furthermore, by contrasting the vienna- <dig> with the hawaiian wild flies’ relative transcript levels and statistical significance, we have identified the presence of several viral-related sequences among the sequenced transcripts, which suggests the existence of a virus in the mass reared colony; this is supported by the occurrence of several stress-related transcripts. preliminary analyses showed that these sequences may belong to a picornavirus; however, it is possible that these transcripts are an indication of increased or activated transposon activity in the vienna- <dig> colony. that the possible presence of virus is detrimental for the quality of the reared colonies needs to be tested, as several endogenous viruses have been found in different strains of c. capitata and are commonly found in other fruit flies  <cit> . nonetheless, this is an interesting point to investigate and simple measures could be employed to monitor viral levels in mass reared colonies and measures put forth to reduce the impact of virus on fly quality. additionally, by comparing the vienna- <dig> colony to wild pupae and adults, the differential expression analyses showed marked down-regulation of signaling and neurological processes. in adults, two important sensory mechanisms were observed to be down-regulated in the vienna- <dig> flies: light response processes and chemoreception. a third marked difference was observed in genes related to muscle development, muscle differentiation and locomotion, which were also reduced in abundance in the vienna- <dig> colonies compared to the wild hawaiian flies. given the number and consistency of go terms in the above mentioned categories, we hypothesize that vienna- <dig> flies may have reduced fitness and competitiveness due to impaired response to light stimuli as a consequence of mass rearing in artificial conditions under low/artificial light, this impairment being reflected at the signaling  and neuronal levels . vienna- <dig> may also have reduced host and mate finding ability due to decreased chemical sensory development. in addition muscular development is diminished, reducing movement or flight ability in the flies as well as having potential impacts on longevity. as for irradiation effects, pfam abundance clustering demonstrated the marked randomness of the irradiation effects, while few genes may be consistently affected by the treatment. this is not to say that irradiation does not have a deleterious effect on the fly, just that expression level changes are not consistent between replicate treatments. the study showed high induction of statistically differentially regulated genes in go terms related to dna repair mechanisms, demonstrating the dna damage that occurs in the irradiated samples. single and double stranded dna damage caused by ionizing gamma radiation has been extensively reported in mammals  <cit> , and is very likely one of the effects in flies. the data also showed that irradiation may somehow affect the presence of virus in pupae. one possible explanation of this is that the proportion of the population that is virus infected is weaker than other flies, and thus do not survive the impact of irradiation. in general, we can conclude that long-term artificial rearing of flies, added to the effect of ionizing radiation, may affect several specific pathways and biological processes in the fly, all of which may translate into reduced quality of individuals released for sit.

CONCLUSIONS
the california department of food and agriculture  reports a weekly release of approximately  <dig>  sterile flies per square mile over more than  <dig>  square miles by the usda-cdfa mediterranean fruit fly exclusion program, at an annual cost of approximately  <dig> million dollars for preventive purposes . under that perspective, it is highly desirable that the released sterile flies are of the best possible quality and with a high rate of competitiveness in the field. the basic principles under which current sit methods are applied at this time  may limit its potential utility, and alternatives to sit or modifications to it should be considered. one such potential approach involves transgenesis, a concept already tested in c. capitata through the insertion of a tetracycline-repressible transactivator  <cit> , and in olive fly  with the use of a dominant, female-specific lethal genetic system  <cit> . another alternative is population replacement. this method has been widely studied in the control mosquito-borne diseases with insects carrying anti-pathogen genes and thus unable to transmit disease  <cit> . similar approaches could be utilized to produce only male progeny from mated females, and subsequent mating with these males will continue spreading this trait, effectively allowing the wild population to serve as the rearing mechanism. additionally, in population replacement approaches, repeated mass release of flies would not be required, and the trait is pushed through the population. those males carrying the trait are wild derived, and thus there is not expected to be a reduced fitness cost compared to flies derived from the wild population. as the international atomic energy agency has expressed its interest in developing alternatives to gamma irradiation used for sit programs  <cit> , recent advances in gene silencing through rnai methods should also be considered which could induce sterilization. these alternative approaches would have reduced impact on the quality of the fly as irradiation is not performed, which has been shown to impact courtship behavior. overall, the analysis presented here provides the foundation for beginning to evaluate mass reared flies at a genomic level, and to develop tools for better monitoring the quality of these flies over generations of colony production.

