BACKGROUND
analyses of gene co-expression that use measures of association, such as the pearson and spearman correlation coefficients, the squared pearson correlation coefficient , and mutual information, are ubiquitous in modern biology. these measures of association are the basis for the most widely used clustering techniques
 <cit> , and are also used for a diversity of network motif and inference algorithms .

they effectively highlight relationships between genes whose expression levels co-vary across a set of heterogeneous samples, and the results they produce are quite similar
 <cit> . and while newer approaches, such as the maximum information coefficient 
 <cit> , have been presented, their novelty relative to existing measures has been disputed
 <cit> .

the properties and similarities among current methods raise two related issues. first, there is a rapidly growing repertoire of transcriptome studies that each consist of large numbers of homogeneous samples, including single-cell rna-seq studies. is there an effective way to detect biological relationships from these expression data that will not depend heavily on sample heterogeneity? second, are there classes of relationships of potential biological importance that have been persistently missed or undervalued by the existing methods?

to address these questions we sought a measure that would detect previously missed relationships, while including known ones. others have pointed to limitations in the standard methods, although they are widely unappreciated . relevant to the current study is the fact that variability affects the usual measures of gene co-expression in sometimes unexpected ways, including causing some genes to score as not co-expressed, even though scrutiny of the evidence suggests that they are.

in this study we develop and implement a conceptually different approach, termed the ratiometric method , which ranks each gene pair a and b based on the stability of the ratios of their expression values a/b and b/a across samples. the more stable the ratio is, the more strongly the relationship will score. from a biological point of view, the objective is to be sensitive to gene pair relationships in which the relative expression levels are constant, irrespective of whether the absolute levels differ widely. further, we are interested in finding and scoring expression patterns that are highly constrained within and between the components of different cellular pathways and structures. these hypothesized tight quantitative relationships at the rna level are of interest, because they may reflect novel regulatory strategies and constraints. by applying ra as a first step, we find that such relationships can be detected and ranked for their ratiometric stability.

we use a previously published large b-cell rna-seq dataset from the  <dig> genomes project consortium
 <cit>  to characterize the ratiometric method. these data represent a rapidly growing class of rna-seq data, in which many samples are biologically similar to each other. we reasoned that such datasets are incompletely served by the classical methods that focus on sample differences/perturbations to identify gene-sets that are co-regulated or otherwise function jointly. among highly similar samples, we postulated that a hallmark of shared regulation and/or function would instead be constancy of relative expression levels . we reasoned that this measure would be robust in a way that the usual measures would not be for both technical and biological reasons.

we revaluate that results from ra and find they are markedly different from correlation- and mutual information-based methods. ra captures relationships ignored by other measures and also assigns different rankings to many relationships detected by all methods. expression relationships uniquely or preferentially detected by ra include important biological processes such as rna processing. compared with the traditional methods, ra also identifies a larger number of relationships that are annotated as kegg pathways. mere expression level similarity-by-chance did not explain this collection of functional relationships. we consider possible regulatory implications for ratio-stable genes and pathways and show that for rna processing, which was the most ra-preferential pathway, many of the driving genes have been previously shown to be highly sensitive to quantitative variation or to be in a known ratiometric relationship. finally, we perform a pilot test on single-cell rna-seq data collected from a lymphoblastoid cell line, and show that ra performs more robustly than do conventional measures. we discuss how ra could make a unique contribution to emerging high throughput single-cell studies.

RESULTS
a ratiometric approach for evaluating pairwise gene expression relationships
considering a gene pair a and b, we define the ratiometric relationship as a function of the relative dispersion of the ratios a/b and b/a. this relative dispersion is measured by the coefficient of variation , which is the standard deviation of the ratio divided by the mean of the ratio. the rationale for this choice is given in the methods and additional file
1: supplemental method section. to determine how well a ratiometric equation describes a gene pair’s expression pattern, we calculate the stringency of a fit to a ratiometric relationship as follows:

  

we use Δcv to explicitly model the variability in expression values for a given gene pair , which may affect traditional measures of co-expression differently than ra. this arises when variability is lowered because the range of values for a and b is restricted. below we outline how Δcv relates to restriction in the variability of a and b and discuss why this can be important. we also note that value of Δcv is the same no matter what the order of the genes a and b is, as are the correlation coefficient and mutual information measures. additional variability and its relationship to Δcv is discussed in methods and additional file
 <dig> 

two genes are defined as following a ratiometric profile if Δcv<  <dig> . we selected this value based on prior analysis of the data structure by looking at the sensitivity of the results when changing the Δcv , in addition to a simulation that examined the degree to which two independently expressed hypothetical genes would produce a false positive gene pair relationship . within the tested Δcv -range there was little or no change in ra gene ranking and the increased gene pair incorporation was mainly observed at the lower end of the stability range. the robust results in gene ranking were combined with the theoretical justification of a Δcv close to  <dig> . in any use, the Δcv would be adjusted to accommodate data with different characteristics based on the observed incorporation profile at different Δcv settings. once gene pairs were selected by this criterion, further analyses were based on cv and cv that are below a specified value. it is convenient to specify these two ratios together as cv, as when Δcv is set close to  <dig> the two cvs are approximately the same. the smaller the cv, the stronger the ratiometric association . in figures and tables, we abbreviate the ratiometric approach as ra , mutual information as mi , and the squared pearson correlation coefficient as pe . we confine most analyses in the rest of the study to these three major models, though we note that the spearman correlation coefficient was also tested for many of the analyses and behaved very similarly to pearson r <dig> 

variability and association
in addition to directly seeking ratio-based relationships the ra approach, as we have developed it, also focuses on variability. an underappreciated property of the standard statistical measure of association  is that it combines elements of both association and variability. this was noted by bland and altman
 <cit> , when they explored how restrictions in the range of gene expression leads to reduction in the correlation coefficient. they note that

“correlation coefficients are a property of the variables and also the population in which they are measured. if we look at a restricted population, we should not conclude that there is little or no relation between the variables because the correlation coefficient is small.”

this observation is consistent with results from the statistical literature, as it is known that truncation , can alter the correlation coefficient of the bivariate normal
 <cit> . while truncation  is sufficient to cause the problem, it is not required, because simple narrowness of the range of expression can be enough to reduce the correlation coefficient. in principle, this condition would be expected in some biologically important parts of gene expression space, especially for high-quality data from samples that are quite similar to each other, where that similarity is driven by biological constraint and functional affiliation.

we illustrate this with a “toy case” and a simulation . a plausible pattern for  <dig> distinct genes across  <dig> samples, showing all possible relationships between them, is shown together with pe  and ra  analyses. pe evaluates the gene pairs based on the degree of covariance, while ra measures the stability of each ratio. in this hypothetical case, only gene pair  has a sufficiently high r <dig> to be considered correlated and these genes are also identified to be in a ratiometric expression relationship. however, an additional pair of genes  is also in a ratiometric relationship, but it is not detected using r <dig>  this shows how, in principle, gene pairs can be undetected by the traditional pe method, but be detected by ra. the most notable difference between gene pair  and gene pair  in the above example is the narrow expression range of the former two genes compared to the latter two. we note that this is a situation one might especially anticipate among samples of similar type, such as similar individual cells, and that these underlying relationships might be biologically pertinent .figure  <dig> 
schematic illustration of the differences between the ratiometric analysis and correlation metrics. a) for five samples , the expression levels of genes 1– <dig> are measured . the box on the right shows the analysis of expression relationships using a pearson correlation. only gene pair 1: <dig> is identified as a significant interaction, . in contrast, the ratiometric method  identifies both pairs 1: <dig> and 3: <dig> as significant. the pe method does not capture the second relationship  as the fpkm ranges of the two genes are too narrow for a regression line to be stable. on the other hand, the ra model assesses only the fpkm fold-change across samples, is much less sensitive to narrow fpkm ranges, and identifies both pairs. b) shown is simulated expression data for two genes, a and b. the expression levels of a were generated from those of b as follows: a
i = 2b
i + u
i. for each dataset, the expression range of b was varied by increasing cv from  <dig> to 25% of the mean level of b. the expression level of b is thus normally distributed b ∼ n. for each value of cv,  <dig> datasets with  <dig> samples each were generated. the pearson and spearman r <dig>  the entropy, mutual information, and the cv, cv and Δcv -values were calculated for each dataset, and the mean and standard error are shown. note that the gene pair association does not change along the x axis and the expression of gene b can be used to predict the expression of gene a equally well in all runs. as the expression range for b narrows, the pearson and spearman r2-values decrease, along with the mutual information index. in contrast, the ratiometric cv is constant and the relationship between the expression levels of the two genes is always recovered.



following this reasoning, we next examined the expression range sensitivity of pe, mi and ra by carrying out a simulation of expression data for two hypothetical genes, a and b. the expression levels of a are generated from b by the following equation for every sample i:
  

where ui ∼ n. for each run, we varied the expression range of b by increasing the standard deviation of b from  <dig> to 25% of the mean expression level of b. setting e= <dig>  the expression level of b is thus normally distributed following b ∼ n, where s is standard deviation ranging from  <dig> to  <dig> of the expression level. each run was repeated  <dig> times with n= <dig>  and for each iteration we calculated pearson and spearman r <dig> values, mutual information, cv, cv and Δcv . the pearson and spearman r <dig> and the mutual information index are very low at low s, and they only approach  <dig>  and  <dig>  as s increases. in contrast, the cv measures were constant throughout the whole range of s, and thus accurately described the underlying generative relationship of a constant association between the two genes. if we take “restriction” to mean, more generally, limited variation in one of the genes, these results confirm bland and altman’s concern and argue in favor of alternative approaches.

simulations also showed that the correlation coefficient can remain the same in situations where the ratiometric score varies, with the ratiometric measure once again being more sensitive in cases of low variability. figure 
 <dig> shows results of a supporting simulation for a bivariate normal distribution with e=e= <dig> with a fixed pearson correlation coefficient r =  <dig> , with the standard deviations of both a and b allowed to vary from  <dig> to  <dig> while always being equal to each other. agreement with the ratiometric selection criteria falls off rapidly once the standard deviation exceeds  <dig>  while the correlation coefficient remains constant. additional file
1: figure s <dig> shows an example from the  <dig> genomes dataset of a pair of genes that has a low r <dig> but meets the ra criteria.figure  <dig> 
simulation for a bivariate normal distribution. the fraction of observations  meeting the ratiometric definition  is shown as a function of the average correlation coefficient for each standard deviation. the constant correlation coefficient in this figure under the assumptions of equal changes in the standard deviation can be shown  to be a property of the multivariate normal distribution.



dataset collection and processing
to test the ratiometric method on a representative contemporary homogeneous sample group, we used a panel of rna-seq datasets for lymphoblastoid cell lines derived from  <dig> human individuals from the  <dig> genomes project
 <cit> . this is a good test case because it consists of high-quality datasets over a large number of biologically similar samples. in this setting, we reasoned that biologically important gene pair relationships, driven by either direct or indirect co-regulation relationships, would display a low degree of expression fluctuation, since only one cell type and growth condition is represented in the study. however, we did not know what fraction of already known pathways and cellular structures would be identifiable by our criteria.

raw sequencing reads were downloaded and quantified in a uniform way using express
 <cit>  . genes with very low expression values were excluded so that only genes with fpkm values ≥ <dig> in at least 95% of samples were included . we note that in cells of this type, we have previously measured the number of transcripts per cell
 <cit>  and the threshold selected here is below the level that corresponds to one transcript per cell. subsequent analysis was carried out on the resulting dataset.

relationships between ra, pe and mi
we examined the distributions of the pearson correlation coefficient r, r <dig>  Δcv and mutual information, i, and found them to have the same general shape, with the exception of the correlation coefficient . this similarity in shape, however, does not extend to a similarity in the variation of these measures. as table 
 <dig> reveals, i and r <dig> are very similar, with a correlation coefficient between the two > <dig> . this is not unexpected as r <dig> can be interpreted as the fraction of variation explained, and mutual information as a likelihood ratio and hence goodness of fit. the simple pearson r is moderately correlated with the i and r <dig> values. however, while Δcv is highly correlated with cv and cv, none of these three measures is meaningfully correlated with the more usual measures of association. this suggests that the ra method is identifying a substantially different kind of relationships.table  <dig> 
correlation between measures


2
cv
r2
∆cv


finally, while reduction of variability is one way to meet our criteria for ratiometric behavior, it can also arise by following the ratiometric relationship a/b ≈ c. it is shown in the additional file
 <dig>  that a reduction of expected variation agrees with some intuitive definitions of ratiometric behavior . an example of that type of reduction from a pair of genes from the  <dig> genomes project is shown in additional file
1: figure s <dig> 

the gene expression connectivity landscape
to investigate how the ratiometric approach evaluates gene pair relationships differently than the pe and mi methods, we ranked all gene pairs according to their association strength calculated by each method in the  <dig> genomes dataset. we then divided each ranking list into a series of  <dig> steps according to its stringency range . each step or set of relationships was drawn as an interaction graph, where the nodes are genes and the edges the gene pair relationships. we denote the graphs as gi , the set of undirected edges in each graph  as e and the number of such edges as |e|. we excluded all genes with a vertex degree dg  from each graph and denoted the size of the remaining vertices as |v| .

we first examined the number of individual genes participating in a ra, pe or mi relationship as a function of the ratio stability cv, r <dig> and i, respectively . naturally, more genes are identified as the thresholds are relaxed . the ra method displays a 2-stage inclusion profile, in which the majority of genes are included within a short interval at high stringency and inclusion then quickly levels off. the few remaining genes are spread out over a much larger range, as the stringency level decreases . pe differs, having an inclusion profile that is roughly bell-shaped, while mi behavior falls somewhere between the other two.figure  <dig> 
connectivity trends in gene graphs built by each model. analyzing the increase of connectivity coverage as the stringency level  decreases. a and b, for every cutoff, the accepted portion of the graph is plotted as the percentage of all genes  and the number of gene pair connections . all three graphs include >98% of the genes at the lowest plotted stringency level, though the dynamics of how the graphs grow are different, separating the ra method from pe and mi. likewise in gene pair relationship inclusion, with the additional distinction that as the ratiometric model does only consider connections that exhibit a ratiometric profile it will have a smaller total number of possible connections . the dashed black vertical line marks the stringency level at which 95% of the genes are included, |v| =  <dig>  b) the overlap of genes and gene pairs between the three methods at different vertex sizes, plotted against number of genes accepted  or number of gene pairs accepted . for each size of the graph, the following fractions of the total number of discoveries  are given: ra, mi, pe, ra-mi, ra-pe, ra-mi-pe, mi-pe, where ra = ratiometric method, pe = squared pearson correlation and mi = mutual information. pe and mi have a larger overlap compared to the ra method that differs compared to both former ones.



the distinction between the ra method and pe or mi is even more striking when the interactions among gene pairs are analyzed . ra again displays rapid inclusion followed by a leveling off. in contrast, both the pe and mi methods exhibit exponential increases of interaction inclusion, but only at very low stringency levels that are much lower than the stringency at which the majority of genes had been identified as participating in at least one interaction. the implication is that when new genes are incorporated in ra clusters they form, to a greater extent, interactions with preexisting genes, and the number of new interactions identified increases rapidly relative to pe or mi clusters. when 95% of the genes | = 9244) are incorporated in a graph , ra identifies ~5-fold and ~4-fold more gene interactions compared with the pe and mi approaches, respectively. hence the bulk of the gene pair interactions are included in pe and mi clusters long after most genes are already added, while in ra the bulk of interactions are incorporated into the graphs together with genes.

the different ra inclusion profile would be of little biological relevance if the different methods produced identical gene and/or gene pair ordering. to investigate whether this is the case, we first generated venn diagrams using same-sized graphs from the three methods for several different graph sizes, first using genes, |vra| ≈ |vpe| ≈ |vmi|, and then using gene pairs, |era| ≈ |epe| ≈ |emi|, as size measures . as expected, we observed a high degree of overlap between both gene sets and gene-pair sets produced by pe and mi. in contrast, ra found large numbers of genes and gene pair interactions per graph  that are unique relative to pe and mi. we therefore conclude that a separate set of gene expression relationships exist that are not identified as strong associations by traditional measures but are captured by ra.

invariant gene expression does not automatically lead to stable ratios
some genes in our dataset are expected to, display constant ratios and so thus have a favorable ra-score, because they are invariantly expressed in the sample set, without reflecting any underlying biological relationship. to test if such constancy-by-chance relationships are prominent and could account for most of the ranking order produced by ra, each gene expression variation was plotted against its most stable ratio . invariant gene expression alone does not correlate strongly with high ra-ranking, r2= <dig> , when including the top  <dig> ra-ranked genes. thus, ra rankings do not mainly reflect the general gene expression homogeneity in the dataset, but instead identify certain gene pair relationships based on more specific ratio stability.

characterization of gene pair relationships highly ranked only by pe and mi
to further assess the differences between the different methods, we carried out a go term analysis of gene pairs that do not fit a ratiometric relationship  and are hence not ra-ranked at all, but are highly ranked by pe and mi. it revealed that they are enriched for genes involved in apoptosis, regulation of cell death and caspase activity . among the gene relationships highly ranked by pe and mi, ~40% display a 2-regime pattern in which a smaller subgroup is highly expressed and drives the high ranking, while the majority of the data points indicate a low expression with little correlation. no 2-regime gene pair relationships where discovered among those highly ra-ranked.

go category enrichment among ratiometrically related genes
a major question raised by these observations is the biological significance of ratiometric expression relationships, especially those that were not identified or were ranked as weak by standard pe and mi methods. we compiled the set of genes v in each ra, pe or mi graph gi at varying vertex set sizes i =  <dig> …, <dig>  and used david  to assess go category enrichment for each set, with the following modifications. because a number of go categories are functionally highly similar, we merged categories by grouping the genes in all branches in the go tree hierarchy up to the level at which the resulting aggregated go category contained more than  <dig> genes among the  <dig> genes included in our lymphoblastoid rna-seq data analysis. we consider an aggregated go category to be enriched if the bonferroni-corrected p-value ≤ 10- <dig>  for easy reference the aggregated go categories are further grouped into more general biological categories, e.g. “ribosome” and “cell cycle”.

results of the go analysis are summarized in figure 
 <dig>  the sets of genes in ra relationships were enriched for more go categories than the sets identified using pe or mi. in addition, in cases where go categories were enriched for all three, ratiometrically-constructed graphs generally exhibited enrichment at higher stringency levels | and lower i). ra displayed higher enrichment for ribosomal genes, genes involved in transcription and rna processing, translation, and ubiquitination. by contrast, pe and mi sets were more highly enriched for only one function, the aggregated cell cycle-related terms.figure  <dig> 
go category enrichment for the top vertex sets. the v sizes plotted for which, the aggregated go categories  have a go enrichment with a bonferroni-corrected p ≤ 10- <dig>  the aggregated go categories are created by using the complete graph | = 9752) and grouping all go categories with less than  <dig> detected genes together with its closest go category upwards in the go tree hierarchy having a detected gene set of ≥ <dig> 



kegg pathway analysis
we further explored the biological relevance of the ratiometric relationships by using the pathway annotations in the kyoto encyclopedia of genes and genomes database . we calculated the percentage of edges in each graph that are between genes both of which are annotated in a kegg pathway, at similar graph vertex set sizes |v| for ra, pe and mi. this analysis revealed first, that ratiometric relationships are more enriched in kegg interactions, and second, that the strongest enrichment differences between the methods are at high-inclusion stringency levels |) . the ratiometric analysis discovered more validated biologically relevant interactions than pe and mi among the top-ranked gene pairs.figure  <dig> 
fraction of gene pair relationships between annotated and non-annotated genes in kegg detected by each method. the percentage of gene pair relationships  between two annotated genes in kegg of the total number of relationships reported for each graph size . the ra method detects to a higher degree than pe and mi gene pair relationships that are within the kegg annotated database.



next, we analyzed the recovery of individual kegg pathways by the three methods, using a similar framework. we calculated the number of edges within a kegg pathway identified as a function of |v|. only kegg pathways for which at least 25% of the genes were part of at least one of the three graphs at |v|= <dig> were considered. the ratiometric analysis identified more interactions than pe or mi for most kegg pathways .figure  <dig> 
kegg pathway enrichment analysis. the number of gene pair relationships within the same pathway plotted against an increasing graph size, given in gene number. the ra method, red, mi, blue, pe, green. only pathways with gene % ≥ <dig> for at least one method at graph size ~ <dig> genes are included in the figure. pathways detected early in the graphs are: ribosome, proteasome, spliceosome, rna transport. pathways picked up by the ra method more strongly than pe and mi are both basic cell function pathways as well as disease related ones, such as: spliceosome, rna transport, mrna surveillance, and citrate cycle tca cycle. slightly stronger: proteasome, ubiquitin mediated proteolysis, parkinson’s disease, oxidative phosphorylation, and huntington’s disease. pathways picked up equally well by all three methods are ribosome, ribosome biogenesis in eukaryotes, and alzheimer’s disease. where pe and mi methods do better than the ra model is in pathways protein processing in er, mismatch repair, and dna replication. dashed lines represent the perturbed runs simulating the actual pathway.



we then investigated the possible reasons for the observed differences in pathway recovery by the three methods. as suggested above, a potential strength of the ra approach compared to pe and mi is the ability to identify relationships between genes having narrow expression ranges. we therefore examined the gene expression ranges for genes involved in each pathway . we divided pathways into four groups: 1) pathways that the ra approach recovers better than pe or mi by a wide margin; 2) pathways recovered similarly by all methods, but slightly better by the ra analysis; 3) pathways for which the three methods identify an approximately equal number of genes; and 4) pathways better recovered by pe and mi, figure 
7a. the cv values are lowest, on average, for pathways in the first group, and highest for pathways that are better recovered by pe and mi, in agreement with prior theoretical considerations and simulation results . in the additional file
 <dig>  in the section “statistical test of cv groupings” we show that group  <dig> has a significantly smaller  average cv than either group  <dig>   <dig> or  <dig> and that group  <dig> is significantly larger  than either group  <dig>   <dig> or  <dig> . the results show that the pathways unique to the ra approach correspond to pathways with the lowest intrinsic variability across samples.figure  <dig> 
distribution of fpkm cvs per kegg pathway. a) the kernel density, per pathway, of fpkm cvs for the pathway’s genes found in our data set. the top graph show pathways detected much more strongly by the ra method than by the pe and mi. the second graph show pathways picked up slightly more strongly by ra. the third graph show pathways detected equally well by all three methods. the bottom graph contains pathways better picked up by pe and mi compared to the ra method. the better the ra method detects a pathway compared to the other two, the further left its curve sits. the dotted purple lines indicate how the distributions shift towards the left as one goes up the graph series. b and c, two pathways, one from the top graph, and one from the third graph, showing the densities for the subgroup of genes that each method detects at v5 =  <dig>  the pathway cv density , ra , mi , pe .



we further investigated the relationship between the expression ranges of genes within a given pathway and the interaction recovery rate. we began by comparing two major kegg pathways: 1)“ribosome”, which belongs to the group recovered equally well by all three methods, and 2) “spliceosome”, which is recovered best by ratiometric analysis, figure 
7b. for the “ribosome pathway”, all three cv distributions of the captured genes overlap. in contrast, the few genes in the “spliceosome” recovered by pe and mi had broader expression range distributions compared with the spliceosome genes detected by ra.to ascertain that the kegg enrichments reported by ra were not generated mainly by random pairing of genes that exhibit invariant expression across the samples, we performed a perturbation analysis. we generated randomly permuted models of each kegg pathway, mimicking the number of genes in the pathway and its their rna expression levels. we then calculated the detection rates by ra, pe and mi . we never observed a ra detection rate as high as that for known biological pathways, although some relationships are identified that are without an underlying kegg pathway relationship. these results support the conclusion that ra relationships detected in our study often reflect known biological pathways, including some missed by the major existing approaches.

intpath gene pair relationship enrichment
to further verify the biological relevance of the gene pair relationships detected by ra, we used gene pair relationships annotated in the intpath database 
 <cit> . again, ra produced a higher enrichment in intpath-gene pair relationships among top-ranked genes compared to pe and mi . there was an overlap of pathways detected using kegg and intpath, with the two best identified being the ribosomal genes and the spliceosomal genes, with the latter annotated in kegg as “spliceosome” and in intpath as “mrna processing”.figure  <dig> 
enrichment of intpath-gene pair relationships at various stringency levels for the three methods. the enrichment is given in percentage of gene pairs at a given stringency level that are annotated in the sapiensintpathgenepairs database. ra shows a higher enrichment than pearson correlation and mutual information.



application of ra to single-cell rna-seq data
single-cell rna-seq is an emerging area in which many similar samples  will be the norm. we therefore performed a pilot study to determine ra’s utility for analyzing this type of data compared to pe and mi. we applied it to two single-cell data sets of  <dig> rna-seq libraries each from one of the  <dig> genomes lymphoblastoid lines
 <cit>  as a pilot study . we compiled a list of  <dig> genes expressed in at least  <dig> of the  <dig> cells  and then analyzed the two sets of single cells separately in order to measure the degree of consistency between the results for each method. first we analyzed ranking congruency of each method between the two sets, recognizing that these data are first-generation and that they display significant levels of known technical stochasticity
 <cit> . ra displayed a higher degree of ranking consistency, >40%, between data sets  than pe and mi. the ra associations were also more highly enriched by kegg annotated genes compared to pe and mi . when examining the individual pathways, the only one sufficiently represented among the  <dig> genes used for evaluation was the ribosome. compared to bulk-rna cell line data, where the “ribosome” was easily detected by all three methods, only ra detected it in the single-cell data . thus ra dealt best with the considerable technical weaknesses of first-generation single-cell data
 <cit> . at present, ra proved to be the most robust method by the criterion of ranking consistency and by its ability to identify relationships known from the larger bulk rna data.figure  <dig> 
single-cell rna-seq analysis. comparing the results from two separate batches of  <dig> single-cell samples, including  <dig> genes expressed in both batches. a) ranking stability between the two batches for ra, mi and pe. b) kegg enrichment per graph size. error bars describe the variability between batches. c) the only kegg pathway sufficiently represented in this data set is the ribosome. the number of gene pair relationships reported within the ribosome pathway per graph sizes  and the false discovery interval . colors as ra , red, pe , green, mi , blue.



CONCLUSIONS
the ratiometric approach developed here was able to extract gene expression relationships from a large set of rna-seq samples from a single homogeneous cell type. these gene pair relationships were mainly not identified or highly ranked by the more traditional methods. we did this by using the relative dispersion of the expression ratios between pairs of genes to detect gene pair relationships. the ranking produced by ra is distinct from r <dig>  and mutual information , which produce results similar to each other. a striking result is that when comparing the top-ranked gene pair relationships across a large set of lymphoblastoid samples, the ones identified by ra were more highly enriched for biologically validated interactions than pe and mi.

ra has a straightforward biological interpretation, as it evaluates all possible gene pair interactions based on the stability of the ratio between their expression levels, regardless of the degree of dispersion of absolute expression values among the samples. in this sense ra is a simple and general interpretation of a gene  pair association. pe and mi both conform to a notion of coordinated gene expression changes across samples, but they do it in a way that is insensitive to genes with narrow expression ranges. this means that certain ratiometrically constrained relationships would be missed. to the extent that many studies have explicitly or implicitly “cared” only about genes and pathways whose absolute levels differ substantially within a set of samples, pe and mi have clearly been very effective. they are at their best when variation between samples in the analysis is large. the resulting expression relationships, along with their gene network structures and regulatory mechanisms, have received much attention. ra’s particular strengths, on the other hand, are in detecting relationships between genes having by low dispersion, across a sample set. they have not received similarly intense attention.

across the  <dig> genome b-cell rna-seq data, go category, kegg pathway, and intpath analyses showed enhanced recovery of known biological gene interactions by ra compared to pe and mi. this was most obvious for biological processes and complexes containing genes with low expression dispersion. by specifically comparing genes encoding components of the “ribosome” and the “spliceosome”, we explored the relationship between decreased detection power by pe or mi and narrower fpkm ranges. genes in the ribosome pathway showed a wider range of relative expression values. the ribosomal pathway was identified equally well by ra, pe and mi, but the specific gene pairs responsible for ra enrichment differed from those responsible for pe or mi enrichment. in contrast, the genes in the spliceosome pathway displayed narrower expression ranges, leading this pathway to be scored as largely “non-associated” by pe and mi. ra analysis showed that a substantial set of spliceosomal genes displays an especially constrained relative expression pattern across these samples. this is consistent with previous literature suggesting that relative constancy may be important for defining a cellular state and that deviation from it may be important in some cancers
. of particular relevance to our study is evidence that the relative levels of some rna splicing factors determine alternative splicing patterns
 <cit> . ra assigned top-rankings to components of the rna processing machinery that include hnrnpk
 <cit> , srsfs <dig>   <dig>  and 7
 <cit> , tra2β
 <cit>  and rbmx
 <cit> . although the relevant gene pairs have yet to be systematically perturbed, individual studies in various cell systems suggest quantitative sensitivity. for example tra2β and rbmx are reported to regulate alternative splice site choices according to their ratio
 <cit> , and their protein products interact with each other
 <cit>  and with srsf <dig>  the sr and hnrnp classes are widely understood to compete to set isoform choice
 <cit> , and a recent example showed that the srsf <dig> ratio relative to hnrnpa <dig> governs specific splice site choice in vivo
 <cit> . other high ratiometric rankings might be due to functional relationships other than rna splicing among some of these genes. thus rbmx can also function in homologous recombination initiated by dna-damage
 <cit> , and it pairs strongly by ra rank with hnrnpk, which functions in the p53/tp <dig> dna damage response
 <cit> .

combining ra with either pe or mi revealed expression subdivisions within the sample group. in this specific case, the division appeared to correlate with apoptosis and regulation of cell death, suggesting that a small set of the cell line cultures were probably stressed. more broadly, we imagine that for the majority of datasets the optimal analysis will first use one of the traditional metrics as well as ra to distinguish potentially existing subgroups within the dataset. based on those results, one might then move to ra for the entire set if it proves highly homogeneous, or instead parse it into informative sample subsets for ra: these sample subsets can then be reanalyzed by ra as individual groups . this stratified approach would focus ra analysis on internal relationships that meet useful ratiometric and associated variability criteria. this such an approach would allow ra to identify gene pair relationships present across different cell conditions that have gone undetected by the major methods .

in summary, ra allowed us to analyze homogeneous datasets and successfully identify in them expression relationships that are strongly invariant between individual samples. the relationships recovered were strongly enriched for biologically meaningful pathways and gene groups, based on go, kegg, and intpath enrichment. we found that some of these relationships are ignored or low-ranked by conventional correlation and mutual information-based methods. this raises major questions for the future about the mechanistic basis of narrow-variance control, and about its possible implications for gene network structure and circuit function. single-cell studies, now in their infancy, present additional questions about dynamic variation and stochasticity that were previously obscured in population data and for which ra may be especially well suited.

