BACKGROUND
receptor-like kinases  are plant-specific transmembrane  receptor kinases  that are closely related to the pelle proteins, a family of animal cytoplasmic kinases. these rlk/pelle proteins are involved in host defense against a range of pathogens and are also key regulators of many developmental processes in both plants and animals  <cit> . in an extended phylogenetic analysis of eukaryotic receptor kinases, shiu and bleecker  have shown that, with respect to the kinase domain , the rlk/pelle, receptor tyrosine kinase , receptor serine/threonine kinase  and raf protein subfamilies form a monophyletic group, the receptor kinase group , that is distinct from all other eukaryotic kinases  <cit> . all plant rlks possess a single-pass tm domain and an intracytoplasmic kd but differ in their extracellular domain   <cit> . members of the largest rlk subfamily, the leucine-rich repeat receptor-like kinases , contain  <dig> to  <dig> leucine-rich repeats  in their ecds . plant lrr-rlks are involved in many developmental processes and in host responses to biotic and abiotic stresses  <cit> . animals also possess lrr-containing receptors  that play a role in development and immunity  <cit> . interestingly, these animal receptors contain lrrs in their ecd but do not possess a kd, and several transduce their signal by activating kinase-containing co-receptors through the binding to adaptor proteins. because the structural organization  was previously found only in plants, a plant-specific dogma for lrr-rlks was expounded for many years. however, lrr and kd domains are highly versatile with respect to their associations with other protein domains and are predicted to be present in all genomes from bacteria to humans  <cit> .

in this report, we show that lrr-kd subfamilies have been reinvented in several eukaryotic genomes outside plants. moreover, the evolutionary history of these lrr-rks is comparable to the one described for the lrr-rlk plant subfamilies.

RESULTS
lrr-containing receptor kinases are not plant-specific
as lrrs and kds are present in all genomes, we searched for the presence of structurally related lrr-rlks in non-plant lineages. we analyzed  <dig> bacterial,  <dig> archaeal and  <dig> eukaryotic genomes to identify lrr-containing rks that were structurally related to plant lrr-rlks . additional file  <dig> details the references and links for all of the genomes analyzed. our study reveals that, among all of the genomes outside of land plants that were analyzed, lrr receptor kinase  subfamilies are present in the genomes of monosiga brevicollis , chlorella variabilis nc64a  and several stramenopiles  . some of these findings have recently been reported, albeit unobtrusively, mentioned as only a side discovery notice in two articles  <cit> . our detailed analysis shows that the ectocarpus, chlorella and monosiga genomes contain  <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> lrr-rk genes, respectively, whereas the oomycete species  contain up to  <dig> lrr-rk genes per genome. the step-by-step procedure used to detect the lrr-rk genes is described in additional file  <dig>  these lrr-rks possess up to  <dig> lrrs in their ecds . interestingly, although we searched for other domains  associated with rks in oomycetes, we did not find any.

lrr-rk subfamilies have been reinvented several times in eukaryotic genomes and evolved independently from each other
a phylogenetic analysis of a representative subset of animal and plant eukaryotic kinases and all of the lrr-rks, including receptors that are closely related to lrr-rks but lack tm domains and/or lrrs, has been performed . this analysis reveals that the ectocarpus, chlorella, monosiga and oomycete lrr-rk genes form four separate lineage-specific clades within the eukaryotic rkg. because we did not observe incongruence between the phylogenetic and the species trees, we excluded the hypothesis of lateral transfer of the lrr-rk genes between species. however, because the tree is not fully resolved, we cannot rule out the possibility that the kds of the lrr-rks are more closely related to one of the rkg subfamilies. nevertheless, with regard to the combination of the three modules  to form new genes that are structurally related to lrr-rlks, the most parsimonious hypothesis, based primarily on the species tree , is that the association of lrrs with rks appeared independently at least four times in eukaryotic evolutionary history. this hypothesis is supported by previous work on plants that showed that the kd of the rlk families has been recruited several times to form all of the lrr-rlk subfamilies  <cit> . moreover, lrr domains are known to be highly versatile with respect to their associations with other protein domains  <cit> . thus, our study expands what has been observed in plant lineages to several eukaryotic genomes. alternatively, even if much less parsimonious, we cannot completely rule out a third hypothesis, which states that the lrr-rk and lrr-rlk gene families evolved from a common ancestor and have been subjected to massive gene losses.

lrr-rk genes are in expansion in certain oomycete genomes
in plants, lrr-rlks show a pattern of expansion with amplification/deletion and evolution of domain organization leading to the functional diversification of the members of the gene family  <cit> . the same evolutionary history can be observed in the oomycete lrr-rk subfamily. indeed, we were able to identify gains and losses of lrr-rks in each oomycete genome analyzed . moreover, some of the gene subgroups are saprolegnia- or phytophthora-specific, suggesting that several duplication events occurred independently in the saprolegnia and phytophthora genomes to give rise to ~ <dig> copies in each lineage . in the phytophthora-specific subgroups, most of the duplications are present in all of the phytophthora genomes, indicating that these genetic changes occurred in the last common ancestor of the phytophthora species. however, a few duplications are species specific, implying the possibility for the acquisition of new functions of these genes in these species. notably, the absence of amplification in the pythium genome and the independent amplifications in the saprolegnia and phytophthora genomes suggest that these genes may be involved in signaling pathways and, therefore, in functions that have diverged between saprolegnia, phytophthora and pythium species. indeed, similar to what is known in plants, these oomycete receptors could be involved in the perception of diverse signals leading to multiple cellular responses  <cit> .

oomycete lrr-rks may play a role in several stages of the oomycete life cycle
to determine whether these oomycete lrr-rk genes are expressed, we first performed an in silico gene expression analysis by identifying expressed sequenced tags  in the public databases . among the  <dig> oomycete lrr-rk genes assessed,  <dig> are represented by one to eight ests. these ests were obtained from libraries of various developmental stages, indicating that the oomycete lrr-rk genes are expressed during vegetative growth, mating, dissemination and host infection. to analyze the expression of these lrr-rk genes further, we used the plant pathosystem available in our laboratory: the phytophthora parasitica/arabidopsis thaliana interaction  <cit> . first, we searched for ests of phytophthora parasitica and retrieved  <dig> ests . next, we verified and analyzed the expression patterns of these lrr-rk genes using quantitative reverse-transcriptase polymerase chain reaction  at several key stages during the course of the pathogen/host interaction : penetration ), biotrophic invasive growth , switch to necrotrophy  and necrotrophy . the data reveal that these genes are actually differentially expressed in the course of arabidopsis thaliana infection. moreover, the divergences in the expression profiles among the lrr-rk genes analyzed indicate that functional diversification may have occurred in the oomycete lrr-rk family. taken together, these results suggest that these receptors could be involved in the perception of environmental cues, in the adaptation to specific conditions encountered in the host and/or in various developmental processes.

CONCLUSIONS
in conclusion, we have shown that the monosiga, chlorella, ectocarpus and oomycete lrr-rk receptors belong to the rkg and are likely to have acquired the lrrs in their ecds independently. the evolutionary history of the oomycete lrr-rk receptor subfamily is consistent with the molecular evolution of plant lrr-rlks  <cit> . saprolegnia and phytophthora species have developed, expanded and functionally diversified a subfamily of receptors that are structurally, but not phylogenetically, related to plant lrr-rlks. considering the key roles that plant lrr-rlks play throughout the plant life cycle and in plant-environment interactions, it is tempting to propose that oomycete lrr-rks may be important regulators of the oomycete life cycle. future work should focus on deciphering the functions of oomycete lrr-rks in host-oomycete interactions to reveal new targets to help combat these pathogens, which pose a serious threat to plants and aquaculture farming worldwide, causing tremendous economic damage every year  <cit> .

