BACKGROUND
psoriasis is a chronic inflammatory skin disease characterized by epidermal hyperplasia and infiltration of inflammatory cells into skin lesions. anti-psoriatic therapies are mainly anti-inflammatory. long-term use of many of these anti-psoriatic therapies is often hampered by serious adverse effects  <cit> . in this connection it is of interest that already in  <dig>  schweckendiek introduced fumaric acid, an intermediate of the citric acid cycle, for the treatment of his psoriasis  <cit> . the main adverse effect of fumaric acid therapy, i.e. induction of gastric ulcers, was overcome by application of a mixture of fumaric acid esters  with great bioavailability  <cit> . this mixture, consisting of dimethylfumarate  and salts of monoethylfumarate , was formulated as enteric-coated tablets. this systemic therapy, successfully applied by several german  <cit>  and dutch  <cit>  dermatologists, can be taken by patients for a long period due to the excellent safety profile  <cit> . adverse effects that do occur are mostly mild and transient and include facial flushing and gastro-intestinal complaints. pharmacokinetic data of fae therapy are very limited and mainly based on personal communications  <cit> . for such a pharmacokinetic study, we first developed a highly sensitive method to determine concentrations of fae in human blood . in the present study, we investigated the hydrolysis of dmf to its most bioactive metabolite monomethylfumarate  and the stability of mmf, dmf and mef in different environments representing various body compartments using this methodology.

RESULTS
stability of fae and hydrolysis of dmf to mmf in buffers of various ph
dmf, mmf and mef remained completely intact in a buffer of ph  <dig> mimicking the ph in the stomach . however, at ph  <dig> resembling the ph in the small intestines dmf, the most abundant component of the fae tablet, was hydrolyzed to mmf  . addition of mef, the other component of the fae tablet, did not affect the half-life of dmf  . mmf remained intact  in this buffer during the period of analysis  as did mef .

to further examine the ph-dependency of the hydrolysis of dmf to mmf, we measured concentrations of dmf and mmf in phosphate buffers  supplemented with dmf or the combination of dmf and mef. the results revealed that the half-life of dmf dramatically decreased with increasing ph values and the maximal hydrolysis of dmf to mmf was seen at ph  <dig> . for example, at ph  <dig>  the half-life of dmf amounted to  <dig>  ±  <dig>  hr  . in agreement with these results we observed that the fumaraat  <dig> tablet disintegrated completely between  <dig>  and  <dig>  hr in the alkaline, but not in the acidic, environment. the half-life of dmf in the tablet amounted to approximately  <dig>  hr .

changes in the concentrations of dmf, mmf and mef in serum and whole blood
since fae must enter the circulation to exert their anti-psoriatic effects at the affected skin site  <cit> , we determined the hydrolysis of dmf to mmf and examined the stability of mmf, dmf and mef in both normal human serum and whole blood . the half-life of dmf in serum  is dramatically shorter  than that in a buffer of the same ph. mmf  and mef  concentrations slowly decreased in serum during the period of analysis . furthermore, the half-life of dmf was even shorter  in whole blood than in serum , indicating that circulating cells are also involved in the hydrolysis of dmf to mmf. furthermore, concentrations of mmf  and mef  in whole blood decreased steadily during the period of analysis , indicating that they may be metabolized by blood cells as well.

to find out which blood cell type is  responsible for the hydrolysis of fae in whole blood, hydrolysis of dmf in a buffer of ph  <dig>  by purified blood cell fractions was analyzed. the results revealed that monocytes/lymphocytes , but not granulocytes  and erythrocytes , at concentrations present in whole blood effectively hydrolyzed dmf to mmf.

discussion
a major finding of the present study is that hardly any dmf was hydrolyzed in a buffer of ph ≤  <dig> , whereas at ph  <dig>  resembling the ph of the small intestines, this fae was effectively hydrolyzed to its active metabolite mmf. it should be noted that mmf  remained stable in these buffers. we realize that using acidic or alkaline buffers to mimick the conditions in body compartments, like the stomach and the small intestines, is only a first attempt to investigate the in vitro pharmacokinetics of fae. for example, no enzymes, e.g. esterases, are present in these buffers whereas they are in these body compartments. in this connection, werdenberg and collegues  <cit>  recently showed that in the small intestines, the concentrations of mef and mmf remained unaffected, whereas concentrations of dmf decreased by the action of esterases, such as carboxyl- and choline-esterases in this compartment. esterase activity is also present in the liver which can cause a rapid disappearance of the various fae from the circulation. absorption of fae from the small intestines into the circulation is not only dependent on the permeability of the intestinal membrane for the various fae , but also on the stabilities of the various fae in the small intestines and liver. clearly, hydrolysis of dmf to mmf is not only dependent on the ph of the environment but also on the activities of esterases.

another important finding of this study is that the half-life of dmf in whole blood is considerably shorter than that in serum, although the ph of both blood and serum is  <dig> . to explain this difference in hydrolysis of dmf in whole blood and serum we considered the possibility that blood cells also hydrolyze dmf to mmf. using purified blood cell fractions resuspended in pbs  we found that monocytes/lymphocytes, but not granulocytes and erythrocytes, at concentrations present in whole blood effectively hydrolyzed dmf to mmf. the rapid removal of dmf from pbs after addition of granulocytes and erythrocytes suggests that these blood cells bind dmf.

it should be realized that mmf  most likely enter the circulation of psoriasis patients in order to exert their antipsoriatic effects in the skin lesions. in agreement we detected mmf and mef, but not dmf, in the circulation of healthy volunteers and psoriasis patients after oral intake of fumaraat 120® tablets . our observation that the mmf is more rapidly removed from whole blood than from serum could indicate that mmf  is taken up by blood cells and perhaps further metabolized into fa, which subsequently fuels the citric acid cycle, as suggested earlier by joshi . the different interactions between fae and blood cells may affect their functional activities, as has been reported earlier  <cit> , thus contributing to the beneficial effects of fae therapy.

CONCLUSIONS
together, these in vitro data indicate that dmf is almost completely hydrolyzed to mmf at an alkaline ph, but not at an acidic ph, suggesting that this hydrolysis occurs mainly within the small intestines and not in the stomach. most likely, mmf and mef are then absorbed in the circulation where they interact with blood cells and perhaps cells in the psoriatic lesions. the different interactions between these fae and the various cell types may explain the beneficial effects of fae in psoriasis. finally, these in vitro experimental data will be key to the pharmacokinetic analysis of oral fae in human healthy volunteers and psoriasis patients.

