BACKGROUND
population boundaries are largely determined by local environment, the strength of barriers to migration, and the organism's inherent dispersal abilities. the interaction among these and genetic factors determines the potential for evolutionary divergence, and is at the heart of our understanding of ecological adaptation and ongoing speciation processes. when individuals can easily cross barriers between suitable habitat patches, gene flow acts to homogenize most neutral genetic diversity and may swamp the effects of any local phenotypic selection whereas low levels of migration may facilitate ecological divergence, even when selection is modest. evolutionary divergence through fine-scale geographic isolation is believed to be one of the main mechanisms promoting speciation in the cichlid radiations of the african great lakes  <cit> . many lake species are extreme local endemics, with distributions limited to small patches of ecologically distinct habitat. many narrowly endemic cichlid species are confined to rocky sections along the shores of the lakes separated by stretches of sandy, muddy or weedy shoreline or by deep channels  <cit> . in several cases, molecular markers have shown that small patches of sand or mud  <cit> , intervening deep channels  <cit> , and the mouths of streams and rivers  <cit>  are all noteworthy barriers to migration, and some species even show a pattern of isolation by distance along continuous habitat  <cit> . cichlid philopatry in the african great lakes may augment the effects of disruptive selection on phenotypic traits associated with mate choice and trophic adaptations believed to be important in species divergence.

comparatively little is known about the population structure and extent of cichlid philopatry in river systems. in south american cichlids, ready et al.  <cit> , have detected only modest levels of genetic divergence along the amazon river and a strong pattern of divergence between drainages in the eastern amazon basin in two different cichlid genera but on a much larger geographic scale than has been observed in african lake cichlids. similarly, only a few published studies of african river cichlids have focused on broad scale phylogeographic patterns. for example, wu's study of the habitat generalist astatoreochromis alluaudi throughout the lake victoria basin found little population differentiation <cit> , whereas hassanan and gilbey  <cit>  detected only modest levels of differentiation among oreochromis niloticus populations separated by more than  <dig> km. in the haplochromine genus pseudocrenilabrus, katongo et al.  <cit>  detected mtdna haplotype and morphological differences on broad geographic scales suggesting a pattern consistent with geographic speciation.

the proximate causes and adaptive significance of cichlid philopatry have long been the subject of much speculation. in the african great lakes, proposed advantages that may indirectly promote philopatry include predator avoidance  <cit> , microallopatric divergence  <cit> , and reduced mating success for immigrant males who may lack the locally preferred phenotype  <cit> . the pattern could also be a byproduct of extended brood care or male territoriality .

while considerably less rich than the african great lakes, the shoreline habitats of the lower congo river  nonetheless harbor a large number of cichlid species, and to date  <dig> narrowly endemic species have been reported from this short stretch of river. one of these, steatocranus mpozoensis, is known also to occur in the mpozo river, a large leftbank tributary of the lcr. thoracochromis demeusii occurs predominantly in the main channel but is also often found in lower reaches of numerous affluent streams, while the remaining lcr endemics are found exclusively in marginal habitats along the river's main channel. interestingly there are also parallels in habitat type between the great lakes and the lcr system. the eddies along many sections of the lcr shoreline encompass patches of rocky, sandy, muddy, and weedy substrates that resemble the mosaics of habitat types described in the african great lakes  <cit> . unlike the lacustrine setting, in large rivers, the presence of strong currents might also influence both the distribution of and connectivity among cichlid populations. in particular, the complex hydrology of the lcr provides the potential for additional barriers to inter-population migration that are absent in lacustrine settings.

the congo river drains approximately  <dig>  million km <dig> section of equatorial africa containing the largest continuous rainforest on the continent and a water volume that is five times larger than that of the mississippi river. near the twin cities of kinshasa  and brazzaville  the congo river spills over a rocky sill that forms the eastern boundary of the lcr and plunges through a narrow gorge descending some  <dig> m in its  <dig> km journey to the sea  <cit> . the river gorge itself contains many width expansions and contractions and can be extraordinarily deep--recent in situ depth measurements record the channel to be more than  <dig> m in some areas  <cit>  forming the deepest river trenches and canyons in the world. this, combined with the high annual discharge, steep elevational incline, fluctuating channel width and complex channel topology creates an extremely energetic flow regime with downstream water velocities in excess of  <dig> cm/s and with vertical water velocities of up to  <dig> cm/second in some sections  <cit> .

the extreme hydrological conditions with persistent, high in-stream water velocities in the lcr are expected to hinder cross-channel passage and isolate small, epibenthic cichlid populations to shorelines. furthermore, because cichlids have physoclistous gas bladders, adult fish have limited tolerance for rapid change in water pressure  <cit> , suggesting that few individuals would survive a rapid upward transport from depth through entrainment in dynamic vertically upwelling waters. if these complex and powerful river currents do reduce gene flow this would then facilitate subsequent phenotypic divergence in isolation through natural selection, sexual selection, or genetic drift.

here we report the first detailed estimates of interpopulational connectivity and phenotypic divergence among cichlids in a high energy african river. we selected two locally endemic species with distinct ecologies from a  <dig> km stretch of the lcr . teleogramma depressum, is a goby-like, benthic species that is confined to rocky, shoreline habitats and which guard fixed territories . teleogramma depressum appears to be restricted in its geographical distribution to a region approximately matching the present study reach. lamprologus tigripictilis is a habitat generalist found over riffles and rocky habitats as well as over less complex substrates where sand or mud predominate. they have even been occasionally collected in flooded grasses, and are considerably less territorial than t. depressum . the known distributional range of l. tigripictilis is considerably larger than that of t. depressum, and extends beyond the study reach from the region of mbelo some  <dig> km downstream from pool malebo to boma about  <dig> km downstream of site e near matadi.

RESULTS
morphological divergence
the results of the coordinate-based morphometric analyses are graphically represented in figure  <dig>  for l. tigripictilis, pca  indicates phenotypic differentiation between individuals from the three upstream sites  and those of the two downstream sites . hotelling's t <dig> indicates these differences are significant . a grid display of deformations implied by pc  <dig> scores using procrustes superposition highlights regions of shape variation concentrated on mouth size, paired fin placement, and body depth . in contrast, pca results for t. depressum  revealed no clear relationship between shape variation and geographic location. deformation implied by pc <dig> scores using procrustes superposition  indicates little variation among landmark configurations, and no significant differentiation between populations from sites a and b-c were detected .

genetic diversity
sample sizes and genetic diversity summary statistics for the nuclear loci can be found in table  <dig>  in t. depressum, the observed  <dig> locus mean heterozygosity ranged from  <dig>  in the sample from site c to  <dig>  at sites a and b. all loci were in hardy-weinberg equilibrium after using a bonferroni correction for multiple comparisons, however one locus deviated significantly from hardy-weinberg expectations at the p= <dig>  level in samples from sites b and c. population samples at sites  <dig> and  <dig> were both fixed for single alleles at locus tmom <dig> and at locus gm- <dig>  l. tigripictilis populations showed a clear trend of decreasing heterozygosity from upstream to downstream, with hobs ranging from  <dig>  at site a to  <dig>  at site e., and all loci were in hardy-weinberg equilibrium. within site variation for mtdna markers is shown in table  <dig>  no clear upstream - downstream trend in mtdna diversity was detected.

"distance from a" shows dispersal distances  within the river relative to site a. n = sample size, na = number of alleles observed per locus, hobs = observed heterozygosity. nm = the estimated number of migrants estimated using the private alleles method. traditional  ϕst values are shown between adjacent populations .

values for l. tigripictilis are shown above the diagonal, those for t. depressum are shown below.

the bottleneck program detected no evidence of a recent bottleneck in any of the populations in either species .

genetic divergence
both mitochondrial and nuclear loci supported the presence of two partially isolated genetic groups for both study species. in t. depressum mtdna revealed two distinct sets of haplotypes that differed by  <dig> substitutions between the samples from site a relative to the samples from sites b and c. individuals in populations a and b differed by an average of  <dig> mtdna base substitutions. similarly, our analysis of nuclear loci using the assignment test framework found the strongest support for two genetic clusters  vs. , ). these groups were strongly differentiated, with a microsatellite based ϕst of  <dig>   . sites b and c were not statistically distinguishable from each other within t. depressum.


isolation by distance analysis could not be conducted on the t. depressum data set because only three geographic localities were successfully sampled. the data were not consistent with a pattern of isolation by distance among l. tigripictilis populations . a high level of gene flow between populations a and b caused a deviation from the relationship expected under an ibd model.

discussion
evolutionary divergence is a continuous and dynamic process in which landscape features may limit gene flow between populations. when local ecological factors select for distinct phenotypes in different and genetically isolated populations, or when genetic drift causes different phenotypic traits to become fixed, this process may lead to the development of reproductive isolation  between populations. our data sets are the first documentation of high levels of both genetic isolation and phenotypic divergence owing to fine-scale philopatry in cichlids in a high energy fluviatile setting. in both t. depressum and l. tigripictilis we detected genetic isolation at small geographic scales. in l. tigripictilis, we also detected measurable phenotypic differentiation.

in the lower congo river, both t. depressum and l. tigripictilis are confined to relatively sheltered shoreline habitats that are in many ways similar to those along the shores of the great lakes with a linear array of rocky, sandy, and intermediate substrates. however the hydrodynamics of this powerful river system are strikingly different from those of the great lakes. between the western edge of pool malebo and the atlantic ocean, the congo river descends some 280m. this steep drop generates an array of sheltered, isolated habitat patches separated by variously sized, and often extremely powerful, rapids. in the study area, the width of the channel varies more than five-fold, from a maximum of  <dig>  km in the inga reach to as little as  <dig>  km in several intervening narrow chutes. many of these constricted regions are associated with high-energy rapids that span the entire width of the channel and interrupt stretches of suitable cichlid habitat. because of these geographic features and the high levels of endemism documented for this river reach, the lower congo river represents an important new biohydrologic model system for exploring the isolating mechanisms underlying patterns of species diversification. consistent with the extreme hydrological forces operating in the lcr, our estimates of genetic isolation are among the highest reported for any african cichlid species on a comparable geographic scale .

two relatively small but intense rapids lie between the most strongly differentiated t. depressum populations at sites a and b. the rapids at isangala and fwamalo are both associated with a narrowing of the river channel . in both cases, an area of whitewater extends from bank to bank. analysis of the modest number of available samples at sites b and c did not permit rejection of the null hypothesis of panmixia along the much larger, wider, and shallower rapids at inga. this pattern may be a result of either reduced statistical power owing to modest sample sizes, or a genuine reflection of population connectivity along the complex shoreline in this stretch with its numerous potential stepping stone habitats.

perhaps not surprisingly  the pattern among lamprologus tigripictilis samples is more complex. assignment tests support the presence of two distinct genetic clusters at sites a and b, however the probability of belonging to either cluster is not related to the collection locality, and many individuals have intermediate assignment probabilities. a single individual collected from site c also belongs to one of these two clusters. almost all individuals at sites d and e assign to a single genetic cluster. estimates of ϕst between each pair of adjacent collection localities were all significantly different from zero, although we treat this allele frequency based result cautiously because sample sizes were modest, particularly at sites d and e. the highest ϕst estimate was between samples from sites b and d . this genetic break was also detected in the mtdna data set. our morphometric analysis detected phenotypic divergence across this genetic barrier as well, suggesting that the barrier is strong enough for selection or drift to maintain phenotypic differences between populations.

because the rugged terrain of the lcr did not permit us to collect samples along a formal transect, we cannot unambiguously determine which specific biogeographic barriers maintain population isolation. however the overall patterns of genetic divergence suggest that two species may not respond identically to the same barriers. in t. depressum, the strongest genetic break is between sites a and b, and the two sets of intervening narrow rapids likely play a role in isolating these populations. lamprologus tigripictilis populations from these two sites are also significantly different from each other as measured using ϕst, however the level of genetic differentiation is lower than in t. depressum from the same sites or from l. tigripictilis populations from further downstream.

in l. tigripictilis there is an intriguing general trend of lower genetic diversity at downstream sites relative to upstream sites. however, we detected no evidence of recent genetic bottlenecks in any of the populations, suggesting that the populations have existed in their current state long enough to reach migration-mutation-drift equilibrium. relative to population b, population d has a large number of private alleles. indeed, at  <dig> of the  <dig> loci, the most common allele in population d was not found in population b suggesting almost no recent gene flow between sites, consistent with long term isolation of these populations. the large number of mtdna substitutions that distinguish upstream and downstream l. tigripictilis haplotypes further supports the idea that the populations have been isolated long enough to have achieved equilibrium.

CONCLUSIONS
the hotspots of species endemism of some african rivers may be less speciose and far less famous than those of the great lakes, yet they represent a substantial fraction of cichlid biodiversity and available habitat. it is likely that the observed relationship between landscape forces and population genetic processes observed here is comparable to those operating during the early stages of ecological divergence of many recognized endemic species in the lcr. they may even help illuminate the origins of the spectacular radiations within the great lakes. it has been suggested patterns of cichlid evolution and adaptation to high energy river environments may have had an influence on the spectacular patterns of philopatry and evolutionary divergence currently observed in rock-dwelling species in the african great lakes  <cit> . current phylogenenetic analyses indicate that these particular lcr cichlids are not the direct ancestors of the great lakes species flocks. however, the complex climate history of eastern africa with frequent xeric periods suggests that some of the founders of the great lakes faunas would have spent part of their evolutionary history in river systems  <cit> . we hypothesize that philopatry in high energy river systems may be adaptive for these small physoclistous species. if early lake colonists were also philopatric, this 'preadaptation' would have had a profound influence on evolution of species diversity in the african great lakes.

