BACKGROUND
bahd acyltransferases make up a large family of enzymes responsible for acyl-coa dependent acylation of secondary metabolites, typically resulting in the formation of esters and amides. in a foundational paper, st. pierre & de luca  <cit>  named the family after the first four characterized members . currently, the bahd family encompasses over sixty biochemically characterized members in plant taxa ranging from gymnosperms to monocots to legumes. previous work has shown that these enzymes may be involved in synthesis or modification of such diverse metabolites as alkaloids, terpenoids and phenolics, with ecophysiological roles in minimizing cuticular water loss, defending against herbivory, and attracting pollinators .

the bahd family has been previously organized into five major phylogenetic clades, using  <dig> biochemically or genetically characterized members  <cit> . this classification revealed both clade-specific and clade-independent biochemical activities among family members. for example, benzoyl-coa donor utilization so far appears to be limited to clade v, while hydroxycinnamoyl-coa has been reported as a donor for members in multiple clades  <cit> . substrate specificity typically varies among clades, and sometimes within clade as well. for example, clade i members act mainly upon flavonoids, while clade v members utilize substrates ranging from terpenoids to medium-chain alcohols to quinic acid, in association with major phylogenetic branches within this clade  <cit> . similar diversity of function was also noted for clade iii members, which are involved in formation of alkaloids, esters, and flavonoids, but functional association was less clear due to the smaller size of subclades in this branch. this highlights both the diversity of the bahd family and the potential challenge of phylogeny-based functional inference with limited sequence and/or species representation.

most functionally characterized bahd acyltransferases share two conserved motifs, hxxxd and dfgwg  <cit> . the conservation of these motifs has facilitated in silico identification of bahd acyltransferases from available genome sequences  <cit> . the hxxxd motif is also found in other thioester coa-utilizing acyltransferase families  <cit>  and is absolutely conserved among bahd acyltransferases. its importance for catalysis was first established by site-directed mutagenesis  <cit> . crystallographic analysis of the chrysanthemum  malonyltransferase dm3mat <dig> provided the structural basis for the catalytic role of the his residue in malonyl-coa binding  <cit> . the importance of the dfgwg motif, which is highly but not absolutely conserved, for enzyme activity was first shown in a salvia malonyltransferase  <cit>  and a rauvolfia vinorine synthase  <cit>  based on mutagenesis studies of the asp residue. however, structural analysis of dm3mat <dig> suggested that this asp residue most likely plays a structural, rather than catalytic, role in enzyme function  <cit> . coupling the structural analysis with mutagenesis studies of two other malonyltransferases from the same species also revealed a greater structural diversity of acyl acceptor binding sites relative to the acyl-coa donor binding sites  <cit> . this is consistent with the known broad range of acceptor molecules and relatively narrow range of acyl-donors utilized by different bahd acyltransferases  <cit> .

despite the prevalence of bahd acyltransferases in plants, cross-genome analysis of this family is lacking. genome-wide analyses of this family have recently been reported for arabidopsis and populus <cit> , but only in a single-taxon context. we sought to explore bahd acyltransferase diversity from an evolutionary perspective, with a primary focus in populus due to its ability to synthesize a broad array of secondary metabolites. the most abundant of these metabolites are the phenylpropanoid-derived non-structural phenolics known to play significant roles in biotic and abiotic stress responses in this genus  <cit> . the diversity of populus phenylpropanoids  can be attributed in large part to side-chain modifications, such as glycosylation, methylation, and acylation  <cit> . we therefore used a phylogenomic approach to develop an updated phylogeny of the populus bahd acyltransferase family in reference to four other angiosperm taxa. together with gene duplication and expression analyses, our data suggest that lineage-specific gene duplication is a key process in bahd family evolution. the results are consistent with a role of the bahd acyltransferases in diversifying the secondary metabolite repertoire in plants.

RESULTS
populus has more bahd acyltransferase genes than arabidopsis, medicago, oryza, and vitis
blastp searches against the jgi populus trichocarpa genome release v <dig>  revealed  <dig> unique loci with high similarity to biochemically characterized bahd acyltransferases from a previous review  <cit> . manual curation and referencing against the recently released genome v <dig>  were conducted to exclude loci lacking a conserved motif , loci that represented redundant, possibly allelic copies, and loci resembling spurious gene models . the final list of  <dig> putative populus bahd acyltransferases was used for all subsequent analyses and annotation . in the course of our work, another group also annotated the bahd family in populus <cit>  and reported  <dig> putative gene models. these models correspond to  <dig> putative bahd genes on our list, with one model that matched two v <dig>  gene models on our list; the  <dig> remaining models were either redundant or rejected based on our manual curation criteria . similar blast search and quality control measures were also performed for the genomes of arabidopsis, medicago, oryza, and vitis, producing final lists of  <dig>   <dig>   <dig>  and  <dig> putative bahd genes, respectively . these lists include ten biochemically characterized arabidopsis members and one biochemically characterized medicago member .


phylogenetic analysis supports eight major clades of plant bahd acyltransferases
phylogenetic relationships among the bahd acyltransferases were reconstructed using a maximum-likelihood algorithm, for a collection of  <dig> biochemically characterized plant bahd acyltransferases and the putative members from populus, arabidopsis, oryza, medicago, and vitis . the resulting phylogenetic tree is broadly consistent with that of d'auria  <cit> , who sorted biochemically characterized bahd acyltransferases into five major groups. our expanded analysis suggests that a grouping of eight major clades is now warranted, a finding consistent with previous, single-genome-based, neighbour-joining analyses  <cit> . in particular, a strongly-supported clade comprised entirely of bahd acyltransferases lacking biochemical characterization data was sister to the group of proteins previously designated as clade i by d'auria  <cit> . to maintain consistency, we adopted a similar clade nomenclature, and name the previous and the "new" groups as clades ia and ib, respectively. clades ia and ib correspond respectively to the populus clades vb+vc and va, and to the arabidopsis clades iib and iia reported by yu et al.  <cit> . another strongly supported clade containing the petunia acetyl coa:coniferyl alcohol acetyltransferase  was sister to the group classified by d'auria as clade iii  <cit> . we name the previous and the "new" clades as iiia and iiib, respectively; these correspond to the populus clades iv and ii and arabidopsis clades iv and iiia in yu et al.  <cit> . members of the former clade v  <cit>  clustered into two well-supported groups in our analysis, renamed hereafter clades va and vb. these clades correspond to yu et al.'s clades ia and ib for both populus and arabidopsis <cit> . characterized proteins in clade va tend to be involved in volatile ester formation, while those in clade vb are closely related to hydroxycinnamoyltransferases  responsible for the synthesis of chlorogenic acid and monolignols. our analysis also placed clade iv basal to clades va and vb, with good support. the remaining sequences clustered into one strongly supported group corresponding to d'auria's clade ii  <cit> .

the distribution of sequences among the five species varied within each clade . populus and oryza have the largest number of bahd members overall, and collectively these made up the majority of clades ia, va, and vb. populus also predominated in the dicot-specific clade iiia, while clade iv was monocot-specific. taxon bias was also evident in clades ib and iiib, where medicago and vitis, respectively, were over-represented. when analyzed by species, clade va, the largest clade, remained the largest group in all taxa, except in medicago where clade ib predominated . clades ii, iiib, and iv had the lowest representations overall, consistent with their small overall sizes. the major exception to this pattern was vitis, which showed a relatively higher representation of clade iiib, coinciding with a much lower representation of clade ia. other species-biased patterns included high  representation for clade iiia in populus, clade ib in arabidopsis, and clade ia in oryza.

closer examination of the phylogeny revealed that bahd sequences from a single taxon tended to cluster together, especially within the larger clades. in clade ia, all sequences from the five taxa formed lineage-specific groups with strong bootstrap support, except for one well-supported subgroup . oryza sequences were basal to all eudicot sequences in this clade. two strongly-supported subclades consisting of a combined total of sixteen populus sequences comprised another large, but in this case weakly-supported, group, sister to a group of eight arabidopsis sequences, including a malonyl coa:cyanidin  <dig> -diglucoside transferase . similar, but less dramatic patterns were observed for clade ib . while the two most basal subgroups in this clade did not show strong taxon specificity, the two remaining subgroups each comprised five taxon-specific branches with strong support . in accordance with its overrepresentation overall in clade ib, medicago exhibited substantial taxon-specific expansions within these two branches.

taxon-specific clustering appeared more scattered in clade iiia, perhaps because the larger of the two major branches was poorly resolved . ten populus sequences formed a well-supported subclade together with a clarkia breweri acetyltransferase involved in benzyl acetate formation , and with an uncharacterized vitis sequence. a smaller subclade contained five populus sequences, and a third taxon-specific subclade containing seven of the nine arabidopsis sequences in clade iiia also had high bootstrap support.

as the largest phylogenetic group, clade va contained a number of highly-derived branches, some specific to gymnosperms, monocots, or dicots . the largest well-supported branch in this clade contained four taxon-specific clusters of at least seven members , one each for vitis , populus , medicago , and oryza . oryza sequences were over-represented in this clade and fell mainly into two large branches with moderate bootstrap support. one was oryza-specific as mentioned above, and the other contained three eudicot sequences . taxon-specific clustering was not as evident in clade vb, except for a well-supported branch of seven oryza sequences, sister to a group of hydroxycinnamoyltransferases  involved in biosynthesis of lignin, chlorogenic acid, and other phytoalexins .

clade ii lacked species-specific clustering patterns, as members were more evenly distributed among species . clade iiib was relatively small, and exhibited some degree of taxon-specific clustering. the largest such grouping comprised nine vitis sequences, consistent with their overrepresentation in this clade . a four-member subclade of oryza sequences and a three-member subclade each for arabidopsis and medicago were also evident. clade iv was the smallest clade and was restricted to monocots, as mentioned previously.

with regard to populus, species-specific expansion was evidenced within clades ia, iiia and va. because the populus-specific subgroup in clade ia is most closely related to several biochemically characterized malonyltransferases from arabidopsis, medicago, and glycine, we have named members of this clade as malonyltransferase-like . the sequences in the populus-specific branch are matl1- <dig> and 16- <dig>  we designated all populus sequences in clade iiia as alcohol acyltransferase-like , after the numerous characterized alcohol acyltransferases within that clade. the populus-specific branch includes aatl <dig>   <dig>  7- <dig>  18- <dig>  and 22- <dig>  we refer to the three populus clusters within the largest branch of group va by three names. first, we named the set of four populus sequences clustering with two malus sequences and a set of vitis sequences, including an anthraniloyl-coa:methanol acyltransferase from vitis labrusca , as amat-like . next, we refer to the six populus proteins most closely related to the arabidopsis acetyl coa:cis-3-hexen-1-ol acetyl transferase  <cit>  as chat-like . finally, the subgroup of seven populus sequences that fell into a poorly-resolved region of clade va, most closely to a tigloyl-coa:-13α-hydroxymultiflorine/-13α-hydroxylupanine o-tigloyltransferase from lupinus , were named hmt-like .

new family-wide and clade-specific motifs are present in bahd acyltransferases
the large number of bahd genes available from sequenced plant genomes presents an opportunity to expand the analysis of conserved motifs in this family beyond the two known functional domains, hxxxd and dfgwg. we subjected sequences from each clade to motif analysis using miner v <dig>   <cit> . clades ii and iv were excluded from the analysis due to their small sizes. using a sequence window of five amino acids and the default z-score threshold, four to nine motifs were predicted for each clade . miner identified the dfgwg motif in four of the six tested clades . although it did not meet the miner threshold, visual inspection revealed high conservation of this motif in clades iiib and vb as well . this supports the validity of our approach towards the identification of conserved motifs. the hxxxd motif escaped detection by miner, but this was expected since the motif contains a variable core.

two new motifs were identified with multi-clade conservation. the first motif had a consensus of yplagr beginning around position 71- <dig>  and was predicted in clades iiia, va, and vb. manual inspection of the other clades identified a similar motif in this region, but with notable variability from the consensus, especially for the two flanking residues . the second motif had a consensus of qvtxxcgg around position 136- <dig> and was predicted in clades ib, iiia, and va. manual inspection revealed that qvt was highly conserved in the other three clades, but cgg was poorly conserved in clades ia and ib . clade-specific motifs were also observed, several of which were located near the n-terminus of the protein: the ltffd motif from clade ia was located at positions 33- <dig>  the ikpssptp motif of clade iiia at positions 11- <dig>  and snldl from clade vb at positions 25- <dig> . because the n-terminus often contains targeting peptide sequences, we examined the predicted protein subcellular localization patterns by clade using three different prediction programs. however, we found no evidence for a link between the observed clade-specific n-terminal motifs and the predicted subcellular targeting of the bahd proteins .

although clade ii was too small for motif analysis, we note that none of its members would have been accepted using our initial search criteria . the two original clade members, zmglossy <dig> and atcer <dig>  are known to participate in cuticular wax biosynthesis based exclusively on genetic characterization studies  <cit> . in the absence of biochemical data, it remains debatable as to whether clade ii members should be considered true bahd acyltransferases.

multiple gene duplication types have contributed to bahd family expansion in the populus genome
populus has experienced at least two genome-wide duplication events, the salicoid event approximately 60- <dig> mya and the older eudicot triplication event, as well as numerous segmental and tandem duplication events  <cit> . we sought to determine whether the various types of gene duplications contributed towards the expansion of the populus bahd family, especially with regard to populus-specific subclades . overall, we found sixty bahd genes were associated with recent  duplications , accounting for more than half of the bahd acyltransferases in populus . this is broadly consistent with previous analysis of chromosomal location of bahd acyltransferases in populus, which mapped  <dig> of  <dig> genes to homeologous chromosome segments or tandem duplication blocks based on the v <dig>  genome release  <cit> . events were spread approximately evenly across the two duplication types, with a greater number of local  duplications overall. duplications were found in all but the two smallest clades . salicoid and local duplications were overrepresented in clades ib, va, and vb relative to the genome overall. such duplications impacted every member of clade ib , all but two genes in the largest subclade of va , and all but one member of clade vb . for two subclades within the large, poorly resolved region in clade va, multiple local duplications appear to have followed genome-wide duplication events in one of the two salicoid paralogues . the first instance is the relationship between hmtl <dig> on linkage group  xi and the hmtl1- <dig> cluster on lg i. the second is the relationship between chatl <dig> on lg xix and the chatl1- <dig> triplet on lg xiii.

a two members in clade va are associated with both salicoid and local duplications ; b includes two triplets; c includes one triplet; d includes one triplet and one quadruplet.

although clade iiia exhibited several duplications, the populus-dominated aatl subclade had just one tandem pair . clade ia had the lowest rate of duplications among the larger clades, with two local triplets within the populus-dominated matl subclade . the relatively low numbers of local and salicoid duplications in the populus-dominated aatl and matl subclades raises the possibility that some of these genes might have originated through other mechanisms, such as transposable elements. we therefore searched for the presence of retrotransposons within the two 10-kb windows flanking either side of each populus bahd gene. we found retrotransposon associations in each clade, covering over one third of the family as a whole, although the majority of associated genes were flanked on only one end . retrotransposon associations were frequently observed for recently duplicated genes . retrotransposon associations were overrepresented in clade va, noted for all amatls and the majority of chatls and hmtls . however, all of these gene models contained at least one intron , suggesting that retrotransposition is unlikely to be a direct cause of duplication. retrotransposon associations were underrepresented in clade iiia and absent from the aatl populus-dominated subclade . despite its average representation of retrotransposon associations, clade ia had the greatest number of genes with retrotransposons flanking both sides . two such genes, matl <dig> and  <dig>  formed a strongly supported branch with matl <dig>  all three are located on lg iv , lack predicted introns , and share a high degree of nucleotide identity with one another . although preliminary, our analysis suggests that retrotransposons have contributed to the duplications of some bahd genes.

some recently duplicated bahd acyltransferases are differentially expressed
to investigate expression of populus bahd genes, we mined a set of nine affymetrix microarray datasets encompassing five different genotypes and four different tissue types generated in our laboratory  <cit> . after excluding probes that had consistently low expression across all samples  and annotating probes based on the poparray database  <cit> , we obtained expression data for  <dig> probes corresponding to  <dig> bahd genes . pairwise correlations of bahd gene expression across all microarray experiments were computed and the results organized by duplication type . median spearman rank correlations were significantly different among the duplication categories according to one-way anova . not surprisingly, median correlations for gene pairs derived from local or salicoid duplications were significantly higher than for other types of  gene pairs .

when the log-transformed microarray data were visualized as a heatmap, expression across the bahd family as a whole was biased towards leaves, and we did not observe clear differences in expression patterns among the major clades . within the major clades, genotype- and/or tissue-dependent expression patterns were evident. for example, root-specific expression dominated in the hmtl subclade, while the majority of other clade va genes showed the more typical leaf-biased expression . in another case, hct <dig> and hct <dig> were relatively uniformly expressed in all three p. fremontii × angustifolia hybrid genotypes examined, while hct <dig> and hct <dig> were detected only in genotype  <dig> . hct <dig>  on the other hand, was most abundant in roots. expression patterns diverged for closely related genes in several cases, including genes within the populus-dominated subclades. for example, matl <dig> was biased towards p. fremontii × angustifolia genotype  <dig> relative to matl1- <dig>  which were more evenly expressed across genotypes and tissues. the populus-dominated aatl subclade includes aatl <dig>  which was preferentially expressed in cell suspension cultures, as well as aatl <dig>   <dig>  and  <dig>  which exhibited different expression patterns by leaf age and genotype. the chatl cluster includes two members  that were fairly evenly expressed across sampled tissues, and two  that were detected only in leaves. the more divergent chatl4/ <dig> were most strongly expressed in non-photosynthetic tissues, yielding an overall pattern that resembled the hmtls more than the other chatls .

qpcr was performed to verify the expression patterns of closely related chatl transcripts observed by microarray analysis, using an independent set of p. tremuloides tissues . specific primers were designed to distinguish among the three paralogous pairs with different duplication history : chatl1/ <dig>  chatl3/ <dig> and chatl4/ <dig>  chatl1/ <dig> were expressed relatively consistently across all leaf and stem internode tissues sampled, but were lower in root and flower tissues . chatl3/ <dig> were most strongly expressed in young leaves and roots, followed by apices and mature leaves, and were much lower in stem and flower tissues. the transcript levels of chatl4/ <dig> were very low overall, with the highest levels detected in roots, similar to the microarray data of p. fremontii × angustifolia. overall, the qpcr data were broadly consistent with the microarray results, and support the idea that the three pairs of chatl genes have diverged in their expression patterns despite their high homology.

we next analyzed the microarray data to examine the responses of bahd gene expression to four different stress treatments, including nitrogen limitation, wounding, detopping, or methyl jasmonate feeding, across several tissues and/or genotypes. again, no clear overall patterns by clade were observed, and the differential gene expression patterns observed among some paralogous genes described above also held for the stress treatments . additional evidence of functional divergence was observed. for example, clade iiia member aatl <dig> showed its strongest upregulation in young leaves one week after wounding, while the responses of aatl <dig> and aatl <dig> were most drastically affected via down-regulation in expanding leaves following detopping. the leaf-expressing chatl genes were generally up-regulated by nitrogen stress in p. fremontii × angustifolia genotype  <dig>  except chatl <dig> in expanding leaves. however, the trend was more variable in genotype  <dig> , despite similar baseline expression of these genes between the two genotypes . qpcr analysis of the same suite of samples confirmed this general discrepancy between the two genotypes , although the degree of expression changes varied between the two analytical  methods. the data hint at differential expression among closely related bahd genes in response to nitrogen stress between different populus hybrid genotypes. future investigation would help determine how widespread this pattern is across the bahd family and a broader range of genotypes in this genus.

discussion
bahd family expansion as a factor enabling metabolic diversification
across the five angiosperm genomes investigated here, we observed numerous differential lineage expansions within the bahd acyltransferase phylogeny. examination of retained gene copies following duplications in populus revealed that the majority of bahd genes, at least in this genus, are associated with recent genome-wide as well as local duplication events. an estimated 32% of all v <dig>  populus genes  were derived from the salicoid duplication event  <cit> . however, only 26% of the populus bahd acyltransferases were associated with the salicoid duplication. tandem or local duplications, on the other hand, accounted for over one-third  of the populus bahd genes, much higher than the genome average estimated at 16%  <cit> . it thus appeared that local duplications were over-represented and genome-wide duplications were under-represented in the populus bahd family relative to the genome average. we speculate that this pattern may be generally applicable to the other angiosperm genomes surveyed in this study. local duplications might be more likely than polyploidization events to account for the observed taxon-specific expansions of bahd acyltransferases. this was indeed the case for the populus-dominated hmtl and chatl subclades, where the majority of the genes were derived from local duplications, and to a much lesser extent, for the matl subclade. in contrast, only two of the ten members in the populus-dominated subclade among the aatls were implicated in any duplication event. preliminary molecular clock analysis suggested that the divergence times among members of the populus-dominated matl and aatl subclades were similar and predated the salicoid duplication event. this suggests that other duplications, prior to the salicoid duplication event but after the eudicot triplication event, probably contributed to the populus-specific expansion as well.

previous work has shown that genes involved in stress responses, including secondary metabolic genes, are more likely than average to experience lineage-specific diversification via tandem duplication  <cit> . when placed in a metabolic pathway context, we suggest that taxon-specific, local duplication-derived expansion of gene families may be characteristic of enzymes that occupy a terminal or tangential position in a metabolic pathway. conversely, enzymes with an intermediate position in a core pathway would likely retain a more constant number of gene copies across taxa due to evolutionarily constraint for balanced stoichiometry between enzymes acting within the same pathway. in support of this idea, hcts known to be involved in intermediate steps of monolignol biosynthesis formed a multi-taxon cluster within clade vb, encoded by 1- <dig> genes in all sequenced genomes. in populus, clade vb diversified about equally via salicoid and local duplication events. in contrast, the sister clade va exhibited extensive taxon-specific clustering ; populus genes in the major subclade were associated with more than three times as many local duplications as retained salicoid duplicates. the biochemically characterized enzymes within this branch are all involved in the final step of various volatile ester and alkaloid ester biosynthetic pathways  <cit> .

taxon-specific phylogenetic expansions have also been observed within the o-methyltransferase   <cit>  and glycosyltransferase   families. like bahd acyltransferases, omts and gts form large families, and collectively the three are responsible for the elaboration  of a wide range of secondary metabolites  <cit> . these modifications increase the diversity of natural products, with regard to both their chemical structures and biological activities, and they hold chemotaxonomic value due to their taxon-specificity  <cit> . studies from the omt and gt <dig> families have shown that many of these enzymes possess promiscuous substrate specificity  <cit> . this, coupled with the tendency of taxon-specific diversification of some of the subfamily members, may be a means to afford metabolic plasticity. consistent with this idea, multifunctional omts from thalictrum tuberosum formed a taxon-specific subclade, while those with a limited substrate range formed multi-taxon subclades  <cit> . in the case of bahd acyltransferases, numerous biochemically characterized clade va members involved in volatile ester biosynthesis have been shown to accept multiple substrates and/or donors, at least in vitro  <cit> . many of these were found in the same subclade where taxon-specific diversification was common . these data further support the view that differential lineage expansions of the bahd family may be linked to taxon-specific metabolic diversification.

implications of divergent paralogue expression and newly identified conserved motifs for bahd acyltransferase function
given the extent of gene duplications in the populus bahd family, it was not surprising that many of the closely related members retained similar expression patterns. this, however, was not universal, as we noted for the chatls, especially in stressed tissues. while genes with high sequence similarity are likely to have similar biochemical functions, the differential expression patterns observed here suggest that physiological functions might have already diverged for some recent duplicates. our examination of bahd acyltransferase expression in p. fremontii × angustifolia and p. tremuloides under various stress conditions builds upon the previous analysis in p. trichocarpa by yu et al.  <cit> . overall, these results are broadly consistent in that bahd expression was generally much stronger in photosynthetic than non-photosynthetic tissues. in the present study, the expression bias towards leaves was generally consistent across genotypes. relatively little difference was observed between genotypes under control conditions, but differences became evident under stress. biotic and abiotic stresses are known to influence the relative proportions of secondary metabolites in populus , and different genotypes differ in both secondary metabolite diversity and quantities  <cit> . the variety of bahd expression patterns in stressed tissues, either among recently duplicated genes, between closely related genotypes or during leaf development, is consistent with a role for bahd genes in regulating secondary metabolite accumulation and diversity in populus.

the two known conserved motifs in bahd acyltransferases, hxxxd and dfgwg, have been implicated in the binding of the acyl-coa donor and in the structural integrity of the enzyme-donor complex, respectively  <cit> . our analysis revealed two new motifs, yplagr and qvtxxcgg, that were conserved across multiple clades. the yplagr motif corresponds to the small α-helix- <dig>  on the crystal structure of vinorine synthase  <cit> , but no mutagenesis analysis targeting this region has yet been conducted. the lower conservation of this motif in clade ia is correlated with a lack of this α-helix and an extra string of 9- <dig> residues  <cit> , positioned between the corresponding gly and arg residues of the yplagr motif on the clade iiia enzyme vinorine synthase  <cit> . the qvtxxcgg motif is eight amino acids upstream of the hxxxd motif, spanning β- <dig> and β- <dig> of vinorine synthase  <cit> , or β- <dig> and β- <dig> of dm3mat <dig>  <cit> . previous work in vinorine synthase  <cit>  has established the functional importance of the cys residue in the qvtxxcgg motif. a cys-to-ala point mutation reduced enzymatic activity by 90%, an impact only exceeded by mutation of the his or asp residues in hxxxd  <cit> . functional support for several clade-specific motifs can also be garnered. the ltffd motif conserved in clade ia maps to α- <dig> on the dm3mat <dig> crystal structure, near the acyl acceptor binding site  <cit> . site-directed mutagenesis of three adjacent α- <dig> residues on dm3mat <dig> reduced enzyme activity  <cit> , supporting the importance of this motif. another clade ia-specific motif, yfgnc , is thought to be involved in anthocyanin acyltransferase interactions with malonyl-coa  <cit> . site-directed mutagenesis of vinorine synthase targeting the first ser residue in the ikpssptp motif  <cit>  has also implicated its role in clade iiia enzyme function. given the reported structural diversity of the acyl acceptor binding sites  <cit> , they are more likely to exhibit sequence conservation by clade. in this regard, the suite of clade-specific motifs that we identified should be of value in future structural modelling and mutagenesis studies to understand the diverse enzyme functions in the large bahd acyltransferase family.

CONCLUSIONS
our phylogenomic analysis expanded and improved upon the previous bahd family phylogeny, highlighting two major clades for which almost no biochemical data has yet been generated. our analysis also identified striking patterns of differential expansion of the bahd family across five angiosperm taxa, including numerous taxon-specific subclades. this finding may provide a basis for understanding the differentiation of secondary metabolism across taxa. examining clusters of homologous genes within populus demonstrated that tandem gene duplication has been an important evolutionary force for bahd diversification within this genus, particularly with respect to two lineage-specific expansions. the retention of salicoid duplicates and likely retrotransposition events have also contributed to the large number of bahd genes in this taxon. microarray analysis showed diversity of gene expression among some highly homologous genes in populus, suggesting that some recently duplicated bahd paralogues have undergone functional divergence in this genus. the discovery of two multi-clade conserved protein motifs as well as clade-specific motifs supports previous research on bahd enzyme structure and biochemical function, while opening the door to future investigation on the structural basis of donor and substrate specificity within and between clades.

