BACKGROUND
natural antisense transcripts  are defined as transcripts of the opposite dna strand to the sense-strand either at the same locus  or a different locus . the first nats were detected in viruses, followed by prokaryotes and then eukaryotes. for an excellent review of current nat knowledge, please refer to lapidot and pilpel  <cit> . nats usually possess a negative regulatory effect and can affect gene expression at multiple stages including transcription, rna processing and transport, and translation  <cit> . thus, nats may be involved in the regulation of varying biological functions such as the adaptation to stresses and development. nats are involved in rna interference  <cit> , methylation  <cit>  and genomic imprinting  <cit> . nats give rise to sense-antisense transcript pairs that were once considered as rare, but the number identified has escalated greatly with the availability of dna sequencing resources and public databases. for example, 22% of annotated genes in the fruit fly genome are reported to overlap as transcript pairs  <cit> , and more than 20% of human transcripts may form sense-antisense transcript pairs  <cit> . in plants, few sense-antisense transcript pairs had been reported until recent large-scale studies in rice  <cit>  and a. thaliana  <cit> . in the rice study, full-length cdna data revealed that approximately 7% of transcripts formed sense-antisense transcript pairs  <cit> . in these plant studies, the alignment of full-length cdnas and expressed sequence tags  to the genome sequence was used to identify the sense-antisense transcript pairs, which is limited to the detection of cis-encoded pairs. in wheat, antisense transcripts have been discovered from serial analysis of gene expression  tags of developing grain  <cit> , where it was reported that  <dig> % of forward  tags had a matching reverse  tag, which indicated widespread antisense transcription in wheat.

an alternative method for large-scale discovery of sense-antisense transcript pairs involves the use of microarrays. in the first study of this type, yelin et al.  <cit>  used a strand-specific oligonucleotide probe array to detect antisense transcription in human cell lines. a study in mouse using a custom oligonucleotide array to assay the expression of  <dig>  known sense-antisense transcript pairs has also been reported  <cit> . however, these studies required prior knowledge of the sense-antisense transcript pairs to enable the design of strand specific probes. to overcome this, werner et al.  <cit>  took advantage of the approximately 25% of incorrectly orientated probes on the affymetrix genechip u74a and u74b 3'in vitro transcription  mouse arrays to detect novel antisense transcription in mouse brain and kidney tissues. the results showed that the commercial expression arrays were sensitive enough to detect antisense transcription, but because it cannot be assumed that current commercial arrays contain incorrectly orientated probes, this type of study could not be repeated. subsequently, ge et al.  <cit>  developed a method called 'antisense transcriptome analysis using exon array ' that used an altered target synthesis and labeling method that allowed both sense- and antisense-strand transcription to be assayed on affymetrix whole-transcript expression arrays . this protocol was successful but cannot be applied to the numerous affymetrix  expression arrays, because these arrays are constructed with probes of the opposite strand to the whole-transcript expression arrays, thus they use a different target labeling procedure altogether.

in the current study, we sought to develop a protocol that could be used to assay sense- and antisense-strand transcription on the affymetrix genechip wheat genome array, which is a 3'ivt expression array. the 3'ivt expression arrays rely on in vitro transcription of double-stranded cdna to both amplify and label the target crna before hybridization. the wheat array currently provides the most comprehensive coverage of the wheat genome for a microarray and is a commonly used resource for transcript expression studies  <cit>  and hybridization-based dna marker discovery  <cit> . this study is the first report of using a 3'ivt expression array to discover the expression of natural sense-antisense transcript pairs without relying on the presence of incorrectly oriented probes, and may be considered as proof-of-concept. by using alternative target preparation schemes, both the sense- and antisense-strand derived transcripts were labeled and hybridized to the wheat genome array. to enable maximum discovery we selected five different tissue types for assay and used 'chinese spring' wheat genotype, since most of the genechip probe sequences were based on its genomic sequence. the functional annotation of detected wheat sense-antisense transcript pairs is discussed, as well as the performance and validation of the technique.

RESULTS
target preparation
total rna was extracted from five 'chinese spring' tissue types . in addition to maximizing discovery, these tissue types were also selected to align with the predominant tissues used for wheat est sequencing efforts, including the international wheat genome sequencing consortium . all samples were of excellent quality as assessed by gel electrophoresis and spectrophotometry. the total rna samples were mixed at equal concentrations before target preparation. the assay of sense-strand transcription followed the regular scheme as for all affymetrix 3'ivt genechips . however, to assay antisense-strand transcription, the affymetrix whole transcript  sense target labeling assay was used, which was designed specifically for use on whole-transcript expression arrays. the wt target preparation method resulted in labeling the opposite strand to the 3'ivt assay and was therefore used in this study to assess antisense-strand transcription . the mixed total rna sample was used as starting material for both the 3'ivt and wt target preparation, and each hybridization was carried out once according to standard affymetrix protocol for the wheat genome array.

data analysis
following hybridization and scanning, cel files were analyzed to identify probe sets that showed successful hybridization in each of the 3'ivt and wt assay. the quality control metrics from the affyqcreport package  <cit>  of bioconductor  <cit>  showed that data was of high-quality for both assays, but as expected the wt assay resulted in a lower percentage of detected transcripts  than the 3'ivt assay  using affymetrix pma  calls. subsequently the relationship of array distributions  showed a skewing towards the 3'ivt assay, but it is clear that successful hybridization did occur in the wt assay. figure  <dig> also showed that the spiked-in hybridization controls from affymetrix  produced similar signals from both assays although signals were slightly higher in the wt assay. the mas  <dig>  pma calls and robust multi-array average  summarized expression values were used to determine successful hybridization for each probe set. because of differences in the two labeling methods, including starting amount of rna and rna amplification, the expression values of each array could not be validly compared. however, the pma calls in combination with the expression values were used to determine positive hybridization to a particular probe set in each assay. this provided a qualitative measure of expression rather than quantitative, but for the purposes of this study which was to detect natural sense-antisense transcript pairs, this measure was satisfactory.

identifying sense-antisense transcript pairs
to determine a confident positive threshold for expression value in both assays, the expression values of spiked-in hybridization controls  were used. because these controls are spiked-in immediately before hybridization, they were expected to behave in the same way in both assays. the biob control is spiked-in at the detection limit, while the others are spiked-in at staggered concentrations after biob. thus, the log <dig> expression value of biob was considered the threshold for positive hybridization in each assay . because the biob probe set is replicated three times on the wheat genechip, the log <dig> expression value of the lowest individual probe set was used. for the 3'ivt assay this value was  <dig> , and for the wt assay it was  <dig> . these cut-off values were used in combination with the mas  <dig>  pma calls and corresponding probability  values to detect successful hybridization in each assay. in both assays, a probe set must have firstly been called 'present' with wilcoxon rank sum test p-value <  <dig> , and the rma summarized log <dig> expression value must have been greater than  <dig>  in the 3'ivt assay, and greater than  <dig>  in the wt assay. this threshold cutoff identified  <dig> probe sets as positively hybridizing in both the 3'ivt and wt assays. in addition to the  <dig> probe sets,  <dig> probe sets uniquely hybridized in the 3'ivt assay and  <dig> uniquely hybridized to the wt assay . because the aim of this study was detect transcript pairs transcribed from both strands, we mainly focused on probe sets detected in both assays. these stringent detection criteria ensured that the probe sets left were highly expressed in both assays and could more reliably be considered as sense-antisense transcript pairs. in fact, the  <dig> antisense-specific probe sets could not necessarily be classified as antisense transcripts, because these may represent incorrectly orientated probes. also, because the probes for a given transcript do not cover the entire sequence, there is a possibility for bias during hybridization. however, to form the basis of future studies these  <dig> probe sets were also given some attention.

annotation of probe sets
each of the  <dig> candidate sense-antisense transcript pair probe sets were functionally annotated using harvest . gene ontology  was based on the tigr rice genome annotation such that if a unigene possessed a significant  blastx match to rice, as identified in harvest, the corresponding go terms for the rice protein were used, if available. of the  <dig> probe sets  <dig> could be annotated , of which  <dig>  were classified as involved in energy production , including several representations of atp synthase, photosystem proteins and rubisco. to determine the significance of overrepresentation of the number of energy-related transcripts identified, a hypergeometric test of selected energy-related terms in the harvest annotated transcript description were used . for the transcripts identified as present in one or both hybridizations, energy-related terms were identified in  <dig> of the  <dig> transcripts  that possessed a transcript description. using the same search terms,  <dig> of the  <dig> annotated probe sets identified in this study possessed energy-related terms. subsequently, energy-related transcripts were found to be significantly over-represented in this study with a p-value of  <dig>  × 10- <dig>  the diversity of the annotated probe sets is summarized in table  <dig> 

1functional categories were based on the munich information center for protein sequences classifications

2putative function shows the best significant blastx database hit from harvest.

the  <dig> potential antisense-specific probe sets were also annotated as described for the transcript pairs. of the  <dig> probe sets only  <dig> could be annotated , of which  <dig>  were classified as involved in energy production  including several representations of rubisco. nine  were involved in transcription  and included several dna-directed rna polymerase transcripts. however, the majority of antisense-specific transcripts were of unknown function.

strand-specific transcription validation
ten probe sets selected to represent a range of functional categories were validated for sense- and antisense-strand transcription using strand-specific reverse transcription-pcr . an example of the electrophoresis results is shown in figure  <dig>  sense-strand transcription was detected for all  <dig> targets sets in each tissue except for the target rubisco activase in the 'germinated seed' tissue . in fact, the 'germinated seed' tissue was most different to the other tissues and showed the least amount of antisense-strand transcription for the  <dig> targets. the 'shoot', 'flag leaf', 'spike pre-anthesis' and 'spike post-anthesis' tissues all showed the same pattern of sense- and antisense-strand transcription. these results indicate that antisense-strand transcription is likely specific to certain tissues and/or developmental stages, although not to a great extent in the  <dig> target transcripts analyzed in this study. only one of the  <dig> targets  did not show any antisense-strand transcription in any tissue, thus was not in agreement with the microarray results. however, this could be due to the position of the rt-pcr primer for amplifying the antisense-strand transcript. because antisense-strand transcripts may not necessarily span the full-length of their complementary sense-strand transcript, the rt-pcr primer may have been targeted to a missing region in the antisense-strand transcript, thus the rt-pcr would fail.

1functional categories were based on the munich information center for protein sequences classifications and putative function shows the best significant blastx database hit from harvest.

2rt-pcr result shows detection of transcription  for the sense  strand and antisense  strand in each tissue.

discussion
this study reports on the first use of an affymetrix genechip 3'ivt expression array for discovering both sense- and antisense-strand transcription. through the adaptation of the affymetrix wt assay, the antisense transcribed strand was successfully labeled and hybridized to the wheat genome array, which allowed for the detection of natural sense-antisense transcript pairs. to our knowledge, the wheat genome array does not contain any probes for known sense-antisense transcript pairs, thus the data from the hybridizations could not be standardized and/or normalized to a known sense-antisense transcript pair. subsequently, a highly stringent data acceptance threshold was applied, based on pma call and expression value cutoffs. this increased the confidence in detecting true antisense transcription. it is important to recognize the limitations of this study, which stem from the 'closed' nature of microarray systems. because the wheat genome array contains only known transcript sequences, the study is clearly limited to detection of transcript pairs that are present on the array. further, the probes for each transcript are biased to the 3' end of transcripts and do not span the entire gene. thus, because antisense-strand transcripts commonly have a different splice structure they may not be detected. subsequently the  <dig> candidate sense-antisense transcript pairs and the  <dig> potentially antisense-specific transcripts that were identified are likely to under-represent the number of true transcript pairs. in future studies, custom microarrays containing probes for sense and antisense transcripts would be useful as different target preparation assays would not be required, but because we aimed to obtain a broad representation of the extent of antisense transcription we chose to use the most comprehensive wheat genome array.

the function of antisense-strand transcription is widely believed to regulate the expression of sense-strand transcripts at either transcription, mrna maturation or translation  <cit> . in fact, lapidot and pilpel  <cit>  reviewed the literature and postulated four mechanisms of action; transcriptional interference, rna masking, double-stranded rna -dependent mechanisms, and chromatin remodeling. the ds-rna mechanisms would likely be the result of rna-dependent rna polymerases, which generate ds-rna that are the precursors of short interfering rna . the timing of sense- and antisense-strand transcription is also important; for example, if the sense-strand is transcribed first up to a certain level followed by transcription of the antisense-strand, the biological result would be delayed inhibition of the sense-strand gene expression. conversely, if the antisense-strand was transcribed first, this would result in pre-inhibition of sense-strand gene expression up to a threshold. differences in the half-life of the sense-and antisense-strand transcripts, as well as tissue-specificity and potential light and/or diurnal transcript regulation  <cit>  would also affect these scenarios. in the present study the timing of transcription and relative level of sense- and antisense-transcripts could not be determined because a single time-point was used for rna extraction in each tissue, and the design of the assay did not allow valid comparisons between the 3'ivt and wt results to estimate transcript levels. thus the mode of action of the detected sense-antisense transcript pairs would require further study.

an important observation in this study was the functional annotation of the sense-antisense transcript pairs, which indicated a significant over-representation of those involved in energy production, particularly photosynthesis. additionally, many transcripts for ribosomal proteins involved in protein synthesis were identified. the abundance of antisense transcripts for these common plant processes may indicate that they are negatively regulated by antisense transcripts. alternatively, the antisense transcripts could possibly be the result of ectopic expression. there is little data on large-scale antisense transcription profiling in plants to compare these results with, but a study in rice of leaf and seed tissue using serial analysis of gene expression  identified sense-antisense transcript pairs and also found that the most abundant pairs were annotated as involved in energy production, including rubisco and a photosystem i protein  <cit> . the similarity between studies shows that transcripts involved in photosynthesis are likely to be controlled by antisense transcripts in plants. an appealing explanation is the possibility for diurnal regulation of photosynthesis through antisense regulation. although this study did not span a time-course required to demonstrate diurnal regulation, the results warrant further exploration of this hypothesis.

the results of the strand-specific rt-pcr also showed that antisense transcription is likely to be tissue-specific. only one of the rt-pcr results was not in complete agreement with the microarray result, which could be due to truncated antisense transcripts where the priming sites were absent. in their microarray study of human cell antisense transcription, ge et al.  <cit>  found that 26% of the rt-pcr results were not consistent with microarray observations. in this study we also identified  <dig> transcripts as potentially antisense-specific, although further studies would be needed to confirm this because of the possibility for incorrectly oriented probes or strand bias during hybridization. the majority of these transcripts were annotated as unknown, but of those that were there was again a trend towards function in photosynthesis. a high percentage were also functionally involved in controlling transcription, including transcripts with homology to dna-directed rna polymerase, which indicates that gene expression in wheat may be regulated by antisense transcripts at the transcriptional level.

a recent study in wheat involving sage of developing grain also identified antisense transcripts  <cit> , where the most abundant functional categories aside from unknown tags were associated with storage and reproduction. the abundance of these functional categories was due to the sampling of developing grain tissue, while the abundance of energy-related transcripts in our study is most likely due to the selection of photosynthetic tissues. for this reason, these two studies complement each other well. as in our study, poole et al.  <cit>  found that most antisense tags were of unknown function and that many transcripts were highly expressed in both sense and antisense, which may suggest a function of the antisense transcript for mediating alternative polyadenylation rather than down-regulation of the sense transcript, although there is no evidence for this at this stage. one other similarity to our study was the identification by poole et al.  <cit>  of antisense transcripts related to transcription, such as nucleotide binding proteins, which the authors suggest may enable the control of multiple pathways that require large scale changes during development. other than these similarities, the results of our study differ from poole et al.  <cit> , which again is likely due to the complementary tissues analyzed.

this study was exploratory and revealed that the method was successful in identifying sense-antisense transcript pairs using the commercial wheat genome array. the next step from this study is to select potentially interesting antisense transcripts for further study. there were several transcript pairs belonging to functional categories including 'cell death' and 'transcription' that may be involved in the regulation of important biological processes, and the antisense-specific transcripts related to transcription are also of interest. an understanding of the role of antisense transcription as it relates to gene expression may be important for the expression of certain phenotypes of interest. additionally, knowledge of natural antisense transcripts may also be important for altering gene expression through transgenic studies in plants. the abundance of antisense-strand transcripts in plants is supported by recent studies using 'open' transcriptomics systems including sage  <cit>  and massively parallel signature sequencing   <cit> . with the advent of rna-seq , which is high-throughput transcriptome sequencing method  <cit>  that incorporates the use of next-generation sequence-by-synthesis technologies, the future will see a greatly enhanced discovery and understanding of antisense-strand transcription in plants.

CONCLUSIONS
this study demonstrated the novel use of an adapted labeling protocol and a 3'ivt affymetrix genechip microarray for large-scale identification of antisense transcription in wheat, a crop of great economic importance. the results show that antisense transcription is relatively abundant in wheat, and may affect the expression of valuable agronomic phenotypes. strand-specific rt-pcr validated the microarray observations, and showed that antisense transcription is likely to be tissue specific. most of the identified sense-antisense transcript pairs were annotated as genes involved in energy production, indicating that photosynthesis is likely to be under regulation by antisense transcripts.

