BACKGROUND
the advances of the high-throughput technologies and enormous growth in number of experimentally determined interactions have necessitated the development of a database storing molecular interactions network. such a database can be used to develop an algorithm that interprets the high-throughput data, for analysis of properties of biological networks, and for automatic prediction of biological pathways. yet the most reliable knowledge about molecular interactions and pathways currently exists in the form of peer-reviewed scientific literature written in the form of human language scientific jargon. the exponential growth of such literature in the last  <dig> years has made manual fact extraction nearly impossible as well as highly expensive. to address this problem, several text-mining algorithms for automatic fact extraction have been developed. see the introduction in reference  <cit>  for a thorough review of text-mining methods.

in brief, the text-mining algorithms for relations extraction can be classified into those that use simple statistical co-occurrence  <cit> , pattern matching  <cit> , or full-sentence parsing algorithms  <cit> . every text-mining algorithm can be characterized by: a) recovery rate, which measures how many facts it recovers compared to the human curator from the same number of sentences, and b) accuracy rate measuring the percentage of false positives among recovered facts. the co-occurrence algorithms recovery rate depends entirely on the quality of term recognition that is the dictionaries and can be as high as 100%; however, their accuracy rate does not rise above 50%. on the contrary, the recovery rate of the full-sentence parsing methods usually does not rise above 50%, yet they have much better accuracy rates. the pattern matching algorithms tend to have intermediate performance between co-occurrence and full-sentence parsing.

the text-to-knowledge technology called medscan is a natural language processing full-sentence parsing system developed by ariadne genomics  <cit> . medscan can derive the relations between objects only within a scope of one sentence. it recognizes the complete syntactic structure of an english language sentence in order to determine the relation between entities. the core of the technology is domain independent and is capable of finding relations between any types of objects derived purely from the semantic and lexical structure of a sentence. however, medscan has been tuned and curated a great deal towards the language of scientific papers in the field of molecular biology. the performance of medscan has been reported previously  <cit> . medscan recovers about 60% of all relations per sentence in the text. this rate enables nearly 100% detection for all facts that are repeated more than once in the literature corpus. most single-reference facts are usually re-stated several times in a single full-text article, enabling medscan to recover unique single-referenced relations with high certainty as well. we estimate that the most recent medscan pipeline, version  <dig> , extracts 90% of all facts described in the scientific literature. about 10% of all relations found by medscan are false positive. this false positive rate has been thoroughly measured in  <cit>  and is used by this work as the threshold for eliminating false positives in most automatic curation rules.

most information extraction systems in the biomedical domain suffer from the redundancy of extracted relations and a false positive rate that interferes with further network analysis of the extracted data. an aggregation of automatically extracted relations has been proposed as a solution to overcome some of these problems  <cit> . in the first part of the paper, we describe several methods for automatic relation consolidation and curation in the resnet database. resnet is the database of biological association networks  available for purchase from ariadne genomics. it contains molecular interaction data extracted by medscan technology, as well as the interaction data available from the public sources such as entrez gene, bind, and hprd. the resnet database schema is generic and capable of storing, retrieving, and navigating any type of heterogeneous networks. bans in resnet contain annotation for mammalian proteins, small chemicals, and functional classes as graph vertices linked with different types of relations as graph edges. the edges also contain annotations about relation types and references to a literature source where the relation was extracted by medscan.

currently, medscan technology extracts relations between proteins, small molecules, protein functional classes, cell processes, and diseases. these relations can be divided into two major classes: direct physical interactions and indirect regulation events. the direct physical interactions include three types of relations:

• binding 

• protein modification 

• promoter binding .

the indirect interactions include:

• regulation 

• expression regulation 

• molecular transport regulation 

• molecular synthesis regulation .

regulation is the most abundant relation type in resnet, reflecting the most common way scientists express their thoughts about protein signaling. the resnet database contains information about proteins from human, mouse and rat organisms. the orthologs from these three species are merged in one node in resnet . relations found by medscan are annotated by organism, but algorithms described in this paper do not use this information. complete statistics for every relation type in resnet database are presented in table  <dig> 

medscan also extracts information about the relation direction, effect on a target molecule, and mechanism of action if this information is present in a sentence describing the relation. this additional information is recorded in attributes "effect" and "mechanism" for the extracted relation. the attribute "mechanism" is required for protmodification relation and is derived from the verbs used in the sentence, such as "phosphorylate," "glycosylate," "dephosphorylate," etc. the "effect" attribute has the following values: "positive," "negative," and "unknown." every relation is recorded as an individual xml object in the output of the medscan. during an import into the resnet database, two relations are considered the same and merged if they connect the same pair of nodes in the same direction and have both the same effect sign and the same mechanism. if none of these conditions are met, the relation is not merged and is recorded as a new relation.

relations in resnet are generated from multiple literature sources including the entire pubmed database containing  <dig> , <dig> scientific abstracts and  <dig> publicly available full-text journals. medscan processes individual sentences and does not accumulate the information about all other relations in the literature corpus during parsing. as a consequence, the same biological relation expressed differently by different authors will be recorded as two different relations by medscan. also, many sentences contain only partial descriptions of the relations from the medscan output. historically, the relations between proteins are usually first detected as regulation events and then as an exact mechanism of action through binding, protein modification, promoter binding; otherwise, a more precise mechanism for indirect regulation is established in later publications. all these reasons create many true but redundant relations in the resnet database after the import of pubmed data processed by medscan. medscan's 10% false positive rate further complicates the picture, especially for highly-cited relations. most medscan false positives are due to an incorrectly recorded effect or direction for a relation. the most dramatic example of the heterogeneity produced by recording of the natural language sentences into a set of formalized relations can be found for interactions between p <dig> and mdm <dig> proteins. medscan finds  <dig>  sentences describing a relation between these two proteins in the entire literature corpus. the information from these sentences is interpreted by medscan as  <dig> different relation types, including nine false positive relations .

to facilitate the creation of new algorithms for analysis of resnet data and for interpretation of the experimental data using resnet, we have to reduce the complexity of biological association networks produced by medscan. ideally, every linked protein pair should contain only a single link in one direction. the first part of this paper describes algorithms for automatic curation of the medscan data converting bans into a simple graph. the procedure also reduces the number of false positive links in resnet. we used the data obtained after the curation procedure to automatically build pathways containing links from the purified ban. we show that the automatically curated resnet data contains a sufficient amount of information to build thousands of signaling pathways. the algorithm for pathway building is also described.

RESULTS
resnet curating algorithms
the complete set of rules and results for automatic curation are described in additional file  <dig> and table  <dig>  these rules were developed by biology experts after extensive inspection of resnet data produced by the medscan. the accuracy of curation of every rule was also manually evaluated . most cleaning rules were designed to remove medscan errors. yet some cleaning rules aim to overcome the jargon of the molecular biologist. for example, it is common practice to write that insulin phosphorylates some intracellular protein. the phrase always means that insulin induces the protein phosphorylation indirectly, but semantically it implies direct phosphorylation by insulin. other examples include the sentences describing interaction between cytokines. almost exclusively they mean the functional interaction of their downstream signaling pathways, but semantically they imply physical binding.

all merging rules were designed to overcome the shortcomings due to the historical nature of scientific literature and the differences in the way scientists describe the interaction between proteins. for example, it is common to simply mention that p <dig> regulates mdm <dig> without specifying that it actually positively regulates the mdm <dig> expression by binding to the mdm <dig> promoter. yet other sentences describe p <dig> binding to the mdm <dig> promoter and still others describe p <dig> regulation of the mdm <dig> expression. medscan is "unaware" of other facts during text processing, and compilation of all these different facts can be performed only by analyzing the entire collection of available resnet facts.

several curation rules generate new relation types in resnet. for example, the directregulation type symbolizes that one protein binds and regulates another. directregulation can have an attribute mechanism that further specifies the regulation mechanism through binding or protein modification type. to avoid propagating false positive relations, we allowed merging only if the target relation had a number of references above the medscan false positive rate as compared to the relation targeted for deletion . doing this ensured that the target control was always a true positive. an exception was made for merging into the promoterbinding relation. we found that the cleaning rule for promoterbinding relation, which allowed having only transcription factors as regulators, almost completely eliminated false positives for this relation. therefore, the merge of the expression relation with the promoterbinding relation was always allowed.

building ligand-receptor regulomes
the pathway building algorithm uses the core sub-network building procedure described in the materials and methods section. ligand regulomes were defined as a set of proteins regulated by either ligand or its receptor. first, we found all possible pairs of ligands physically interacting with receptors in the curated resnet data. there were  <dig> such interactions in resnet. downstream proteins were selected as proteins linked to either ligand or receptor by any of the indirect regulatory links or as proteins physically interacting with a receptor. to ensure a high confidence of regulome pathways, we used only physical interactions that had more than five references. if pathway building with only high-confidence relations was impossible, the cutoff reference count was gradually relaxed below five until the pathway construction became possible. this approach yielded  <dig> regulomes for  <dig> ligands and  <dig> receptors from the entirety of resnet. among them  <dig> pathways were constructed only from relations with more than five references.

we have monitored how the average number of nodes in pathways was changing with a reference cut-off and found that it did not change much while the cut-off was increased. for example, the average number of nodes in a pathway was  <dig> nodes per pathway with no cutoff, while pathways had on average  <dig> nodes with a reference cutoff equal to  <dig>  the average number of relations, however, changed dramatically from  <dig> in pathways with no cutoff to  <dig> in pathways with a cutoff equal to  <dig>  the overall number of generated regulomes dropped from  <dig> pathways generated with no cutoff to  <dig> generated only with relations that had more than  <dig> references. we interpret these results in the following way: most pathways have backbone interactions that are studied equally well; i.e., they have about the same number of references. once the reference cutoff is increased above the average citation index of these backbone interactions, the pathway cannot be built. in addition to backbone interactions, every pathway has a large number of less-studied relations. these relations mostly connect the same nodes that form a well-cited backbone. such less-cited interactions are lost more rapidly with an increase of reference cutoff, but their loss does not affect pathway integrity.

validation of predicted regulomes pathways
to validate automatically generated regulome pathways, we have compared them with the set of  <dig> pathways manually constructed, based on review articles. one hundred-six pairs of regulome pathways and manually curated pathways were identified as having the same ligand-receptor pair and were thus valid for comparison. we found that, on average, pathways constructed for the same ligand have  <dig> % in node overlap and  <dig> % in relation overlap. we also calculated the p-value of the overlap between the pair of regulomes and the manually built pathway using the fisher exact test. the p-value shows the probability of finding the particular regulome pathway among all pathways in the database, as compared to random sampling. all p-values for all tested pathway pairs were smaller than  <dig> , indicating that the similarity between two pathways is not due to random chance. the distribution of the node overlap among test pathways pairs is shown in figure  <dig>  the example of an automatically built pathway for il <dig> and its receptor is shown on figure  <dig> 

to further validate predicted pathways we have assessed that pathway construction was possible using proteins co-expressed only in one tissue. the publicly available gene expression dataset for  <dig> tissues was used to select tissue-specific proteins. the expression threshold to select proteins expressed in a tissue was intentionally stringent. the approach described in the materials and methods section has yielded  <dig>  pathways for  <dig> tissues,  <dig> ligands,  <dig> receptors and  <dig> ligand-receptor pairs. the distribution of number of pathways built for every tissue is shown in figure  <dig>  the comparison of the protein composition among  <dig>  pathways revealed that  <dig>  pathways had unique protein compositions.

to obtain additional support for the biological relevance of the tissue-specific pathways, we have compared the number of pathways built for ligands specific to the central nervous system  in different brain tissues to the number of pathways built for the same ligands in the immunological tissues. we found that, for eight cns-specific ligands, the algorithm built  <dig> pathways in  <dig> cns-related tissues, while only  <dig> pathways were built for the same ligands in  <dig> immune system tissues. thus, there were  <dig>  times more pathways per tissue built in cns, compared to the immune system. similarly, for  <dig> immunological ligands,  <dig> pathways were built in immune system tissues and only  <dig> pathways in cns tissues. thus, there were  <dig>  times more pathways per tissue built in the immune system, compared to cns for immunological ligands .

discussion
we describe the computational approach to automatically build signaling pathways using the network database of biological associations extracted from scientific literature. the approach is based on a simple notion that the propagation of a regulatory signal is mediated by means of physical interactions in a living cell. the automatic curation step is required for the pathway reconstruction in order to consolidate extracted relations in the database. therefore, this paper also describes rules for automatic curation. without curation the pathway prediction algorithm incorporates false positive relations, making pathways bigger on average . most importantly, however, without relation consolidation performed by merging rules during automatic curation, the pathway reconstruction algorithm becomes impractical. many proteins are connected by multiple relations in the dataset produced by medscan, as explained in the introduction. without their merging pathway reconstruction, algorithms would have to "choose" what relation to include into every pathway. this process would slow down the algorithm significantly.

the automatic curation algorithms produce better quality networks suitable for analysis by other algorithms developed for interpretation of the experimental data. as much as the medscan natural processing technology can be viewed as an automation of the reading process, the automatic curation can be viewed as automation of the literature reviewing process that uses the domain-specific knowledge for better interpretation of the facts recorded in natural language.

most of our automatic curation rules can be generalized for curation of any kind of bans and not only the networks produced by medscan technology. however, we believe that the reference count thresholds reported in additional file  <dig> of this paper are specific to medscan technology. the thresholds values for other bans will most certainly depend on the actual accuracy of information in the curated database. we developed automatic curation from the need to overcome problems caused by scientific jargon and because of the historical nature of the scientific literature. the historical problems are likely to appear for any ban derived from the scientific literature, including manually curated databases. any database that monitors scientific literature for a sufficiently long period should accumulate redundancy due to historical developments and curation errors during the database life cycle. to refresh knowledge accumulated in the aged database or to merge the older knowledge into the new database, curation of the old database is necessary.

the algorithms for automated pathway building were developed from the need to present ban as a set of sub-networks. such sub-networks can be used for analysis of the experimental data from gene expression microarray and other high-throughput methods. the ultimate goal for the analysis of experimental data is to find the sub-network most affected in the experiment. this process can be done by directly traversing the entire network while looking for the most active sub-networks  <cit> . this approach, however, finds sub-networks without considering biological functionality, and thus their functional interpretation has to be completed separately. the alternative approach is to pre-cut ban into multiple functional blocks and to find the most active sub-networks among them.

the core sub-network building procedure presented in this paper was used for successful generation of ligand regulomes. yet it can also be used for construction of other types of pathways. for example, we have used the gene ontology biological process annotation to build pathways describing biological processes . another possibility is to use the list of proteins related to a disease and build disease-association pathways. the use of the trimming procedure described in the materials and methods section as the second step of the pathway reconstruction algorithm is optional and can be skipped for non-signaling pathways. also, the sub-network may be allowed to include indirect regulations if no sufficient number of physical interactions exists for a given protein list.

the biological functionality of the result pathway is solely determined by the input protein list. the biological relevance of regulome pathways is achieved in part by using the high quality protein classification but also heavily depends on the input list. our approach separates the construction of a protein list from pathway building and automates the latter step. this approach allows for focusing manual curation efforts on the development of functional protein lists using non-network information such as sequence homology, disease and phenotype association, or protein clusters in other types of networks.

CONCLUSIONS
we demonstrated that the data extracted automatically by medscan technology can be further automatically curated to generate a high-quality molecular interaction dataset. the quality of the automatically curated resnet is sufficient to automatically reconstruct thousands of biologically relevant signaling pathways for multiple mammalian tissues using basic principles known for signaling pathways in-vivo.

