BACKGROUND
g-protein coupled receptors are important receivers of information input to eukaryotic cells. they share a common fold of seven transmembrane helices arranged as a seven α-helix bundle, as confirmed by analysis of the crystal structure of rhodopsin  <cit>  that has been extensively used as template for homology-based modeling of gpcrs  <cit> . a collection of messages of extreme diversity including photons and native agonists, such as ions, odorants and pheromones, amino acids, nucleotides, peptides, biogenic amines, prostaglandines and glycoprotein hormones  <cit>  interact with different extracellular and/or transmembrane domains of gpcrs, in order to convey their messages to the interior of the cell  <cit> . based primarily on shared sequence motifs, six distinct families of gpcrs are traditionally defined: a, b, c, d, e and the frizzled/smoothened family, as summarized in the gpcrdb classification scheme  <cit> . various methods have been deployed for higher-level classification of gpcrs including profile hidden markov models  <cit> , support vector machines  <cit>  and position specific scoring matrices  <cit> .

the physiological response of the interaction between a gpcr and one of its ligands is judged by the subset of the inactive heterotrimeric  g-proteins within the cell that interact with the activated receptor complex, although many receptors mediate their actions through g-protein independent signaling pathways  <cit> . different agonists may stabilize complexes of gpcrs with g-proteins belonging to different subfamilies  resulting in the activation of different signaling pathways  <cit> .

g-proteins are heterotrimeric complexes, named after their α subunits. on a basis of sequence identity, at least  <dig> discrete α subunits have been identified and classified into four subfamilies: gs and gi/o, which stimulate and inhibit respectively adenylate cyclase, gq/ <dig> which stimulate phospholipase c, and the less characterized g12/ <dig> subfamily that activate the na+/h+ exchanger pathway  <cit> . we should mention at this point, that in the gpdb classification  <cit> , the term "families" has been reserved for this level of hierarchy of g proteins, however hereinafter we will use the term "subfamilies" instead.

agonist binding to gpcrs leads to association of the heterotrimeric g-protein with the receptor, which triggers the exchange of the guanosine diphosphate  bound on the α-subunit of the g-protein with guanosine triphosphate . these events promote the dissociation of the α subunit of the g-protein from the receptor and the βγ complex. the dissociated subunits can activate or inhibit several effector proteins, such as adenylyl cyclase 1– <dig>  plcβ 1– <dig>  tyrosine kinases, ion channels and molecules of the mitogen-activated protein kinase pathway, resulting in a variety of cellular functions that depend on the biological specificity of the dissociated subunits  <cit> . g-protein α subunits possess an intrinsic gtpase activity, which enables them to act as time switches: hydrolysis of the bound gtp to gdp promotes the re-association of the α subunit with the βγ dimer and renders the g-protein in an inactive form.

due to the lack of structural data for activated gpcr complexes, several complementary approaches have been used to decipher the molecular events leading to g-protein activation, and to identify the regions that determine the coupling specificity of a gpcr to a subset of the pool of intracellular g-proteins. these biochemical approaches, that were focused mainly on a gpcrs, include site-directed mutagenesis studies  <cit> , chimeric receptor engineering  <cit> , the use of synthetic peptides to mimic the gpcr regions that activate g-proteins  <cit>  and antibodies to neutralize gpcr binding sites on the g-proteins  <cit> . these studies revealed the major role of gpcr intracellular loops, especially the second and third, and the c-terminal region, as the main determinants of gpcr coupling specificity. furthermore, structural data from high resolution x-ray diffraction of the light-sensing gpcr rhodopsin, as well as complementary methods   <cit>  have indicated that ligand binding induces large conformational changes. these conformational changes reveal gpcr regions buried within the membrane which could interact with the g-protein  <cit> . through a combination of entropy variability plots and correlated mutation analysis, key residues for a variety of gpcr functions, including coupling to g-proteins, can be identified and a mechanism of gpcr activation has been proposed  <cit> .

due to their role as information receivers of eukaryotic cells, gpcrs are involved in many pathophysiological responses. they comprise attractive drug targets for a variety of diseases, including cancer  <cit> , alzheimer's syndrome  <cit>  and aids  <cit> . indeed, over 50% of all prescribed drugs target on gpcrs  <cit> . furthermore, the information explosion in biological sequence databases has resulted in many gpcr entries of unknown ligand binding properties, known as orphan receptors. in order to screen these orphan receptors with libraries of potential ligands, researchers must be able to assay the gpcr-ligand interaction through a downstream event. such events are transcription of a reporter gene or rise in second messenger concentration, which is dependent on the interaction of the gpcr under study with members of a specific g-protein subfamily. thus, knowing or being able to predict, the coupling specificity of orphan gpcrs to g-protein subfamilies, is essential for choosing the appropriate cell lines for heterologous expression and any further in vitro and in vivo studies of potential drug targets  <cit> . meanwhile, a dataset of gpcrs of known coupling specificity exists  <cit> , large enough to guide an in silico database mining approach that could aid further in vivo gpcr research. furthermore, in a work published recently, many gpcrs and their interactions with g-proteins have been summarized in the gpdb system  <cit> .

as in every biological interaction, the specificity of gpcr coupling to specific g-proteins is determined by structural components located on contact regions of the molecules. since the three-dimensional architecture of a protein is encoded in protein sequence, gpcr coupling specificity could be defined by sequence alone. however, gpcrs with low sequence similarity may couple to members of the same subfamily of g-proteins, while members of the same gpcr subfamilies often couple to members of distinct g-protein subfamilies  <cit> . in addition, gpcr coupling is not a one-by-one function since many gpcrs, known as promiscuous gpcrs, have been proven to couple to members of more than one g-protein subfamilies. due to these limitations, gpcr coupling specificity prediction in one step using sequence comparison methods such as the blast  <cit>  or clustalw  <cit>  algorithms is insufficient  <cit> . however a weak sequence signal can be detected among receptor subfamilies where g- protein selectivity was a recent evolutionary process, such as the biogenic amines receptors  <cit> .

previous computational methods of gpcr coupling specificity to g-protein subfamilies have been applied on a priori selected intracellular regions of gpcr sequences. a naive bayes model  <cit>  yields a 72% correct classification rate, while a data-mining approach that combined pattern discovery with membrane topology prediction  <cit>  has also been applied in an effort to model gpcr regions that determine coupling specificity. however, previous approaches are either context-dependent on the a priori knowledge that gpcr coupling specificity is governed by the entire intracellular regions sequence or limited by the non-probabilistic nature and limited descriptive power of patterns as regular expressions, that cannot implement weights to different sequence variation. the approach of this study is exploratory regarding the length and localization of the coupling determining regions among the intracellular regions sequences and recruits profile hidden markov models  as highly discriminative models of biological sequences that have a formal probabilistic basis  <cit> . the results obtained by this method, presented below, justify the chosen approach.

RESULTS
our primary aim was to develop a wide-range predictive system that can be applied with the same discriminative power globally, for all three main gpcr coupling groups, being also able to model promiscuous receptor coupling. our method proved to be self-consistent: using a set of  <dig> gpcr sequences of experimentally identified coupling properties, according to the trends in pharmacological sciences nomenclature supplement of receptors and ion channels   <cit> , that were used to train the models and adopting a five-fold cross-validation procedure, the methods yielded a  <dig> % correct classification rate. when tested in  <dig> sequences of gpcrs  that are homologous to the sequences used to train the models and whose coupling properties are also summarized in  <cit> , at a subtype level, our method yields a  <dig> % correct classification rate . finally, the method predicts correctly the coupling specificity of  <dig> out of  <dig> gpcrs derived from the gpdb database  <cit>  that were not included in  <cit>  .

in order to assess the efficiency of the same method trained on a smaller and non-redundant dataset, the same procedure was applied to a dataset containing only the human gpcrs in the original training set. alternative phmms were generated and integrated into a second predictive system that proved to be also self-consistent. on this human-only dataset, correct classification rate in a five-fold cross-validation, is 86% . when these models were applied to the  <dig> sequences of the validation set, the correct classification rate was  <dig> %, showing an insignificant decrease, as one would expect for a non-overfitted method. additionally, when the model that was trained on human sequences, was applied to the remaining  <dig> non-human sequences derived from  <cit> , yields also a high correct classification rate of  <dig> %.

due to insufficient experimental data, resulting in uncertainty about whether or not most receptors that are known to couple with a specific g-protein group can couple with g-proteins of another subfamily under different physiological conditions, we cannot estimate whether all of the promiscuous predictions are correct or not. for instance, a gpcr that is reported to couple only to g-proteins members of gi/o subfamily, may proved that couples also to members of gs subfamily. it is also well-known that the same gpcr may also couple to different g-protein subfamilies in different heterogenous expression systems. promiscuous coupling was correctly predicted for  <dig> out of  <dig> gpcrs of known promiscuous coupling properties according to information in  <cit> , as one can observe in table  <dig>  we did not attempt to train any phmms from sequences that have been proven to be promiscuous, in order to avoid unnecessary complexity and unequal distribution of the training set to the three major coupling groups of gpcrs.

the main reason that no phmms have been constructed that indicate coupling to g12/ <dig> proteins is the limited amount of data available for the coupling properties of this subfamily of g-proteins. for this reason, this feature is not provided by any of the already published methods that perform the same task. furthermore, to the knowledge of the authors no promiscuous gpcrs are included in the training set , and no receptors that preferentially couple only to members of the g12/ <dig> subfamily have been identified  <cit> . therefore, constructing phmms that classify g12/ <dig> coupled gpcrs with high discriminative power, at this moment, is practically impossible. once larger datasets have been established in the future, promiscuous receptors could be included in the training set, allowing predictions for g12/ <dig> coupled receptors.

our exploratory approach resulted in the discovery of sub-regions within the intracellular gpcr domains that play a key role in determining gpcr coupling specificity to g-proteins. the contribution of these regions to the overall coupling scheme of gpcrs could arise through short-range protein-protein interactions with their structural counterparts in g-proteins, that is, through intermolecular stabilizing interactions that enable several regions of the gpcr molecule to interact with g-proteins. the conformation of the intracellular regions of gpcrs is regulated by intramolecular interactions between the intracellular segments  <cit> . furthermore, each query against the refined library of phmms reveals regions of high identity to the profiles, if such exist in the target sequence. residues in these identified intracellular regions could be targeted for site-directed mutagenesis approaches in order to elucidate the structural features of gpcr – g-protein coupling.

our method can only predict the potential of interaction between a gpcr and a g-protein subfamily, since its only input is the gpcr sequence. thus, common in vivo regulators of gpcr coupling specificity including mechanisms such as selective targeting of gpcrs to specific cell-membrane regions, post-translational modifications  <cit>  or effects of accessory/scaffolding proteins interacting with gpcrs  cannot be modeled by our prediction system. also, gpcr homo- or hetero-dimerization, that appears to be a common feature of many gpcrs, necessary for g-protein activation  <cit>  cannot be directly included in our prediction system.

phmms derived from this study have been trained to model sub-regions within gpcr intracellular domains rather than entire gpcr sequences. the a priori knowledge that a query sequence belongs to a gpcr would be valuable in enhancing the predictive power of the method. when the method is applied to the non-gpcr receptor and the globular protein non-redundant test sets, it produces false positives with a rate  <dig> % and  <dig> % respectively. however filtering the query sequences, by using 7-transmembrane domain phmms derived from the pfam database version  <dig>   <cit>  in a preceding step, diminishes completely the above false positive results without affecting the overall sensitivity of the method. all six phmms for 7-transmembrane receptors contained in the pfam database version  <dig>  have been integrated into our publicly available method. in conclusion, the method could effectively be used in combination with existing 7-transmembrane receptor predictive systems for genome-wide applications.

compared to other previously published methods, performing the same task, our method does not only perform significantly better in terms of overall accuracy, but also employs additional superior features. firstly, it does not rely on the identification of intracellular loops as does the naive bayes method in  <cit> . our method was trained using the annotations for the transmembrane regions  but in the testing phase no such information is required, thus it operates using as input solely the sequence. compared to the pattern discovery method of  <cit> , our method uses a more sophisticated scheme for whole-sequence scoring that has a formal probabilistic interpretation. we should note, however, that most of the patterns discovered by  <cit>  were captured by our phmms , but in a more mathematically sound and exploitable manner. in addition, in  <cit>  no overall measures of accuracy were reported in order to assess a fair comparison. finally, our method is the only method reported until now, that is publicly available through a web-server. at the url: , the user may submit a sequence in fasta format, and receive the prediction. the method is rather fast, producing a self-explanatory output, and, thus it may be used by both molecular biologists requesting information for a single gpcr, and by bioinformaticians performing large-scale computational analyses.

at the final stages of preparation of this manuscript, another method developed independently by sreekumar and coworkers, was published  <cit> , which uses also phmms. however, the method of sreekumar and coworkers, does not treat the multiple intracellular loops of a given gpcr independently, but instead it concatenates them into a single sequence. these concatenated sequences are then used to build phmms with the hmmer package. although, the method performs very well as reported by the authors , there are some severe disadvantages arising from the aforementioned strategy: with this method, to test a newly found protein, one has to perform predictions on the gpcr regarding its transmembrane topology, extract the intracellular loops and concatenate them into a single sequence. this adds another source of error, originating from the prediction errors of the transmembrane topology prediction algorithm. having in mind, that to date, even the best topology prediction algorithms, predict correctly the full topology of a protein with an accuracy of no more than 75%  <cit> , this will further reduce the performance of the method. we should also note that regarding gpcrs, the most accurate predictors fail to even predict seven transmembrane segments for more than 15% of the presented examples  <cit> . furthermore, the method does not control appropriately the level of false positives, since it was not tested on non-gpcr sequences. on the contrary, the method proposed in this work, although it uses essentially the same principles in extracting the loop regions, it treats them independently using the qfast algorithm, and thus, in the prediction phase, no a-priori knowledge of loops and transmembrane topology is needed. in addition to that, the rate of false positive predictions is controlled, providing us a confidence about the validity of the results. last, and perhaps more important, our method is the only one until now that is fully automated and publicly available via a web-server.

CONCLUSIONS
we applied here, a data-mining exploratory approach combined with the high discriminative power of profile hidden markov models , to generate a system that predicts gpcr coupling specificity to the three main subfamilies of g-proteins , based solely on the information included in the protein sequence. we report superior correct classification rate compared to other previously published methods, and we have created a web-server, running the application, freely available for academic users . at present, this is the only web-based server for prediction of gpcrs coupling to g-proteins. expanding this information to characterize the coupling properties for thousands of orphan gpcrs in large-scale proteome annotation studies, our understanding of receptor signaling pathways might improve and new targets for drug research may be uncovered. future studies, utilizing larger representative training sets of gpcrs with known coupling specificity to g-proteins, and more advanced algorithmic techniques are needed in order to increase the accuracy of the prediction method, as also as to handle more efficiently the promiscuity in preferential coupling of gpcrs to g-proteins. this way, we may also be capable of predicting the coupling of gpcrs to g-proteins members of the g12/ <dig> subfamily, a feature neither addressed in this study, nor in previously published methods.

