BACKGROUND
the demand for agricultural products of high quality with little variability in harvest time has resulted in intensive monoculture of a few cultivars resistant to economically important diseases. intensive monoculture systems are characterised by a boom-and-bust cycle: an existing variety is susceptible; a new resistant variety is developed, which introduces a boom period while the resistance lasts; the pathogen adapts itself to the resistant variety by appropriate changes to its virulence; resistance is lost and the new variety itself becomes susceptible. the boom-and-bust cycle has resulted in considerable loss of crop production and intensive use of agro-chemicals to control diseases, leading to accelerated development of fungicide resistant/insensitive pathogen strains and potential pollution of the environment. pyramiding resistance genes is increasingly pursued to breed cultivars with durable resistance to diseases  <cit> . an alternative strategy to prolong the life of resistance genes is the use of cultivar mixtures, thus employing the principle of gene diversification: the planting of mixtures forces the pathogen to survive in a spatially heterogeneous host environment.

both modelling studies  <cit>  and field experiments  <cit>  have shown that cultivar mixtures can significantly reduce the rate of disease increase, compared to monocultures. disease reduction achieved by mixtures depends on the extent of autoinfection , which is mainly affected by spore dispersal gradient, spatial arrangement of cultivars  and number of mixture components  <cit> . mixtures can be used to control both race-specific and non-race-specific pathogens. race-specific pathogens are assumed to have virulence genes which match resistance factors of specific host whereas non-race-specific pathogens are assumed to have a lower degree of specificity with possible involvement of polygenic resistance  <cit> .

cultivar mixtures are a viable strategy in subsistence agriculture  <cit> , which have been effectively exploited on a large scale in china  <cit> . however, mixtures are not widely used, particularly in developed countries, because of several factors. planting mixtures may increase management cost, especially when mixture components differ in their responses to other pathogens and pests, and in their crop husbandry requirements. for some crops, planting mixtures may lead to the final product consisting of produce from several mixture components; this heterogeneity may not meet the high standard of uniformity demanded by consumers. a key biological concern of adopting mixtures is the rate of emergence of complex races  that can infect more mixture components than before  <cit> , or the selection for pathogen strains of increased aggressiveness towards mixture components  <cit> . determining the risk of emergence of super-races is particularly pertinent for perennial tree crops because frequently changing mixture components over time is not economically feasible. however, current experimental studies on cultivar mixture focus on disease reduction and do not last long enough to assess the risk of emergence of super-races over time.

the co-evolution of host and parasite of a natural system has been extensively studied, primarily through theoretical modelling, which is recently reviewed  <cit> ; most of these modelling studies are based on the gene-for-gene  theory and focused on the outcome of this coevolution process. modelling studies suggest that several pathogen genotypes with different virulence factors may be stably maintained  by factors/processes that lead to uncoupling of host and parasite life cycles, such as asynchrony between host and parasite life cycles in time  <cit>  and space  <cit> . transient polymorphism in virulence can be promoted by both genetic and ecological factors, such as genetic drift  <cit>  and spatial population structure  <cit> . the cost of virulence is one of the most important factors in maintaining polymorphisms in virulence, and hence reducing the likelihood of super-races from persisting in the population  <cit> .

pathogen reproduction mode  may have significant impact on host-parasite co-evolution  <cit> , and has been often ignored so far in theoretical studies of host-pathogen coevolution, probably because this factor is more likely to affect the rate approaching the final outcome  in a natural pathosystem rather than the actual outcome of a host-pathogen co-evolution process. however, the time to the equilibrium is also important in the context of agriculture as it allows prediction of the time-scale on which a particular combination of host resistance remains effective. this is particularly true for perennial tree crops because host-resistance make-up and its spatial structure do not usually change for many years. pathogens that undergo regular recombination, including sexual reproduction and parasexual recombination, are generally believed to pose higher risks than pathogens that undergo no or little recombination. the probability of a single isolate combining virulence alleles through sexual recombination also depends on the sexual reproduction process. for example, for pathogens without saprophytic phases it is likely more difficult for two strains with virulence genes against different resistances to mate because by definition these two strains are less likely to infect same host tissue. the relative importance of sexual and asexual spores as primary inoculum is also likely to affect the likelihood of recombination of different virulence alleles and their persistence. in addition, with a few exceptions  <cit>  most studies ignored genetic drift, which frequently occurs for pathogens of agricultural crops in the form of repeated population crashes due to overwintering , crop removal  and disease control measures.

in this study, we developed a stochastic simulation model to study the dynamics of fungal virulence in mixtures of perennial crops, focusing on the effects of cost of virulence and pathogen reproduction mode on the emergence and persistence of super-races in the population. pathogen reproduction is characterised by the composition of sexual and asexual propagules in overwintering inocula, and the probability of the mating between strains on the same host cultivar relative to the mating between strains on different cultivars. the model extends a previous model  <cit>  and simulates development of a generic pathogen in cultivar mixtures of perennial species.

RESULTS
nearly 75% of simulation runs terminated within  <dig> seasons, i.e. there is only a single fungal genotype of virulence left in the population, and only about 4% of simulation runs terminated beyond  <dig> seasons . the longest time to fixation  is  <dig> seasons. most of the variability  in tf among simulation runs cannot be explained by the simulation factors . of the five factors, proportion of primary inocula as sexual propagules and cost of virulence accounted for most variation  in tf:  <dig> % and  <dig> %, respectively . increasing proportion of sexual propagules as primary inocula reduced tf ; average tf was  <dig>   <dig>   <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> seasons for 10%, 30%, 50%, 70% and 100% of sexual propagules in primary inocula, respectively. increasing cost of virulence reduced tf, especially when sexual propagules accounted for more than 10% of primary inocula . on average tf was  <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> seasons for cost of virulence of  <dig> ,  <dig>  and  <dig> , respectively. the interaction between cost of virulence and proportion of sexual propagules accounted for  <dig> % of the total variation in tf. the effect of between-cultivar mating was most pronounced when cost of virulence is  <dig>  , increasing between-cultivar mating lead to greater tf. average tf was  <dig>   <dig>   <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> seasons for between-cultivar mating of  <dig> ,  <dig> ,  <dig> ,  <dig>  and  <dig> , respectively. variability in tf among replicate runs varied greatly with simulation factors and their interactions, especially those between proportion of sexual propagules in primary inocula and cost of virulence , and between cost of virulence and between-cultivar mating . in general, the variability is least when there is no cost of virulence.

a: number of initial diseased units at the beginning of each season .

b: proportion of initial infected units  derived from sexual propagules .

c: probability of sexual propagules derived from mating between diseased units on two different hosts relative to the mating between diseased units on the same cultivar .

d: recombination coefficients among the six virulence alleles , which were linearly located on a chromosome with three of them against the same host cultivar on the same end.

e: cost of virulence for each additional virulence allele against the non-host cultivar .

total number of virulence alleles  at the time of fixation is mainly determined by cost of virulence, accounting for about 37% of the total variation in vt . on average there are  <dig> ,  <dig>  and  <dig>  virulence alleles in the final fixed pathogen genotype for cost of virulence of  <dig> ,  <dig>  and  <dig> , respectively. only the interactions between proportion of sexual propagules in primary inocula and between-cultivar mating had noticeable effects on vt. initial increase in between-cultivar mating led to nearly one additional virulence allele when there no cost of virulence ; there was an increasing difference in vt between cost of virulence of  <dig>  and  <dig>  with increasing between-cultivar mating . more than half of the variability  in vt among simulation runs cannot be explained by the five factors studied .

in contrast to tf and vt, nearly all the variability in bv was accounted for by the simulation factors, primarily by cost of virulence  and its interaction with between-cultivar mating . with larger cost of virulence , nearly all simulation runs ended up with fungal propagules that can only infect one host . on the other hand, at cost of virulence of  <dig>  bv decreased gradually from 98% to 76% when between-cultivar mating increased from  <dig>  to  <dig>  . with no cost of virulence, bv decreased sharply from 44% to 8% when between-cultivar mating increased from  <dig>  to  <dig> , and thereafter decreased gradually to nearly zero with increasing between-cultivar mating . overall, there were about 66% of simulation runs in which the final fixed genotype can infect only one cultivar, and only 15% of the runs in which the final fungal genotype had all six virulence alleles . in many simulation runs , the final fungal genotype did not have the maximum possible number of virulence alleles: three in the case of infecting one cultivar only, and six in the case of infecting both cultivars .

discussion
the present study investigated fungal virulence dynamics within the context of perennial tree species in agriculture where host genetic make-up and their spatial position remained unchanged. this differs from most studies on the host-parasite co-evolution in nature  <cit>  and annual crops. furthermore, repeated population crashes were introduced to mimic pathogen overwintering or oversummering, which is usually not considered in gfg modelling studies. results indicated that a single fungal genotype is likely to quickly dominate a population due to the bottleneck in overwintering with cost of virulence primarily determining whether the dominant genotype can infect both cultivars. however, the dominate genotype is unlikely to accumulate all the virulence alleles due to genetic drift. pathogen reproduction mainly affects the time to fixation and its effects on the emergence of super-races depend on the magnitude of cost of virulence.

nearly all simulated fungal populations became fixed within  <dig> seasons, probably due to genetic drift arising from repeated population crashes. many simulated populations consisted of only two genotypes within  <dig> seasons, which persisted for some time before one dies out. the drift effect can also be seen in terms of the large variability in the time to fixation that cannot be explained by the simulation factors. predicting whether the final fixed fungal genotype could overcome one or two hosts  can be made reliably as long as cost of virulence and the mechanism of sexual reproduction are known. however, the precise number of virulence alleles in the final genotype and the time to fixation are less predictable. in 28% of the simulation runs, the final fungal genotype did not possess the maximum possible number of virulence alleles due to the stochasticity in sampling overwintering inocula and generating sexual propagules. these results on the ability of infecting both cultivars and number of virulence alleles result primarily from the fact that the present model has characteristics of both major and minor genes. any of the three virulence alleles against one cultivar behaves essentially as a major gene, as it allows the strain to infect this particular cultivar. however, subsequent addition of other virulence factors against the same cultivar behaves as a minor-gene system as it only gradually increases sporulation capacity.

higher cost of virulence generally led to a shorter fixation time, which is probably due to strong selection against super-races leading to rapid reductions in the number of fungal genotypes in the population. on the other hand, variability among replicate runs in the fixation time was greater when there was cost of virulence, especially when the cost of virulence is intermediate. this is probably because with no cost of virulence super-races are likely to dominate quickly but at intermediate cost of virulence genetic drift plays more important role in shaping the coevolution. when cost of virulence is smaller or absent, the likelihood of emergence of super-races is also considerably affected by the mechanism of sexual reproduction. increasing mating between fungal strains from different hosts increased the likelihood of super-races persisting in the population and becoming fixed. the present study suggests that a 20% mating chance between strains infecting different cultivars is sufficient for different virulence alleles to combine and for the resulting super-races to persist.

the probability of emergence of fungal strains with virulence against both host cultivars  is primarily determined by cost of virulence and its interaction with the mechanism of sexual reproduction. with a high cost of virulence , there are virtually no possibilities for fungal strains with virulence against both cultivars to persist in the population and, therefore, a super-race combining virulence alleles against both cultivars is unlikely to dominate the population. this agrees with previous modelling results that cost of virulence is likely to maintain polymorphisms in virulence. in the present study, there is no such polymorphism because of fixation arising from repeated population crashes. cost of virulence varied considerably among pathosystems  <cit>  and among virulence alleles of the same pathosystem  <cit> . cost of virulence in the range of 5-10% as used in the present study is not uncommon. a cost of 20% was estimated for two virulence alleles in the wheat rust pathogen   <cit>  and about 15% for one virulence allele in phytophthora infestans <cit> .

pathogen reproduction mode also considerably affects evolutionary dynamics of the virulence trait. often in population genetic modelling studies, random mating is assumed. random mating is usually not a realistic assumption for fungi given the nature of fungal aggregation and local dispersal, often resulting in scale-dependent fungal virulence structure  <cit> . sexual reproduction can happen both on attached host tissues and on dead host material and sometimes it is not certain when and where sexual reproduction has initiated. for example, although ascospores of venturia inaequalis are known to be produced on fallen apple leaf debris and discharged in spring as primary inoculum  <cit> , it is not clear whether sexual reproduction had initiated when the leaf was still attached to the tree or after leaf-fall. mating between fungal strains that infected the same host tissue is more likely to occur, especially if sexual reproduction had initiated when the infected host tissue was still attached to the host. since the present model did not allow multiple infections of a single host unit, the mating between strains on the same host-tissue was simulated as the mating between strains on the same cultivar. this simplification is based on the rational that strains residing on the same cultivar are more likely to have similar genetic makeup in terms of virulence than strains on different cultivars and hence more likely to infect the same host tissue than those strains from different cultivars. if the model had allowed preferential mating between strains on the same host tissue, it is even less likely that virulence alleles are combined than the present model suggested and it would probably take even longer time to fixation. the present model results may, therefore, be considered as an illustration of worst scenarios.

inclusion of mutation and immigration will ensure generation of new fungal variability. the present study did not, however, consider mutation and immigration simply because it focuses on the likelihood of super-races dominating and persisting in the population. thus given the fact that all virulence alleles are present in the population  and there is a mechanism for them to combine together, introduction of new virulence alleles in a given strain via mutation or immigration at a realistic rate should not affect the main simulation conclusions.

time to fixation is a critical factor in determining whether the risk of emergence and subsequent spread of super-races is sufficiently great to prevent the use of cultivar mixtures. this aspect of co-evolution has so far been ignored; present study suggests that time to fixation can be greatly affected by genetic drift. the extent of population size reduction during the season depends on several factors, including amount of available alternative hosts  <cit> , crop removal, and disease management practices . although the present study showed that the time to fixation is rapid in term of the evolutionary scale, it is still relatively long  when the length of cropping cycles in agriculture is considered. for example, modern commercial apple orchards last for about 15- <dig> years. therefore, it is unlikely that super-races could be fixed within one cropping cycle since the shortest fixation time occurred when there is high cost of virulence under which super-races are unlikely to persist in the population. therefore, provided that host resistance makeup in mixtures can be altered between cropping cycles, the risk of emergence and spread of super-races should not be a major constraint for adopting mixtures.

CONCLUSIONS
this simulation study has shown that only in the absence of cost of virulence will super-races dominate the pathogen population. further accumulation of minor virulence genes is, however, subject more to genetic drift; consequently, in many cases the best pathogen genotype was eliminated from the fungal population by chance. furthermore, even when super-races are eventually fixed, it took considerable length of time relative to the life of perennial agricultural crops. the risk of emergence and spread of super-races should, therefore, not be a major constraint for adopting mixtures provided that we disrupt the process of selecting super races by altering host resistance makeup between cropping cycles.

