BACKGROUND
the increase in carbapenemase-producing enterobacteriaceae and pseudomonas aeruginosa is a significant threat to modern medicine  <cit> . as treatment options are very limited, infection control measures are important to contain carbapenemase-producing isolates in health care settings. rapid detection of carbapenemase-producers is a decisive for adequate infection control measures to be undertaken. the methods used so far for the detection of carbapenemases have been phenotypic methods or pcr  <cit>  recently, matrix assisted laser desorption ionization-time of flight  has been introduced in clinical microbiology for species identification and during the last two years a few studies have shown the proof of concept regarding the detection of β-lactamases using this technology  <cit> . these studies have either analyzed a small set of strains  <cit>  or focused on the detection of hydrolysis rather than the verification of specific enzymes  <cit> . all studies have used different protocols and different sets of species/enzyme combinations. in the present study we present a method for the simultaneous detection and discrimination of kpc from the metallo-β-lactamases  ndm and vim in klebsiella pneumoniae and the possibility of verification of vim in pseudomonas aeruginosa through a time dependent hydrolysis assay and the addition of specific inhibitors, apba  and dpa .

RESULTS
stability of ertapenem
ertapenem was stable after one week and six months when stored at −20°c, but degraded after one week when stored at +4°c. the frozen aliquots were used for further analysis.

klebsiella pneumoniae 
all the kpc producing k. pneumoniae  displayed the specific ertapenem hydrolysis peak pattern after 15 min incubation . as no potassium was included in this assay only the sodium ions of hydrolysed ertapenem with the m/z ratios of  <dig> ,  <dig> ,  <dig> ,  <dig>  and  <dig>  were detected. the hydrolysis was inhibited by apba  as only the unhydrolysed forms of ertapenem were detected with the m/z ratios of  <dig> ,  <dig> ,  <dig>  and  <dig> . the ndm-  and vim-producing  k. pneumoniae isolates did not hydrolyse ertapenem in 15 minutes but hydrolysis was observed after 120 minutes incubation . the hydrolysis of vim- and ndm-enzymes was fully inhibited by dpa . at these concentrations the inhibition was 100% specific for the respective enzyme. ertapenem was not hydrolysed by the atcc  <dig> or by the clinical isolates with classical esbl or acquired ampc  . all k. pneumoniae  in the validation panel with kpc, ndm, or vim enzymes were correctly assigned as kpc- or mbl-producers while none of the isolates with oxa- <dig> enzyme  displayed hydrolysis after 2 h while all showed the pattern of ertapenem hydrolysis after 24 h. a summary of the results is presented in table  <dig> 
k. pneumoniae 
after 15 min  and the effect of the supplement of apba inhibiting the kpc mediated hydrolysis of ertapenem .
k. pneumoniae 
, the full hydrolysis of ertapenem of a ndm-producing 
k. pneumoniae 
after 120 min  and the effect of the supplement of dpa inhibiting the ndm mediated hydrolysis of ertapenem .
k. pneumoniae 
, the full hydrolysis of ertapenem of a vim-producing 
k. pneumoniae 
after 120 min  and the effect of the supplement of dpa inhibiting the vim mediated hydrolysis of ertapenem .

k. pneumoniae

p. aeruginosa
a. baumannii

p. aeruginosa

k. pneumoniae

e. coli
*peaks m/z:  <dig> ,  <dig> ,  <dig>  and  <dig>  da.

a synthesis of the results showing the species, resistance mechanism and mic range in the test panel and validation panel in relation to the results in the hydrolysis assay based on ertapenem.

pseudomonas aeruginosa 
six out of elevenvim producing p. aeruginosa, as well as the imp-14-producing isolate tested, hydrolysed ertapenem after 120 minutes of incubation with the specific ertapenem hydrolysis peak pattern. the hydrolysis was fully inhibited in the presence of dpa in all cases. ertapenem was not hydrolysed by the non-carbapenemase producing , carbapenem resistant, p. aeruginosa isolates . of the  <dig> p. aeruginosa isolates included in the validation panel  were correctly assigned as carbapenemase producers . the carbapenemase production was inhibited by dpa both for vim and imp positive strains. prolonged incubation  did not reveal any signs of hydrolysis in the strains tested negative after 120 min incubation . there was no linkage between vim-type and hydrolysis results. a summary of the results is presented in table  <dig> 

other species , escherichia coli 
none of the  <dig> acinetobacter baumannii group isolates, oxa-24-like  and oxa- <dig> like ) included in the validation panel hydrolysed ertapenem within 120 min incubation. all isolates, however, displayed the specific pattern of ertapenem hydrolysis after a prolonged incubation . the two isolates of e. coli only producing a classical esbl-enzyme  did not hydrolyse ertapenem at any time point. the oxa- <dig> positive isolate of e. coli did not hydrolyse ertapenem within 2 h, but prolonged incubation  revealed hydrolysis. a summary of the results is presented in table  <dig> 

discussion
the drastic increase of isolates with the ability to produce carbapenemases in enterobacteriacae, acinetobacter spp. and p. aeruginosa rapidly challenges the treatment concept of severely ill patients  <cit> . whether the carbapenem resistance is due to carbapenemase production or other mechanisms is considered important for infection control teams. molecular methods are available for the verification of the genes responsible for carbapenemase production but have the limitation of not detecting new mechanisms  <cit> . the phenotypic assays so far on the market have problems with the time to result, isolates with low expression of the carbapenemase genes and that specific inhibitors are not available for several enzymes  <cit> . the introduction of maldi-tof for the detection of carbapenemases has seemed promising due to the versatile approach of the detection of hydrolysis and the seemingly high sensitivity and specificity  <cit> . for the detection of carbapenemases in acinetobacter the use of imipenem has been chosen  <cit>  while for the detection of carbapenemases in enterobacteriaceae meropenem is best validated but ertapenem has also been suggested  <cit> . most methods developed so far for this purpose have only investigated very small collections, in all  <dig> isolates, of p. aeruginosa <cit>  and only  <dig> isolates with a vim enzyme out of which  <dig> were detected.  <cit> . we included  <dig> isolates of p. aeruginosa out of which  <dig> carried a vim enzyme and  <dig> an imp-14-enzyme. only  <dig> of these isolates could be detected  using this method based on ertapenem. both the vim-type and absence of vim-production could be ruled out as possible explanations for this. we therefore hypothesize that the non-hydrolysis of ertapenem might be due to additional porin loss resulting in a very low fraction of ertapenem  to reach the periplasmatic site of action of the vim-enzyme  <cit> . this finding is important as it shows that the local epidemiological situation where both the mechanism and species of interest may vary is important when choosing the right method for the detection of carbapenemases. however, when a carbapenemase was detected the use of inhibitor could verify the presence of a metallo-β-lactamase also in p. aeruginosa.

the rapid verification  of carbapenemase production separating kpc isolates from other carbapenemases is to our knowledge the most rapid verification method of carbapenemases in k. pneumoniae developed so far. as shown by others, direct detection of carbapenemase production directly from blood culture vials is possible  <cit>  and could be of great importance especially in hospitals with high incidence of carbapenemase producing isolates, as the rescue treatment in these cases is associated with worse patient outcome  <cit> . we did not have any imp-producing k. pneumoniae isolates available for this study and the specificity for kpc of the 15 min hydrolysis might thus be overrated. however the only imp-producing p. aeruginosa isolate did not hydrolyse ertapenem in 15 min .

the method presented here is not dependent on any know-how in molecular biology and could be performed in any laboratory having access to a maldi-tof with open software allowing the manual analysis of mass spectra in a m/z range far below the range of 2–20 kda used for species id. we choose to build this assay on the hydrolysis of ertapenem as this hydrolysis is associated with specific degradation peaks of  <dig> ,  <dig> ,  <dig>  and  <dig>  easily visualized using the hcca matrix used for species id and does not need the addition of sds   <cit> . the method accurately detection of kpcs in k. pneumoniae and was not primarily developed for detecting oxa-enzymes but these enzymes were introduced in the “validation panel” to test the robustness of the method in a clinical setting. the method failed to detect oxa-enzymes in the validated time frame of 2 h. however a prolonged incubation for 24 h displayed the hydrolysis pattern in k. pneumoniae, acinetobacter spp. and e.coli while the controls containing only ertapenem or classical esbl-producing e.coli did not show any signs of spontaneous hydrolysis. although a bit slow, the method thus seems promising for the detection of the oxa 48-enzyme, but has to be validated further with several more species with varying oxa-enzymes.

the addition of inhibitors, as suggested by others  <cit>  in the assay might not be necessary as the time to detection was highly specific for the separation of kpc from mbl-enzymes. however, we did not test isolates positive for imp-enzymes which might show rapid hydrolysis and if in doubt, both apba and dpa showed specific inhibition of kpc and mbl enzymes respectively and thus served as further verification of the type of enzyme expressed. in an attempt to streamline the two tests an incubation time of 120 min was tested also for the kpc-verification test. this was however not successful as the high amount of apba then needed  also seemed to inhibit the action of ndm. no hydrolysis could be observed in ndm incubated with high concentration of apba. the specificity of apba is thus in this assay dependent on the combination of incubation time and concentration of apba.

from a methodological point of view the assay was easy to perform and interpret. we used a categorical interpretation of the peaks as being present or not and did not use the intensity ratio between the hydrolysis and non-hydrolysis peaks previously proposed by sparbier  <cit> . similar to sparbier we observed the peak of 450 da which is a degradation peak of ertapenem. this peak was by sparbier observed only when performing a similar assay directly from blood culture  <cit> . however, in this study the 450-peak was present in all runs but with a higher intensity in the presence of kpc, vim or ndm. the peak was not included for the interpretation of hydrolysis. for further studies this peak has to be characterized further.

CONCLUSIONS
this method allowed a rapid detection and verification of kpc, ndm and vim producing k. pneumoniae and can be performed at a low cost. this study revealed some caveats regarding the use of this type of hydrolysis assays for the detection of carbapenemases as not all vim-producing p. aeruginosa as well as none of the oxa- <dig> positive isolates were detected within the 120 min time frame of the assay. modifications of the assay and/or a change of conditions and carbapenem used might overcome this problem. if the rapid degradation of ertapenem by kpc also with meropenem or imipenem as substrate has to be investigated further and the definite sensitivity and specificity of the assay have to be evaluated on a larger collection of isolates.

