BACKGROUND
the g-protein-coupled receptors  constitute one of the largest and most ancient superfamilies of membrane proteins, accounting for 1–2% of the vertebrate genome. gpcrs are characterized by the presence of highly conserved molecular architecture encoding seven transmembrane  hydrophobic regions linked by three extracellular loops that alternate with three intracellular loops  <cit> . the extracellular n-terminus is usually glycosylated and the cytoplasmic c-terminus is generally phosphorylated. the extracellular side of these receptors contains residues that are specifically recognized by ligands and is therefore involved in ligand-specific binding. the endogenous ligands for gpcrs have exceptionally high chemical diversity. they include biogenic amines, glycoproteins, ions, lipids, nucleotides, peptides and proteases. moreover, the sensation of exogenous stimuli such as light, odor and taste is also mediated via this superfamily of receptors. ligand-induced activation of all gpcrs leads to a conformational change of the receptor and triggers a family of heterotrimeric gtp binding proteins  and modulates several cellular signaling pathways.

gpcrs have been aggressively pursued as drug targets due to their central role in physiological processes affecting almost all aspects of the life cycle of an organism  <cit> . almost half of the gpcrs are likely to encode sensory receptors and the rest of receptors could be considered as potential drug targets  <cit> . it is estimated that about 50% of all current drug targets are gpcrs and are the most successful of any target class in terms of therapeutic benefit  <cit> . a major goal of gpcr research is to expand the knowledge of gpcr structure/function in order to validate additional gpcr family members as tractable drug targets. much effort, therefore, has been made to identify novel gpcrs and their ligands with potential therapeutic value  <cit> .

the completion of several other vertebrate and invertebrate genome sequencing projects paves the way for "functional genomics". the quest for assigning function to putative gene products exploits the sequence and structural similarities to known genes and further could be elucidated using molecular biology techniques  <cit> . such studies have important implications in biology and in understanding the evolution of distinct organisms. sequencing of the model organisms can be an important source of information on the function of human target class members. for example, evolutionary comparison of gpcr sequences between species can help to identify conserved motifs and may recognize key functional residues  <cit> . the majority of gpcr functional data have been derived from studies in genetic models such as mice, rat, worm and drosophila; additional species provide new comparators for gpcr studies. teleost fish, tetraodon nigroviridis is one of the smallest known vertebrate genomes. it has all the specialized functions of higher vertebrates and can be a good vertebrate model system to study  <cit> . the first available nearly complete sequence of t. nigroviridis genome now allows for the identification and analysis of its full set of gpcrs. here, we describe the genome wide survey of tnig-gpcr repertoire and a detailed analysis of opsin, fish-odorant receptors  and taste receptors .

RESULTS
recent analysis of the genome sequence of the fresh water pufferfish tetraodon nigroviridis genome  has shown that it possesses one of the smallest known vertebrate genomes and revealed a set of  <dig>  predicted genes, much similar to the number of predicted genes in human genome  <cit> . in order to identify complete set of putative gpcrs within tetraodon genome, we developed a comprehensive strategy . table  <dig> summarizes  <dig> tnig-gpcrs that were identified, out of which, to the best of our knowledge,  <dig> have not been reported before. the complete list of tnig-gpcrs, including their sequence similarities to the functionally characterized gpcrs from human and other organisms, is available as additional data file  <dig>  gpcrs represent ~ <dig> % of total number of genes predicted from  <dig> mega base pair t. nigroviridis genome  <cit> , which is comparable to those predicted in fly, mosquito and mammalian genomes  <cit> . despite the higher sequence diversity of gpcrs in fly, mosquito, c. elegans and other vertebrates, sequence analysis suggests evolutionary conservation of gpcrs across phyla and that they might have ancient origins . for almost all tnig-gpcrs, a putative human gpcr homologue could be identified.  <dig> putative human and tetraodon gpcr orthologous pairs are identified .

* numbers and abbreviations are as described in  <cit> .

rhodopsin family in tetraodon has up to one and half times the number of receptors compared with human , whereas about two fold as many gpcr sequences as in fugu and about three fourth of the zebrafish gpcrs  <cit> . tetraodon also has similar numbers of frizzled receptors as expected in mammals and fish genomes. some of the gene families in tetraodon like opsins and fish odorant receptors have shown species-specific expansions similar to trace amine receptors in zebrafish  <cit> . however, taste receptors type  <dig>  and mas related  receptors seem to be absent in tetraodon like other known fish genomes  <cit> .

analysis of the chromosomal distribution of tnig-gpcrs show their distribution across all the chromosomes and gpcrs on one chromosome show a greater tendency to have duplicated copies located on another chromosome . comparative genomic studies of tetraodon and humans show many gpcrs for which there are two copies in tetraodon but one in the human genome. chromosomal distribution of putative tetraodon-human gpcr orthologous pairs and corresponding tnig-gpcr paralogs show correspondence between two different chromosomal regions in tetraodon genome to one region in the human genome . this two to one  association also supports the hypothesis that these genes arose through a large-scale gene duplication event, probably involving whole genome duplication in tetraodon  <cit> , since almost all tetraodon chromosomes are involved.

gpcr classification has been proposed by fredriksson, and schioth in human and other fully sequenced genomes into five main families; glutamate , rhodopsin , adhesion , frizzled  and secretin    <cit> .tetraodon gpcrs also show five main grafs  families . it is observed, however, in tetraodon that there were shifts of some of the receptors between the main groups of rhodopsin family  <cit> . under the rhodopsin family, there are nine opsin receptor representations in humans, but t. nigroviridis displays an expansion where we have identified  <dig> tnig-opsin receptors. the phylogenetic analysis divides tetraodon opsins into three branches: classical visual pigments, neuropsin/rgr like, and encephalopsin/melanopsin like . there are at least four copies of genes under each of these branches in tetraodon, but only one orthologous copy each has been identified in human genome, indicating fish specific gene duplications as observed earlier for trace amine receptors in zebrafish  <cit> .

 <dig> candidate odorant receptors  were identified in fish odorant receptor  subfamily of rhodopsins in tetraodon. these or genes are found in clusters of 3– <dig> members in the tetraodon genome, located on different chromosomes. they display higher sequence identity within a cluster suggesting tandem duplication events might be responsible for or gene family expansion in tetraodon as observed in the genomes of every vertebrate organism investigated earlier, including zebrafish, mice and humans  <cit> . phylogenetic analysis of tetraodon ors with fish odorant receptor subfamily members  grouped them into six clusters of orthologues with very high boot strap support . in teleost lineage, different members of for subfamily have shown species specific gene expansion. for example, there is a large group of fors with  <dig> zebrafish members,  <dig> catfish members,  <dig> medaka fish and one each of tetraodon and channel catfish. another group consists of  <dig> tetraodon members,  <dig> medaka fish members and one each of goldfish and japanese pufferfish . high differences in numbers of or genes in specific fish reflect creature-specific lifestyle and these receptors are responsible for binding ligands important to a particular species  <cit> .

among the glutamate receptor family, we find four novel members of candidate mammalian type- <dig>  taste receptors in tetraodon genome . they have been implicated in sweet and umami detection in mammals by forming homo and/or hetero dimers  <cit> . tnig-taste receptors retain several conserved ligand binding residues when compared to rat mglur <dig> metabotropic glutamate receptor  <cit>  . phylogenetic analysis of t1r receptors in human, rat and tetraodon reveals two groups of tnig-taste receptors: with one t1r1-like gene and other with three t1r3-like genes. a putative human gpcr orthologue has been identified for both groups. the presence of t1r family members in the tetraodon genome suggests that the emergence of dimer-forming chemosensory receptors of glutamate family antedate the emergence of land vertebrates.

CONCLUSIONS
we have identified and analyzed repertoire of tetraodon gpcrs and found high level of orthology with human counterparts. the human and tetraodon gpcr sequences are analogous in terms of gpcr subfamilies, but display disproportionate number of receptors at the subfamily level. the teleost genome, with its expanded set of gpcrs, provides an additional and interesting model to study both evolution and function of these receptors. the availability of repertoire of tetraodon gpcrs will facilitate further studies through "functional genomics" and "reverse pharmacological" strategies to match their cognate ligands and to elucidate biological functions. systematic mutation of tetraodon gpcrs will help to determine their neural, developmental and behavioral roles. they might also yield novel insights into the physiological functions and mutational pathologies of their human homologues in particular and other vertebrate homologues in general.

