BACKGROUND
males and females differ in a number of characteristics ranging from morphology to behavior to physiology. some traits are almost exclusively observed in one sex . other traits show sex bias in which they are displayed by both males and females but on average show higher expression in one sex . regardless of the degree of bias, understanding the origin and maintenance of sex differences has important evolutionary and biomedical consequences .

the brain represents a key site of integration for environment and experiential information, resulting in changes in physiology and behavior. in mammals and birds, sex differences in the brain are mostly due to the organizational and activational effects of sex steroid hormones and hormone-independent genetic mechanisms of sex chromosomes  <cit> . while mammals and well-studied species from other taxa show relatively conserved sex determination patterns characterized by gonochorism, teleost fishes exhibit a high degree of sexual plasticity  <cit> . teleost fishes display temperature-dependent, heterogenic, polygenic, and socially-controlled sex determination systems  <cit> . even in teleost species that exhibit genotypic sex determination, sex ratios can still be heavily skewed with hormone exposure before sexual maturation  <cit> . the most dramatic example of plasticity is seen in several families of fishes where mature adults can undergo functional sex change in response to changes in their social environment  <cit> . hence, teleost fishes represent unique models that can give insight into sexual lability and sex differences in the brain.

although there are sexual dimorphisms in zebrafish behaviors and morphology  <cit> , the genetic and hormonal bases are not well understood. zebrafish do not exhibit strong sex determining gene cascades  or sexually dimorphic chromosomes . recently, it was documented that zebrafish possess a polygenic sex determination system and sex-associated chromosomal regions are not fixed for the species . while zebrafish have been developed as a model system for developmental, toxicological and biomedical studies , few studies have examined sex differences in this species.

as the genomes between the sexes are largely similar, observed sexual dimorphisms can arise and be maintained through differences in gene expression . a substantial amount of differential regulation occurs across the genome between male and female zebrafish gonads  <cit> . differences in gene expression in the brain, gonads, and other tissue can be due to activational effects of hormones. in medaka and other teleost fish, sex steroids will directly alter expression of key genes in the brain in a sex-specific manner that can be both transient and reversible  <cit> . studies to date examining genome wide expression differences in the brain have focused on one strain or pooled several strains, possibly resulting in a limited view of sex-biased gene expression  <cit>  . to identify genes that may be important for sex differences associated with the brain , we compared basal levels of gene expression in the transcriptomes of both males and females across four strains of zebrafish by rna-sequencing with the goal of identifying those differences that are consistently present between the sexes. we also assessed differences in gene co-expression networks between the sexes. for two strains , lsb ) with documented sexual dimorphism in stress-related behaviors  <cit> , we assessed whether the expression levels of select genes are associated with individual variation in behavior in each sex.

RESULTS
whole-brain transcriptome patterns show little sex bias
in this study we used rna-sequencing and subsequent bioinformatic analyses to compare the neurotranscriptomes of four strains of zebrafish  to identify sex-biased gene expression patterns. multidimensional scaling analysis revealed that the samples clearly clustered together by strain rather than sex . of the  <dig>  protein coding genes analyzed,  <dig> showed significant differences between the sexes after controlling for strain differences . the zebrafish brain shows a substantially lower number of sex-biased genes compared to the gonads or liver  <cit>  and the number of differentially expressed genes in the brain in this study is consistent with other studies  <cit> . we speculate that having the majority of the genes displaying similar basal level expression between males and females may be an important factor for sexual lability in fishes. if the male and female zebrafish brain is largely similar at the basal transcript level, behavioral and physiological sex differences may be more easily facilitated by other factors such as the hormonal, ecological, or social environment.figure  <dig> 
multidimensional scaling plot of all genes for each sample. square, circle, star, and diamond represents the lsb, hsb, ab, and sh strains, respectively. male and female samples are represented by open and filled symbols, respectively.
venn diagram of sex-biased genes. after controlling for strain differences, less than  <dig> % of transcriptome was differentially expressed between the sexes. see additional file  <dig> for gene identities.



of note, we observed significant sex-biased expression in genes associated with sex steroid production  and reproduction  across strains . brain aromatase  was female-biased whereas the enzyme that converts androstenedione to testosterone, 17-beta hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase  <dig> , was male-biased. brain aromatase and 17-beta hydroxysteroid dehydrogenases have been implicated in a variety of processes ranging from modulating sexual behavior to neural plasticity in teleosts and other species  <cit> . sex-biased expression of genes encoding proteins that aromatize androgens  or aid in synthesizing testosterone  suggest localized neurosteroid production likely contributes to sex differences and lability. additionally, both insulin-like growth factor  <dig>  and prostaglandin d <dig> synthase  in the brain are modulated by sex steroids, alter neural plasticity, and are linked to sexual behavior . it is possible that these genes may be important in maintaining sex differences in reproductive behavior in zebrafish.

an enzyme that activates thyroid hormone by converting thyroxine  to triiodothyronine , deiodinase  <dig> , showed male-biased expression . localized thyroid hormone action is critical for normal brain development . given teleost brains show continuous neurogenesis even as adults  <cit> , we hypothesize that dio <dig> may help promote sex-specific neural circuits and behavioral plasticity. thyroid hormone has been shown to alter neural plasticity in a sex-specific manner in rats  <cit> . surprisingly, dio <dig> is the only gene that was similarly differentially expressed across two of the three other studies of genomic analyses of sex differences in the zebrafish brain. this suggests that sex-biased dio <dig> activity is conserved in zebrafish. of note, the other genomic studies used different lines than those used here or did not distinguish lines of zebrafish in their analyses  <cit> . since we have demonstrated that there are substantial differences in gene expression by line , it is possible the minimal overlap across studies is due to line differences. future studies should account for potential line effects in their analyses and interpretations.

gene ontology analyses of all differentially expressed genes show that these are generally associated with the extracellular matrix, collagen, and isoprenoid and retinoid binding . when taking into account the direction of expression, approximately 75%  of the differentially expressed genes showed male-biased expression . the explanation for the majority of differentially expressed genes being male-biased is unclear. in mammals, birds and other species with genotypic sex determination systems, potential causes for this bias could be dosage compensation or sex chromosome effects  <cit> . for zebrafish, these are unlikely as no heterogametic chromosomes have been identified and they possess a polygenic sex determination system  <cit> . further, the location of the sex-biased genes in this study is not clustered into the identified sex-associated regions in zebrafish  <cit>  . the  <dig> male-biased genes show an over-enrichment of extracellular matrix part and collagen gene ontology terms. the  <dig> female-biased genes represent over-enriched gene ontology terms comprised of isoprenoid and retinoid binding. we acknowledge the challenging nature of interpreting sex-biased gene ontology terms. nonetheless, these gene ontology terms can be broadly associated with synaptic plasticity  and may be involved in maintaining the behavioral differences observed between sexes.table  <dig> 
significantly overrepresented gene ontology terms for genes showing sex-biased expression across all four zebrafish strains



cc cellular component, mf molecular function.



weighted gene coexpression network analysis  showed that the zebrafish brain transcriptome can be clustered into  <dig> modules . of these modules, the light yellow , royal blue , midnight blue , and dark red  modules were significantly associated with sex. however, only the midnight blue module shows a strong trend after a benjimini-hochberg correction . the midnight blue module consists of  <dig> genes but gene ontology analysis reveals no significantly over-enriched terms. within the midnight blue module there is a significant and positive correlation between gene significance for sex and module membership . this suggests that genes more central to the network  are also strongly associated with sex differences. of note, dio <dig> and igf <dig> are among the top  <dig> most connected genes in the midnight blue module . across all four modules,  <dig> genes also showed a significant sex-bias through differential gene expression analysis . these  <dig> genes had a significantly higher module membership relative to other genes in the four modules . this indicates that these sex-biased genes are highly connected within the module, which suggests they are more central to the network  and have the potential to be key regulators of the gene co-expression network. the identification of these  <dig> genes  as being associated with sex differences in our two independent analyses suggest they may be more important in basal level sex differences and consistent with the idea of neurosteroid production contributing to sexual plasticity in teleost fishes.figure  <dig> 
hierarchical eigengene diagram of all samples.all modules were obtained from wgcna analysis. modules in bold show a significant association with sex .



no correlation between individual variation in basal level gene expression and behavior
females spent significantly more time stationary than males in the open field test  after controlling for strain differences. there was no significant strain x sex interaction effect  indicating that females spent more time stationary than males in both the lsb and hsb strain. this is consistent with our previous study on earlier generations of the lines  <cit> . however, there was no significant correlation between expression of any of the genes analyzed by qrt-pcr  and stationary time in either sex . the gene dio <dig>  and igf <dig>  showed male-biased expression whereas ptgdsb  and gabbr1b  showed female-biased expression . the other genes, cfos , cyp19a1b , gabbr1a , and pmchl  did not show sex-biased expressions. overall, the expression ) of all eight genes is consistent between qrt-pcr and rna-sequencing . these results suggest that within-sex variation in the degree of stress and anxiety-related behavioral displays in our hsb and lsb lines is not linearly related to basal levels of the measured genes. it is possible that our measured sex-biased genes  have a threshold effect that facilitates behavioral sex differences. however, we cannot rule out a potential linear relationship for other genes. a multidimensional study identifying markers for anxiety in male rodents suggested cfos and gabbr <dig> receptor as top candidates  <cit> . surprisingly, the expression of these genes was not correlated with our anxiety-related behavioral measure in either sex. species differences or an unidentified non-linear relationship may account for this observation.figure  <dig> 
time spent stationary in females and males. gray and white bars are females  and males , respectively. error bars represent standard error. **, p <  <dig> .
significantly differentially expressed genes by qrt-pcr. gray and white bars represent female  and males , respectively. gene expression was normalized to a housekeeping gene. error bars represent standard error. ***, p <  <dig> ; *, p =  <dig> .



gene coexpression network interactions differ between the sexes
wgcna analyses revealed that the female and male zebrafish brain transcriptomes can be clustered into  <dig> and  <dig> modules, respectively . in females,  <dig> of the  <dig> identified modules showed strong preservation in males. three modules, however, showed very weak preservation  in males . these modules consisted of  <dig> genes and gene ontology analysis showed no terms were over-enriched. in males,  <dig> of the  <dig> modules identified were strongly preserved in females but seven modules showed very weak preservation  . the seven modules represent  <dig> genes but do not show over-enrichment of any gene ontology terms. although the majority of the genes are expressed at a similar level , network analyses suggest that the genes are largely co-regulated in different ways  in males and females. we hypothesize that the modules weakly preserved in the opposite sex, when subjected to hormonal, ecological, or social environmental variation, may facilitate the flexibility of sex-specific behavior and physiology in teleosts.

to compare network properties between categories of significantly over-enriched gene ontology terms , we assessed the preservation of gene-expression network interactions between the sexes. genes associated with the extracellular matrix showed moderate preservation between males and females . not only do genes associated with the extracellular matrix show sex-biased expression, but the coexpression network also differs between the sexes. the differences in presumed co-regulation of these genes may explain the sex-biased expression. the extracellular region  and structural molecule activity  gene ontology terms displayed very high preservation of gene expression interactions between the sexes . despite sex-biased expression in genes associated with the extracellular region and structural molecule activity, the gene coexpression networks are largely similar between the sexes. the mechanism warrants further study.figure  <dig> 
extracellular matrix gene coexpression network. genes associated with extracellular matrix showed moderate preservation in direction of correlation ), correlation coefficient , and network centrality  between the  females and  males.



CONCLUSIONS
sex differences in morphology, physiology and behavior are prevalent across many species. in teleost fishes, sexual plasticity is often very high. as an initial attempt to understand a mechanism of sexual plasticity in fish, we characterize sex differences in basal gene expression levels, gene coexpression networks, and stress and anxiety-related behavioral responses across several lines of zebrafish. we identified that a small fraction  of the neural transcriptome is differentially expressed at the basal level after controlling for line differences. interestingly, observing less sexual dimorphism in gene expression in the brain relative to other tissues is consistent with studies in a wide variety of taxa from fruit flies to birds and to rodents  <cit> . sex-biased genes in zebrafish are associated with steroid hormone biosynthesis and synaptic plasticity suggesting local neurosteroid production to be a key modulator of the sexual plasticity observed in adult teleosts. since we did not detect any overrepresentations of general biological, cellular, or molecular pathways in the sex-specific modules, with approximately half the modules showing moderate to weak preservation across the opposite sex, it is suggestive that certain genes in the transcriptome are being co-regulated in a sex-specific manner. of the genes analyzed, we did not observe any correlation between basal level of expression and stationary behavior. the presence of only modest differences in gene expression across the brain transcriptome coupled with sex-specific gene coexpression networks possibly allows for sexual plasticity in teleosts to be easily modulated by hormonal, ecological, or social factors.

