BACKGROUND
transposable elements  are dna fragments that can move from one genomic location to another by a process called transposition. they are the largest component of most multicellular organism genomes, often exceeding 50% of content
 <cit> . tes are divided into two classes based on the nature of their transposition intermediate: class  <dig>  retrotransposons and class  <dig> dna transposons. if we think of the genomes of higher plants as ecosystems, then each te class occupies a characteristic niche. although class  <dig> tes are largely intergenic, most class  <dig> tes are preferentially found in and around genes. as such, class  <dig> elements contribute more significantly to plant genome size differences whereas class  <dig> elements are frequently involved in generating allelic diversity
 <cit> .

transposition of class  <dig> elements, which are the focus of this study, requires the enzyme transposase that binds to the elements’ terminal inverted repeat  and catalyzes both excision and integration into a new site. class  <dig> elements are classified into superfamilies based on the relatedness of the transposase and on shared structural features including the tir sequence and the length of the target site duplication  that flanks the tir and is generated during integration. only five of the seventeen superfamilies characterized to date have been found in plant genomes 
 <cit> . while helitrons were considered to be the sixth class  <dig> superfamily in plants
 <cit> , we do not include them here because they have different structures and transposition mechanisms from cut-and-paste elements. each superfamily contains autonomous and nonautonomous elements. autonomous elements encode the transposase necessary for their own movement and the movement of nonautonomous superfamily members, which lack functional transposase genes.

the most numerous class  <dig> elements in characterized plant genomes and in several animal species are miniature inverted-repeat transposable elements . mites are nonautonomous tes that are characterized by short length , high sequence similarity, and a potential for very high copy number 
 <cit> . despite lacking coding sequences, mites can be classified into known superfamilies based on related tir sequence and tsd length. to date, the majority of reported mites are either stowaway or tourist elements that belong to the tc1/mariner and pif/harbinger superfamilies, respectively
 <cit> . mites belonging to the hat and the mutator superfamilies have also been reported
 <cit> .

although te superfamilies can be readily distinguished by shared sequences and structural features , tes are usually lumped together when their relationship with gene and genome evolution is analyzed
 <cit> . a determination of potentially unique and conserved features of each superfamily would require their systematic comparison across species. the availability of complete genome sequences from four grass species, brachypodium distachyon 
 <cit> , oryza sativa 
 <cit> , sorghum bicolor 
 <cit> , and zea mays 
 <cit>  has facilitated such a novel comparative analysis. these four grass species were chosen for several reasons. first, the genomes have been annotated to high quality and some gene expression data is available. although tes have also been annotated in these genomes, we performed a systematic re-annotation to permit a consistent comparative analysis and to classify noncoding elements into superfamilies. with only five of the ~ <dig> class  <dig> cut-and-paste superfamilies identified in eukaryotes, it is more likely that most tes in the genomes can be assigned. in contrast, with over  <dig> superfamilies, it is very difficult to classify aedes aegypti tes into superfamilies unambiguously
 <cit> . in this study, we identified and classified over  <dig>  class  <dig> elements. finally, the genes in these four species are largely syntenic despite a 10-fold difference in genome size. given that most class  <dig> elements are known to insert into or near genes, we were particularly interested in comparing each te superfamily across species to determine what features are conserved and what features may be influenced by the host.

RESULTS
te annotation and definitions
class  <dig> tes from the five superfamilies found in plants were annotated in four grass genomes and the results are summarized in figure 
 <dig> and additional file
 <dig>  coding elements contain all or part of the transposase gene from one of the five superfamilies. their copy numbers were estimated from the number of conserved transposase domains identified by target 
 <cit> . we call them coding elements rather than the more conventional autonomous elements because the latter term implies functional activity, and manual curation of a subset of these elements indicates that most contain inactivating mutations. to save words, coding tes are denoted with a lowercase “c” followed by the superfamily name . similarly, noncoding elements are referred to as ntes. in this study ntes were discovered by mite-hunter, a structure based te identification tool that has as its output consensus sequences that represent nte families. by default mite-hunter identifies ntes shorter than 2kb, which encompasses the majority of ntes including mites
 <cit> .

to obtain the copy number, length and position of ntes in each genome, consensus sequences were used as queries for searches using repeatmasker. from the repeatmasker output, double-ended elements and single-ended elements were identified and analyzed separately . the total copy number of a nte consensus sequence was calculated by adding the double-ended copy number and half of the single-ended copy number. furthermore, ntes were characterized as either mite or non-mite where mites are defined as shorter than 600bp with at least  <dig> double-ended copies or  <dig> nearly identical copies  . the total copy number and length of ntes  as well as the percentage of each superfamily in the four genomes  was determined. while these data are combined in figure 
 <dig> and additional file
 <dig>  the complete dataset is available at
http://target.iplantcollaborative.org.

copy numbers of class  <dig> elements in four grass genomes
except for the tc1/mariner superfamily, the copy numbers of ctes differ dramatically among the four grass genomes . ccactas are the most numerous in rice , sorghum  and maize  and are the second most numerous  in the brachypodium genome . furthermore, ccactas increase in copy number with increasing genome size . chats also increase with genome size but their numbers are significantly lower than ccactas . coding members of the mutator and pif/harbinger superfamilies show little copy number variation in brachypodium, rice and sorghum but show a marked increase in the larger maize genome. interestingly, the coding members of the tc1/mariner superfamily have by far the lowest copy numbers in the four genomes and show no correlation with genome size .

despite the dramatic copy number differences across species, the copy number ratio of ntes to ctes is a conserved feature of each superfamily . for each genome, the ratio is lowest for the cacta superfamily , which has the most ctes and the fewest ntes. after cacta, the next lowest ratio in all genomes is for mutator  followed by hat , pif/harbinger  and tc1/mariner . the high ratios for pif/harbinger and tc1/mariner reflect the success of mites from these superfamilies, called tourist and stowaway, respectively
 <cit> . these results indicate that the mechanisms underlying the generation and success of ntes are both conserved and distinctive for each superfamily.

length is a conserved feature of the ntes in a superfamily
figure 
 <dig> is a visual representation of the size and copy number of the ntes from tc1/mariner and pif/harbinger in the four genomes . these data were generated by plotting the double-ended copy numbers of each consensus nte against the length of the consensus sequence. of note is the similarity of the patterns for a particular nte superfamily in all genomes. in addition, with only one exception , the order of the mean lengths of the ntes is the same in all genomes with ntc1/mariner < npif/harbinger < nhat < nmutator.

all ntes except ncactas are enriched near genes
prior studies showed that most plant class  <dig> tes have a preference for insertion into or near genes
 <cit> . recently, the determination of over  <dig> insertions of the active mite mping near rice genes identified a preference for insertion of this member of the pif/harbinger superfamily within 1kb of the transcription start site  and 1kb downstream of the transcription stop site 
 <cit> . here our annotation results have been used to determine whether ntes from other superfamilies show similar enrichment and, if so, whether this feature is conserved in all genomes.

to this end we first calculated the average percentages of class  <dig> ntes in the whole genome as well as in the 5′ and 3′ flanking regions around genes. these data are presented diagrammatically in figure 
3a and in detail in additional file
 <dig> . taken together these data indicate that the ntes from all superfamilies except cacta are enriched in the 1kb compartments flanking the 5′ and 3′ ends of coding regions. the only exception is in maize where there are more ncactas near genes than in other areas of the maize genome, which may reflect the overwhelming number of class  <dig> ltr elements that are enriched in intergenic regions 
 <cit> . the extent of enrichment is especially pronounced in rice, sorghum and maize where about 20% of the sequences in these regions are derived from class  <dig> nte sequences .
 <dig> 

to characterize the distribution of ntes at higher resolution and in regions more distant from the tss and tts, we calculated nte percentages in continuous 10bp windows extending 10kb upstream and 10kb downstream of coding regions. the distributions of all ntes in these regions are similar as evidenced by the black curves in figure 
3b, although the percentage of elements around the genes of brachypodium is about half that of the other three species. after the 5′ and 3′ flanking regions, intron ntes are the most abundant across all the superfamilies and species. however, unlike the patterns observed in the gene flanking regions, nte frequencies are highest in the middle of introns and drop gradually toward the splice sites .

ntes differ in their association with genes of high or low expression
the abundance of class  <dig> ntes in genic regions prompted us to examine whether the presence of a particular superfamily member near genes correlates with increased or reduced expression levels. this analysis was performed in rice and maize where annotation is of high quality and gene expression data is available. genes harboring ntes from members of the same te superfamily were grouped and their expression levels were compared with a control group of genes without class  <dig> ntes. extensive comparisons were performed using rice microarray data from different experiments, tissues and platforms. a more limited comparison was also made with available maize expression data .

in all microarray data analyzed in rice and maize, genes with npif/harbinger and ntc1/mariner elements have significantly higher expression levels than genes in the control group. in contrast, the expression of both rice and maize genes with ncactas is significantly lower than the control dataset . although expression levels for maize genes associated with nhats and nmutators are significantly higher than the controls in rna samples from two tissues , no clear picture emerged when rice samples were analyzed .
 <dig> 

to confirm these findings, we analyzed publically available rna-seq data from rice and obtained very similar results . specifically, genes with class  <dig> superfamily ntes except for ncactas, showed significantly higher expression levels than controls. the expression levels of genes with ncactas are lower than controls, but these data are not statistically significant , which can be explained by the small sample size and limited sequencing reads to discern genes with low expression.

discussion
the major focus of this study was to generate comprehensive and accurate class  <dig> te data for comparative analyses. to this end we utilized target and mite-hunter, two programs that have proved efficient at detecting ctes and ntes, respectively
 <cit> . in our analyses we separated ntes from ctes, classified them into superfamilies, and further identified mites among the ntes. this protocol was necessary because ntes and ctes have distinct features. for example, coding tc1/mariners have only about  <dig> copies in each of the analyzed genome but there are two orders of magnitude more ntc1/mariners  . the dramatic amplification potential of small ntes, in particular mites, is also very different across superfamilies. extensive manual curation was performed for each nte consensus sequence to ensure the accuracy of te discovery and classification. in this way, we achieved the most comprehensive annotation of class  <dig> cut-and-paste tes to date in these four grass genomes. for example, we found several-fold more stowaway and tourist elements than a previous annotation of these elements in rice, sorghum and maize
 <cit> . comparative analysis of this robust dataset led to the identification of several previously unknown features related to copy number, element size, genomic distribution and correlation with the expression level of nearby genes.

the cacta superfamily is the outlier in all comparisons. among the superfamilies analyzed in this study, cacta has the fewest number of ntes and the greatest number of ctes . this paucity of ncactas suggests that this superfamily generates fewer short elements than the others. further, in three of the four genomes analyzed, cactas are enriched in intergenic regions where their copy numbers increase proportionally with genome size . finally, in at least two grass species  the presence of ncactas in or near genes has a negative correlation with transcription . taken together, these data suggest that cacta elements have either evolved a genic region insensitive/avoidance strategy or are removed from genic regions by selection.

the other four class  <dig> te superfamilies also have distinctive features that are conserved in all genomes analyzed. for example, the ratio of the number of ntes to ctes is the highest for the tc1/mariner superfamily and next highest for pif/harbinger followed by hat, mutator and cacta . in this same order, the average length of ntes also increases  suggesting that there is a range of lengths that is optimal for the transposition and amplification of each superfamily.

with regard to the distribution of elements in the four superfamilies, we have extended an observation originally made in rice
 <cit>  and show that except for ncactas ntes are enriched at gene borders . specifically, ntes are most abundant at the 5′ gene border, and also enriched but less so near the 3′ border . this result, however, differs from a recent report in rice
 <cit> . for the pif/harbinger superfamily, enrichment of the active mite mping was shown previously to result from its preference for insertion into gene proximal regions
 <cit> . although our data are descriptive and as such cannot distinguish between an insertion preference or winnowing by selection, the strikingly similar patterns around grass genes suggests a preference. a similar insertion preference was observed for hermes, an active member of the hat superfamily from the housefly musca domestica <cit> . characterization of almost two hundred thousand insertion sites in a saccharomyces cerevisiae transposition assay revealed a marked preference for nucleosome free regions  around genes, presumably because of their accessibility. given that nfrs have also been found near the 5′ ends of plant genes
 <cit>  it is possible that their distribution underlies the pattern of nte insertion sites from four of the five superfamilies in plants.

the dramatic enrichment of class  <dig> ntes around genes especially in promoters prompted us to analyze the correlation between these elements and nearby gene expression levels using microarray data. genes with pif/harbinger and tc1/mariner elements, which are the two superfamilies that generate the majority of mites, showed significantly higher expression values . furthermore, genes with hat and mutators showed higher expression levels in maize but not in all rice tissues. in contrast, as discussed above, genes with cacta elements were associated with lower gene expression.

CONCLUSIONS
these results indicate that superfamily identity needs to be considered when analyzing the correlation between tes and the expression of nearby genes. this conclusion may explain discrepancies between our results and those of prior studies. for example, hollister et al. and lu et al. reported negative association between tes and nearby genes in arabidopsis
 <cit>  and rice
 <cit> , respectively. based on our results, a possible explanation is that in both of these studies tes were not separated into superfamilies for the analysis. grouping of tes in this way, without regard for superfamily identity, could mask the unique behavior of individual superfamilies. finally, as our data and prior studies have shown, ntes, especially mites, are abundant near genes
 <cit> . it would be difficult to explain this distribution if the impact of these elements were largely negative.

