BACKGROUND
gene expression profiling utilizing microarrays has become a widely used approach to elucidate biological function in complex systems. in mice and humans, a number of different platforms and approaches have been developed that have allowed gene expression analysis under a broad range of treatment conditions both in vitro and in vivo. in swine, in spite of limited genomic information available, several platforms have been developed for gene expression profiling. there are two microarrays currently available for porcine gene expression studies: affymetrix porcine , and a u.s. pig genome coordination program glass spotted long oligonucleotide microarray   <cit> . in addition, a few groups have reported cross-species microarray hybridization onto affymetrix human arrays with mrna from species such as dog, cattle, and swine  <cit> , thus suggesting that the affymetrix human platform  may also be useful in porcine gene expression studies. there has also been a single report of cross-species hybridization of porcine cdna onto human nylon microarrays  <cit> .

while zhao et al. reports validation of the porcine glass spotted long oligonucleotide array  <cit> , there are no reports thus far on the affymetrix porcine microarray released in early  <dig>  in order to determine which of the presently available microarrays would be preferable for swine gene-profiling studies we compared both porcine based platforms as well as the human affymetrix arrays . there are compelling reasons why one might theoretically choose any of these three array platforms. the affymetrix human array has the greatest coverage and is well annotated against the human genome, but is complicated by the effects of cross-species hybridization. the affymetrix porcine array has an intermediate level of coverage but is poorly annotated. the glass spotted oligonucleotide array platform has the potential advantage of greater specificity and has a lower unit cost, but has the lowest coverage of all three platforms.

to ensure that we could assess platforms in terms of the biological relevance of the information generated, we chose to compare gene expression profiles of biparental and parthenogenetic porcine fibroblasts. comparisons between control and parthenogenetic mouse embryos have been previously used to identify imprinted genes  <cit>  and extensive information exists regarding expected differences in gene expression between these two cell populations. as such, results from the three platforms being compared can be examined not just for their technical reproducibility, but also for the relevance of the information expected. specifically, diploid parthenogenetic embryos contain only maternally-derived chromosomes and as such they have two sets of maternally imprinted genes and no paternally imprinted genes. in contrast, normal biparental embryos contain one complement each of paternal and maternal imprinted genes. comparison of the gene expression profiles of both groups allows the identification of imprinted genes as has been demonstrated by mizuno et al.  <cit> . thus, by using this model system it is possible not only to compare platforms for their technical merits but also for the extent of biological information generated .

RESULTS
technical reproducibility
all arrays were normalized  and compared by pairwise correlations between technical replicates, with the average pearson correlation coefficient given below. affymetrix human and porcine arrays were both highly correlated between technical replicates indicating high technical reproducibility. the lower correlation between replicates of the affymetrix human array is likely due to the greater percentage of inherently more variable non-hybridizing probes caused by sequence divergence mismatches. also, it was necessary to remove approximately 10% of the probes on the long glass oligonucleotide array due to printing defects prior to normalization . after this procedure, it was found that although these spotted arrays performed relatively well, they nonetheless showed significantly more variability than the affymetrix arrays. decreased error variance due to high technical reproducibility is one of the key contributing factors to a platform's ability to identify differentially expressed genes .

cross-species hybridization onto affymetrix human genechips
utilizing the design described above, porcine crna was hybridized to human affymetrix arrays and data analyzed by filtering and subsequent analysis via a linear mixed model as described in the methods. due to the effects of cross-species hybridization, the complexity of downstream analysis for affymetrix human u133+ <dig>  arrays in the context of cross-species hybridization was significantly greater than for the remaining arrays. specifically, a high degree of variability within probe sets, likely due to probes with low sequence identity between human and pig was noted. the plots of probe expression profiles highlights the difficulty of this problem .

in the affymetrix human probe set 212092_at, targeting the gene peg <dig> , the small black arrows indicate that only 1st, 2nd, and 11th probes appear to be differentially expressed in control versus parthenogenetic samples. the remaining probes show intensities that are randomly distributed around the median of the array. in contrast, ssc. <dig> .a1_at, a porcine-specific probe for the same transcript , showed clear evidence of differential expression across all probes. this inconsistent hybridization within probe sets is representative of the probes on the affymetrix human array under these cross-species hybridization conditions. figure 2c further illustrates difficulties with the filtering process. in this figure, the dotted red line in the expression profile on the left is a filtering threshold. the probe set in the lower left shows results of filtering at a particular threshold . this illustrates how this type of filtering is imperfect as at a fairly stringent threshold, only two of three probe sets that exhibit evidence for differential expression are retained along with two probe sets that do not.

we tested a number of filtering thresholds based on the perfect match probe intensity in an effort to optimize this procedure . however, far fewer differentially expressed known imprinted genes were identified by the affymetrix human array, even after applying these filtering procedures. a filtering procedure proposed by ji. et al., which implements a filter based on the difference and ratio of perfect match and mismatch probes  <cit>  was also tested. this filtering approach did not improve results in terms of known imprinted genes identified in comparison to filtering solely based on perfect match intensity .

estimates of differential expression
differential expression for all three platforms was determined by estimating treatment effects after fitting a linear mixed model using sas and jmp/genomics via the method of wolfinger et al..  <cit> . the volcano plots   demonstrate that the number of significant differentially expressed genes identified varies greatly between these three platforms. all known imprinted transcripts have been highlighted in red; the dotted red lines correspond to a bonferroni adjusted  on the vertical axis and > 2-fold change on the horizontal. the affymetrix porcine array identified both the greatest number of differentially expressed genes as well as the greatest number of differentially expressed known imprinted genes. this same trend was exhibited when the threshold for differential expression was set at q< <dig>  and q< <dig> . table  <dig> summarizes the transcriptional differences identified.

sensitivity
a cumulative distribution plot shows the proportion of genes that are at or below a full range of p-value thresholds . it corroborates that at all significance thresholds, the affymetrix porcine array detects genes as being differentially expressed with higher frequency.

identification of sequence-matched probes
in order to assess the performance of the microarrays independently of coverage, we identified a set of  <dig> probe clusters common to all platforms by sequence-based mapping on the probe level. briefly, we selected short oligonucleotide probes that mapped to long oligonucleotide probes with complete sequence identity and included them in a matching probe cluster where there were mappings for both short oligonucleotide affymetrix microarrays to the single porcine glass long oligonucleotide microarray.  <dig>  affymetrix porcine short oligonucleotides mapped to  <dig>  unique porcine glass long oligonucleotides;  <dig> affymetrix human short oligonucleotides map to  <dig> unique porcine glass long oligonucleotides. the intersection of these two mappings results in the  <dig> probe clusters which are used to assess intra-platform reproducibility.  <dig> of these probe clusters contain short oligonucleotide sequences that match exactly between the two affymetrix platforms; correlation coefficients are also calculated for this subset. 

within the constraints of the technology , this sequence-based probe-to-probe mapping is the most rigorous method of identifying comparable matching probes to assess inter-platform reproducibility.

inter/intra-platform reproducibility
average pairwise pearson and spearman correlation coefficients were calculated, showing strong correlation both within and between the two affymetrix microarrays, but moderate correlation between the porcine glass and the affymetrix platforms. as expected, given the high strong intra-platform correlation of the affymetrix microarrays, probes with identical sequence between affymetrix porcine and affymetrix human microarrays also show very strong correlation .

these correlation values compare favorably with the best correlations reported by pylatuik et al. on biological replicates between platforms and are comparable to the correlations for a values obtained by barczak et al. where technical replicates were used to compare the same sample between short and long oligonucleotide platforms .

validation of known imprinted genes by qrt-pcr
validation of microarray results by real-time quantitative reverse-transcription pcr  was conducted by examining expression of known imprinted transcripts. a subset of known imprinted transcripts were selected regardless of their levels of expression on the various microarrays. our results  indicate that for those transcripts where the individual microarrays showed significant evidence for differential expression  there was qualitative agreement with the results of qrt-pcr. at a more relaxed threshold, sgce would also be detected as significantly differentially expressed on the glass oligonucleotide array, while plagl <dig> and igf <dig> are not represented on the glass arrays. there were two transcripts, dlx <dig> and dcn, which were detected as differentially expressed by qpcr but not by the microarrays at a statistically conservative bonferroni corrected p <  <dig>  cutoff. this is consistent with the observation that microarrays tend to underestimate absolute fold change and that qrt-pcr has greater detection sensitivity  than microarray technology  <cit> .

discussion
the difficulty with assessing relative performance of microarrays is that the truth regarding which genes are actually differentially expressed is not known. it is not feasible in practice to validate all but a relatively small sampling of genes by quantitative pcr, thus, surrogate measures for accuracy such as concordance are typically used in comparisons between platforms. in this study, we've used several classical metrics for reproducibility and sensitivity of detection. in addition, we've chosen to use the number of known imprinted genes identified as an ad hoc measure of the performance of each platform under realistic experimental conditions. we find that affymetrix porcine arrays were the most technically reproducible and were able to identify the greatest number  of currently known imprinted genes, while affymetrix human and porcine glass oligonucleotide arrays identify a comparable number . the biological significance of this study is that it suggests that the following genes: diras <dig>  mest, ndn, nnat, sgce, srnpn, peg <dig>  plagl <dig>  and peg <dig> are imprinted in porcine fibroblast. their prominent disregulation may point to a role in the failure of parthenogenetic development to term in swine.

it has been suggested that it might be possible to run additional glass long oligonucleotide arrays to compensate for their increased technical variability, particularly as they have a lower unit cost. while a larger number of arrays may be able to compensate and provide increased statistical power to a glass long oligonucleotide array experiment, it is not relevant to the remaining issue of considerably lower coverage.

the primary complication with cross-species hybridization of porcine derived crna onto affymetrix human genechips is the difficulty in differentiating whether observed low signal intensity is due to low transcript abundance or sequence divergence. without genome sequence to resolve this question, the utility of these arrays for porcine gene expression studies is reduced. furthermore, though filtering at varying thresholds does appear to improve the detection of differentially expressed known imprinted genes there is not a clear optimum, and varying sets of known imprinted genes are detected at different thresholds. the optimal threshold may vary with sample condition and may thus be difficult to determine without known differentially expressed genes as controls, as we have in this case. this would pose an obstacle to typical experiments without a priori information about differential expression. we propose that while it is possible to identify differentially expressed genes by this method, with the availability of the affymetrix porcine array it is no longer necessary to perform this cross-species hybridization procedure in swine unless one is specifically interested in questions such as the degree of interspecies sequence similarity  <cit> . overall, our observation that is that the effective coverage of affymetrix human arrays for detecting differential expression  is less than that of affymetrix porcine arrays.

in other species where a commercial short oligonucleotide array is not available, the only available option may be cross-species hybridization onto a similar affymetrix array. we observed that probe level filtering based only on perfect match probe intensities performs comparably to the perfect match and mismatch based approach of ji et al. one possible reason that these two filtering procedures perform similarly despite fairly different implementations is because the ji et al. procedure uses the affymetrix mas <dig> algorithm to obtain summary expression intensities. since mas <dig> is an expression summary based on the difference in intensity between perfect match and mismatch probes, it is logical and consistent to use a filtering scheme also based on this difference. we obviate the need to consider the mismatch probes when filtering by estimating differential expression using an approach based on perfect match intensities only and using this approach we obtain satisfactory and comparable results to a pm-mm filtering scheme which we implemented as described in ji et al.  <cit> .

there are open questions about whether data from different microarrays is comparable given low levels of concordance observed between different microarray platforms  <cit> . spotted long oligonucleotide platforms are considered to be an improvement over cdna arrays as it eliminates the problem of clone misidentification, although incorrect spot placement is still possible  <cit> . our observation of moderate correlations between platforms is consistent with earlier studies. it reinforces the idea that, particularly in the absence of known reference standards, microarrays are better suited for identifying relative as opposed to absolute quantitative differences. the results of our microarray analyses, taken together with results of real-time quantitative pcr, suggest that microarrays are generally successful at identifying differentially expressed genes and identifying the same biological group of imprinted genes that were predicted to be differentially expressed a priori based on the parthenogenetic animal model along with empirical evidence from prior studies.

CONCLUSIONS
in summary, results presented here indicate that the affymetrix porcine arrays have higher sensitivity and technical reproducibility in comparison to a porcine long glass oligonucleotide platform and cross species hybridization onto an affymetrix human platform. in addition, we have expanded the utility of these porcine microarrays through development of a more comprehensive annotation  <cit> . this enhanced annotation increases the amount of biological information that can be derived from the affymetrix porcine microarrays and increases their usefulness for swine genomic studies.

