BACKGROUND
the qinghai-tibet plateau, referred to as the “roof of the world”  <cit> , is the highest  and one of the most extensive  plateaus on earth. the qinghai-tibet plateau possesses an extremely harsh environment characterized by severe hypoxia, severe coldness and strong ultraviolet radiation that has profound effects on animal survival  <cit> . this unique plateau climate has made the qinghai-tibet plateau a global biodiversity hotspot and a natural laboratory for long-term hypoxia and cold adaptation studies . during the evolutionary process, many native organisms developed unique mechanisms to adapt to the harsh plateau environment  <cit> . numerous studies have been conducted to explore the adaptive mechanisms of endemic animals. for example, plateau zokor , a subterranean rodent endemic to the qinghai–tibet plateau, has significantly higher microvessel density in cardiac muscle and different structures of hemoglobin and myoglobin compared with other rodents  <cit> . mammalian species including tibetan antelope   <cit> , plateau pika   <cit> , tibetan wild ass   <cit> , plateau zokor   <cit> , and grey wolf   <cit>  have been intensively investigated. however, few molecular evolutionary studies have focused on plateau fishes.

the plateau schizothoracine fishes  are aquatic vertebrates that are endemic to the qinghai-tibet plateau  <cit> . the subfamily schizothoracinae consists of  <dig> genera containing approximately  <dig> species  <cit> . more than  <dig> species in  <dig> of these genera are endemic to the tibetan plateau  <cit> . the schizothoracines are among the most diverse subfamilies of cyprinids and are divided into three grades of specialization  according to their habitat elevations and differences in their scales, pharyngeal teeth, and barbels  <cit> . from the primitive to the highly specialized grade, species show gradual reductions in skin scale coverage, pharyngeal teeth, and barbels with habitat elevation; indeed, the scales of many highly specialized species have been completely lost. analyses of the mitochondrial genomes demonstrated that there has been positive selection on the protein-coding genes in the mitochondrial genomes of the specialized clade, providing evidence for adaptation to high altitudes in the specialized schizothoracines  <cit> . for example, guan et al.  revealed that hif-1αb  might play an important role in the adaptation of schizothoracine fish to the hypoxic tibetan plateau  <cit> .

gymnocypris dobula, which has hardly any scales and barbels, belongs to the highly specialized schizothoracines. it occupies the shallow lakes and tributaries at high altitudes  in the himalayan mountains, where the low oxygen tension exerts unique selection pressures. ptychobarbus kaznakovi is highly specialized but has a comparably lower altitudinal distribution  and was collected to enhance the altitudinal comparisons among species. schizothorax nukiangensis tsao and schizothorax gongshanensis are specialized schizothoracine fish with a limited distribution throughout tibet, the upper nujiang river drainage and the gongshan area of yunnan province with a habitat altitude between 1000 m and 3000 m. schizothorax prenanti is a primitive schizothoracine fish with two barbels and small scales covering its entire body that is distributed throughout the upper yangtze river drainage and upper reaches of the renhe river in the hanjiang river drainage, where the water temperature is relatively low   <cit> .

erythropoietin  is a glycoprotein hormone that plays a principal regulatory role in erythropoiesis, the process of production of red blood cells  <cit> . the effects of epo are mediated by binding to the epo receptor , which is primarily expressed on hematopoietic progenitor cells  <cit> . epo:epor engagement leads to the dimerization of epor and activation of the jak/stat signaling pathway  <cit> . epo was first isolated from mammals, including humans and mice  <cit> . it was subsequently identified in teleost species, including the pufferfish   <cit> , zebrafish   <cit>  and goldfish   <cit> .

previous studies showed that hypoxia treatment resulted in increased epo expression that could mediate the proliferation, differentiation and maturation of erythroid progenitor cells  <cit> . hypoxia in mammals and fish has also been reported to induce epo production through transcriptional regulation by hif  <cit> . despite the low sequence identity between fish and mammals, various studies have suggested conserved functions of epo/epor signal transduction in erythropoiesis in these animals  <cit> . additionally, epo has been reported to initiate survival and proliferative activities in non-erythroid progenitor cells such as endothelial cells, endothelial progenitor cells, cardiomyocytes and neural cells under conditions of moderate environmental stress and tissue damage . however, the functions of epo in the high-altitude adaptation of the schizothoracines to the aquatic fields of the qinghai-tibet plateau remain unknown.

to address this question, the epo genes from the aforementioned five schizothoracines were characterized. computational and experimental analyses revealed possibly adaptive amino acid substitutions and an enhanced hypoxic protection function in the epo gene of the highly specialized g. dobula.

RESULTS
characterization of epo genes from schizothoracines
samples of g. dobula, p. kaznakovi , s. nukiangensis tsao, s. gongshanensis  and s. prenanti  were captured from yadong, the southeast qinghai-tibet plateau, the qinghai plateau, the gongshang and nujiang rivers in yunnan province, and ya’an in sichuan province. sample information is provided in table  <dig> table  <dig> summary information for the five schizothoracine fish samples used in this study


g. dobula

p. kaznakovi

s. nukiangensis tsao

s. gongshanensis

s. prenanti

t temperature under the water ; do dissolved oxygen. habitat characteristics data were obtained from global position system and ysi water quality analyzer 



the coding regions of the epo full-length cdnas for the five species were cloned and sequenced. the full-length coding sequences from the translation start codon  to the stop codon  were 552 bp in length in all five species and encoded epo proteins of  <dig> amino acids .fig.  <dig> the sequences of g. dobula epo and the schematic representation of the five schizothoracine fish epos. a
g. dobula  epo mrna and deduced amino acid sequence. the predicted motifs and signal peptide sequence are shaded with a gray background with name abbreviations. the boxed amino acid sequences indicate the n-glycosylation motif sites. the start codon  and the stop codon  are underlined. the asterisk in the amino acid sequence indicates the stop codon. the motif abbreviations are presented as follows: ck <dig>  casein kinase ii phosphorylation site; pkc, protein kinase c phosphorylation site; cys, cysteine. the nucleotide and deduced amino acid residues are numbered on the right. b schematic representation of the architecture of the five schizothoracine fish epos. the structural domains are marked by different box patterns as indicated in the legend. the length of each bar is proportional to the size of the represented domain. the number of amino acids is shown to the right of each epo



sequence analysis indicated that the deduced amino acid sequence of schizothoracine epo included a signal peptide predicted to be cleaved between amino acids   <dig> and  <dig> . the predicted motifs included one protein kinase c  phosphorylation site,  <dig> casein kinase ii  phosphorylation sites, 2 n-glycosylation  sites and four conserved cysteine  residues . an additional ngs  and the loss of a ck <dig> site were uniquely found in the high-altitude schizothoracine g. dobula and p. kaznakovi epo structures, which differed from lower-altitude epos .

phylogenetic analysis of the schizothoracine epo protein
to investigate the evolutionary relationships between the vertebrate epos, we gathered the epo protein sequences from the newly characterized schizothoracines, goldfish , carp , zebrafish , northern pike , tongue sole , medaka , tilapia , orange-spotted grouper ,  <dig> amphibian epo sequences  and african clawed frog ) and  <dig> mammalian epos , pig , cat , yak , mouse  and human ). a multiple sequence alignment of the  <dig> actinopterygii and  <dig> mammalian epo proteins is shown in fig.  <dig> fig.  <dig> sequence alignment of the epos. seventeen epo sequences, including those of  <dig> actinopterygii fish species  and  <dig> mammals  were aligned with clustalw. the ten species used for the phylogenetic tree construction  are highlighted in a dashed rectangle. the limits of each helix are drawn according to the human epo protein sequence and marked by bold lines. the four conserved cysteine residues are marked by asterisks. the ngs sites, the ck <dig> phosphorylation sites and the pkc phosphorylation sites are marked with orange, green and blue rectangles, respectively. the epo receptor binding sites were inferred based on a structural model of human epo  <cit>  and are indicated by blue triangles. the deduced amino acid residues are numbered on the right. the amino acid sites unique to the two highly specialized schizothoracine fish g. dobula and p. kaznakovi within the cyprinidae fishes are highlighted with red shadows and numbers



the sequence alignment indicated that all vertebrate epos possessed ngs, pkc phosphorylation sites, ck <dig> phosphorylation sites, four conserved cysteine residues and four predicted helical domains . although the overall sequence similarities between actinopterygii and mammalian epos were low, the nflrgk sequence in the fourth helical domain was conserved among these lineages . the residues potentially involved in epor binding  were identified based on a structural model of the human epo  <cit> . it was clear that the epos of all eight cyprinidae fish shared high sequence similarities  and contained similar motifs . within the amino acids which are diverged between the high-altitudinal and the rest of cyprinidae fish, two amino acid sites  were shared by the high-altitudinal schizothoracines g. dobula and p. kaznakovi, and six were unique  to the g. dobula epo gene . although an additional round of whole-genome duplication occurred during teleost evolution compared to other vertebrate lineages, the epo gene remained as a single-copy gene in all of the teleosts examined.

test for positive selection in g. dobula epo and epor gene
given the unusual amino acid substitution pattern detected in g. dobula epo, we investigated whether it has undergone adaptive evolution. we obtained the epo coding sequences from five schizothoracine fish  and five other fishes . these species were chosen for analysis because they either belong to the clade cyprinidae or are most closely related to the epos of the schizothoracines currently available from the public database. codon substitution analysis was performed using the paml  <dig>  software  <cit>  based on the phylogenetic trees generated using the maximum likelihood method .fig.  <dig> evolutionary relationships of the epos. the phylogenetic tree was constructed using the ml method, as described in the methods. the calculated d
n/d
s  values  and bootstrap values are shown in each branch. the branches with ω values ≥  <dig>  are shown in bold. the tibetan plateau schizothoracine g. dobula assigned to the foreground is highlighted by a red solid rectangle



first, we estimated the relative evolutionary rate using the free-ratio model, which assumes an independent dn/ds  ratio for each branch of the tree. as shown in fig.  <dig>  the branch of g. dobula demonstrated a dn/ds  value of  <dig>  . the dn  and ds  calculated from g. dobula epo were both significantly higher than those of epos from other schizothoracines , indicating a possibly accelerated evolution in this branch among the schizothoracines.

the tree length based on ds is approximately  <dig>  according to the estimation by the m <dig> model. the divergence is sufficient to employ the branch-site model to evaluate branch-specific sites for positive selection. under this model, we assigned g. dobula as the foreground branch, and all other branches were set as the background branches. although the lrt  was not significant, five sites  were identified as potentially under positive selection, with the posterior possibilities ranging from  <dig>  to  <dig>  based on bayes empirical bayes estimation . of these sites, 131h was unique to the two high-altitude schizothoracines , and 133 t, 138s, and 153 l were unique to g. dobula .table  <dig> parameter estimates for the evolutionary analysis of the schizothoracine epo

the branch-site model in codeml program divides all the sites into four classes, class  <dig>   <dig>   <dig>  and  <dig>  class  <dig> is for the sites under purifying selection. class  <dig> is for the sites under neutral selection. class  <dig> and  <dig> are for the sites that have positive selection in foreground branches. in this table, p
 <dig> and ω <dig> stand for the percentage and averaged omega value of class  <dig> sites in the alignment. p
 <dig> and ω <dig> stand for the percentage and averaged omega value of class  <dig> sites. p
2 + p
 <dig> and ω2 + ω <dig> are for the percentage and averaged omega value of the sites in class  <dig> and 3



similarly, epor coding sequences from the same ten fish species were obtained and used for positive selection analysis. the multiple sequence alignment of the epor proteins is shown in additional file 1: figure s <dig>  according to paml analysis, the ω  value of the g. dobula epor branch was < <dig> , and that of the branch leading to the two high-altitude schizothoracines  epors was close to  <dig> , greater than those found in other branches , suggesting the possible acceleration of amino acid substitution in this branch. some amino acids were predicted under potentially positive selection using the branch-site model by assigning the two high-altitude schizothoracines as the foreground and all other branches as the background branches . most of the identified positive selection sites  were located in the ligand-binding domain and the fibronectin type iii domain  of the epor protein. however, the lrt results for the branch-site model for both epo  and epor  genes fell short of being statistically significant , suggesting the selection on the two genes were statistically weak.

structural prediction of the g. dobula epo
the tertiary structures of the g. dobula epos were predicted based on a structural model of the human epo   <cit> . the deduced amino acid sequence of the schizothoracine epo included a signal peptide sequence predicted to be cleaved between amino acids  <dig> and 24; four conserved cysteine residues at  <dig>   <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> that were required for disulfide bonding and the cytokine structure; and four predicted helical domains . based on the amino acid sequence and the positions of the disulfide bonds, the g. dobula epo was predicted to assume a four-antiparallel amphipathic α-helical bundle structure similar to other members of the cytokine family  <cit> . to compare the protein structures between high-altitude and low-altitude schizothoracine epos, the tertiary structure of the s. prenanti epo was also predicted, producing a similar structure .fig.  <dig> the three-dimensional structure of the g. dobula epo. a ribbon diagram of the predicted g. dobula epo tertiary structure. the four α-helices are labeled a–d . disulfide bonds bridge the residues 30– <dig> and 52– <dig>  the important functional sites  are marked in blue. this folding pattern is strongly suggested by the large size of the two interconnecting loops ab and cd. b schematic representation of the g. dobula epo primary structure depicting the predicted up–up–down–down orientation of the four antiparallel α-helices . an apparent signal peptide sequence of  <dig> amino acids is delineated by the solid rectangle. the limits of each helix were drawn according to the human epo protein sequence, as in fig.  <dig>  the dashed rectangle shows a predicted short region of the β-sheet. the locations of the two disulfide bridges are shown. amino acid sites under positive selection  are represented by blue arrows



the five sites potentially under positive selection  detected with the branch-site model were scattered among the third  and fourth  helices and in the loop region between the third and fourth helices .

epo expression profiles in three schizothoracines
messenger rnas were extracted from six tissues  from g. dobula , s. nukiangensis tsao and s. prenanti and tissue-specific transcriptomes were sequenced. sequencing and the assembly statistics are shown in additional file 5: table s <dig>  to gain a further glimpse of coverage of the epo genes in the transcriptomes, we analyzed that in the brain tissues of the three schizothoracine fishes as examples, and results were shown in additional file 6: table s <dig>  in high expressing tissues like g. doubula brain, the number of reads for epo ranged from  <dig> to  <dig>  we then conducted comparative studies on the transcriptomes of the three species that represented the highly specialized, specialized and primitive grades of qinghai-tibet plateau adaptation, respectively. by comparing the normalized expression values of the epo mrna in each tissue, the expression profiles of the gene in six tissues of each species were obtained . significantly higher levels of epo expression were found in the brain , p =  <dig>  ) and less significantly in the gill , p =  <dig>  ) of g. dobula compared with the same tissues from s. nukiangensis tsao and s. prenanti .fig.  <dig> tissue expression analysis of the epo in the three schizothoracine fishes. a six tissues  from three schizothoracine fish , s. nukiangensis tsao  and s. prenanti ) were subjected to transcriptome sequencing. epo expression levels were calculated based on normalized expression values. the gene expression levels of epo in g. dobula were derived from three replicates. to compare epo gene expression levels between the highly specialized and the non-highly specialized schizothoracines, s. nukiangensis tsao and s. prenanti were set as the non-highly specialized schizothoracine fish group. the statistical significance was determined using a one-tailed unpaired student’s t-test with p <  <dig> . b normalized expression values of the epo genes in  <dig> tissues from three schizothoracine fish  and the relevant statistical analyses. p value a and p value b were the p values adjusted by fdr  and bonferroni correction, respectively



the reliability of the epo expression profiles obtained from rna sequencing data were verified by quantitative rt-pcr. all of the six tissues from the three species were subjected to quantitative rt-pcr analysis. seven  out of  <dig> comparisons largely agreed in the direction and degree of changes between the rna sequencing-based gene expression profiling and quantitative pcr assays . based on these results, significantly up-regulated epo expression levels were observed in g. dobula brain and gill compared with the same tissues from the other two species .fig.  <dig> verification of the rna sequencing results by quantitative rt-pcr. a six tissues  from g. dobula , s. nukiangensis tsao  and s. prenanti  were subjected to quantitative rt-pcr analysis. the relative expression levels of the epo gene deduced from the sequencing-based analysis and from qrt-pcr analysis are plotted for each tissue. b ratio of epo expression levels between the high-latitudinal species  and the two low-altitudinal  species deduced from rna sequencing and qrt-pcr. athe normalized expression values were extracted from fig. 5b. b
β-actin was used as an internal control in qrt-pcr analysis. qrt-pcr was performed with three biological replicates, and each sample was assayed three times. the relative expression levels between the comparison partners were calculated using the 2−ΔΔct method. statistical significance was determined using the two-tailed unpaired student t-test with p <  <dig> 



the blood nitric oxide  levels of high- and low-altitudinal schizothoracines
we measured the concentration of nitric acid  in the blood of g. dobula and s. prenanti. we found that nitric oxide , a downstream signaling molecule that is inducible by epo  <cit>  was significantly higher in the plasma of g. dobula compared with the low-altitudinal s. prenanti , indicating that epo signaling was up-regulated in the high-altitude schizothoracine.

the hypoxic adaptive feature of g. dobula epo determined by cell transfection assays
to investigate whether g. dobula epo was endowed with hypoxic protection during evolution, we cloned the g. dobula and s. prenanti epo coding sequences into an expression vector  and transfected the plasmids into human embryonic kidney 293 t cells. due to the lack of proper antibodies against g. dobula epo, transfection efficiency was determined by the presence of the epo mrna and by western blotting to detect the egfp that was co-expressed with epo . after ensuring that similar levels of gd-epo and sp-epo were expressed in both transfections, the cells were subjected to hypoxia  for 12 h. cell viability was measured and compared with cells transfected with the empty vector. cell viability is an indicator of cell health, which can be measured by examining cellular reducing conditions. when cells are alive, they maintain a reducing environment within the cytosol. resazurin, the active ingredient of alamarblue® reagent, is a non-toxic, cell-permeable compound that is blue in color and non-fluorescent. in viable cells, resazurin is continuously reduced to resorufin, a compound that is red in color and highly fluorescent. using the alamarblue measurement, we found that under normoxic conditions, the cells transfected with the epo genes exhibited lower viability than the control cells . in contrast, under hypoxic conditions, the cells containing sp-epo continued to exhibit lower viability compared with the control cells , while cells expressing the gd-epo largely reversed the reduction in viability and reached viability levels that were comparable to or slightly higher than the controls. these results demonstrated that there are significant functional differences between gd-epo and sp-epo, suggesting an adaptive feature of gd-epo under hypoxic conditions.fig.  <dig> viability analysis of 293 t cells transfected with schizothoracine epos under hypoxic challenge. a the schematic diagram of the recombinant epo plasmid. the g. dobula and s. prenanti epo coding sequences were cloned into the pegfp-c <dig> plasmid restriction digested by bamhi and ecori. epo was co-expressed with egfp. b due to the lack of proper antibodies against g. dobula epo, expression of transfected epo was determined by western blotting to detect the egfp co-expressed with epo. significantly higher expression levels were detected in the cells transfected with gd-epo when subjected to hypoxia . c the boxplots indicate relative cell viability analyses of cells transfected with schizothoracine epos under normoxic culture conditions  and hypoxic culture conditions . under normoxic conditions, cells transfected with the epo genes exhibited lower viability than the control cells . in contrast, under hypoxic conditions, the cells containing sp-epo continued to exhibit lower viability compared with the control cells, the expression of gd-epo largely reversed the reduction in viability and reached levels that were comparable to or slightly higher than the controls. error bars represent the mean ± se



discussion
comparison of the adaptive mechanisms between qinghai-tibet plateau schizothoracine fish and native tibetans
as the world’s highest and largest plateau, the tibetan plateau, with an average elevation of 4500 m above sea level, imposes low oxygen concentrations on most organisms  <cit> . species inhabiting the qinghai-tibet plateau have developed adaptive mechanisms to respond to low oxygen tension. undoubtedly, the adaptive processes in humans native to the qinghai-tibet plateau are the most abundantly studied to date . compared with people living at sea level, tibetans possess several key adaptive features to cope with the hypoxic conditions. these features include decreased hemoglobin levels  <cit> , an unusually small degree of hypoxic pulmonary vasoconstriction   <cit> , increased levels of the vasodilator nitric oxide  and increased rates of the flow of oxygen-carrying blood to tissues and of oxygen diffusion from the bloodstream into cells  <cit> . these adaptive features in tibetans are possibly correlated with adaptive evolutionary changes that occurred in a few genes  that have experienced positive selection in tibetans  <cit> .

molecular evolutionary studies on the schizothoracine fish have been rare to date. guan et al. first identified teleost-specific duplicated hif-α genes from schizothoracine fish and suggested that hif-1αb may be the most important regulator in the adaptation of schizothoracine fish to the aquatic environment of the tibetan plateau  <cit> . our study is the first evolutionary study on erythropoietin , which is a downstream gene regulated by the hifs and is the principal regulator of erythropoiesis. elevated epo expression in several tissues  and possible positive selection sites  were identified specifically in the highly specialized schizothoracine species. in combination with the enhanced cytoprotection function found with g. dobula epo under hypoxic conditions, the epo gene likely plays a role in the adaptation of the schizothoracines to the high-altitude qinghai-tibet plateau. similar to native tibetans, higher levels of nitric oxide  were detected in the plasma of g. dobula compared to the lower altitudinal s. prenanti . our unpublished data also showed that the blood cell number or the blood hemoglobin content of g. dobula is only approximately  <dig> or 68 % of that of s. prenanti, clearly suggesting that both of the blood cell number and the blood hemoglobin levels of the schizothoracine fish were reduced with the increase of elevation . while different genes might have experienced positive darwinian selection in human and fish, some adaptive features such as higher no content and lowered hemoglobin levels might have occurred in parallel as organisms adapted to the hypoxic conditions. the lowered blood cell number and hemoglobin levels in g. dobula suggest that factors other than epo may also have contributed to the hypoxia adaptation of the high-altitudinal fishes.

sequence differences between g. dobula and low altitude schizothoracines might have an impact on the adaptation of epo
in this study, we compared epo sequences from  <dig> cyprinidae fish to identify site variations and to understand the mechanism of functional evolution of the tibetan schizothoracine epo. of the  <dig> sites that are uniquely present in the high-altitudinal species, g. dobula and p. kaznakovi, six sites  are restricted to the g. dobula epo, and  <dig>  are shared by the two highly specialized schizothoracine fish . most of these variable sites were detected as possible positively selected sites  in the branch-site model , suggesting that g. dobula might have experienced higher selection pressure than p. kaznakovi, which is a specialized schizothoracine species inhabiting comparatively lower altitudes.

the presence of 131h and 153 l in g. dobula resulted in a reduction of  <dig> ck <dig> phosphorylation sites  in g. dobula compared to the lower altitude cyprinidae fish. notably, more serine residues  are present in the g. dobula epo . deletions in non-helical regions at the n terminus, the c terminus, and in the loops between helices resulted in the formation of epo proteins that were readily secreted from the cell and were biologically active  <cit> . these regions can be ruled out as domains that are essential for function, such as the sites involved in epo binding to its receptor. regarding the g. dobula and p. kaznakovi epors, homology comparison of the proteins between the fishes and human indicated that the majority of the sites of potential positive selection are located in the ligand-binding domain and the fibronectin type iii domain , providing evidence for potentially synergetic changes of the epo-epor interacting patterns in the high-altitude fishes. however, the functional relationship between site variations in epo and epor and the extent to which the amino acid variations relate to hypoxia adaptation of the epo/epor remain to be clarified.

the altered epo expression pattern in tissues of g. dobula
numerous studies have suggested that epo is expressed in multiple tissues in different taxa . a decrease in oxygen delivery  stimulates epo production, while increased oxygen delivery  decreases epo production  <cit> .

epo genes have been characterized from many fish species . the gene is clearly expressed in diverse tissues, including heart, brain, liver and spleen  <cit> . in the current study, significant upregulation of epo expression in the brain and less significantly in the gill was detected in g. dobula compared with two other schizothoracine fish  , and this was verified by qrt-pcr analysis , indicating the importance of the two organs  in long-term hypoxia adaptation. epo expression in the brain of g. dobula was approximately 3–8-fold higher than that of the lower altitude schizothoracine s. nukiangensis tsao and s. prenanti . a medium level of epo expression was also detected in the brain of the plateau zokor  <cit> . thus, brain tissues might be subject to extensive regulatory modification during hypoxia adaptation. regarding the tissue epor expression profiling, no clear expression patterns were detected among the six tissues of the three schizothoracines , and no significantly different expression levels of epor were found between the high-altitude schizothoracine  and the lower altitude schizothoracines  . given the potential cell-protective functions of epo against environmental stress, the upregulation of epo expression in brain and gill might confer adaptive cytoprotective functions in the high-altitude fish.

based on both the rna sequencing data and qrt-pcr assays, one can conclude that epo expression in liver and muscle of g. dobula was not as high as that of the low-altitudinal species, suggesting a potential down regulation of the gene in g. dobula in these two tissues.

notably, hormone expression levels can vary within minutes and have very short half-lives in the tissues. thus, although the significantly higher epo gene expression in the brain and gills of the high-altitude species may suggest an alteration in hypoxic responses in these tissues, it is premature to conclude a causal relationship between the altered expression pattern and specific adaptive phenotypes. similarly, the biological significance of increased epo expression in the liver and muscle of the low-altitude species is not clear. however, the current data do indicate that epo expression in fishes is complicated and may be shaped by multiple physiological and environmental factors, such as the altitude and temperature of the habitats. much of the physiology of this hormone and the function it plays in environmental adaptation remains to be understood.

the elevated cytoprotective function of g. dobula epo
in addition to its erythropoietic promotion function  <cit> , epo has been reported to initiate adaptive cellular responses to both moderate environmental challenges and tissue damage . epo is also subject to apoptotic stimuli in insects, strongly indicating a possible preliminary phylogenetic role for epo in tissue protection in addition to its functional role in erythropoiesis, considering that insects lack erythropoiesis  <cit> .

functional analysis was performed by transfecting schizothoracine epos into 293 t cells. the relative cell viability for the cells transfected with the g. dobula epo was significantly higher than for the cells transfected with the s. prenanti epo . the epo gene in the high-altitude schizothoracine fish acquired an elevated tissue protective function under hypoxic conditions.

CONCLUSIONS
the epo genes of five schizothoracine fish were characterized. the schizothoracine epo proteins exhibited the same principal domains as their mammalian counterparts. epo expression levels were significantly different between the high-altitude plateau schizothoracine fish and low-altitude plateau schizothoracine fish, and the cytoprotective function of the epo from the high-altitude fish was augmented during evolution. taken together, adaptation to the tibetan plateau by the schizothoracine fish might have been associated with the expression of and structural changes in a cluster of genes involved in erythropoiesis and protection from hypoxia.

