BACKGROUND
chromosomal inversion, a type of genetic rearrangement involving the inversion of a chromosome segment, is one of the most important causes of genomic changes. inversions have been identified as phylogenetic signatures since the first third of the twentieth century  <cit>  and are thought to have affected phenotypic evolution  <cit> . while large-size inversions , microscopically-detectable and/or visible in genetic maps, were identified early on  <cit> , the recent abundance of genomic sequences and progress in sequence analysis has enabled the extensive detection of inversions of various sizes in genomes. in particular, comparative genomics between populations and between closely related species have revealed the occurrence of numerous inversions in genomes including small-size  inversions  <cit> . more than  <dig>  inversions varying in length from  <dig> bp to  <dig> mb occur in the human and chimpanzee genomes, suggesting that inversions are common mechanisms for differentiating genomes  <cit> . although several methods have been developed to identify these inversions, they focus only on the macroscopic or microscopic inversions which are inversions large enough to be detected as a single alignment or a string of local alignments  <cit> .

some inversions may be too small to be identified even as a local alignment block. such ultramicro inversions are extremely difficult to detect using existing methods because they may be hidden within the local alignments of blast or other popular alignment softwares. these inversions are very short such that the alignment extends beyond them allowing mismatches and gaps. in such cases, the ultramicro-inverted regions are treated as small arrays of mismatches and gaps within the local alignments. the degree of overlooking the ultramicro inversions hidden within the local alignments would be higher within the alignment between closely related genomes, because mismatches in short regions are negligibly small for highly similar alignments longer than ten kilobases.

these ultramicro inversions would be aligned with mismatches and gaps more frequently than would a random distribution of such differences. generally, mismatches and gaps within alignments account for nucleotide substitutions and insertions and deletions , respectively. however, mismatches and gaps generated at inverted sites are a result of erroneous alignments. whether or not differences in the alignments are caused by nucleotide substitutions and indels is apparently unclear. thus, it is difficult to obtain information about ultramicro inversions from the local alignments themselves. identifying ultramicro inversions within the alignments would be necessary for distinguishing the mismatches and gaps caused by nucleotide substitutions and indels from those caused by inversions.

the human genome is different from the chimpanzee genome, at  <dig> % of sequence mismatches  <cit>  and 5% of sequence mismatches plus gaps  <cit> . some of these differences are assumed to play important roles in the phenotypic evolution of the human lineage. furthermore, macroscopic inversions are one of the major mechanisms of differentiating species  <cit> . for example, pericentric inversion is one type of large genomic rearrangements which distinguishes the human karyotype from that of the chimpanzee  <cit> , implying that such inversions are one of the important causes of speciation. ultramicro inversions may also be spread across the human and chimpanzee genomes because the size distribution of the macroscopic and microscopic inversions decays as the size of the inversions increases  <cit> . in addition, the differences in the human-chimpanzee alignments caused by inversions raise the average differences between the human and chimpanzee genomes. in order to examine the impact of ultramicro inversions on the genome alignment, we developed a method for identifying ultramicro inversions within the alignments between the human and chimpanzee genomes. we first generated  <dig>  gb of one-to-one  alignments between the human and chimpanzee genomes using the g-compass pipeline  <cit> , and identified inversions in each local alignment. subsequently, we examined the relationships of ultramicro inversions with the structural features of the human genome to determine the molecular mechanisms of the inversions. furthermore, we examined biologically functional segments to infer the effects of the inversions on the phenotypic evolution of the human lineage.

RESULTS
simulation
firstly, we defined ultramicro inversions as the inverted regions buried within local alignments. with this definition, most of the "ultramicro" inversions are expected to be smaller than the "microscopic" inversions which are identified as a single alignment or a string of local alignments. within the local alignments, the ultramicro inversions would be misaligned forwardly. we developed a method for identifying such ultramicro inversions hidden within regions of local pairwise-alignments rich in mismatches and gaps. in such regions, erroneously aligned ultramicro inversions would possess high density of mismatches and gaps. assuming that the sequence differences are spread across the genome following a negative binominal distribution, we determined if these regions could be aligned inversely with greater similarity than the forward alignments . a simulation was conducted in order to test the strength and accuracy of this algorithm using the indelible program  <cit>  for evolving random sequences. eleven sets of pairwise nucleotide alignments were generated allowing the creation of indels, each consisting of  <dig>  pairs of  <dig>  bp random nucleotide sequences, with parameters  equivalent to the human-chimpanzee genome alignments. a short  segment with fixed length was randomly chosen and inverted in one sequence of every pair. re-aligned pairwise sequences were then subjected to the inversion identification.

through the identification of inversions, the sensitivity of the algorithm was found to approximately range from  <dig>  to  <dig> , except for the  <dig> and  <dig> bp inversions;  <dig>  for  <dig> bp and  <dig>  for  <dig> bp inversions . hence, this method is particularly useful for identifying all inversions except the extremely short ones. in addition, only  <dig> false positives were found in a set of  <dig>  pairs of sequences , suggesting a very low false-positive rate. only  <dig> false positives were expected in the human-chimpanzee alignments consisting of  <dig>  gb of alignment sites.

identification of inversions between the human and chimpanzee genomes
we detected  <dig>  ultramicro inversions hidden within the one-to-one alignments between the human and chimpanzee genomes. interestingly,  <dig> inversion segments consisted of adenine and thymine exclusively  . in addition, at content of the inversions excluding the at-exclusive segments was higher  than the average at content of the entire human-chimpanzee alignments  , suggesting that ultramicro inversions preferentially occurred in at-rich regions. the at-exclusive regions possess considerably different conditions from the other regions to the extent of at content and thus would show different power for the inversion identification from that assumed in the simulation in previous subsection. in order to validate the strength and accuracy of the inversion identification methods for the at-exclusive regions, we conducted a simulation under the prior conditions except for different base compositions of the at-exclusive regions . sensitivity for searching for the true ultramicro inversions in simulation in the at-exclusive condition was less than that in the initial condition and, as well as the initial condition, increased with increasing inversion size from  <dig>  for  <dig> bp inversion to  <dig>  for  <dig> bp inversion . false positives were greater in the at-exclusive conditions than in the initial simulation condition with less than  <dig> false positives in the  <dig> mb at-exclusive simulation set . although  <dig> or less false positives were expected in the  <dig>  gb at-exclusive alignments, which was as large as the human-chimpanzee genome alignments, the number of false positives in the human-chimpanzee genome alignments may have been much lower than  <dig> since the at blocks constitute small fractions of the genome. blocks consisting of a series of at least  <dig> bp of adenines and thymines were summed at approximately  <dig> mb in the human genome, in which all the  <dig> at-exclusive inversions were included, indicating that less than  <dig> false positives of the at-exclusive inversions could be expected in the human-chimpanzee alignments.

*subject to incomplete lineage sorting among human, chimpanzee, and gorilla.

the size of ultramicro inversions between the human and chimpanzee genomes ranged from  <dig> to  <dig> bp , and the distribution of their lengths, which was classified into three characteristics, showed a peculiar shape. while this distribution basically decayed in a fashion similar to the macroscopic and microscopic inversions between the human and chimpanzee genomes  <cit> , extremely short inversions were less frequent . this is because our identification method was less sensitive to extremely short inversions as shown in the simulation results. the most peculiar feature was that among the ≤ <dig> bp inversions, ultramicro inversions with odd number lengths were more frequent than those with even number lengths. the frequency of ultramicro inversions seemed to be independent of whether the inversion length was odd or even in the simulations . this implies that different shapes of the distributions of the odd and even numbered-inversion lengths were not likely because of the internal cause of the identification algorithm. in addition, we found a small peak around  <dig> bp in the size distribution of the ultramicro inversions.

while the ultramicro inversions as well as the macroscopic and microscopic inversions were spread throughout the human genome  <cit> , the density of inversions was significantly different on chromosome y compared with that on the autosomes . autosomes averaged  <dig>  ±  <dig>  at-exclusive and  <dig>  ±  <dig>  guanine and cytosine-including  inversions per mb. however, chromosome y possessed more frequent inversions:  <dig>  at-exclusive inversions  and  <dig>  gc-including inversions  per mb. in contrast, the numbers of at-exclusive and gc-including inversions on chromosome x  were not significantly different from those on the autosomes . in addition, the proportions of the inversion ratios between chromosome y and autosomes  are larger than the proportion of the mutation rates  between them. these observations suggest that the abundance of ultramicro inversions in chromosome y is mainly subject to high diversity of the genomic structures specifically in chromosome y  <cit>  rather than male driven evolution. one possibility is that frequent intrachromosomal recombinations in chromosome y  <cit>  had been involved in frequent ultramicro inversions.

ultramicro inversions validated by phylogenetic profiles
by comparing the ultramicro inversions within the human-chimpanzee alignments with the orthologous sequences of the primate outgroups, the lineages in which the inversions occurred can be inferred . generating multiple alignments of ultramicro inversions concatenating their neighbors of human, chimpanzee, gorilla, and/or orangutan as outgroups, the species possessing the inverted sequences were identified. in  <dig>  ultramicro inversions out of  <dig> , the lineages in which the sequences had inverted were definitely determined . four hundred and seventy-nine and  <dig> inversions were identified specifically in the human and chimpanzee sequences, respectively, suggesting that they had occurred specifically in the human and chimpanzee lineages after the separation between the two species. on the other hand,  <dig> inversions appeared to be inconsistent with the species phylogeny among human, chimpanzee, and gorilla, suggesting incomplete lineage sorting in the common ancestor of these three species:  <dig> ultramicro inversions shared between human and gorilla and  <dig> between chimpanzee and gorilla . the former represented the gene phylogeny as , chimpanzee) and the latter represented the gene phylogeny as ).

while our detection method for ultramicro inversions possessed a high degree of accuracy, it is noteworthy that these  <dig>  ultramicro inversions were also supported by the phylogenetic profiles of the outgroups. thus, we considered that these inversions were very plausible. out of the rest of  <dig> ultramicro inversion, we could not obtained the strong support by phylogenetic profiles in  <dig> ultramicro inversions and the orthologous sequences of gorilla or orangutan in  <dig> ultramicro inversions.

ultramicro inversions within genes
to examine the impact of ultramicro inversions on gene evolution in the human lineage, we searched for ultramicro inversions within those exons defined in h-invdb  <cit> , and found a total of  <dig> inversions . more than half the inversions were identified in the 3' utr region. although  <dig> ultramicro inversions out of  <dig> were found in the coding regions, they were either inferred to have occurred in the chimpanzee lineage specifically  or not supported by the phylogenetic profiles  . the  <dig> genes of which ultramicro inversions were identified in the coding regions included several well-annotated ones such as tumor protein p <dig> , protein tyrosine phosphatase receptor type b , and nadph oxidase organizer  <dig> . in  <dig> out of  <dig> inversions, biochemically different amino acids were observed between human and chimpanzee. these inversions ranges from five to  <dig> bp and affected the corresponding amino acid sequences from two to nine residues. in the remaining one, a stop codon was observed in the human sequence but not in the chimpanzee sequence: only four amino acids were extended in the chimpanzee sequence. these observations suggest that ultramicro inversions in coding regions have contributed to gene evolution mainly in the chimpanzee lineage.

discussion
we developed a highly sensitive and distinctly specific method for identifying ultramicro inversions hidden within nucleotide alignments. this method could be very effective for sequences with average base compositions of the human and chimpanzee genomes as well as would work well for those with extremely biased base compositions such as 100% at content  with extra filtering for simple repeats. positive predictive values ) are more than  <dig>  for the former case and  <dig>  for the latter case, respectively. however, this method is remarkably less sensitive for the extra-short ultramicro inversions consisting of  <dig> or  <dig> bp . there may be two plausible reasons. one is the word size of the homology search for inverted sequences. our method involved using the blast program blastn with a word size of five to detect inversions, which sometimes failed to capture the extra-short inversions. the other possibility is limitations in the detection of difference-rich regions. our method focused on the alignment region in which a trio of difference signatures, mismatches, and gap blocks were neighbors. some inverted segments can be forwardly aligned with fewer than three differences , which is beyond our criteria. the frequency of hidden inversions increases as the size decreases. nevertheless, as described above, this method is useful in identifying ultramicro inversions with a high degree of specificity.

in addition to macroscopic and microscopic inversions, a large number of ultramicro inversions, ranging from five to  <dig> bp, were detected between the human and chimpanzee genomes using our method . from this observation, we defined the size of ultramicro inversions equal to or less than  <dig> bp. based on the simulations, at most approximately  <dig> false positives  were expected. on an average,  <dig>  ultramicro inversions were found per mb of the human-chimpanzee alignments. these inversions had been treated as mismatches and gaps in the local alignment, suggesting that the identification of ultramicro inversions is one of the effective ways for fine-tuning the local alignments. however, we found only  <dig> % and  <dig> % of mismatches and gaps in the whole human-chimpanzee genome alignments were derived from the ultramicro inversions, respectively. the nucleotide divergence between chimpanzees and humans before and after excluding the ultramicro inversions was estimated at  <dig>  and  <dig> , respectively, indicating that ultramicro inversions hardly affect the nucleotide divergence between human and chimpanzee. still, because of the relatively low sensitivity in detecting extra-short and palindrome-like inversions, the number of ultramicro inversions may be greater within the human-chimpanzee alignments. one of our most important findings was the large fraction of at-exclusive ultramicro inversions . our method included additional filtering of at-exclusive inversions, which excluded inversions consisting of mono- or dinucleotide repeats of a and t. the simulation produced indicated a very high positive predictive rate. however, some of the at-exclusive inversions may have been false positives because of the unknown aspects of genomic evolution. filtering inversion candidates using the phylogenic profile would generate a highly specific subset of inversions  <cit> . the high frequency of odd-length inversions in nearly minimum size  would be independent of the inversion identification algorithm. the simulation indicated that our algorithm did not perform better the ultramicro inversions in odd numbers . in addition, high frequency of odd-length inversions was observed in both odd and even numbers of the word size for blastn , suggesting that this is independent of the homology searching algorithms. these observations implied that high frequency of odd-length inversions in the human and chimpanzee genomes would be involved in undefined biological causes such as the structure of dna strands for generating inversions.

by comparing inverted segments with the primate outgroup,  <dig> of the at-exclusive inversions belonged to this specific subset , still suggesting frequent at-exclusive inversions. the inversions ranging from  <dig> to  <dig> bp could be any one of the ultramicro inversions hidden in a local alignment or small-size inversions identified as a single or a string of local alignment  <cit> . size distribution of the inversions roughly indicated that inversions less than  <dig> bp were preferably hidden in the local alignments between the human and chimpanzee genomes . the ultramicro inversions are also distinguished from larger microscopic inversions that are detectable as a single alignment or a string of local alignments, in that the exact boundaries of ultramicro inversions can be identified easily within the local alignment. this may have a significant insight into the elucidation of the mechanism for the ultramicro inversions.

in this study, the human-chimpanzee alignments were generated by the g-compass pipeline  <cit> . although the g-compass pipeline is different from the ucsc axtnet alignment  <cit>  based on the definition of orthologous alignments, both methods initially generate local alignments with blastz  <cit>  or its successor lastz  <cit> . thus an equivalent number of ultramicro inversions is likely to be obtained from the ucsc axtnet alignment. as expected,  <dig>  ultramicro inversions were found in the human-chimpanzee alignments using ucsc axtnet alignment, suggesting that most of the ultramicro inversions are independent of the g-compass pipeline. although we have not examined for ultramicro inversions within the genome alignment generated by local alignments other than blastz, differences in the ultramicro inversions between different alignment algorithms may be helpful in verifying the behavior of the alignment algorithms involving ultramicro inversions either erroneously aligned or excluded from the local alignments.

out of the  <dig>  ultramicro inversions validated by phylogenetic profiling,  <dig> were found to have occurred specifically in the chimpanzee lineage, which were approximately twice more than those  in the human lineage . several studies have indicated that the sequence accuracy of the chimpanzee genome is poorer than that of the human genome  <cit>  because of the lower coverage. this may be one of the causes of the abundance of ultramicro inversions in the chimpanzee lineage. however, the substitutions especially those in the chimpanzee lineage were at most  <dig>  times more than those in the human lineage  <cit> , indicating that a large number of ultramicro inversions in the chimpanzee lineage were unlikely to be the result of sequence errors. higher level of false assembles of the sequence reads in the chimpanzee genome than the human's might be another explanation. it can be a cause for the false positives in the larger inversions as a single alignment or a string of local alignments  than ultramicro inversions. however, this may be also difficult to explain ultramicro inversions within a local alignment. thus, the differences in inversion frequencies between humans and chimpanzees give an insight into the different histories of genomic structural changes between the two species. furthermore, this observation ensures the abundance of ultramicro inversions in coding regions found specifically in the chimpanzee lineage. as shown in figure 3a, ultramicro inversions substitute more than one amino acid at a time into physicochemically different ones. the inversion in ptprb genes in chimpanzee  had altered a string of two residues of glutamine and glycine into physicochemically different ones, proline  and cysteine , respectively. in contrast, the hydrophilic residue of glutamine or histidine at the corresponding site to the residue  <dig> is conserved across amniotes, and the glycine at the corresponding site to the residue  <dig> is conserved across tereosts and tetrapods. this implies that the ultramicro inversion had altered the function of the corresponding fibronectin type iii domain. this implies that such ultramicro inversions played a role in drastic protein evolution in the chimpanzee lineage.

although it has not been clear how ultramicro inversions have occurred, our findings of frequent ultramicro inversions in chromosome y and the at-exclusive regions suggests that ultramicro inversions are preferably located in those genomic regions that may relate to genomic instability. to examine the relationship between ultramicro inversions and genomic instability in detail, we compared the positions of ultramicro inversions with those of the genomic features involved in stability of the human genome. ultramicro inversions significantly and frequently overlapped on the boundaries of l <dig> and alu  and were located in the region  closer to these transposable elements , strongly suggesting that ultramicro inversions are associated with the genomic features generating instability as previously indicated by the macroscopic inversions  <cit> . to elucidate the mechanisms of ultramicro inversions at the molecular level, we examined the genomic features near the inverted segments and found that cruciform formation with inverted repeats mediated the ultramicro inversions, indicating that inverted repeats on both ends of the inversion segments were the signature of the cruciform-forming inversions  <cit> . we found  <dig> ultramicro inversions sandwiched between the inverted repeats of ≥ <dig> bp, out of which  <dig> were the gc-including inversions. this represents a small fraction of the total ultramicro inversions but is significantly greater than expected , suggesting that the ultramicro inversions were partly generated via cruciform formation. the ultramicro inversion in figure  <dig> is sandwiched between inverted repeats and was possibly generated via the cruciform formation. the inverted repeat next to the 3' end of the ultramicro inversion segment is specifically found in the human sequence. this implies that inversion follows double-strand breaks, strand displacement by the invading 3' end, de novo dna synthesis, and concomitant dna elongation  <cit> . thus, we have shown that ultramicro inversions are related to the genomic features involved in genomic instability, which is a characteristic similar to that of macroscopic inversions.

CONCLUSIONS
we developed an effective method for identifying ultramicro inversions within pairwise alignments and found a large number of ultramicro inversions within the local alignments between the human and chimpanzee genomes. this is the first finding of an abundance of short and extra-short inversions within the local alignments between closely related species. this observation suggests that a considerable number of ultramicro inversions could be found within the alignments between individuals from different populations. furthermore, some of the adjacent snps may be ultramicro inversions as well as large inversions observed in hapmap data  <cit> . identification of ultramicro inversions within human populations may be helpful in elucidating how phenotypic characteristics have diversified during human evolution. while our inversion-identification method was helpful for examining the impact of microscopic inversions, this method is also applicable in fine tuning genome alignments by distinguishing ultramicro inversions from nucleotide substitutions and indels.

