BACKGROUND
establishment of infection by intracellular pathogens involves appropriation of host cell functions to facilitate host cell entry, trafficking to specific intracellular locations and for nutrient acquisition  <cit> . changes in host cell gene expression that accompany the infection process are highly dynamic and reflect a wide array of responses to a specific host-pathogen relationship  <cit> . as such, transcriptional profiling is frequently used as a genome-wide tool to screen for the impact of pathogens on host cell functions  <cit> . however, deciphering the biological information contained within transcriptional response data is a major challenge in host-pathogen studies  <cit> . transcriptional response data provide valuable insights into pathogen-triggered host defense pathways and changes in expression of host cell metabolic genes during infection, the transcriptional outcomes of such events are often obscured by compounded responses to diffusible molecules released by infected or neighboring cells. the ability to identify gene expression changes that occur independently of cytokines and other diffusible molecules provides a first step toward revealing transcriptional changes that report the more intimate host-pathogen interaction, and to providing novel insights into physical and biochemical impact of infection. in this study, we have carried out a comparative analysis of host cell transcriptional response to the intracellular protozoan parasite, trypanosoma cruzi, in three phenotypically diverse mammalian cell types with a view to uncovering a common signature response to parasite infection. we coupled this approach with the use of a transwell plating system to permit the identification of cytokine-dependent and -independent responses to this pathogen.

t. cruzi, is the causative agent of human chagas' disease that affects several million people in south and central america  <cit> . clinical manifestations arise during chronic chagas' disease and are the result of damage of the cardiac, digestive and/or nervous systems  <cit> . while the basis for the diverse organ disease patterns has not been elucidated, differential cellular susceptibility to infection, coupled with the nature of the host response elicited in infected cells are likely to influence disease outcome. trypomastigotes, the tissue invasive forms of t. cruzi, are capable of establishing infection within in a variety of nucleated cell types, including professional phagocytes  <cit>  and non-phagocytic cells, such as cardiomyocytes, striated and smooth muscle cells, endothelial cells, adipocytes and neurons  <cit> . to promote entry into non-phagocytic cell types, t. cruzi trypomastigotes activate of a number of host cell signaling pathways, including calcium-dependent signaling  <cit> , adenylyl cyclase  <cit> , phosphatidylinositol 3-kinases  <cit>  and protein tyrosine kinases  <cit> . these early signaling events are thought to orchestrate the host cellular events required for invasion, such as actin microfilament remodeling  <cit>  as well as plasma membrane invagination  <cit>  and targeted lysosome fusion  <cit>  that are involved in the formation of the parasitophorous vacuole. t. cruzi escapes the vacuole several hours after entry resulting in cytosolic localization of the parasite where transformation to the replicative amastigote stage is completed by  <dig> hours  <cit> . over the course of 3– <dig> days cytosolic amastigotes divide every  <dig> hours giving rise to several dozen intracellular parasites.

intracellular growth and persistence of t. cruzi amastigotes within a range of host cell types in vivo represents an important target for therapeutic intervention, however, little is known regarding the requirements for intracellular growth of t. cruzi in mammalian cells. similar to other kinetoplastid protozoan parasites, t. cruzi is a purine auxotroph  <cit>  that can utilize both glucose and amino acids as a carbon source  <cit> . the inability of t. cruzi to synthesize leucine, isoleucine and valine  <cit>  predicts that these aliphatic amino acids are also scavenged from the host. to investigate the impact of intracellular t. cruzi infection on host cell gene expression, we compared the global transcriptional response elicited by infection in three different cell types. we find that approximately one-third of the transcriptional changes observed in t. cruzi-infected cells at  <dig> hours post infection, were initiated by cytokines and other diffusible molecules released by infected tissue cultures. the core cytokine-independent response elicited in fibroblasts and endothelial cells underscore metabolic and signaling pathways involved in cell proliferation, amino acid catabolism and response to wounding. furthermore, the overall dampening of host cell genes related to the mitotic cell cycle and cell division, suggested that t. cruzi infection impedes cell cycle progression in the host cell. this prediction was confirmed with the observation of parasite-containing multinucleate cells arising in t. cruzi-infected cultures, indicative of a failure to undergo cytokinesis following nuclear replication. overall, our findings validate the use of transcriptional profiling in conjunction with transwell plates to provide novel insights into biological processes that are modulated in infected host cells in a cytokine-independent manner.

RESULTS
t. cruzi elicits a robust cytokine-dependent response in diverse cell types
to reveal a signature response elicited by trypanosoma cruzi in phenotypically diverse non-phagocytic mammalian cell types, rna was prepared from mock- and parasite-infected human vascular smooth muscle cells , human microvascular endothelial cells  and human foreskin fibroblasts  at  <dig> hours post-infection and prepared for hybridization to hg_u <dig> plus  <dig>  affymetrix arrays for analysis of over  <dig>  transcripts. vsmc were found to be less responsive to t. cruzi infection than hff or hmvec where the average number of gene expression changes observed in two independent experiments was as follows: vsmc:  <dig> genes ; hff:  <dig> genes  and hmvec  <dig> genes   where differences in the level of infection achieved in each cell type  did not obviously correlate with the range or intensity of the transcriptional response in each cell type. no gross variation between the trypomastigote to amastigote transition rate that could account for these differences among cell lines was evident either. the intersection of gene sets representing induced genes in the three cell types revealed  <dig> genes . furthermore, intersecting the go functions induced in the three cell types, revealed  <dig> common go function categories . within this common set of genes, interferon-stimulated genes  including ifn-stimulated exonuclease ,  <dig> -oligoadenylate synthase  and myxovirus resistance protein , featured as among the most highly expressed in parasite-infected vsmc, hff, and hmvec . as a reflection of the robust induction of isgs, 'ifn-signaling' was identified as the top signaling pathway induced by t. cruzi in infected cells  consistent with the marked increase in ifnβ expression in all cell types .

dissecting the global host cell transcriptional response to t. cruzi
while the induction of cytokines and the cytokine-dependent response in infected host cells provides important information regarding the nature of the innate immune response to t. cruzi, gene expression changes occurring in a cytokine-independent manner are predicted to more directly report the impact of intracellular parasitism. in addition to ifnβ, t. cruzi triggers the expression of cytokines such as il- <dig>  il- <dig>  il- <dig> and il- <dig> in host cells , which are predicted to contribute to the global transcriptional response to this pathogen. to discriminate between cytokine-dependent and cytokine-independent responses to t. cruzi, a transwell plating system was adopted to experimentally dissect the global transcriptional response in hff and hmvec. in this setup, cells in the top chamber serve as reporters for the effect of cytokines and other diffusible factors  secreted by parasite-infected cells in the bottom chamber .  as predicted, cells exposed only to secreted cytokines and diffusible products  generated by the infected cell population  responded with significant changes in gene expression. the cytokine-responsive genes represent a substantial fraction of the total number of genes modulated in infected cells: 28% in hff  and 22% in hmvec .

to arrive at a subset of cytokine-independent gene changes, the cytokine-responsive genes  were filtered from the set of genes changing ≥ 2-fold in parasite-infected cells  as displayed . the resultant heat map clearly shows that a large number of genes, including those annotated as ifn-responsive, were removed by this filtering step . in addition, the biological pathways corresponding to 'ifn signaling', 'antigen presentation' and 'protein ubiquitination' that featured prominently in the overall transcriptional response to t. cruzi , are no longer represented as part of a significant cytokine-independent response in hff and hmvec . quantitative rt-pcr  was used to confirm some of the cytokine-dependent and -independent predictions from the microarray analysis with excellent concordance . of note, many of the cytokine and chemokine genes induced upon infection  were found to be cytokine-independent , indicating that the expression of some cytokines and chemokines likely occurs as part of the primary response to t. cruzi. others, such as il- <dig>  appear to be upregulated in response to diffusible molecules in parasite-infected cultures.

t. cruzi alters expression of host cell metabolic and signaling pathways in a cytokine-independent manner
to uncover a cytokine-independent signature response to t. cruzi that is shared by diverse host cell types, we identified metabolic and signaling pathways that are significantly modulated in response to infection after filtering out the cytokine-dependent genes . in general, little overlap was observed in host cell pathways found to be significantly perturbed in t. cruzi-infected hff and hmvec . however, pathways involving "valine, leucine and isoleucine degradation", "ephrin receptor signaling" and "pi3/akt signaling" were similarly altered in both t. cruzi-infected hff and hmvec . several enzymes in the valine, leucine and isoleucine degradation pathway were downregulated in both cell types including bcat <dig>  which catalyzes the first step in the degradation of branched chain amino acids  <cit> . in the pi- <dig> kinase signaling pathway, two negative regulators of akt, pp2a and ctmp were downregulated in infected fibroblasts and endothelial cells, as was tsc <dig>  a negative regulator of the mtor pathway. in the ephrin receptor signaling pathway, upregulation of growth factors such as fgf, pdgf and vegf that signal through receptor tyrosine kinases and repression of heterotrimeric g proteins in hff whereas in hmvec, there is a trend toward downregulation of growth factor signaling pathways and a similar repression of heterotrimeric g proteins.

a set of  <dig> genes was found to be commonly altered in a cytokine-independent manner in response to t. cruzi infection of hff and hmvec  which was represented by  <dig> go function categories  . the top functional categories associated with upregulated genes in hff and hmvec included 'immune response' and 'response to wounding' . to extend our analysis of shared host cell responses to t. cruzi, we next considered transcriptional response data for vsmc despite the lack of transwell data for this cell type. intersection of vsmc expression data with cytokine-independent genesets from hff and hmvec reveals only  <dig> genes  that are commonly modulated in the three cell types following infection with t. cruzi . in addition to strong expression of ifnβ and ccl <dig> in all cell types, parasite infection induces the expression of genes involved in cell-matrix interactions  carbohydrate modification , vesicular transport sytl <dig> and t-snare <dig> and ca2+ homeostasis stim <dig> and carkl . in terms of common metabolic genes, pantothenate kinase  <dig> , the first enzyme in the biosynthetic pathway for coenzyme a production, was upregulated in these diverse cell types in response to t. cruzi-infection. while these genes do not assemble into common metabolic or signaling pathways, examination of significant go terms indicate that the most basic common features of the host cell response to t. cruzi infection of fibroblasts, endothelial cells and smooth muscle cells involve the induction of stress response genes and those involved in cell growth and proliferation .

gene expression changes occurring in human vascular smooth muscle cells  <dig> hours after infection with t. cruzi. the data shown corresponds to probes for transcripts showing an intensity increase of 2-fold or greater  with respect to their matched controls according to the analysis with rosetta resolver biosoftware  <dig> . *transwell data not available for vsmc.

upregulated
downregulated
shown are selected go functions modulated  in a cytokine-independent fashion  <dig> hours after t. cruzi infection.*transwell data was not available for vsmc.

t. cruzi infection impedes late mitotic events
go function analysis of genes that are downregulated in t. cruzi-infected hff and hmvec in a cytokine-independent manner, reveal a significant bias toward 'mitotic cell cycle', 'm phase', and 'cell division' , suggesting the possibility that t. cruzi infection negatively impacts the host cell cycle. to further characterize this finding, markers of cell cycle progression were evaluated in t. cruzi-infected cells. we first examined the relative ability of infected cells to incorporate brdu into nuclear dna  by immunofluorescence microscopy where parasite-containing and parasite-free cells were scored separately. t. cruzi-containing cells incorporate brdu into nuclear dna at levels similar to mock-infected controls at  <dig> hours and by  <dig> hr post-infection, twice as many infected cells were positive for brdu  as compared to controls   revealing that parasite infection does not impair cell entry into s-phase. given that this increase was observed in both uninfected and parasite-containing cells in the monolayer  suggests the presence of a soluble 'mitogen' in infected cell cultures that stimulates dna replication in neighboring uninfected cells. in contrast, by  <dig> hr post-infection nuclear brdu incorporation was shown to be minimal in parasite-infected cells where increases in incorporation were found to be refractory to egf stimulation . however, the uninfected cells in the population were still able to respond to egf with increased brdu incorporation relative to parasite-containing cells. these data suggest that following an increase in cell cycle progression, a parasite-specific block on cell cycle progression occurs somewhere between  <dig> and  <dig> hr post-infection.

the ability to label host cell nuclei with anti-phospho-h <dig> at  <dig> hours post-infection  indicates that t. cruzi-infected cells are not blocked at the g2/m phase. however, in  <dig> and  <dig> hour cultures t. cruzi-infected cells containing  <dig>   <dig> or  <dig> nuclei were observed  where the multinucleate phenotype was strictly observed in parasite-containing cells in the infected cultures. no multinucleate cells were observed in mock-infected control populations at any time point . because multinucleate cells can arise as a result of a block in cytokinesis following nuclear division or via cell-to-cell fusion, fluorescently labeled cells were used to distinguish between these possibilities. cells labeled with cytotracker-green or cytotracker-orange were infected in separate dishes for  <dig> hours then mixed in a 1: <dig> ratio and infection was allowed to progress for  <dig> and  <dig> hours. parasite-containing multinucleate cells were either green or orange as shown in the representative images . no yellow cells, indicating that fusion had occurred, were observed under any condition. these data indicate that the multinucleate cells arose from rounds of nuclear duplication without cytokinesis, demonstrating the inhibitory effect of t. cruzi infection on the late stages of host cell division as predicted from the results of the microarray analysis.

discussion
perturbation of host metabolic pathways and cellular functions following pathogen infection is predicted to result in compensatory changes in the expression of key regulatory components in at least some of the affected pathways. to facilitate elucidation of these critical functions in t. cruzi-infected host cells, we identified a core transcriptional response elicited in phenotypically diverse cell types following intracellular infection with this pathogen. a subset of host cell genes for which expression was similarly modulated in three different human cell types was identified in dermal fibroblasts, microvascular endothelial, and vascular smooth muscle, following infection with t. cruzi. within this subset of genes we find that interferon-stimulated genes  are among the most highly induced by t. cruzi in the three cell types. this finding is consistent with previous observations that t. cruzi triggers ifnβ expression in fibroblasts  <cit> , macrophages and dendritic cells  <cit>  and reveals the robust nature of the cytokine-driven response in shaping the early transcriptional profile to this pathogen. in the second phase of the study, transwell plates were employed to experimentally distinguish cytokine-dependent and -independent responses elicited in t. cruzi-infected cells. this application permitted the identification of metabolic pathways and cellular processes that were significantly altered by the infective process in a cytokine-independent manner, enabling us to focus on host cell transcriptional changes that relate more directly to the metabolic impact of intracellular parasitism.

host transcriptional responses to t. cruzi become detectable at  <dig> hours post infection  <cit>  which reflect the cumulative pre- and post-invasion events including differentiation of the invasive t. cruzi trypomastigotes to replicative amastigotes located in the host cell cytoplasm. it is predicted that these activities are responsible for a subset of the cytokine-independent changes in expression of host biosynthetic pathways such as those that would favor utilization of metabolites by the parasite. for example, in parasite-infected fibroblasts, endothelial cells and smooth muscle cells we observe upregulation of host 5'-nucleotidase and/or purine nucleoside phosphorylase , which generate the purine nucleosides and purine bases  <cit> . given that t. cruzi is reliant on purine salvage for growth  <cit> , induction of purine catabolic enzymes in infected host cells may directly benefit replicating parasites. along these lines, where t. cruzi is incapable of synthesizing the aliphatic amino acids, leucine, isoleucine and valine  <cit> , we have observed a general repression of the valine, leucine and isoleucine degradation pathway, including expression of the first enzyme in the catabolic pathway, bcat <dig>  inhibiting the breakdown of these amino acids would presumably increase their cellular concentration and opportunities for scavenging by the parasite. another gene of interest, upregulated in diverse cell types in response to t. cruzi, is pank <dig>  that encodes pantothenate kinase  <dig>  the first enzyme in the biosynthetic pathway for coenzyme a production  <cit> . given that coa is required for gpi anchor synthesis, which is the modification of choice for t. cruzi surface glycoproteins, it is tempting to speculate that by co-opting host coa or one of its precursors, the parasite creates an increased demand for coa which is met by upregulating this key enzyme in the host cell coa biosynthetic pathway.

in addition to potential changes in host cell biosynthetic activities, the expression of apoptotic regulators and stimulators of cell proliferation were also significantly induced in t. cruzi-infected cells. this observation is interesting in light of data showing that t. cruzi infection protects cardiomyocytes and neuronal cells from apoptotic stimuli  <cit> . moreover, parasite-mediated protection from cell death appears independent of diffusible molecules released from infected host cells  <cit> , consistent with the observed modulation of the expression of apoptosis regulators in a 'cytokine-independent' manner in this study. while the mechanistic basis for the apoptotic block is currently not known, alteration of expression of host cell genes related to apoptosis is likely to benefit the parasite by preventing host cell death before the intracellular replicative cycle is complete.

despite commonalities observed in the early response of diverse host cell types to t. cruzi, a minor fraction of host metabolic and signaling pathways were found to be shared by t. cruzi-infected fibroblasts, endothelial and smooth muscle cells. intrinsic differences in the levels of available host cell metabolic intermediates might be a determining factor in the activation of homeostatic mechanisms and associated transcriptional changes. in addition to absolute differences between cell types, kinetic differences in the cellular response to metabolic pressures exerted by intracellular parasites may also produce non-overlapping responses at a given time-point. in our study, which examined only  <dig> hours post-infection, vsmc were found to respond with relatively few changes in transcript abundance as compared to hff or hmvec, despite similar burden of intracellular parasites. a comparison of canonical pathways altered in vsmc at  <dig> hr post-infection  with the cytokine-independent response triggered in hff and hmvec revealed an increase in the number of overlapping pathways . this observation suggests that cell type specific responses to t. cruzi include a kinetic component that influences the timing for which significant changes are observed in an infected cell type. in general, presumptive compensatory changes in host cell genes involved in certain metabolic processes: eg. purine metabolism, aliphatic amino acid catabolism, cell growth and anti-apoptosis might have been predicted based on our knowledge of t. cruzi physiology and interactions of the parasite with the host cell. however, our array analysis also predicted the unexpected finding that t. cruzi infection might impede cell cycle progression, on the basis that the top go terms associated with downregulated cytokine-independent genes in hff and hmvec were associated with mitosis and cell division. while the impact of t. cruzi on cellular proliferation genes has been noted in a previous microarray study of t. cruzi-infected hela cells at  <dig> hours post-infection  <cit> , no conclusions were drawn as to the impact of these changes on cellular proliferation. here, we have demonstrated that t. cruzi-infected fibroblasts are capable of dna synthesis and nuclear replication, but exhibit abortive cytokinesis as judged by an accumulation of multinucleate cells at  <dig> and  <dig> hours post-infection. the increased level of brdu incorporation observed in both parasite-containing and parasite-free cells in infected monolayers at  <dig> hours post-infection suggest that infection with t. cruzi potentiates host cell dna synthesis early in the infective process and, secondly, that this may be mediated by a soluble factor in the medium. these findings are consistent with the observation that a number of growth factor genes  are upregulated in infected fibroblasts at  <dig> hours post-infection and that 'cellular proliferation' features as one of the overrepresented go terms for upregulated genes in t. cruzi-infected hff, hmvec and vsmc.

the mechanistic basis for the block in cell division is currently unknown, but it may be linked to a general dampening of key cytoskeletal genes that would be required for cytokinesis, including septins and several actin regulatory genes  as well as induction of the protein phosphatase slingshot- <dig>  in infected cells which promotes actin disassembly via the activation of cofilin  <cit> . related to these findings, we have recently demonstrated that the mechanical properties of t. cruzi infected cells change significantly with infected cells becoming less stiff over the course of a  <dig> hour infection in a manner that appears to be related to decreased rho kinase activity in infected cells  <cit> . while the significance of these findings is presently unclear, it is possible that inhibition of host cell division provides a more favorable environment for nutrient acquisition by the intracellular parasites. it should be noted that some of the important in vivo targets of t. cruzi infection, cardiomyocytes for example, are terminally differentiated cells that are no longer undergo mitosis. it has also been demonstrated that mitotic cells are relatively refractory to infection in vitro  <cit> . while there are many potential reasons for this observation, including the dramatic reorganization of microtubules and reduced vesicular trafficking that occurs during this stage of the cell cycle  <cit> , the collective set of observations are reflective of the important interplay between host cell cycle and t. cruzi infection. several intracellular parasites are known to impinge on host cellular proliferation pathways where leishmania amazonensis and toxoplasma gondii block host cell cycle progression at the g1/s transition  <cit>  and g2/m stages  <cit> , respectively. in contrast, theileria parva promotes uncontrolled proliferation of infected host lymphocytes  <cit> . the ability of toxoplasma to block cell cycle progression was associated with the induction of host uhrf <dig> protein , the suppression of which by sirna blocks both g <dig> arrest and reduces parasite proliferation in the host cell  <cit> . a similar induction of uhfr <dig> mrna is not observed at  <dig> hours post-infection at any of the cell types infected with t. cruzi, consistent with the observation that this parasite does not impede cycles of dna replication and nuclear division, but instead, appears to dysregulate aspects of cytokinesis. additional studies will be instrumental for elucidation of the mechanism of t. cruzi-mediated interruption of the host cell cycle and to determine the benefits, if any, to host and pathogen. such studies could include transcriptional profiling of other cell types, including cardiomyocytes and other non-dividing cells, which constitute important targets for t. cruzi infection, and would provide a contrasting view with respect to the cells that were examined here. furthermore, although the cell cycle progression analysis was performed in cell cultures that had reached confluence  <dig> hours prior the experiments and demonstrated to be were arrested in g <dig> , future global transcriptional profiling of synchronized cells could more clearly define the modulation of cell cycle-related genes. prior to this study, there was no indication in the literature that t. cruzi can block host cell division. the novel findings, reported here, demonstrate the utility of transcriptional profiling in directing the rational search for host biological functions affected during pathogen intracellular infection.

in summary, we have uncovered novel host cell physiology secondary to parasite infection that is cytokine-independent, including evidence for parasite induced host cell cycle arrest. given that we have limited knowledge of the intracellular requirements for t. cruzi amastigote replication and survival, the parasite-modulated pathways identified here represent potential targets for further functional analysis and intervention.

CONCLUSIONS
with the goal of expanding the current understanding of intracellular requirements of t. cruzi and the host pathways and processes that support its intracellular growth, an experimental approach that combined transcriptional profiling and transwell culture systems was employed in this study. a core set of host transcriptional changes elicited directly  by intracellular infection with t. cruzi in three different human cell types was unveiled . common responses include metabolic and signaling pathways involved in cell proliferation, amino acid catabolism and response to wounding. the transcriptional profiles also suggested the blockage of the cell cycle progression due to parasite infection in two out of the three studied cell types, a novel finding that was experimentally confirmed as infected cells demonstrated a failure to undergo cytokinesis. the experimental approach employed in this study is a valid tool to unveil biological events triggered directly by the presence of intracellular microorganisms, without the mediation of soluble factors.

