BACKGROUND
one of the most promising and productive research approaches in contemporary biology involves deploying modern genomic methods to investigate the origin, maintenance, and function of biological diversity present in natural populations. research efforts in this nascent field of evolutionary and ecological functional genomics  generally can be split into two categories  <cit> . one approach studies natural populations of the few taxa  that are already well-established laboratory model systems, making use of the extensive molecular genetic and genomic resources available for such organisms   <cit> . the alternative approach focuses on taxa which may be less tractable from a methodological perspective but which offer superb opportunities to investigate interesting and important ecological and evolutionary phenomena. in the case of such emerging model taxa, the development of genomic resources such as genetic libraries, linkage maps, and sequence databases are necessary and fundamental first steps in any eefg research program  <cit> .

heliconius butterflies stand out among emerging model taxa for their extensive history in ecological and evolutionary research  <cit> . the genus heliconius, comprised of ~ <dig> neotropical species, contains a remarkable diversity of phenotypes, behaviors, and physiologies, all of which have evolved relatively recently  <cit> . the most conspicuous and well-studied aspect of this diversity is the variation, convergence, and mimicry of wing-color patterns present both within and between species  <cit> . efforts to identify the genetic basis of this wing pattern diversity have driven the recent development of genomic resources for heliconius butterflies  <cit> . the accumulation of such resources now provides a strong precedent for investigating additional aspects of heliconius diversity.

here we present the first genomic foray into facets of heliconius diversity other than wing pattern. we focus on the striking dichotomy of mating systems found within the genus and sample the transcriptome of male reproductive tissues from species representative of the two mating systems. our two focal species are the co-mimetic h. erato and h. melpomene. these species have an average synonymous site divergence of  <dig> %, do not interbreed, show extensive parallel radiations of wing patterns, and are the primary focus for wing pattern research in the genus  <cit> . consequently, these species possess the vast majority of genomic resources available for heliconius: bac libraries, linkage maps, and extensive collections of expressed sequence tags  generated from wing tissue and curated in a lepidopteran-specific database,  <cit> .

heliconius erato and h. melpomene represent the two divergent mating systems found in the genus. about half of heliconius species, including h. erato, exhibit an unusual pupal mating behavior: females are mated before or during eclosion and typically mate only once . otherwise, heliconius butterflies, such as h. melpomene, mate as fully developed adults and regularly mate more than once   <cit> . heliconius species fall evenly into two major clades which correspond exactly with mating system  <cit> .

this difference in mating system can engender very different regimes of sexual selection between the two clades. for instance, the pupal mating system drives extremely intense pre-mating sexual selection; males compete vigorously for mating position on the female chrysalis  <cit> . in contrast, the lack of remating in pupal mating females likely precludes most aspects of post-mating sexual selection such as sperm competition and cryptic female choice . therefore this phylogenetically concordant split in mating systems presents an unusual opportunity to explore hypotheses relating sexual selection to the molecular evolution of reproductive proteins.

reproductive proteins include proteins mediating gametic interactions or those found in seminal fluid. these proteins tend to diverge rapidly between related species and often evolve via positive darwinian selection . this is a pattern widely observed among animals and also often in plants. it is commonly hypothesized that post-mating sexual selection is the primary evolutionary process underlying this pattern  <cit> . however, there are very few data currently available that directly address this hypothesis .

ultimately we will use the dichotomous mating systems in heliconius to test for a relationship between intensity of post-mating sexual selection and evolutionary rates of reproductive proteins. to do this it is first necessary to identify reproductive proteins in heliconius butterflies. here again we take our cues from previous eefg research, though this time not from heliconius but from drosophila fruit flies and from two genera of crickets. in these taxa researchers focused on proteins secreted by the accessory glands – part of the male reproductive tract – into seminal fluid. early work in this field focused on indirect criteria such as the presence of a signal peptide and accessory gland biased expression to identify genes encoding accessory gland proteins  which were assumed to be transferred to females in seminal fluid. using modest numbers of ests generated from cdna libraries enriched for male-biased transcripts, this work identified dozens of acps in these species  <cit> . subsequent studies at the protein level verified that many of these acps are transferred to females in seminal fluid  <cit> . these proteins have diverse and often dramatic effects on female reproductive physiology and behavior, including stimulating egg-laying, facilitating sperm storage, and inducing refractoriness to remating  <cit> . moreover, in drosophila melanogaster, genetic variation in seminal fluid proteins has been correlated with sperm competitive ability, indicating an important link between reproductive protein evolution and sexual selection  <cit> .

in this paper we present parallel analyses of ests generated from male accessory glands of the pupal mating h. erato and the adult mating h. melpomene. these data constitute an important first step toward identifying a set of seminal fluid proteins in heliconius butterflies and using these genes to examine the relationship between post-mating sexual selection and the molecular evolution of reproductive proteins. these data also contribute significantly to the development of heliconius butterflies into a sophisticated model system for genomic explorations of ecological and evolutionary phenomena.

RESULTS
library construction and est assembly
the accessory glands from  <dig> adult male h. erato and  <dig> adult male h. melpomene were dissected from live butterflies and pooled within species to generate two tissue-specific directional cdna libraries. the h. erato and h. melpomene libraries respectively contained  <dig> ×  <dig> and  <dig>  ×  <dig> colony-forming units. to enrich for transcripts expressed primarily in male tissue, both libraries were screened with cdna generated from conspecific female abdominal tissue, and only non-hybridizing clones were sequenced. approximately  <dig> clones were sequenced from each species to generate a collection of ests which then were trimmed of low quality reads and poly-a tails, clustered, and assembled into contigs. we presume these assembled clusters, or unique gene objects , represent distinct transcripts. results were very similar in both species. h. erato yielded  <dig> unigenes and h. melpomene yielded  <dig>  the two libraries were comparable in number of high quality ests, average read length, and the frequency spectrum of ests per unigene . in both libraries the vast majority of unigenes were represented by a single est and ~90% of unigenes corresponded to three or fewer ests .

1ests >  <dig> bp after trimming raw sequences of vector sequence, low-scoring base calls, and poly-a tails. 2percentages given in reference to total number of unigenes. 3includes results from both blastn and blastx searches. 4we required a positive result from both hidden markov models and neural network methods implemented in signalp.

all est sequences have been submitted to genbank. h. erato, . complete unigene sequences from h. erato and h. melpomene are available in additional files  <dig> and  <dig>  respectively.

unigene annotation
we annotated the unigenes using blastx and blastn to search for similar sequences in genbank's protein and nucleotide non-redundant databases; a significance cut-off of e-value < 10- <dig> was used for both searches. results are summarized in table 1; the top-five best blast hits for each unigene are reported in additional file  <dig> 

overall, 69% of unigenes in each species yielded significant blast hits to genbank sequences . this suggests nearly a third of the unigenes obtained from each species may correspond to novel and previously undescribed genes. in both species many unigenes with significant blastn hits to genbank lacked significant blastx hits . these discrepancies could be explained in one of two ways: 1) these unigenes corresponded to ribosomal rna or 2) these unigenes contained a heliconius specific novel repetitive element and were similar only to a few other heliconius sequences in genbank containing such repeats  <cit>  . nineteen unigene pairs were reciprocal best-blast-hits between h. erato and h. melpomene and also showed no significant similarity to sequences in genbank.

we used signalp to identify protein-coding unigenes containing a predicted signal peptide sequence  <cit> . acps are extracellularly secreted proteins and are therefore expected to have a signal peptide  <cit> . results were again similar between libraries, with  <dig>  secreted proteins in h. erato and  <dig>  in h. melpomene .

gene ontology
where possible, we assigned gene ontology  annotations to protein-coding unigenes using the annot8r application in the partigene software package  <cit> . annot8r assigns go terms to unigenes based on blastx similarity  to proteins with known go annotations; results are summarized via go-slim terms corresponding to broad functional classes. go annotations fall into three independent categories  and a single sequence may be annotated in any or all categories. moreover, a single sequence may be associated with multiple go annotations within a single category, giving rise to more go-annotations than sequences annotated . the complete set of go annotations is provided in additional file  <dig> 

 unigenes could be assigned more than one annotation both within and between categories.

 <dig> percentages given in reference to total number of unigenes.

overall we assigned go annotations to  <dig>  and  <dig>  unigenes from h. erato and h. melpomene, respectively. with one exception, the distribution of annotations across go-slim summary terms is quite similar between the two species for all three go categories . the one exception is the class "structural molecule activity" in the category molecular function . the proportion of h. melpomene annotations in this class is twice that obtained from h. erato. this discrepancy clearly results from the greater number of ribosomal proteins represented in the h. melpomene ests, although it is unclear whether this reflects any biologically significant difference between the two species.

novel heliconius repetitive elements
recently, papa et al. identified nine novel, short  heliconius specific repetitive elements in bac sequences from h. melpomene and h. erato  <cit> . we used repeatmasker to identify and mask these repetitive elements in both accessory gland and wing unigenes  <cit> . overall, each of the nine repeats were identified among the unigenes, but not all were present in each library .

repetitive element labeling numbers correspond to those used in papa et al.  <dig>  <cit> .

as reported by papa et al., repeat # <dig> was by far the most abundant and was significantly more common in h. erato  than h. melpomene . to better characterize the nature of these heliconius repeats we further examined repeat # <dig>  instances of this repeat typically fell outside orf predictions from the partigene software, suggesting that when present in transcribed sequence it occurs in 3' or 5' untranslated regions of genes, not in the coding sequence. for one h. erato accessory gland unigene , three of five ests lacked the repeat sequence; this indicates that for at least one locus the repeat motif is polymorphic  among individuals pooled for library construction. finally, blast searches in genbank revealed repeat # <dig> was present in the introns of two additional heliconius species . these results are consistent with the interpretation of papa et al. that these repetitive elements likely arise from the replication and insertion of transposable elements that are common among heliconius butterflies.

these repeats present a practical problem when using blast to identify homologous unigenes within and between heliconius species. such searches may generate significant alignment scores between unigenes either because the transcribed genes are truly homologous or because a repetitive element occurs in both transcripts. we therefore used the masked unigenes for all blast searches between h. erato and h. melpomene libraries. we assume that significant similarity scores produced using these masked unigenes indicate homologous transcripts and not spurious similarity due to sharing of repetitive sequence.

comparisons of accessory gland and wing libraries
we used the criterion of high-scoring reciprocal best blast hits  to explore overlaps in the transcripts sampled from accessory gland and wing libraries . for this analysis we assume that a highly significant rbbh between unigenes indicates that these transcripts originate from the same locus  or orthologous loci . however, we fully recognize that such questions of identity and orthology can only be conclusively determined in the context of complete genome sequences and that the modest number of ests generated for some of these libraries hardly represents an exhaustive profiling of the tissue's transcriptome. nonetheless, contrasting the overlap in ests sampled between species or tissues is useful for identifying qualitative differences and similarities in the results. for instance, comparing wing and accessory gland rbbhs between species as a percentage of total h. melpomene unigenes yields similar results: ests sampled from accessory glands  and from wing  show similar proportions of unigenes shared between species. we used h. melpomene unigenes as the denominator in this comparison because h. melpomene has fewer ests sampled from both tissues, which we assume is a limiting factor in identifying rbbhs. these results suggest consistency between libraries, but must be interpreted with caution due to differences in library construction and est sampling. we anticipate that the numbers of genes identified in common between these species will increase dramatically as more ests become available.

a useful comparison can also be made between tissues within species. genes common among accessory gland ests but absent from wing ests are promising candidates for encoding seminal fluid proteins. encouragingly, the results from both species clearly indicated that a majority of transcripts sampled from the accessory glands were not present in wing tissue unigenes . in h. erato only  <dig> accessory gland unigenes had high-scoring blast hits  to wing unigenes, of which  <dig> were rbbhs. in h. melpomene there were  <dig> high-scoring blast hits to wing unigenes, with  <dig> rbbhs. therefore, in both species about 65% of accessory gland unigenes were not found among transcripts sampled from wing tissue.

considered broadly, this lack of overlap indicates that the set of genes sampled from accessory glands is qualitatively different from the set of genes previously sampled from developing wing tissues. the wing libraries were not screened or subtracted and were well-sampled   <cit> , so this discrepancy in genes sampled from the two tissues likely reflects two phenomena, one biological and one methodological. biologically, it might be that patterns of gene expression are quite different between these two tissues; the differences in sampled genes therefore may reflect substantial differences in transcript abundances. however, verifying this would require much deeper est sampling and a methodologically consistent approach for profiling transcripts . apart from any underlying biological differences, our sampling method was also explicitly biased: we probed our libraries with female cdna and sequenced non-hybridizing clones in order to enrich our ests for male-specific transcripts. although we do not have unbiased samples for comparison, the relatively low and stable proportion of unigenes shared between wing and accessory gland ests suggests that the enrichment for male-specific transcripts was moderately successful and that the resulting accessory gland ests will prove a useful resource for identifying seminal fluid proteins. nonetheless, the enrichment process was clearly not perfect. for instance, many accessory gland unigenes showed highly significant blast hits to well-known 'housekeeping' genes which presumably exhibit little differential expression between sexes  .

highly abundant transcripts are repetitive, secreted proteins
both the h. erato and h. melpomene libraries contained a few unusually abundant transcripts . blast searches within libraries revealed that these abundant transcripts were highly similar to several other less-abundant transcripts. overall there were three such groups each composed of about ten unigenes. each group encoded highly repetitive proteins, two with a repeat structure rich in tyrosine and one rich in asparagine; all had a predicted signal peptide . these same three groups were identified in both species and sequences within groups were clearly similar between species. similarities were also evident in the repeat structure present in the two tyrosine-rich groups. unfortunately, extensive indel variation and the repetitive nature of these sequences precluded reliable alignments among any of these unigenes. therefore robust inferences of homology between these sequences were not possible either within groups or between species. sequences included in figure  <dig> have been submitted to genbank .

it is worth noting that the h. erato transcripts from the third  group exhibited some exceptions to the patterns uniting these groups of proteins. first, they completely lacked the repetitive asparagine-rich c-terminus motif that characterizes their h. melpomene counterparts . nonetheless, the h. erato transcripts were clearly homologous to the non-repetitive n-termini of the h. melpomene sequences. second, there were only two unigenes in this h. erato group while the other groups contained around ten unigenes. nonetheless, one of these two unigenes, her <dig>  was comprised of  <dig> ests and was the third most abundant transcript sampled from that library.

sequences from these three groups of transcripts did exhibit weak but significant similarity to sequences or protein domains in public databases . however, after inspecting these results we concluded that these similarities did not reflect true homology. rather, these significant scores arose spuriously from matches to the repetitive motifs found in these sequences. no similar sequences were found among wing unigenes.

accessory gland ests facilitate identifying reproductive proteins
in insects, most work identifying seminal fluid proteins has focused on two major criteria: enriched expression in accessory glands and the presence of a computationally predicted signal peptide  <cit> . genes  meeting these two criteria are commonly called acps  and early work in drosophila using western blots generally supported the assumption that these proteins are transferred to females in seminal fluid  <cit> . more recent proteomic studies have broadly confirmed this assumption but have also revealed that many genes encoding seminal fluid proteins show significant expression outside of accessory glands  <cit> . in light of this precedent, we focused on the highly abundant tyrosine- and asparagine-rich transcripts to demonstrate the utility of our ests for identifying heliconius acps and seminal fluid proteins.

the high abundance of these transcripts in the accessory gland make them obvious candidates for being acps encoding seminal fluid proteins. the presence of a signal peptide in all groups meets one of the major criteria for identifying insect acps. none of these sequences were found among ests generated from developing wing tissue in either species; this absence, contrasted with their abundance among accessory gland ests, provides support for the criterion of accessory-gland biased expression. we further evaluated this criterion using reverse transcription pcr  to amplify these transcripts from male and female abdomen and also male thorax. species-specific primers were designed to fall in regions of robust alignment between all members of each group so that tests of tissue-specific patterns of expression were inclusive of all transcripts and were therefore conservative. we used primers designed for α-tubulin as a positive control. rt-pcr results were similar for all three groups of transcripts in both species: there was robust amplification from male abdomen but weak or no amplification from male thorax and female abdomen . in contrast, α-tubulin amplified robustly from all tissues. these three observations: 1) the presence of a predicted signal peptide, 2) the discrepancy in est abundance between wing and accessory gland tissue, and 3) the tissue-specific patterns of expression, are consistent with these transcripts being acp genes and suggest they encode seminal fluid proteins.

we used shotgun peptide sequencing  to search for these candidate seminal fluid proteins in h. erato spermatophores, the proteinaceous packet containing sperm and seminal fluid transferred from males to females during copulation. in heliconius, spermatophores can be easily and cleanly dissected from freshly mated females; we crushed the spermatophores in buffer, pelleted the remnants via centrifugation, and reserved the supernatant for analysis. tandem mass spectra generated from this supernatant were searched against protein translations of the combined h. erato and h. melpomene accessory gland and wing unigenes. this search yielded a significant match  to the tyrosine-rich  <dig> group of proteins from h. erato , which includes the single most abundant transcript  sampled from the accessory glands. this result confirms that at least one of the three groups of transcripts encodes a seminal fluid protein. more generally, it demonstrates the utility of these accessory gland ests as a resource for identifying seminal fluid proteins in heliconius butterflies.

unfortunately, due to the lack of similarity to other known sequences it is difficult to predict the molecular function of the tyrosine-rich  <dig> group of proteins or the two others which were not detected in the 2d-lc/ms experiment. however, we note the similarity between our results and other studies in crickets reporting abundant, hyper-variable, repetitive, secreted proteins with accessory gland biased expression and which were present in the spermatophore  <cit> . these authors speculate that the abundance and repetitive nature of these proteins suggest they are structural components of the spermatophore, which are generally known to be encoded by male insect accessory glands  <cit> . although the tyrosine- and asparagine- rich heliconius proteins do not appear to be homologous to the cricket proteins or another spermatophore protein reported in beetles  <cit> , if these heliconius proteins are structural components of the spermatophore it offers a possible explanation for the failure to detect the two additional groups in our proteomic assay. these proteins are unlikely to be water-soluble and the centrifugation step could have removed most of the spermatophore's structural components from the supernatant which was analyzed. future work on the biochemical properties and structure of these three proteins will be informative in this matter, as will precisely specifying where in the spermatophore the tyrosine-rich  <dig> proteins are located. alternately, it may be that the two undetected proteins are not present in the spermatophore and are not seminal fluid proteins, in which case useful biological insights will likely arise from investigating this functional difference between otherwise similar proteins. either way, this combined approach using focused est sequencing, in silico and in vitro expression assays, and proteomic analyses has successfully identified novel and noteworthy heliconius proteins for future research.

CONCLUSIONS
we report the successful sequencing of  <dig> ests, corresponding to  <dig> unigenes, and  <dig> ests, corresponding to  <dig> unigenes, from the male accessory glands of h. erato and h. melpomene, respectively. overall the results from the two species were very similar; our analyses did not reveal any obvious patterns that might reflect differences between the pupal and adult mating system. approximately one-third of these unigenes showed no significant blast similarity to sequences in genbank's non-redundant databases, indicating that a large proportion of novel genes are expressed in heliconius male accessory glands. in both species only a third of accessory gland unigenes were also found among unigenes derived from wing tissue. about 25% of unigenes from both species encode secreted proteins. this includes three distinct groups of unigenes which consist of a few highly abundant transcripts and several less-abundant related transcripts, all differentiated by extensive indel variation. patterns of tissue-specific expression suggest that they are acps; proteomic analysis confirmed the presence of proteins from one of these groups in the spermatophore.

these est sequences lay the foundation for future research investigating the patterns and processes of molecular evolution among reproductive proteins in heliconius butterflies. in particular, the striking dichotomy in mating systems offers a promising opportunity to explore the role of post-mating sexual selection in contributing to the rapid evolution of reproductive proteins. more generally, heliconius butterflies are a remarkable system for investigating patterns of genetic diversity in the context of well-characterized ecological and phenotypic diversity. the two species studied here are also the focal taxa for research examining the genetic basis of wing pattern diversity in heliconius. our results comprise the first major expansion of genomic-scale research into other aspects of heliconius biology. they therefore mark a significant advance in the development of these species, and the heliconius genus, as model systems for connecting various aspects of genomic, phenotypic, and ecological diversity.

