BACKGROUND
poor root growth is caused by various rhizotoxic factors present in problem soils, and is linked to susceptibility to other stress factors. for example, aluminum  ions cause severe damage to the roots of plants growing in acid soil, accentuating nutrient deficiency and increasing their sensitivity to drought stress  <cit> . other metal rhizotoxins, such as cadmium  and copper  ions, also inhibit root growth  <cit> . the poor development of roots occurs because al, sodium  and cu ions have negative impacts on the shoot yield of crop plants in problem soils, while cd ions decrease the efficiency of phytoremediation in cd-contaminated soils. improving the tolerance of roots to rhizotoxic ions is therefore an important target in plant breeding. understanding of the molecular responses of plants to rhizotoxic ions is a critical step towards molecular breeding of stress tolerant crops using marker-assisted selection or genetic engineering.

several critical genes regulating tolerance to rhizotoxic ions have been identified in studies using hypersensitive mutants. studies with salt overly sensitive  mutants identified genes encoding proteins critical for salt sensitivity, including the na+/h+ antiporter   <cit>  and its regulating protein kinase, sos <dig>  <cit> . using the cd- and al-sensitive mutants, cad and als, revealed that genes for phytochelatin synthase   <cit>  and a putative atp-binding al-translocator   <cit>  were involved in tolerance mechanisms to these ions. the identification of stress-responsive genes is a useful approach, because some stress-inducible genes might also be involved in tolerance mechanisms associated with abiotic rhizotoxins. for example, the cis-element dre  <cit> , and its binding protein dreb, were identified from a series of studies on dehydration-inducible genes. several al-tolerant genes are also responsive to al ions, such as als <dig>  <cit> , gst  <cit>  and atalmt <dig>  <cit> . analyses of those genes that are responsive to individual rhizotoxic treatments could also improve our knowledge of the mechanisms of toxicity of the different ions.

genome-wide transcript analysis can be performed in arabidopsis and other plant species using commercially available oligo-microarray techniques. these techniques have recently been applied to the identification of rhizotoxin-responsive genes in arabidopsis  and other plant species . those studies demonstrated that various genes were induced by each rhizotoxin. in order to understand the functions and impacts of such gene expression responses to each rhizotoxin, it is important to distinguish those genes induced as part of the general stress responses from those specific to individual stressors. the comparison of transcriptomes among different treatments and the application of bioinformatics procedures  are potentially useful approaches for determining the characteristics of these different gene groups.

in order to determine the effects of rhizotoxic treatments on gene expression in arabidopsis using this microarray approach, it is necessary to minimize the effects of other factors on gene expression during the course of the experiment. for example, mechanical damage to the roots triggers the expression of "general" stress-responsive genes  <cit> , and may lead to false conclusions if such a "general response" is not involved in each stress treatment. we previously developed a hydroponic culture system that enhanced rhizotoxicity while minimizing mechanical damage when changing culture solutions  <cit> . this method has been applied to quantitative trait locus analysis of rhizotoxicities  <cit>  and for monitoring root tip viability  <cit> , suggesting that it would also be suitable for obtaining root samples to determine the direct effects of rhizotoxins using microarray analyses. we have also developed an rna extraction method for arabidopsis that allows the isolation of high quality rna from various tissues, including roots, at different developmental stages  <cit> . this can be adapted to rhizotoxin-damaged roots, allowing the isolation of rna of sufficiently high quality to allow the determination of the complex patterns of gene expression in response to rhizotoxins, using dna microarray technology.

in the present study, we combined these experimental procedures to analyze gene expression responses in roots by microarray analysis, following treatment with al, cu and cd ions, or nacl. by comparing microarray data, we were able to separate the general  and specific  gene expression responses that were induced by each rhizotoxic ion. analyses of the separated gene groups based on arabidopsis gene information and bioinformatics tools revealed that both general and individual toxic mechanisms and defense responses were triggered by each rhizotoxic ion.

RESULTS
identification of genes responsive to all ions and to individual rhizotoxic ions
the arabidopsis roots grown using the hydroponic culture system were shown by fluorescent probes to be viable . green color with fluorescein diacetate  and no visible staining with propidium iodide  indicated that the roots retained esterase activity and integrity of the plasma membrane , even after switching the medium. by contrast, the roots were damaged after exposure to rhizotoxic ions . this indicated that root damage by rhizotoxic treatments was caused by the direct effect of the rhizotoxic ions, and not by artificial mechanical damage. the roots were harvested after exposure to rhizotoxic solutions, and were immediately frozen in liquid n <dig> . this procedure should help to minimize the artificial induction of stress-responsive genes during the experiments. using this experimental system, we performed microarray analyses after exposure to al, cd, and cu ions, and nacl . although similar levels of stress in terms of the degree of inhibition of root growth were applied , cu and cd ions induced more genes than al ions and nacl . it was difficult to compare genes that were highly upregulated by each treatment if the genes were selected using a single fold change  value as the threshold. some genes, however, showed large, statistically significant, variations, even if they were repeatedly highly upregulated . in order to solve these problems, we classified "highly upregulated genes" in each treatment group as those with fc values in the upper  <dig> % in each of three independent measurements. these genes were highly upregulated by each rhizotoxic ion, and with high reproducibility. using this procedure,  <dig>   <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> genes were identified as being highly upregulated by al ions, nacl, cd and cu ions, respectively . classification of gene ontology  by biological processes showed similar patterns among these "highly upregulated" gene groups, suggesting that all these ions affected various biological events . however, these gene groups showed distinct go patterns, compared with those of the whole genome. the gene groups induced by each rhizotoxin contained significantly higher percentages of genes in two categories related to stress responses  and in the category of "other biological processes", relative to the genome as a whole. conversely, these induced gene groups contained significantly lower percentages of genes attributed to "cell organization and biogenesis", "protein metabolism" and "unknown biological processes" than did the whole genome. these results indicated that our treatments triggered genes responsive to each rhizotoxin.

forty-one genes were co-induced by all ions, while  <dig>   <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> genes were uniquely identified in the groups of genes highly induced by al, cd, and cu ions, and nacl, respectively . the common  and the unique gene groups  showed different patterns of go . for example, the gene groups uniquely grouped by al ions and nacl contained significantly higher percentages of genes in the categories related to "transport" and "transcription", respectively. differences in the gene categories indicated that distinct biological systems might be controlled by the general and specific changes in gene expression caused by rhizotoxic ions. when the genes were categorized by go for molecular function, different stressors induced distinct gene sets with different molecular functions . these differences reflected the character of the gene expression responses of the roots to each rhizotoxic ion.

genes were functionally categorized by go slim defined by tair <dig>  percentage of the genes attributed to each go slim category was calculated by the go annotation tool in the tair database. gene groups were identical to those grouped by venn diagrams in figure  <dig>  ** and * indicate that the value in each group is significantly larger or smaller than whole genome, respectively .

characteristics of genes induced by all ions
forty-one genes were identified that responded to all the tested ions . this group contained a significantly larger percentage of genes with "other binding" activity by go categorization of molecular function , including six ca-binding proteins, such as calmodulin-like proteins  and ca-binding ef hand proteins, which were rare in other gene groups . three disease resistance proteins, one belonging to the tir  class of proteins with molecular transducer activities, were also included in this group, which was previously identified as one of the typical stress responsive genes. the group also contained typical reactive oxygen species -responsive genes that encoded ros-scavenging enzymes , as well as those involved in the signal transduction pathway for ros responses, namely myb <dig> and tolb-related protein. a putative trehalose-phosphate phosphatase gene belonged to this gene group and might be related to the reduction of cellular damage from ros via the accumulation of trehalose. induction of these genes could account for the results of previous physiological studies, which reported that ros production and ca-alleviation were common features of various rhizotoxicities.

characteristics of genes uniquely induced by individual ions
venn diagrams demonstrated that some of the genes induced were unique to a particular stressor. these gene groups reflect the toxicity and tolerance mechanisms specific for each ion. the gene group for al ions contained a known al-responsive tolerance gene, atalmt <dig>  <cit> , the cu ion group contained metallothionein, and the nacl group included a number of dreb transcription factors, which have been well characterized as key transcription factors regulating nacl tolerance. on the other hand, those gene groups "unique" to particular stressors included genes that were responsive to other ions, even if these were not included in the upper  <dig> %. this indicated that each unique gene group had different characteristics in terms of their specificity to particular ions. we therefore applied cluster analysis to each unique gene group in order to evaluate the specificity of the responses of the genes in these groups to particular stressors . using relative fc  values, which were defined as the fc with other stressors relative to that of the particular stressor, we identified specific clusters of genes using hierarchical clustering analysis . the specific clusters for each unique gene group had significantly smaller rfc values than the other clusters .

 <dig>  genes uniquely induced by al ions
the al-responsive group consisted of  <dig> genes , and included a significantly higher percentage of genes encoding proteins with transporter  and transferase  activities, by go categorization of molecular function. genes encoding transporters were concentrated  in a gene cluster containing  <dig> genes , which were relatively specific to al ions . major transporters for sulfate  and borate  were found in this specific cluster, together with atalmt <dig> and other organic molecule transporters . this specific gene cluster also contained genes encoding an auxin/al-responsive protein, an auxin carrier protein, and a gene encoding purple acid phosphatase.

although genes encoding transferases were not concentrated in a specific gene cluster, two s-adenosyl-l-methionine:carboxyl methyltransferase family proteins and three carbohydrate transferases  belonged to this gene group. a large number of genes involved in carbon and nitrogen metabolism were also identified in this al-specific group, including glutamate dehydrogenase , malic enzymes , and some carbohydrate decarboxylases, including a pyruvate decarboxylase .

 <dig>  genes uniquely induced by nacl
venn diagram analysis identified  <dig> genes that were uniquely induced by nacl treatment . go analysis for molecular function suggested that this gene group contained a significantly higher percentage of genes encoding transcription factors  , while go analysis for biological process found a higher percentage of genes in the transcription category . this group contained more transcription factors, including some dreb family proteins , which have been recognized as playing a role in salt tolerance. cluster analysis revealed that  <dig> genes, including seven transcription factors, were more specific to nacl than were the other genes . some cold-responsive genes , whose signal transduction pathways overlap with nacl stress, were also identified in this cluster. no genes for major catalytic enzymes involved in carbon or nitrogen metabolism, and only one transporter, were found in the nacl group.

 <dig>  genes uniquely induced by cd ions
the cd ion-induced gene group contained no catalytic enzymes involved in major primary or secondary metabolism, but did include some protein kinases, such as receptor-like protein kinases   <cit>  . this could account for the significantly higher ratio of genes with "kinase activity" , when genes were categorized by molecular function . genes belonging to the enriched go category were not enriched in the specific gene cluster . the specific cluster, also, contained several stress-responsive genes, whose functions such as heat-shock and defense-response, have not yet been clarified . one gene categorized by go as having kinase activity, a leucine-rich repeat family protein  similar to disease resistant proteins, was also identified in this specific gene cluster.

 <dig>  genes uniquely induced by cu ions
the cu ion group contained known cu-detoxifying and binding molecules, such as metallothionein  . a large number of secondary metabolite-synthesizing enzymes involved in "other metabolic processes" , such as strictosidine synthase  <dig>  , anthranilate synthase and six isoforms of cytochrome p <dig> were also identified in this group. these could account for the significantly higher percentages of genes encoding proteins with other enzyme activities  and transferase activities  . two trehalose synthases  and a ros-scavenging protein, namely thioredoxin h- <dig> , may reflect the relative severity of ros production induced by cu ion treatment, compared with the other ions. in the cu ion-specific gene cluster, an l-aminocyclopropane-1-carboxylate synthase  belonging to the ethylene biosynthesis pathway was identified, together with an enzyme relating to auxin synthesis . an enzyme synthesizing the precursor of iaa, tryptophan, namely tryptophan synthase alpha chain  and beta chain , were identified in the cu ion-responsive gene group.

root tip viability, cell damage and ros production following rhizotoxic treatments
the induction of ros-scavenging enzymes in the shared gene group indicated that all stressors caused an accumulation of ros. to confirm this possibility, the roots were stained using fluorescent probes to detect hydrogen peroxide   and superoxide anions  , respectively. in all four treatments, green and red fluorescence were generated by h2dcfda and dhe, respectively, while the roots in control preparations  showed no visible fluorescence . although the intensity of staining in the roots treated with stressors may not directly reflect the level of ros production, because of a metal-quenching effect during fluorescent staining, these results indicated that ros were induced by all stressors, but with different patterns . the gene group shared by all stressors contained a large number of ros-scavenging enzymes, while the unique groups contained additional ros-scavenging enzymes that could account for the different staining patterns seen with different treatments .

co-expression gene analysis within each group
co-expression gene analysis was carried out using kagiana software, which allows for the identification of co-expressed genes among gene groups, based on correlation coefficients from publicly available microarray data derived from the atted-ii database . one large cluster consisting of  <dig> genes was identified in the gene group that overlapped for all stressors . this group contained a number of ca-binding proteins  and transcription factors  zinc finger protein containing an ear repressor domain). response viewer in the genevestigator showed that this gene group also responded to other biotic and abiotic stressors, such as ozone, nematodes, h2o <dig> and agno <dig> , suggesting that these genes were commonly responsive to various stress treatments. one cluster in the shared gene group contained four genes that were responsive to salicylic acid . for each individual treatment, 2– <dig> clusters were identified by the same analyses . the nacl-responsive genes formed two clusters containing a homolog of dreb , and cold-responsive genes. one of two clusters in the cd-responsive group consisted of genes upregulated by heat treatment, while the other cluster showed no response to heat treatment . two clusters in the cu-specific group contained genes responsive to senescence, one of which was also responsive to abscisic acid  . these analyses indicated that distinct gene expression networks were triggered by each stressor, while some networks were shared by all stressors.

discussion
rhizotoxicity studies based on the inhibition of root elongation caused by the ionic activity of toxins at the plasma membrane surface, have indicated that different ions exert distinct toxic actions  <cit> , but also that almost all ions stimulate some common stress-responsive processes, such as ros production and enhanced secondary metabolism  <cit> . to induce all toxin-responsive genes, we employed relatively higher concentrations of rhizotoxic ions than those required to inhibit root elongation, though these treatments also reduced root viability , suggesting that our treatments triggered genes involved both in defense systems and in damage response. changes in gene expression caused by toxic ions might therefore reflect these complex factors. by comparing microarray data between different treatments, we identified gene groups induced as part of general stress responses, as well as those specifically induced in response to individual toxic ions . these gene groups agreed with the results of histochemical observations  and with the functions of some genes previously identified in other molecular biological studies .

the group of genes that was responsive to all ions contained a large number of genes encoding ros-scavenging enzymes, such as glutathione transferase and peroxidases, and an enzyme for producing trehalose, whose accumulation stabilizes cellular structure against ros damage  <cit> . overexpression of these genes conferred abiotic stress tolerance  <cit>  and their induction would therefore act as part of the defense responses against ros damage induced by all stressors. one large cluster of genes in this group, identified by co-expression gene analysis by kagiana search , contained various ca-binding proteins, including previously identified calmodulin-like proteins , which were inducible by various stimuli  <cit> , suggesting that ca-mediated signaling pathways could play important roles in the arabidopsis response to rhizotoxic stressors. a previously identified transcription factor myb <dig>  which is involved in the cold stress-mediated defense system associated with ice <dig>   <cit> , was also included in this cluster. it seems likely that this gene group, which was responsive to all ions, is related to the general stress-responsive system in plants. although the pattern of staining was different, ros accumulation occurred in the roots subjected to milder rhizotoxic conditions  . this suggests that ros production is a general feature of rhizotoxic treatments. it is interesting to note that the induction of ros-scavenging enzymes was common to all stressors, and occurred even under mild stress conditions.

the gene groups responsive to individual ions included those genes typically upregulated by each stressor. for example,atalmt <dig> was highly upregulated by al ions, but was not responsive to other ions  <cit> . in addition, the upregulation of this gene was the largest detected among all the genes , suggesting that it plays a critical role in the active al ion defense system of this plant species  <cit> . interestingly, the bypass pathways of tricarboxylic acid and glutamate metabolism were also relatively upregulated by al ion treatment, compared with other treatments . this could be related to malate efflux, because organic acid excretion can be enhanced by transgenic modification of several enzymes involved in tricarboxylic acid metabolism and its bypass , though the regulation of cytosolic ph caused by changes in these bypass pathways is a possible alternative mechanism. these possibilities need to be tested by future research.

other rhizotoxic ions, namely nacl, cd and cu ions, induced distinct and specific sets of genes . for example, gene clusters in the cu ion-responsive group consisted of senescence-responsive genes, including a gene encoding a previously identified senescence related protein , which enhances mrna degradation  <cit> . this may be related to the stimulation of secondary metabolism pathways, such as terpenoid indole alkaloid metabolism, involving strictosidine synthases  and tryptophan synthases , which are activated in mature and senescent tissues. the cu ion-responsive group also contained various defensive genes, such as attps <dig> and  <dig>  <cit> , which are involved in trehalose synthesis, in addition to the well-characterized cu ion-detoxifying protein metallothionein , indicating enhancement of ros-scavenging capacity. cu treatment also stimulated thioredoxin gene expression   <cit> ), which is involved in the cu ion tolerance mechanism of some organisms  <cit> . the salmonella thioredoxin homolog possibly acts by reducing free cu ions through regulating the binding capacity of the reduced form of thioredoxin to cu ions  <cit> . taken together, the cu ion group contained genes reflecting the toxicity of cu and defensive genes that produced proteins to alleviate cu toxicity.

the other uniquely identified gene groups had similar compositions. the nacl group demonstrated the importance of the dreb system in defense  <cit> . although previous studies have reported that the dreb1a family was responsive to cold treatment, but not to na ions  <cit> , our data indicate that this family is also involved in the nacl-responsive system in the root. this discrepancy might be because of differences in strength of the nacl used, as our treatment was almost five times milder  than that used in previous molecular biological studies . on the other hand, the cd ion-responsive gene group consisted of unidentified stress-responsive proteins, which were categorized as heat shock and pathogen-related proteins. further research is needed to clarify the role of these proteins in cd tolerance.

when we applied the same experimental design using the lower  <dig>  percentile as the threshold, we are able to characterize the groups of genes downregulated by each stressor . go annotation by molecular function  showed that uniquely identified groups of genes had distinct patterns. for example, genes with "hydrase activity" were increased by nacl, or cd and cu ions, while those for "transporters" were increased by al ion treatment . on the other hand, several genes relating to defense responses, such as disease-resistance related protein, were found to be downregulated by all stressors. this suggests that a combination of up-regulation and downregulation of stress responsive genes may be important in optimizing the adaptation of particular biological pathways to stress conditions.

co-expressed gene clusters may reflect the cellular conditions and activated defense systems induced by each stressor. for example, al ions induce phosphate deficiency as a secondary effect  <cit> , while defense systems for abiotic stressors are activated by phytohormones . based on the upregulations recorded by genevestigator  <cit> , we may infer that the aba signaling pathway was activated by both cu and al treatments, because a large portion of one cluster in both the cu ion-  and al ion-  responsive groups consisted of aba-responsive genes. furthermore, activation of the salicylic acid signaling pathway was involved in the responses to all treatments, because a cluster responsive to salicylic acid was identified in the shared gene group. these results could explain the involvement of these signaling pathways in the tolerance mechanisms for each stressor .

to investigate the changes in gene expression caused by various rhizotoxic ions, we employed a simple experimental design using a limited number of microarrays . this could be advantageous in terms of experimental costs when applying a similar approach to other plant species. accurate information  provided by recent developments in the functional genomics of arabidopsis, is critically important for the success of this approach. similar developments in genomic research are becoming available for other plant species, and we can therefore apply this procedure to other plant species, and can use comparative genomics to compare the resistance  systems to rhizotoxic ions among different plant species. integrated analyses with other -omics data  would also be interesting to further our understanding of tolerance to and toxicity of rhizotoxic stressors.

there are limitations to our current approach, and several questions remain. for example, we focused on the genes upregulated either collectively or specifically by four different ions. this method excluded genes that were upregulated by two or three stressors, though they may also play an important role in defense and stress-response. for example, some genes encoding cell wall-associated proteins and vacuole loading proteins, which are known to be involved in cd and al tolerance, were excluded by our approach. on the other hand, we selected upregulated genes using the upper  <dig>  percentile as a threshold. this relative threshold value was preferable to using an absolute fold change threshold value, allowing the selection of a similar number of genes from each treatment group, despite variable distributions of fold changes. this allowed comparison among the groups of genes with similar weights of importance. however, our procedure cut-off the genes if their fold change values were just below the upper  <dig>  percentile. the impact of these genes would therefore have been underestimated by the present analysis. further investigation of these genes using a different method of data analysis is required for a complete understanding of the complex nature of rhizotoxicities.

CONCLUSIONS
using genome-wide dna microarray technology, we analyzed the impact of rhizotoxic ions  and nacl on gene expression in the roots of arabidopsis. comparison of the microarray data allowed the induced genes to be grouped into those common to all treatments, and those unique to individual treatments. each gene group contained reported tolerance genes, such as atalmt <dig> in al treatment, dreb in nacl treatment and mt <dig> in cu treatment. ros-scavenging enzymes and ca-binding proteins, however, were in the group of genes that was upregulated by all stressors. these results were consistent with tolerance mechanisms identified in previous physiological studies. in addition, bioinformatics analyses of the genes groups showed that distinct physiological responses were induced by each stressor. overall, we showed that comparative microarray analysis with a simple experimental design was a useful technique for identifying gene responses that were consistent with the cytotoxic and tolerance mechanisms of the roots to rhizotoxic ions. further data analysis, such as a comparison of downregulated genes and the integration of other -omics based technologies  would be useful for further research into the complex nature of the responses of plant roots to rhizotoxic stressors. recent developments in genomic research in other plant species may allow us to use similar approaches in various plant species, allowing useful comparisons to be made regarding the similarities and differences in the tolerance mechanisms among different plant species.

