BACKGROUND
polychaetes assigned as scoloplos armiger are common as dominant species in ecological surveys in different marine habitats. benthic surveys have shown that s. armiger represents one of the dominant macrofauna species in a norwegian fjord  <cit> , in a portuguese estuary  <cit> , and in the peter the great bay in the sea of japan  <cit> . besides its wide ranging distribution, s. armiger also plays a more or less important role in recent ecological studies. it has been identified as a possible intermediate host for the flatfish nematode cucullanus heterochrous  <cit>  and the population dynamics of s. armiger and its predator nephtys hombergii  on intertidal flats in the netherlands' part of the wadden sea are well studied  <cit> .

scoloplos armiger  has been reported to show a cosmopolitan distribution and has been encountered in all zoogeographic regions  <cit>  where it is present from the intertidal to the subtidal  <cit> . in the north sea region it is one of the most common polychaetes and a direct development in egg cocoons was observed at many intertidal flats  <cit> . in additional to these well known and eye-catching cocoons, free swimming pelagic larvae of these worms have been reported from the north sea near the island of helgoland, germany  <cit> .

for many marine invertebrate species a worldwide distribution has been reported. at least four hypotheses can reasonably explain such a distribution pattern;  truly cosmopolitan species,  cosmopolitan morphospecies which correspond to genetically distinct species  <cit> ,  poor taxonomic understanding of a taxon, causing "the cosmopolitan syndrome"  <cit>  and  cosmopolitans where the current range distribution is the result of human introductions. an example for the latter is the reef-building serpulid ficopomatus enigmaticus which can be found in brackish waters of warm-temperate regions all over the world, and which is supposed to be distributed through human shipping  <cit> . however, most reports of cosmopolitan distributional ranges of marine invertebrate species after application of molecular methods turned out to be the result of an over-conservative taxonomy  <cit> .

among marine invertebrates, polychaete annelids have a high frequency of cosmopolitan species  <cit> . polychaetes like owenia fusiformis , sternaspis scutata  and scoloplos armiger  are recorded from all oceans in different depths and nearly all temperate regions  <cit> . however o. fusiformis later has been found to consist of more than one species  <cit> .

only a few genetic studies investigated such "cosmopolitan" polychaetes and most of them did not use discrete nucleotide data. rapds and its sequence data confirmed the amphi-atlantic distribution pattern of the ctenodrillid ctenodrilus serratus  <cit> . the worldwide distributed petitia amphophthalma  has been investigated with rapd markers  <cit>  which do not support the cosmopolitan status of this taxon. the phylogeography of the invasive sabellid sabella spallanzanii was investigated using nuclear markers  <cit>  and human introduction to australia due to ballast water has been suggested for this polychaete. the cosmopolitan status of hesionides areneria  was confirmed using rapd markers  <cit> , nevertheless it cannot be ruled out that lack of differences in the band pattern of rapds is due to primer choice. in contrast to this, the cosmopolitan status of another hesionid  was not supported by rapd data  <cit> .

interestingly, none of these studies used mitochondrial markers which are commonly used for phylogeographic studies in other animal groups  <cit> . this might be due to the lack of suitable primers for the amplification of variable regions of the mitochondrial genome. although many polychaetes are recorded from different zoogeographic regions, truly cosmopolitan species seem to be rare, and in many cases taxonomy is unable to distinguish between morphologically similar taxa  <cit> . it is supposed that widely distributed species are frequently being found to consist of distinguishable subspecies or siblings when examined in sufficient detail  <cit> .

in a series of papers it has been shown with rapd data, aflps, cross-breeding experiments and investigation of the sperm morphology, that different developmental traits of scoloplos armiger collected near the island of sylt  belong to two distinct scoloplos species  <cit> . this means that two sympatric sibling species of scoloplos cf. armiger occur in the north sea: one living in the intertidal with egg cocoons and one living subtidally with pelagic larvae.

the aim of the present study is to investigate the status of different scoloplos cf. armiger populations in the northern east atlantic  and the northern east pacific using mitochondrial markers. for this purpose we sequenced a  <dig> kb fragment of the mitochondrial genome of scoloplos cf. armiger to develop primers for a variable mitochondrial region. our present study gives no support for a cosmopolitan distribution of scoloplos cf. armiger and phylogenetic analyses of the investigated populations reveal five distinct reciprocal monophyletic clades of scoloplos cf. armiger.

RESULTS
genome organisation, base composition, and codon usage of the mitochondrial genome of scoloplos cf. armiger
the fragment of the mitochondrial genome of scoloplos cf. armiger individual si <dig> is  <dig>  bp long and contains  <dig> protein coding genes,  <dig> of the  <dig> expected trnas, and the large ribosomal subunit . as in the case for all annelids so far studied all genes are transcribed from the same strand. one difference found in the gene arrangement of scoloplos cf. armiger when compared with the other known orbiniid mitochondrial genome of orbinia latreillii  <cit>  is that the gene trng is missing within the so far sequenced portion of scoloplos cf. armiger . the mitochondrial genome is at-rich , and the base frequencies are a =  <dig> , c =  <dig> , g =  <dig> , and t =  <dig> .

all  <dig> protein-coding genes typically found in metazoan mtdna  <cit>  are identified for scoloplos cf. armiger. in  <dig> of these aug is used as a start codon. the exception is cox <dig>  for which sequence alignment comparison with other annelids reveals the use of guu as alternative start codon. an alternative start codon is also found for the same gene in orbinia  <cit> . except for nad <dig> complete stop codons  are found in all other protein coding genes in scoloplos cf. armiger .

phylogenetic analysis of the cox <dig> – trnq – nad <dig> data set
within  <dig> individuals we found  <dig> unique sequence haplotypes for which we produced an alignment spanning  <dig> characters. of these  <dig> characters,  <dig> characters are constant,  <dig> characters are variable but parsimony uninformative, and  <dig> are parsimony informative. the nucleotide composition is at biased, as is it common for polychaete mitochondria  <cit>  and the empirical base frequencies are a =  <dig> , c =  <dig> , g =  <dig> , and t =  <dig> . the chi-square test of homogeneity of base frequencies across taxa resulted in no significant p-values .

the application of the different phylogenetic methods yielded different tree topologies , but the same major clades are recovered by all. the mp approach yielded  <dig> equally parsimonious trees  which are presented as a strict consensus tree . five different reciprocal monophyletic clades of scoloplos cf. armiger are recovered: a clade containing the individuals from malibu , one containing the individuals from san diego , one containing the intertidal specimens from roscoff, low newton by the sea, and sylt , one containing individuals from sylt and fehrmanns belt which were collected from the subtidal , and one also containing individuals from the latter two locations, as well as individuals from trondheim and kristiansand. the sample site in kristiansand is located near the type locality and so this clade is named the 'type locality clade'. the 'malibu clade' is represented by two identical sequences and the monophyly of the other clades is well supported through bootstrap values and bayesian posterior probabilities  . the relationship between these clades remains unclear, but no analysis recovered a monophyletic scoloplos cf. armiger clade. ml and bayesian inference indicates that the 'malibu clade' is closely related to leitoscoloplos pugettensis, but this relationship is only poorly supported through bpp , as well as that there is a sistergroup relationship between the 'san diego clade' and scoloplos sp. the relationships between the three clades from european waters are also not clear. whereas mp recovers a sister group relationship between the 'type locality clade' and the 'intertidal clade' , a sister group relationship between the 'subtidal clade' and the 'type locality clade' is suggested by the most likely tree . the majority rule tree of the bayesian inference does not resolve this issue .

as expected from this phylogenetic analyses, comparison of average nucleotide diversity between different scoloplos cf. armiger clades shows that variation between clades  are much higher than within clades .

there are several amino acid changes within the nad <dig> gene . within the scoloplos cf. armiger group unique amino acid substitutions are present for the 'malibu clade', the 'san diego clade', the 'subtidal clade', and the 'type locality clade'.

trnq secondary structures
proposed trnq secondary structures for all clades/taxa are given in figure  <dig> and all possess the common cloverleaf structure with an acceptor stem, tΨc stem and loop, anticodon stem and loop, and dhu stem and loop . secondary structures are identical within each clade/taxon and therefore only structures of one individual are shown. the secondary structure predicted for the 'san diego clade' differs from the other scoloplos cf. armiger taxa in possessing  <dig> bp instead of  <dig> bp in the tΨc loop,  <dig> paired bases instead of  <dig> paired bases in the anticodon stem, and  <dig> bp instead of  <dig> bp in the anticodon loop.

discussion
relationships of different scoloplos cf. armiger populations
the results of the phylogenetic analyses of the cox3-trnq-nad <dig> data set clearly supports that scoloplos armiger represents a species complex and not a cosmopolitan species. we find at least two s. armiger-like genetic clades within the pacific region and these are more closely related to other pacific species  than to the european scoloplos cf. armiger clades. under the phylogenetic species concept sensu mishler and theriot  <cit>  it is parsimonious to assume that these clades represent distinct evolutionary lineages which should be considered as species distantly related to s. armiger. we identified three well supported reciprocal monophyletic clades within european scoloplos cf. armiger. applying the phylogenetic species concept sensu mishler and theriot  <cit>  to our data, we hypothesize the presence of at least three different species  formerly referred to as s. armiger in the north atlantic.

the inference of a monophyletic clade containing all intertidally collected interviduals from european waters confirms the results that individuals that are producing egg-cocoons and live on intertidal flats represent a distinct evolutionary lineage rather than part of a s. armiger species with different developmental modes  <cit> . surprisingly the results show that in subtidal areas of the north sea and baltic sea there are two clearly separated genetic clades of scoloplos cf.armiger, which are also distinct in amino acid data: the 'subtidal clade' and the 'type locality clade'. whereas we found both genetic types in the north sea and baltic sea samples in sympatry, only one of these clades seems to be present in the norwegian samples, which include the type locality. as pointed out before, we consider it likely that these two genetic clades represent two different species. however, at this point the possibility must be considered that processes unrelated to speciation have generated reciprocal monophyletic mtdna haplotype lineages  <cit> , especially for the separation of the 'subtidal clade' and the 'type locality clade'. this hypothesis should be tested with additional data, e.g. by application of independent nuclear markers.

differences in sperm morphology and in the length of anal cirri of benthic juveniles between intertidal and subtidal populations have been reported by kruse & reise  <cit> , but they did not find any such differences or variation within the 'subtidal clade'. the same holds true for chaetal characters. furcate chaetae are present in abdominal segments of individuals of the subtidal populations, but these are lacking in intertidal individuals  <cit> . these characters were also compared with individuals from the type locality , but no differences to the subtidal individuals from the sylt population are found. however, our results explain why significantly higher genetic diversity has been found in a rapd study within the subtidal populations  <cit> . it is very likely that this has been caused by mixing of two cryptic species which together contribute to an ostensible high variability.

the question emerges if there are ecological differences between the two cryptic subtidal species. study of the ecological background of the two scoloplos cf. armiger species in the wadden sea  has revealed that there is a higher tolerance against sulphide and hypoxia for intertidal individuals, which can be interpreted as an adaptation to intertidal habitats being cut off from supply with oxygenated sea water during low tide. however, no unusual high variation of the physiological tolerance of subtidal scoloplos cf. armiger individuals is revealed by these physiological studies  <cit> .

interestingly, it can be observed that intertidal and subtidal populations both spawn their egg cocoons and pelagic larvae respectively in spring and additionally pelagic larvae from subtidal populations were present in autumn. spawning asynchrony is typical for marine sibling species living in sympatry  <cit>  and in the future it needs to be tested if this is realized in the two clades with subtidal scoloplos cf. armiger: one spawning in autumn and one in spring.

implications for scoloplos taxonomy
it is obvious from this analysis, as well as from molecular study of phylogenetic relationships of orbiniidae  <cit> , that the genus scoloplos is not monophyletic. characters currently used for genus diagnoses in orbiniids are highly variable within this group and are not suitable for cladistic analysis  <cit> . the status of the worldwide distributed scoloplos armiger was doubted by some authors before  <cit> . s. armiger is a species with variable morphological characters. descriptions of this species differ so widely that more than one species may have been confused  <cit> .

from the present analysis it becomes clear that at least three additional scoloplos species should be erected within the species complex currently referred to as scoloplos armiger: the malibu clade, san diego clade, and the intertidal clade. additional to this, according to our data the existence of sibling species within the subtidal populations of the eastern north atlantic is highly likely .

whereas the descriptions for the malibu clade and the intertidal clade are in preparation, the two other clades need further investigation before formal description. in future, the name scoloplos armiger should be restricted to the type locality clade.

with the present molecular analysis at hand it is very likely that different species have been mixed in previous ecological studies. whereas it seems reasonable that european scoloplos armiger-like individuals from tidal flats can be assigned to the intertidal clade, the status of subtidal populations remains more ambiguous. in the future reports of s. armiger from non-european waters should be treated with caution. the analysis of the few included pacific individuals clearly indicates that these represent different species, which appear to be distantly related to european scoloplos species. it would be interesting to include mediterranean as well as subtidal species from the sea of japan, white sea, and british waters in future studies to clarify the species status of different s. armiger-like populations and to understand their distribution.

scoloplos mitochondrial genome data
this is the first attempt to use mitochondrial data to distinguish between scoloplos species which has proven to be very powerful. we present the first nearly complete mitochondrial genome  for this genus including all protein coding genes. long-pcr's ranging from nad <dig> to 16s were not successful. problems with amplifying the part of the mitochondrial genome including the putative control region have also been reported by others  <cit> . compared with the mitochondrial genome of the orbiniid orbinia latreillii  <cit>  two translocations of trna genes must be assumed. this shows that gene rearrangements might be more frequent in annelids than previously assumed  <cit> .

we analysed a fragment of the mitochondrial genome starting from the 3'-end of cox <dig>  continuing over the complete trnq, and finishing after a large part of nad <dig>  analysis of the secondary structure of the trnq genes in our data set show the typical functional cloverleaf structure, which indicates that we most likely did not encounter mitochondrial pseudogenes, so called numts  <cit> . the sequenced fragment in this study proved to be very useful in phylogenetic analyses for the distinction of different clades. due to its larger sampling scale this study goes beyond previous analyses which used rapd and aflp markers  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
the phylogenetic analysis of mitochondrial sequence data  reported here revealed that scoloplos armiger represents a species complex and not a cosmopolitan species. we find at least two s. armiger-like species within the pacific region and two or three different s. armiger-like species in the north atlantic. one of these species is represented by the intertidal clade, for which previous studies clearly had supported species status. further morphological as well as genetical investigations of s. armiger-like individuals from the subtidal and the type locality clade will shed additional light on a cryptic speciation within scoloplos. it appears likely that inclusion of more scoloplos cf. armiger specimens from different parts of the world would add more species to this complex.

