BACKGROUND
small rnas play important roles in many aspects of pre- and post-transcriptional gene regulation, epigenetic modifications, chromosome segregation and genome structure. small rnas in mammalian cells have been categorized into different classes based on their size and biogenesis:  <dig> nucleotide  micrornas , 21-24nt endogenous short interfering rnas , 26-32nt piwi interacting  , and 35-42nt crasirnas  . each class of small rnas is synthesized by a distinct mechanism and each has discrete biological functions.

the first class of small rnas identified were the micro rnas , which are small  non-coding rnas that regulate gene expression by base pairing to mrnas where they direct either mrna cleavage or repress translation  <cit> . following a complex process of mirna transcription, processing, and nuclear export, mirnas are further processed by the rnaseiii enzyme, dicer, and its cofactor trbp. the mature mirna is then loaded onto an argonaute protein  where it then interacts with and regulates the mrna target. confounding this, however, is the recent discovery that mirnas can also function in gene activation through induction of promoter activity  <cit> .

another class of important small rnas is the pirnas. it has been proposed that pirnas are synthesized by the sequential cleavage of long single stranded rnas by members of the piwi superfamily of proteins  <cit> . importantly, pirnas silence the expression of selfish repetitive elements in the germline  <cit>  and appear to play a role in the establishment of heterochromatin through interactions with the piwi family of proteins  <cit> . moreover, pirnas have recently been shown to play a key role in epigenetic gene regulation  <cit> .

the crasirnas, originally discovered in the tammar wallaby, macropus eugenii <cit> , are produced from transcription of repeats and are proposed to be essential components of cellular stability and chromosome segregation  <cit> . however, little is known about the biogenesis or sequence composition of these small rnas. it is hypothesized that crasirnas emanate from both centromeric and euchromatic locations in the genome and may be involved in centromere specific histone recruitment  <cit> .

the evolution of these different types of small rnas can provide insight into both conserved regulatory networks as well as lineage-specific transcriptional regulation  <cit>  that has been evolving independently from eutherian  mammals for over  <dig> million years  <cit> . this evolutionary distance makes the tammar an ideal model species for studying emergent specificities of small rnas and their integration into regulatory networks that are mammalian, marsupial or tammar-specific. furthermore, the tammar has several unique developmental innovations, including its hopping mode of locomotion, the development of a pouch, a short-lived and non-invasive placentation, the delivery of an altricial young, a lengthy and highly sophisticated lactation and ex utero sexual differentiation , allowing for examination of small rnas in the context of novel gene networks. of note, the tammar is unique amongst mammals in that it provides a tractable model for the study of centromere structure at the genomic level due to the overall small size of the centromere and its lack of large, monomeric satellite arrays  <cit> .

for this study, we used massively parallel sequencing to annotate and characterize the major small rna classes in the tammar wallaby as part of the global effort to understand the genome biology of this australian marsupial. based on both the annotated meug_ <dig>  assembly and the newly derived meug_ <dig>  assembly  <cit> , we developed a pipeline to identify mirnas that are conserved in mammals as well as mirnas that are novel to the tammar. in addition to a survey of testis pirnas, we also present the first full annotation for crasirnas and compare their genome distribution to functional centromeric domains in the tammar genome.

RESULTS
library preprocessing
pre-sequencing size restriction was performed on tammar pouch young brain, liver, testis, ovary and fibroblast cells to target the small rnas in the 18-22nt range, encompassing the mirnas. from testis total rna, pre-sequencing size restriction targeted the small rnas in the 28-32nt range, encompassing the pirnas. in both pouch young testis and fibroblast cells, pre-sequencing size selection was performed to capture the small rnas in the 35-42nt range, comprising the newly discovered crasirnas. post sequencing processing was performed on  <dig> , <dig> reads to clip, trim and verify accuracy of size selection for all three major size classes  <cit> ).

the sequenced and filtered putative small rnas from our datasets, along with the mirbase entries for every mature, annotated mirna, were mapped against the tammar genome using an ungapped short read aligner . each class of sequenced reads was further processed using our bioinformatics pipelines to filter noise and degraded products from bone fide small rnas. longer reference sequences such as repeats and hairpin precursors were mapped to the tammar genome using a gapped alignment tool similar to blast. given the short length of the small rnas and the expectation that at least some classes would be repeat-associated, we performed alignments reporting all valid mapping locations. thus, all of our analysis strategies do not attempt to quantify the level of rna in the experiment; rather, they simply measure presence and absence.

identification of mirna genes
our mirna gene pipeline identified  <dig> putative mirna genes,  <dig> of which have no known orthologs in other species and are therefore referred to as novel . all of these contained intact open reading frames and were annotated as generic protein coding genes, and a further eight had detectable transcripts in whole embryo transcriptome datasets, indicating they are strong candidates for de novo mirna genes in the tammar genome. the remaining eight of the  <dig> protein coding genes are annotated genes but were not considered to be mirna genes according to ensembl. of these, six were detected as transcripts in embryo transcriptome datasets and a further four of these contained a high number of mirna reads, classifying these as strong candidates for de novo mirna genes in the tammar genome . included in these four are the genes hoxd <dig> , pank <dig>  nfyc, and cdc20b. finally  <dig> mirna genes in the ensembl annotation of the tammar wallaby genome were confirmed by our pipeline .

note that there are no mirbase orthologs.

for each, the number of mirna reads, identification of mrna transcripts in embryos and any identified mirbase orthologs are indicated.

one significant overlap between the ensembl annotation and our pipeline lies within a region orthologous to a mirna gene cluster on human xq <dig>  . the human cluster contains six mirnas , all six of which were predicted from meug_ <dig>  . all carry high sequence identity between human and tammar with the exception of mir19b <dig> and mir106a, which carry low sequence identity . surprisingly, the only mirna gene within the cluster for which a hairpin was predicted is the tammar ortholog to mir19b <dig> , a ncrna gene with low sequence identity; however, all mirna genes in this cluster carried an aligning mirna within our datasets . additionally, another mirna was found between mir19b <dig> and mir20b that is in a region of low homology between human and tammar yet outside of any predicted gene. this region may represent a unique site within tammar where a mirna targets specific mirna genes for regulation . interestingly, there is enrichment for this mature mirna in our testis pool, indicating there may be testis-specific de-regulation of genes the mir20b produced mirna typically silences.

conservation of mirna targets
to identify mirna target genes that may be under post-transcriptional regulation in the tammar, valid mirna alignments not contained within a hairpin structure were surveyed. a total of  <dig> genes were identified using meug_ <dig>  annotations as potential targets for mirna regulation. the vast majority of these were found within testes , with the remainder shared among ovary, brain, liver and fibroblast datasets . each target gene identified in our dataset, along with the number of unique mirna reads to that target, was cross-referenced with the miranda database of target genes to identify both conserved and novel mirna regulated genes in the tammar  <cit> . the microrna.org database contains the alignment and score of sequences from mirbase mapped to various genomes . the mirna tissue-specific pools sequenced for the tammar were used as an analog to the mirbase sequences and counts of alignments to genes were generated using the short read alignment tool bowtie . the intensity of each gene is indicative of how many sequences from the database  are attributed to that gene, but is not a proxy for the quantitative measure of the abundance of mirnas. this view of mirna targets across multiple species was used to identify conserved and novel mirna genes, and to place a loose confidence on the accuracy of the putative microrna targets in tammar.

from these analyses, nine genes were identified in tammar that are novel mirna regulated genes when compared to human, although four share conserved mirnas with mouse and one shared a conserved mirna only with drosophila. the final four of this set of genes do not carry resemblance to any previously annotated mirna targets . tammar genes with high intensities relative to other tammar genes on the heat map presented in figure  <dig> provide some indication of confidence that these genes are indeed mirna targets; unfortunately, other factors such as low coverage and tissue specific expression may account for tammar genes with lower intensities. specific genes were targeted for further comparison based on variations in density of mirna reads between tammar, mouse and human in an effort to illustrate the utility of tammar as a means to identifying novel mirnas within other species as well as tammar-specific mirnas.

as an example, lrtm <dig>  leucine-rich repeat and transmembrane domain-containing protein  <dig>  is a gene with a high density of mirna reads in tammar and mouse, but a very low density in human . vista alignment between human and tammar indicate this gene has a highly conserved exon structure between these two species, with a conserved mirna target in the 3‘utr .

in contrast, the gene c17orf <dig>  like lrtm <dig>  has a conserved intron-exon structure between tammar and human , yet the predicted mirna target sites are not conserved. in human and mouse, there are virtually no mirna target sites in this unknown gene , yet there are  <dig> mirnas that map to two unique target sites in the 3’utr. the majority of these mirnas target a second site in the 3’utr that is also highly conserved between human and tammar . in yet another example, srsf <dig>  we have identified brain-specific mirnas for a single target site that are tammar-specific. this gene contains no predicted or verified mirnas from any other species  . srsf <dig> is annotated in the human genome as two alternatively-spliced transcripts, with only a few of the exons from either transcript annotated in meug_ <dig>  due to low sequence coverage of this region. however, the 3’ exons and 3’utrs for both alternative transcripts are well annotated and share high identity between mouse and human. both tammar mirna targets fall within the 3’utrs, one in each of the two alternatively spliced transcripts. the shorter transcript variant contains a mirna that falls within a very conserved region of the 3’utr while the second mirna falls within a region of much lower identity within the 3’utr of the longer transcript variant .

mobile dna and pirnas of the tammar
we identified pirnas from pouch young testis. after clipping and trimming, pirnas from the testis pool were mapped to the tammar genome assembly meug_ <dig> . note that while assembly  <dig>  contained gene annotations,  <dig>  contains comprehensive repeat annotations. the mapped locations of pirnas were then compared for overlap with known repeats as annotated by repeat masker  <cit>  and novel repeats annotated by our in house repeat annotation pipeline  <cit> . pirnas from the tammar, similar to those found in other species, are mobile element enriched. the vast majority of pirnas are derived from lines and sines in the tammar , followed by dna elements  and ltr-containing retroviruses, including kerv  . within the ltrs, ~4% map to ltr-elements unique to the tammar genome. while the genome assembly is too fragmented to assay for clusters of pirna producing repeats, we confirmed that pirnas in the testis are derived from both conserved repeats and tammar-specific repeated elements  .

crasirna and the centromere of the tammar
while the three major classes of small rnas  and variants within each class , have been well studied in various model systems, a fourth major class, crasirnas, was first identified in the tammar  <cit> . named after the original elements characterized within the pool, this class of small rnas is larger than those previously characterized, falling within a size range of 35-42nt, and appear to be derived from centromeric elements  <cit> . to determine whether this novel size class of small rnas is indeed centromere-associated, we aligned all the crasirna sequences in the pool to annotated, de novo, and known centromeric repeats as well as to other repeated elements annotated in the tammar genome meug_ <dig>  . this analysis indicates the crasirnas are enriched for repeated elements , although it was not possible to determine from this mapping scheme whether the repeat elements themselves were associated with centromere domains. however, the testis and fibroblast cell crasirna distribution is not identical, with a preponderance of line-derived crasirnas in the testis and sine-derived crasirnas in fibroblast cells. to confirm that there was no overlap between the testis pirna and testis crasirna pools, regardless of the size limitations performed in the small rna sequencing and subsequent data analyses, we identified only  <dig> crasirnas that overlapped with seven pirnas using the one mismatch mapping strategy . thus, these two classes are largely derived from similar classes of repeats, although the repeat loci themselves are different.

to verify centromere residence, crasirna sequences representative of elements that are highly abundant in the pool  and of lower abundance , as well as representative of different types of repeats , were mapped to the tammar karyotype using primed in situ hybridization . over 80% of mapped crasirnas were found predominantly within centromere regions, with interstitial signals found at the telomeres and regions of the genome previously annotated as evolutionary breakpoints  <cit>  . interestingly the crasirna with a high density of reads, derived from the newly annotated mammalian-specific sine , showed a strong centromeric signal , further supporting the hypothesis that crasirnas are derived from mobile elements found at active centromeres in the tammar karyotype.

while our previous study showed that the original pool of small rnas in the size range of 35-42nt, without separation based on annotation, did in fact co-localize to centromeres in the tammar  <cit> , this new data confirms specificity of the individual sequence types within the crasirna pool. chip-seq with an antibody against tammar cenp-a, the modified histone specific to centromeres  <cit> , provided further verification of centromere association. the chip-seq data set was co-mapped with repeat modeller annotations, crasirna pool sequences, contigs containing a high density of previously annotated centromere repeats, and previously annotated centromere repeats  <cit> . chip-seq peaks coincided with sine, line and novel repeats within these contigs . moreover, the densest peaks for the dna bound to cenp-a nucleosomes were found in regions with the highest density of crasirna reads . across all centromere-annotated contigs,  <dig> of the  <dig> crasirna peaks identified overlapped with regions of cenp-a enrichment.

*de novo repeat.

sequence motif discovery for tammar crasirnas
in an effort to identify a sequence motif that might be shared amongst the crasirnas, regardless of their point of origin in the genome, we performed alignments  <cit>  of 50bp up and downstream of all crasirna alignment locations in the tammar genome. for each crasirna which mapped to the genome multiple times, it was observed that the entire alignment window displayed high identity across all instances, regardless of the progenitor sequence. conservation  of specific nucleotides was uncovered across alignments with a distinct pattern within the crasirna and flanking sequences. this pattern is distinguished when each window is reported according to the strand the crasirna mapped to  . the motif is best described as a mirror pattern, or discontinuous palindrome, such that when the crasirna is split down the middle , each side of the crasirna and flanking sequence carries specific nucleotides that are complementary to one another . this “mirror” pattern is shared among 63% of all crasirna loci .

a simple statistical significance test was developed to assign a p-value to each alignment and its flanking region. the score of a window represents the number of complementary matches between the sequence and its reverse complement. a p-value for this observation is computed by randomizing the sequence  <dig> times and observing the number of random tests that have a score equal to or greater than the original. a distribution of the p-values across the crasirna and mirna pool  indicates that this motif appears more frequently at higher confidences in the crasirna pool than expected at random. moreover, this test shows that this motif is not specific to small rnas in general, as it is not found in the mirna pool. however, distributions for both mirnas and crasirnas have a heavy tail, indicating many low confidence scores, which can be attributed to noise in the pools or sequence composition. for example, if we consider an at-rich sequence, the probability of finding palindromic matches by chance is higher than a sequence with equal base composition across all four nucleotides. in the future, these concerns can be addressed by developing a more robust scoring and significance test that can capture higher order dependencies in the sequence. since the crasirnas are derived largely from repeated elements, it would be interesting to explore enrichment of discontiguous palindromic motifs in specific regions of the genome such as those enriched in repetitive elements and centromeric regions.

discussion
mirna gene predictions
the presented pipeline identified  <dig> high quality, previously unknown mirna genes in tammar using a strict gene annotation and confirmed  <dig> of the  <dig> known mirna genes in tammar. the remaining mirna genes predicted in ensembl that do not match a mature mirna from one of our datasets could be bone fide mirna genes for which a mature mirna is not expressed or sequenced in one of the target tissues analyzed herein. alternatively, these could also represent mirna loci that, while carrying sequence orthology to mirnas in mirbase, have undergone lineage-specific locus death by genetic drift due to a lack of selection for function in this lineage  <cit> . however in light of our validation experiments and since each of the steps in our pipeline utilizes published tools, we have high confidence in our predictions.

within our mirna gene dataset are three pseudogenes that represent novel mirna genes in the tammar. previous work has shown that two mirnas in primates were derived from processed pseudogenes  <cit> , although the incidence of this type of mirna gene evolution is considered rare  <cit> . thus, there has been lineage-specific selection on the hairpins found in these pseudogene transcripts, which we can infer is involved in tammar-specific gene regulation given the mature mirnas observed from these loci.

closer examination of a cluster of mirnas genes on the human x chromosome indicates there is high conservation of this specific mirna gene cluster in metatherian mammals. this cluster is likely conserved on the x chromosome in tammar as it found on human xq <dig> , in a region on the ancient portion of the mammalian x chromosome and conserved on the x in marsupials  <cit> . while the conservation of the six mirna genes in this region was confirmed by the presence of mature mirnas in our mirna pools, a mirna peak was identified just downstream of mir20b that was highly represented in the testis. the placement of this mirna just adjacent to the 3’ end of this mirna gene indicates this gene is likely under post-transcriptional regulation by a mirna derived from another location, specifically in the testis. this would lead to a loss of gene regulation for targets of mir20b in a testis-specific fashion, although the specific cell type affected and functional consequences remain to be determined.

mature mirna analyses
for each of the microrna pools, many of the mirna reads did not overlap with known mature mirnas annotated in mirbase, indicating that the tissues analyzed in the tammar may carry numerous novel micrornas or that there has been high sequence divergence from previously annotated animal mirnas. however, this may be an overestimation of lineage-specificity based on the criteria used in the mapping pipeline. each rna from mirbase, along with the sequenced mirna pools, was mapped to the genome allowing for at most one mismatch to the genome sequence. this procedure indirectly performs an un-gapped alignment with no more than two mismatches between each mirbase annotation and sequenced tammar mirna. while allowing more mismatches would increase the likelihood of identifying false mirna targets, relying on such high stringency to identify conserved mirnas may not account for deep evolutionary distances. this data will ultimately be used to develop new annotation methods that not only use direct information such as sequence similarity to previously annotated mirnas, but also indirect information such as a predicted set of target genes.

our annotation strategy for mature mirnas allowed for assessment of target genes. while limited in the number of target genes to those with a full annotation in meug_ <dig> , we were able to identify several tammar-specific mirna targets, confirm conserved mirna targets and potentially identify previously unknown mirna targets in other species, such as human. for example, a conserved mirna target was identified in the 3’utr of the gene lrtm <dig> , although the usage of this particular mirna target varies across species . thus, while mirna utility may be species- or tissue-specific, the target location remains conserved. within the annotated 3’utr of c17orf <dig>  we identified two mirna targets that appeared at first glance to be tammar-specific. however, closer examination of the conservation of this gene between tammar and human indicates these two locations are specific sites of high conservation, spanning ~ <dig> million years of evolution. note that the predicted human mirna target sites are not correspondingly conserved . the two tammar-identified target locations may indicate a conserved mirna site in human that was previously unknown . moreover, c17orf <dig> is a gene of unknown function in both tammar and human, thus indicating that the regulatory network of mirna target genes may aide in understanding novel gene function.

our analyses also identified several target genes that may represent tammar-specific mirna regulation. one example of this was the gene srfs <dig> , which carries two different target mirna sites . one target location resides within the 3’ most utr and is in a region of low conservation between human and tammar. the second location lies within a cryptic 3’utr that is utilized in an alternatively-spliced isoform of this gene  <cit> . similar to c17orf <dig>  this mirna site is in a region of high conservation between tammar and human and accordingly may represent a conserved mirna target site. this 3’utr, unlike most 3’utrs in tammar, is highly conserved with human across its entire length, confounding inferences regarding the conservation of specific mirna target sites as the conservation of this portion of the transcript may be independent of any mirna regulatory pathway. the mirna identified for the cryptic 3’utr target site was found limited to the pouch young brain mirna pool, indicating this gene is under mirna regulation specifically in that tissue. interestingly, this gene codes for a splicing factor that is involved in alternative splicing of transcripts . while it is interesting to speculate that the derivation of a mirna regulated splicing pathway may have evolved in the tammar brain, leading to species-specific adaptation, a more exhaustive search within brain subregions in human and other mammalian species would be needed to confirm species-specificity.

genome defense and pirnas
the annotation of the pirnas in tammar was restricted to the testis due to technical difficulties with the ovary-specific library. however, we were able to confirm that while pirnas in this species are predominantly derived from mobile elements, we found this pool was enriched for retrotransposons such as lines, sines, and ltr-elements. as in other species, there were several pirna subgroups that were specific to de novo repeats identified in this species that are not conserved with opossum, platypus, mouse or human . within this de novo pool was enrichment for tammar-specific lines and ltr-elements. given the restriction of pirnas to the germ line, and their role in genome defense and reproductive isolation  <cit> , our discovery that a subset of pirnas within the tammar are derived from novel repeats may provide an explanation to the long-standing mystery of haldane’s rule  <cit>  within macropodid marsupials  <cit> . while macropodid marsupials can produce viable offspring, male f <dig> hybrids are sterile, following the tenets of haldane’s rule in which the heterogametic sex is adversely affected in interspecific crosses  <cit> . in addition, the genomes of macropodid marsupial f <dig> hybrids experience instability specifically associated with mobile elements  <cit> . thus, we postulate that the rapid evolution of mobile dna across macropodid marsupial species may result in an incompatibility within species hybrids that is manifest in the male germline as a result of expressed pirna incompatibilities  <cit> .

crasirnas and centromeres
the final small rna class that was annotated as part of the tammar genome project is the crasirnas. first discovered in the tammar  <cit> , crasirnas were hypothesized to be derived from mobile elements resident within centromeres  <cit> . our analyses represent the first full annotation of small rnas in this class range and have identified several salient characteristics that demarcate this class from other small rnas . across both tissues examined , we find enrichment for mobile dna progenitor sequences . unlike the pirnas, the predominant class of element within crasirnas is the sine retroelement, including a recently discovered sine class, sine <dig>  although the distribution of sines within each pool is different between testis and fibroblast cells. our analyses of specific members within the crasirnas cytologically confirm that progenitor sequences are enriched at centromeres . moreover, these progenitor sequences are enriched in cenp-a containing nucleosomes, further supporting the classification of these small rnas as centromere-repeat associated. while it cannot be ruled out that discontinuous palindromic signature identified in the crasirnas is a feature of the progenitor sequence from which the crasirnas are derived, it may also be a pattern involved in the biogenesis and/or targeting of crasirnas within centromeric sequences.

while this study has provided sequence annotation and genomic location for these small rnas, their function within the genome has yet to be determined and remains largely inferential. the fact that crasirnas are found specifically in cenp-a rich regions of the centromere points to a role in centromere function; how these small rnas participate in the demarcation of cenp-a nucleosomes or in centromere function is unknown. histone tail modifications are dynamic processes that are modulated by other protein complexes and noncoding rnas, such as small rnas. for example, it has been proposed that rnas mediate the pairing of centromere-specific dnas to chromodomain-like adaptor proteins which in turn recruit histone methyltransferases  that target the h3k <dig> residue for methylation. this interaction may be stabilized by the centromere-specific heterochromatin protein  <dig>  <cit> . the methylation of h3k <dig> also triggers dna methylation of cpg residues in centromeres  <cit> .

the role of rna in the process of histone modification is not clear; however, regions of the genome once thought of as “junk”, such as repeated dnas and centromeres, are transcriptionally active and can modulate epigenetic states. centromeres have long been thought to comprise noncoding and transcriptionally inactive dna. surprising new evidence suggests that eukaryotic centromeres produce a variety of transcripts. the transcription of satellites has been observed in numerous eukaryotic species across a broad range of phyla, from yeast to human. the wide-spread conservation of satellite transcription is consistent with a conserved regulatory role for these transcripts in gene regulation or chromatin modification  <cit> .

these transcripts may function in one of four ways: 1) they may facilitate post-transcriptional gene regulation  <cit> , potentially through the rna-induced silencing complex . in this pathway, double stranded  rnas are cleaved into short interfering rnas  that, upon association with risc, mediate native mrna inactivation  <cit> . 2) they may participate in the rna-induced transcriptional silencing complex , a pathway in which sirnas are involved in heterochromatin recruitment  <cit> . 3) alternatively, in a manner analogous to the xist transcript in mammalian x-inactivation, they may recruit heterochromatin assembly factors such as hp <dig>  <cit> , histone deacetylases, set domain proteins and polycomb group proteins  <cit> ). 4) lastly, they may regulate the movement of chromosomes through nuclear territories via association with specific chromocenters and “transcriptional factories”  <cit> . although the mechanisms are unknown, evidence that satellite transcripts participate in heterochromatin assembly and/or nucleosome recruitment is accumulating.

CONCLUSIONS
the international efforts of the tammar wallaby genome project have provided the opportunity to survey the major classes of small rnas in this australian marsupial model. targeting multiple tissues in tammar pouch young, we have identified both conserved and novel mirna producing genes in the tammar genome. we surveyed the genome for mature mirna target genes, identifying both conserved targets as well as novel targets. of these novel target genes, locations of mature mirna binding sites represent both tammar-specific regions of low conservation across mammals, as well as regions of high conservation between human and tammar. such comparisons point to the potential for the tammar as a model system to identify previously unknown mirna regulated genes in other mammalian systems. while our analyses of the pirnas was limited to the testis, tammar-specific repeats were identified that produce pirnas, possibly as part of the gonad-specific genome defense network. lastly, this study includes the first in depth analyses of the newest small rna class, the crasirnas. derived largely from repeat elements found at centromeres and associated with cenp-a nucleosomes, this pool of small rnas is enriched for sines and exhibits a unique, discontinuous palindrome signature that may indicate a novel biogenesis mechanism. in summary, this study catalogs the major constituents of the small rna repertoire of the tammar and, given the data herein, provides insight into the regulatory networks in which these small rnas participate.

