BACKGROUND
heat stress due to high ambient temperatures is a serious threat to crop production  <cit> . photosynthesis is one of the most sensitive physiological processes to heat stress in green plants  <cit> . photochemical reactions in thylakoid lamellae in the chloroplast stroma have been suggested as the primary sites of injury at high temperature  <cit> . heat stress may lead to the dissociation of the oxygen evolving complex , resulting in an imbalance during the electron flow from oec toward the acceptor side of photosystem ii   <cit> . heat stress may also impair other parts of the reaction center, e.g., the d <dig> and/or the d <dig> proteins  <cit> . several studies have suggested that heat stress inhibits electron transport at the acceptor side of psii  <cit> . direct measurements of the redox potential of qa have demonstrated that heat stress induces an increase in the midpoint redox potential of the qa/qa- couple in which electron transfer from qa- to the secondary quinone electron acceptor of psii  is inhibited  <cit> . on the other hand, some studies have shown that the decreased photosynthesis could be attributed to the perturbations of biochemical processes, such as decreases in ribulose bisphosphate carboxylase/oxygenase  activity and decreases in ribulose- <dig> -bisphosphate  or pi regeneration capacity  <cit> .

plants have evolved a series of mechanisms to protect the photosynthetic apparatus against damage resulting from heat stress. for example, many studies have shown that heat dissipation of excess excitation energy is an important mechanism  <cit> . when plants are subjected to heat stress, a small heat shock protein is expressed that binds to thylakoid membranes and protects psii and whole-chain electron transport  <cit> . but, when plants are subjected to more severe stress, these protective mechanisms may be inadequate. however, some growth regulators have been used to induce or enhance these protective functions  <cit> .

salicylic acid  is a common plant-produced phenolic compound that can function as a plant growth regulator. various physiological and biochemical functions of sa in plants have been reported  <cit> , and sa has received much attention due to its role in plant responses to abiotic stresses, including heat stress. sa application may improve photosynthetic capacity in spring wheat and barley under salt stress and drought stress  <cit>  and phillyrea angustifolia and wheat seedlings under drought stress  <cit> . but, relatively little is yet known about sa-related mechanisms that alleviate the decline of photosynthesis in these studies. in addition, exogenous application of sa or acetylsalicylate has been shown to enhance thermotolerance in tobacco and arabidopsis  <cit> . wang and li  <cit>  reported that spraying with a  <dig>  mm solution of sa decreased thiobarbituric acid-reactive substances and relative electrolyte leakage in young grape leaves under heat stress, indicating that sa can induce intrinsic heat tolerance in grapevines. dat et al.  <cit>  showed that thermotolerance  of mustard  seedlings could be obtained by sa treatment. lopez-delgado et al.  <cit>  reported that thermotolerance  can be induced in potato microplant tissues by treatment with acetylsalicylic acid, and wang et al.  <cit>  reported that sa treatment can maintain at higher pn in grape leaves under heat stress. there are, however, very few reports on how sa affects the photochemical aspects of psii in plants under heat stress, such as energy absorption, utilization, and dissipation of excess energy.

worldwide, grape has become one of the most productive and important specialty crops. in many production regions, the maximum midday air temperature can reach more than 40°c, which is especially critical at veraison when the berries are rapidly accumulating photosynthates. climate change may produce more frequent high temperature conditions close to the current northern limit of grape cultivation  <cit> . extreme temperatures may endanger berry quality and economic returns  <cit> . wang and li  <cit>  have previously reported that sa alleviates heat damage of plants by up-regulating the antioxidant system. here, in the present experiment, we investigated the effect of sa on photosynthesis of grape leaves before, during and after heat stress.

RESULTS
net photosynthesis rate , substomatal co <dig> concentration  and stomatal conductance 
at normal growth temperature, spraying sa did not induce significant  changes in pn, ci and gs in the grapevines . when these plants were heat stressed at 43°c for  <dig> h, pn and gssharply declined while ci abruptly rose; however, the sa-treated plants had significantly higher pn values than the controls . there was no significant difference in ci between sa-treated and control plants in normal growth conditions. during recovery, pn and gs of heat treated plants increased and ci steeply decreased . pn, ci and gs of these plants then gradually increased, and the sa-treated plants had higher pn than the control plants. however, no significant differences were found in pn, ci and gs between sa and control plants on day  <dig> .

donor side, reaction centre and acceptor side of psii
in general, a typical polyphasic rise of fluorescence transients determined by a handy plant efficiency analyzer  includes phases o, j, i and p. it has been shown that heat stress can induce a rapid rise in these polyphasic fluorescence transients. this rapid rise, occurring at around  <dig> μs, has been labeled as k, and is the fastest phase observed in the ojip transient which, consequently, becomes an okjip transient  <cit> . it has also been shown that phase k is caused by an inhibition of electron transfer to the secondary electron donor of psii, yz, which is due to a damaged oxygen evolving complex . the amplitude of step k can therefore be used as a specific indicator of damage to the oec  <cit> . fig.  <dig> shows the changes in amplitude in the k step expressed as the ratio wk. sa spraying did not result in obvious changes of wk in grape leaves under normal temperature. when control and sa-sprayed plants were stressed by heat, wk of both went up quickly, and similarly. during recovery wk of the sa treatment dropped more quickly than wk of the control. moreover, wk of the sa treatment was significantly lower than that of the control on the first day of recovery .

the density of rcqa in the control and sa-treated leaves was unchanged at normal temperature. when heat stress was imposed, density of rcqa declined rapidly. during the recovery period, density of rcqa of sa-sprayed leaves rose and nearly reached normal levels on day  <dig>  but the control rcqa recovered slowly, and reached normal levels on day  <dig> .

fig.  <dig> demonstrates  the changes in maximum quantum yield for primary photochemistry ,  the efficiency with which a trapped excitation can move an electron into the electron transport chain further than qa- , and  the quantum yield of electron transport  in grape leaves. under normal temperatures, spraying sa did not change ϕpo, ψeo and ϕeo. with heat stress, ϕpo, ψeo and ϕeo in both sa-treatedand control leaves significantly declined. during recovery, ϕpo, ψeo and ϕeo of sa-treated leaves rapidly increased, and these parameters were markedly greater in sa-treated leaves than in the controls on day  <dig> 

fig.  <dig> demonstrates the changes in approximated initial slope of the fluorescence transient  and in the redox state of psi expressed as /. at normal temperature, spraying sa did not change mo and /. after heat stress, mo and / rose rapidly. during recovery, mo and / of sa-treated leaves rapidly declined, and these parameters were markedly less in sa-treated leaves than in the control leaves on the first day of recovery .

psii efficiency and excitation energy dissipation
psii efficiency and excitation energy dissipation in grape leaves was examined by modulated fluorescence techniques. fig.  <dig> shows that sa had no effect on the actual psii efficiency , the efficiency of excitation energy capture by open psii reaction centers , the photochemical quenching coefficient , or on non-photochemical quenching  at the normal temperature. heat stress led to a sharp decrease of fv'/fm', Φpsii and qp, and a striking increase of npq irrespective of sa-treatment. with recovery, fv'/fm', Φpsii and qp gradually rose; moreover, these parameters in sa-treated leaves were always greater than those in control leaves. Φpsii values in sa-treated leaves were always significantly greater than in the control during recovery. on the first day of recovery , npq of sa treatments declined rapidly, but npq of the controls remained higher. during the rest of the recovery period, there were no obvious differences in npq between sa treatments and the controls.

rubisco activation state
fig.  <dig> demonstrates the changes in activation state of rubisco  in grape leaves. at normal temperatures, spraying sa did not change the ratio. in response to the heat stress, the ratio declined rapidly; however, sa-treated plants had a greater rubisco activation state than the controls. during the recovery period, the rubisco activation state of sa-treated leaves became similar to that of the non-stressed controls.

hsp  <dig> in the chloroplast
hsp <dig> is found only in the chloroplast, and a  <dig> kda peptide was in the grape leaves  in both sa-pretreated and control leaves. sa did not significantly  change the immune signal of hsp <dig> before heat stress. when sa-pretreated and control leaves were stressed, they both showed higher levels of the immune signal. however, during recovery, hsp <dig> levels in the sa-pretreatment remained high until the end of the experiment while those in the control decreased below pre-stress levels.

discussion
in this experiment, the pn of plants sprayed with h2o and maintained at normal temperatures was  <dig>  ±  <dig>  μmol m- <dig> s- <dig> at 14: <dig> h on day  <dig> of the experiment, significantly  higher than the pn of heat stressed plants sprayed with h2o or sa . therefore, the decrease of pn of sa-treated and control leaves under heat stress from 9: <dig> to 14: <dig> h on day  <dig> was not due to a diurnal change in photosynthesis, but instead due to heat stress. sa did not alter pn significantly in plants maintained at the normal growth temperature, but it mitigated the decrease in pn under heat stress and promoted the increase in pn during recovery . under heat stress, change of ci was opposite to that of pn in the control and sa-treated leaves , indicating that the decrease of pn under heat stress was due to non-stomatal factors. during recovery, the strong decrease in ci in control heat stressed plants  can be caused by the heat induced closing of stomata . therefore, gs may have been a main constraint to pn for control plants at this time. but during the following recovery period, relative lower pn for control plants was not accompanied by lower ci and gs. sa treated leaves showed bigger pn, ci and gs after the first recovery day . these results may be related to electron transport and energy distribution. this can be seen by the changes in psii parameters .

psii is often considered the most heat-sensitive component of the photochemistry, and the oxygen-evolving complex within the psii is very sensitive to heat stress  <cit> . obviously, an increase in heat resistance of the oxygen-evolving complex would help increase the thermotolerance of psii. chlorophyll fluorescence parameters have been used to detect and quantify heat stress induced changes in psii  <cit> , and appearance of a k-step in the ojip polyphasic fluorescence transient can be used as a specific indicator of injury to the oxygen-evolving complex  <cit> . in this study, we took advantage of the appearance of a k-step in the ojip polyphasic fluoroscence transient to examine if sa-induced protection or improvement to psii during heat stress and the recovery was related to the oxygen-evolving complex. wk in both control and sa treatments significantly increased when these plants were exposed to heat stress, but wk in the sa- treated plants dropped quickly while wk of the controls dropped slowly during recovery . therefore, the above hypothesis is supported by the data.

the psii reaction center is also one of the sites damaged by heat stress  <cit> . our results showed that the increased thermostability of psii induced by sa treatment was partly associated with an increase in the thermostability of the psii center. it was also observed that the density of qa- reducing psii reaction centers in sa-treated plants increased more rapidly than in the controls during recovery from heat stress . this was also confirmed by a quicker increase in sa-treated plants in qp  which can represent the fraction of open psii reaction centers  <cit> . the results support the hypothesis that sa-induced protection of psii during heat stress and the recovery was involved in several aspects of psii function, such as the o2-evolving complex and the psii reaction center.

in these experiments, the much lower ψeo and ϕeo showed that the activity of the electron transport beyond qa was inhibited in heat stressed grape leaves . the results indicated that heat stress also damaged the acceptor side of psii. in addition, ψeo and ϕeo of sa-treated leaves increased more rapidly than that of the control leaves during recovery, indicating that sa can protect the acceptor side of psii. in addition, the change in the ratio of / may suggest that sa also protected psi, allowing more rapid recovery from heat stress .

efficiency of psii under steady-state irradiance  is the product of qp and the efficiency of excitation capture fv'/fm' by open psii reaction centers under non-photorespiratory conditions. under heat stress, sa-treated and control leaves had much lower Φpsii , and had greater thermal dissipation of excitation energy as measured by increased npq . with the recovery from heat stress, Φpsii of sa-treated and control plants gradually increased, and this was accompanied by increases in fv'/fm' and qp, and a rapid decline of npq in sa-treatment. however, npq of control plants slowly declined. in addition, pn of sa-treated plants was greater than that of the control plants. this indicated that during recovery sa-treated plants do not need to dissipate much energy as heat, but instead are able to convert more energy into electron transport.

inhibition of photosynthesis by heat stress has long been attributed to an impairment of electron transport  <cit> . however, other studies support the idea that the initial site of inhibition is associated with a calvin cycle reaction, specifically the inactivation of rubisco  <cit> . measurements of the activation state of rubisco in leaves, determined from the ratio of initial extractable activity to the activity after incubation under conditions that fully carbamylate the enzyme, show that the activation state of rubisco decreases when net photosynthesis is inhibited by heat stress  <cit> . here, under heat stress ribisco activation state was greater in sa treated leaves than in the controls , indicating that sa may alleviate rubisco inactiviation under heat stress. however, sa treatment did nothing to improve the rate of recovery of the rubisco activation state.

evidence suggests that the small chloroplast heat-shock protein  is involved in plant thermotolerance, and protects the thermolabile ps ii and whole-chain electron transport  <cit> . hsps including hsp <dig> have a high capacity to bind, stabilize and prevent protein aggregation, and help them regain normal function following stress  <cit> . in this study, hsp  <dig> levels increased in both sa-treated and control leaves during heat stress . under severe heat stress, many proteins in the chloroplast are subject to denaturation, and hsps function as molecular chaperones to provide protection. when stressed plants recover, hsps are no longer made, and further degraded  <cit> ; but, here in controls the levels of hsp <dig> decreased during the recovery to below initial levels . similarly, park et al  <cit>  also reported that hsp <dig> levels in creeping bentgrass during recovery were lower than initially. however, sa treatment here maintained hsp <dig> at high levels in the recovery period. these data indicate that sa may alleviate rubisco deactivation as well as enhance psii recovery through hsp <dig> 

CONCLUSIONS
sa pretreatment did not significantly influence photosynthesis of grape leaves at normal growth temperatures. however, sa pretreatment alleviated the decrease of pn under heat stress, apparently in part through maintaining a higher rubisco activation state and greater psii efficiency. sa also accelerated the increase of pn mainly through the more rapid recovery of psii function after heat stress. these sa effects may be related to higher levels of hsp <dig>  other mechanisms by which sa protects photosynthesis in grape leaves are still to be determined.

