BACKGROUND
advances in sequencing technologies have equipped researchers with the ability to sequence collective genomes of entire microbial communities, commonly referred to as metagenomics, in an inexpensive and high-throughput manner. microbes are omnipresent within the human body and environments across the world. as such, characterizing and understanding their roles is crucial for improving human health and the environment. metagenomics provides an unbiased view of the diversity and biological potential of microbial communities  <cit>  and analysis of community samples from several different microbial environments has provided some key insights into the understandings of these microbial communities. some of the important metagenomic endeavours have radically transformed our knowledge of microbial world. one of the pioneering studies, which sequenced samples from sargasso sea  <cit> , revealed more than  <dig>  million unknown genes and identified  <dig> new bacterial phylotypes. another study of sorcerer ii global ocean sampling project  <cit>  has added many new protein families to the existing protein databases and a large scale metagenomic analysis of fecal samples  <cit>  has identified and cataloged a common core of genes and gut bacteria.

one of the major challenges related to metagenomic processing is the assembly of short reads obtained from community samples. due to the lack of specific assemblers to handle metagenomes, researchers continue to use assemblers originally developed for whole genome assembly.

we have evaluated the performance of a state-of-the-art eulerian-path based sequence assembler on simulated metagenomic datasets using a read length of  <dig> base pairs , as produced by the solexa/illumina sequencing technology. the datasets were meant to reflect the different complexities of real metagenomic samples  <cit> . they included, a low complexity dataset with one dominant organism, a high complexity dataset with no dominant organism and a medium complexity dataset having a few dominant organisms. we also created a dataset containing different strains of the same organism to measure the extent of co-assembly when reads from very similar organisms are used. since the metagenomic read datasets are voluminous, we used a parallel sequence assembly algorithm  which can be deployed easily on a commodity linux cluster.

the assembled contigs were evaluated based on several quality measures for contig length and assembly accuracy. to improve the quality of the contigs, we clustered the results of different parameter runs of the assembler. we used efficient local alignment to quickly and accurately map the assembled contigs to the input source genomes. we also used a short read mapping algorithm to align the input reads to the assembled contigs to compute the homogeneity of the assembled contigs using entropy as a metric. finally, we assessed the coverage of the source genomes by the produced contigs.

short-read assembly of metagenomes performed better than our initial expectation in some aspects such as accuracy of the contigs and coverage of the source genomes. however, fragmentation of the contigs was more severe in metagenomic datasets than in the isolate assemblies. the assembly of a smaller dataset consisting of reads from  <dig> ecoli strains showed that the contigs obtainable through co-assembly of related strains are considerably shorter than those generated using isolate assemblies. we also observed that by clustering results from assembly runs for different k-mer size values of de bruijn graph, we were able to obtain a greater number of longer contigs .

metagenomics overview
traditionally, microbial genomics has relied primarily on pure cultures of microbes for sequencing. in recent years, researchers have developed a new approach known as metagenomics wherein the genetic material is obtained by directly sequencing the complex microbial communities without prior culturing. this presents an unbiased view of the diversity and biological potential of these communities  <cit> .

the heterogeneous nature of the genetic material contained in metagenomic samples presents significant challenges for metagenomic assembly and analysis. metagenomic samples have genomic content from many organisms which can not be easily separated. the genetic material of individual organisms in these samples is roughly proportional to the abundance of these organisms in the communities, which varies significantly. the dominant organisms are over-represented whereas the organism at low levels of abundance are not sequenced at sufficient depth. also, the polymorphism between related members of the communities may lead to incorrect estimation of the repeat structures  <cit> .

phylogenetic classification of metagenomic reads is problem closely related to assembly. ideally if the reads could be separated by their respective genomes the the problem of assembling them would be much more simple. however, segregation of reads in this manner is difficult to perform and several supervised and unsupervised approaches have been developed to address this problem. some notable ones include phymm and phymmbl  <cit>  which uses interpolated markov models, megan  <cit>  <cit>  which classifies sequences based on lowest common ancestor from sequence similarity search using blast and phylopythia  <cit> , a multiclass support vector based classifier using oligonucleotide frequencies. unsupervised methods for classifying reads are sometimes also referred to as clustering or binning methods  <cit>  <cit> . unsupervised methods have an advantage over the supervised methods because the known sequences only represent a minority of the estimated microbial diversity  <cit> . the major drawback of classification and binning methods is that they are reliable only for relatively long sequences, of size greater than  <dig> bp. in addition to binning and assembly, several other tools have been developed for gene prediction  <cit>  <cit>  and comparative analysis of metagenomic datasets  <cit>  <cit> . we refer the reader to  <cit>  for a review of computational challenges and available tools for metagenomics.

next generation sequencing and short read assembly
sanger’s method  <cit>  has been the dominant sequencing platform for several decades. in recent years, the emergence of the so called “next generation sequencing”   <cit>  technologies has radically transformed dna sequencing domain. these new technologies are amenable to parallel sequencing and yield a much higher throughput at significantly lower cost per base compared to sanger’s method. the compromise with ngs is shorter read length which seems to be getting better gradually. ngs is particularly suited for metagenomic applications because it obviates the need for clonal culturing and the lower per base cost allows the genomes to be sequenced at much greater depth than feasible through sanger-based methods. the conventional overlap layout consensus  strategy has been one of the most successful paradigms for assembling long sanger-based reads. however, in the recent years an alternative method inspired by the sequencing by hybridization and based on eulerian tour of de bruijn graphs has gained prominence. some of the assemblers using this eulerian-based approach include euler  <cit> , velvet  <cit> , abyss  <cit>  and allpaths  <cit> .

related work
to study the extent of errors in metagenomic assemblies in comparison to single genome assembly, we performed a set of experiments on simulated datasets. although, simulated datasets do not completely capture the characteristics of real metagenomes  <cit> , simulation studies do provide some insight into the feasibility of assembly of short read metagenomic samples. in our current work, we have estimated the extent of problems associated with the assembly of short reads obtained from next generation sequencing solexa platform for metagenomic samples. a similar study by mavromatis et al.  <cit>  produced three simulated metagenomic datasets representing microbial communities of different complexities using reads obtained from sanger-based sequencing. they used these datasets for benchmarking various metagenomic processing methods. one of the focuses of their study was estimating the chimericity in assembling reads obtained from sangers sequencing using overlap-layout-consensus  based assemblers commonly used for whole genome assembly. another simulation study by wommack et al.  <cit>  evaluated simulated ngs short reads from different metagenomic samples for taxonomic and functional annotation. as more and more metagenomic projects have started to tap into the potential of ngs, we felt the need for a similar simulation study to evaluate short read assemblers. the work of pop  <cit>  provides a good overview of olc and eulerian assembly paradigms and addresses some of the challenges associated with short read assembly. since the next generation sequencing allows the samples to be sequenced at a greater depth, we used considerably larger datasets. several researchers have studied the performance of ngs short reads and paired-end short reads for individual genome assembly  <cit> . recently, kingsford et al.  <cit>  performed a theoretical analysis of eulerian-path based approaches to survey the repeat structure of individual prokaryotic genomes.

RESULTS
we have evaluated metagenomic assemblies based on the accuracy of the generated contigs using alignment-based similarity to the source genomes, contig length statistics, and the proportions of the source genomes recovered by the contigs. as the k-mer size of de bruijn graph plays a crucial role in abyss’s assembly, we have also tried to assess the impact of k-mer size on metagenomic assemblies by comparing the contigs produced from different runs of the k-mer parameter. we also provide comparisons of metagenomics assemblies to the isolate assemblies of the constituent genomes.

impact of de bruijn graph k-mer size on contig length
simlc-36m, simmc-36m, simhc-36m are the results for the low, medium and high complexity datasets with  <dig> million reads, respectively. ecolistrains-10m are the results for the co-assembly strain dataset with  <dig> million reads. c shows the clustering results after pooling contigs obtained from running abyss with k ranging from  <dig> to  <dig>  c- <dig> shows the clustering results after excluding the contigs obtained by running abyss for k =  <dig> 

comparison of metagenomic assembly to isolate assembly
as a benchmark for our metagenomic assemblies we separated the reads by their source sequence and performed isolate assemblies. we assembled the reads from each individual sequence separately and combined the final contigs from all the source sequences. we performed the isolate assemblies with different values of k and pooled the results using the clustering algorithm. figure  <dig>  compares the length distribution of clustered results form metagenomic and isolate assemblies. the simhc dataset produced shorter contigs in both isolate as well as metagenomic assemblies. amongst the simlc and simhc datasets, the performance of simlc was closer to the isolate assemblies, whereas, the simmc metagenomic assembly was far poorer in comparison to its isolated assembly.

contig alignment accuracy
even assemblies of isolate genomes are not completely error free. in the case of metagenomes, the presence of multiple genomes at different coverage depths causes additional problem and the contigs are expected to have more mis-assemblies compared to the contigs from isolate genome assemblies. to assess the accuracy of the assembly we aligned the contigs back to the source genomes. table  <dig> reports the results for the different datasets. a threshold accuracy of 95% was used for considering a contig accurate. details of alignment methods and accuracy calculations are provided in the methods section. the assembly accuracy decreased as the k-mer size was decreased and was worst for all datasets at k= <dig>  further, the accuracy of the clustered contigs was lowest, due to the accumulation of errors from all the contig sets. this is due to our clustering approach, which tries to retain all the unique sequences. an alternative clustering strategy could be designed that takes the consensus of contigs obtained from different runs. this strategy would improve the accuracy of the results while reducing the total number of bases recovered.

contig homogeneity
in an ideal case of metagenomic assembly, all the reads forming a contig would come from the same source sequence. in metagenomes the reads from different sources may be co-assembled, resulting in chimeric assemblies. therefore, to estimate the degree of chimericity, we evaluated the homogeneity of contigs using their read composition. essentially, greater the number of sources from which a contig is assembled, the higher its entropy will be. the methods section describes the alignment of reads to the assembled contigs and entropy calculations.

coverage of the source sequences
escherichia strains co-assembly
since the collection of dna sequences for metagenomic experiments does not involve cloning, the reads could come from strains which are highly similar, with very little sequence variation. in this case, even though the effective read coverage of the species is high, due to minor differences in the sequences of the strains, the quality of assembly might not be as good as an isolate genome assembly. to evaluate the performance of co-assembly of reads from related strains, we created the ecolistrains dataset consisting of  <dig> million reads from  <dig> strains of escherichia coli. for comparing the assembly performance, we created another dataset with the same number of reads from a single strain, e.coli strain  <dig> , and assembled it using the different k-mer size values used for assembly of the strains dataset. for isolate assembly, k= <dig> and  <dig> produced the longest contigs. figure  <dig> shows a comparison of isolated and metagenomic strains datasets for k= <dig> and  <dig>  the contigs in metagenomic assembly are considerably shorter than the isolate assembly, suggesting a severe degradation in assembly quality resulting from the presence of multiple strains. figure  <dig> shows the source coverage ratio of the constituent strains for different k-mer size values. a relatively high percentage of the source sequences was recovered by the contigs. table  <dig> provides some additional assembly statistics for ecolistrains dataset. the ecolistrains dataset exhibited some of the same general trends as the simlc, simmc, and simhc datasets. but, the variations in the total number of bases and contig accuracies were less pronounced.

paired ended assembly
to evaluate the improvement in assembly quality with mate-pairs information we generated and assembled datasets similar to simhc, simlc and simmc with paired-ended reads of insert length  <dig> bases. however we observed that only a small fraction  of the contigs being produced were using mate pairs information. in addition, most of these contigs were assembled with gaps. for our analysis we broke those contigs at the gaps and treated them as separate contigs. therefore, because to these two factors, we did not observe a significant improvement in the assembly quality of paired ended reads in metagenomic samples.

CONCLUSIONS
in this paper we have presented the results of assembly and analysis of some simulated metagenomic datasets. short-read assembly of metagenomes performed better than our initial expectations in some aspects such as accuracy of the contigs and coverage of the source genomes. although a large fraction of the contigs were assembled accurately, fragmentation of the contigs was more severe in metagenomic datasets when compared to the isolate assemblies. further, assembling the high complexity dataset was more difficult in comparison to the the low complexity dataset as well as the medium complexity datasets. we also observed that abyss was able to utilize the mate pairs information to assemble only a small fraction of the contig with gaps. therefore, using mate-pairs did not improve the results significantly in our case. the assembly of a smaller dataset consisting of reads from  <dig> ecoli strains showed that the contigs obtainable through co-assembly of related strains are considerably shorter than those generated using isolate assemblies.

we also observed that by simple clustering of the results from various assembly runs  we were able to obtain a greater number of longer contigs, as optimal contigs are distributed across the k-mer space. however, due to our simple approach towards clustering which retains all unique contigs, most mis-assembled contigs made their way into the clustered results, increasing their error rate. further improvements in clustering technique may be required to improve the quality of the clustered results.

