BACKGROUND
our understanding of the basic mechanisms underlying most biological processes has been transformed by the systematic application of mutational analysis. traditionally, forward genetics, driven by the identification of mutant phenotypes, has been the most widely used approach. on the other hand, genome sequencing projects over the past few decades have identified numerous genes in key species, and the completion of these sequences produced a situation in which most of the genes are known, but most of their phenotypes are obscure. in this situation, reverse genetics, which provides targeted inactivation of genes identified by sequence analysis followed by phenotype analysis of the mutant, has become an important tool for many biologists. in mice, reverse genetics is usually carried out using homologous recombination in embryonic stem cells, which allow a precise mutation to be constructed in nearly any gene. however, embryonic stem cells are only available in a limited number of organisms. thus, a general method that is applicable to many organisms would be in great demand, and several approaches have been tried.

one of these approaches is tilling . tilling is a reverse-genetic strategy that combines random chemical mutagenesis with high-throughput discovery of the induced mutations in target genes. the method is general and, following its original application to the model plant arabidopsis thaliana  <cit> , has been applied to a variety of plant and animal species including maize, lotus, barley, wheat, drosophila, zebrafish, and medaka  <cit> . the first step in tilling is chemical mutagenesis. for mutagenesis in animals, males are mutagenized using n-ethyl-n-nitrosourea  and then used to generate a large population of f <dig> animals that consequently harbor many random heterozygous mutations in their genomes. next, the dna from these animals is analyzed for mutations in a specific gene of interest. once a mutation is identified, homozygous mutant animals can be obtained by crossing progeny from heterozygous f <dig> matings.

among the vertebrates, small laboratory fish are suitable for the study of gene function due to their ease of handling, large numbers of progeny per generation, and, in particular, their translucent embryos. in many species, embryos develop outside the mother's body, enabling easy visual inspection and manipulation of their tissues and cells. one such fish is the zebrafish, danio rerio, which is the most widely used laboratory fish. the success of forward genetics in the past two decades has established the zebrafish as the premier vertebrate for the study of gene function. medaka, oryzias latipes, is another small laboratory fish that has been used as an experimental model animal since the 1920s. medaka has a small genome size  and is phylogenetically distinct from zebrafish, having diverged about  <dig> million years ago  <cit> , making it useful for comparisons of conserved and divergent gene function in teleost evolution. for these reasons, both the zebrafish and medaka are currently widely used in comparative mutagenesis, carcinogenesis, and genomic instability studies. shimada and shima  <cit>  showed that the mutation response of the medaka male germ cell is comparable to that of the mouse, and therefore medaka could serve as a vertebrate model system of dna damage response in germ cells.

all cells have elaborate mechanisms to protect their genomes. dna can be damaged by reactive metabolic byproducts and by environmental mutagens, and the response to dna damage and its repair are crucial for cell viability and disease prevention. the dna-damage response is a signal-transduction pathway that coordinates cell-cycle transitions, dna replication, dna repair, and apoptosis  <cit> . the major regulators of the dna-damage response are two protein kinases, ataxia-telangiectasia mutated  and atm and rad3-related   <cit> . these two large kinases have significant sequence homology and play important roles in the initiation of cell cycle checkpoints by targeting an overlapping set of substrates that promote cell-cycle arrest and dna repair  <cit> . another key player that mediates cell cycle checkpoints is the tumor suppressor p <dig>  which is activated and stabilized by atm and serves as a transcription factor for the downstream cell cycle regulator  <cit> . the p <dig> pathway depends on the transcription of its downstream genes and its activity is therefore delayed after dna damage. thus, its role lies in the maintenance of the cell cycle checkpoint.

the most widely used reverse genetics' tool in zebrafish and medaka is undoubtedly morpholinos, but they are not used as a substitute for mutations because they can only be used in transient methods and for early developmental stages. recently, tilling was applied to zebrafish, and several mutants have been described  <cit> . the success of this reverse genetics approach in zebrafish allowed us to apply tilling to medaka. once males have been mutagenizaed with enu, the tilling procedure can be divided into two steps, construction of a library and screening of the library. the library consists of pair sets of genomic dna and frozen sperm of f <dig> offspring from each enu-mutagenized male. we established a medaka tilling library from  <dig> f <dig> male fish derived from enu-mutagenized g <dig>  <cit> .

in the next screening step, two methods are widely used for the detection of mutations, direct sequencing  <cit>  and celi nuclease-mediated screening for heteroduplex formation with wild-type and mutant alleles  <cit> . both methods are effective; however, costs are substantial and turnaround time is relatively long. these disadvantages have resulted in the development of alternative methods that are more cost effective, faster, and easier to perform. the high resolution melting  analysis is a recently developed, promising technology used for the detection of variations in dna  <cit> . it is an in-tube method that can be performed in a fast, cheap, and robust manner. the thermal stability of a dna fragment is determined by its base sequence. when the dna fragment contains an altered sequence, the duplex stability is changed, leading to different melting behavior, which can be identified with hrm analysis. during hrm analysis, melting curves are produced using intercalating dna dyes that fluoresce in the presence of double-stranded dna and a specialized instrument designed to monitor fluorescence during heating  <cit> . when the temperature increases, the dna-intercalating dye is released from the dna and the fluorescence decreases. this process produces a characteristic melting profile that can be monitored with precision. changes in the sequence within the dna fragment, as in snps or mutations, alter the melting profile. the hrm assay has successfully been used to detect point mutations in ethyl methanesulfonate-mutated plant populations  <cit> .

in the present study, we developed hrm assays to evaluate the effectiveness of this methodology for screening enu-induced mutations in the tilling library. we first used the hrm assay to screen mutations in exons  <dig> and  <dig> of the p <dig> gene because the same library was previously screened with the direct sequencing method  <cit> , enabling comparison of the two methods. we detected mutations in exons  <dig> and  <dig> of p <dig> with efficiency equivalent to that of the direct sequencing method. then we screened for mutations in the atr and atm genes. we identified  <dig> mutations in atr and  <dig> in atm, including one nonsense mutation in each gene. the phenotypes of these nonsense mutants confirmed their loss-of-function nature. the results demonstrate the utility of the hrm assay for mutant screening using tilling.

RESULTS
screening of mutations in p <dig> gene
to evaluate whether the hrm assay is applicable to the screening of a tilling library, we first used it to screen in exons  <dig> and  <dig> of the p <dig> gene  and compared the results with those obtained previously by screening the same library with direct sequencing  <cit> . the p <dig> hrm assay yielded  <dig> hrm-positive samples that displayed aberrant melting curves. to magnify the changes in the contour of the melting curve, subtraction plots are generated from the melting curve by subtracting the test curve from that of the wild type . examples of the melting curves and subtraction plots are shown in figs. 1b and 1c, respectively. subsequent sequencing of the positive samples revealed mutations  that were correctly identified by the hrm assay except for three mutations, n220d, e241x, and a splicing site mutation . of these, e241x and the splicing site mutation were located close to the end of the primer used for pcr amplification . a previous report demonstrated that the sensitivity  of hrm scanning does not depend on the position of the mutation within the pcr product when the mutations are positioned more than  <dig> bp from each end  <cit> , but our result shows a lower sensitivity for mutations located near the end of the pcr products. interestingly, the hrm assay identified two additional mutations, an intronic mutation and s222x, which were not identified by the previous sequencing method. the sensitivity of the hrm assay was 62% , which is considerably lower than the 75%  for the sequencing. however, when the pcr primers were designed far enough from each end of the target exon, the sensitivity improved to 83% , which is adequate for screening the tilling library.

*x indicates a stop codon.

screening of mutations in atr and atm genes
we next performed the hrm assay to screen for mutations in the atr and atm genes for each of  <dig> different amplicons covering  <dig> and  <dig> exons, respectively . after subsequent sequencing of hrm-positive pcr amplicons, we identified  <dig> independent mutations in atr and  <dig> in atm . figs.  <dig> and  <dig> show melting curves and subtraction plots from the hrm assay of pcr amplicons with amino-acid-substitution-type mutations. we retrieved highly likely loss-of-function mutations for each gene by screening for nonsense mutations, and found point mutations in exon  <dig> of atr and in exon  <dig> of atm that created premature stop codons in the proteins . these two exons were well conserved when compared with the corresponding exons of mammals and teleost atr or atm genes . to demonstrate their loss-of-function nature, heterozygotes obtained by artificial insemination were backcrossed twice to wild-type fish, and then homozygous mutants for each mutation were established by mutual crossing of the heterozygotes.

atr is required for cellular proliferation
in mice, atr is essential for early embryonic development, and atr-/- embryos die in early developmental stages  <cit> . to test whether atr is also essential for development in medaka, we generated homozygous atr-deficient fishes by intercrossing atr+/s1339x fishes and determined their viability. surprisingly, atrs1339x/s1339x embryos developed and hatched successfully. no apparent abnormality was observed under the stereomicroscope in the atrs1339x/s1339x embryo during development. the hatched fry survived at rates similar to the wild-type and atr+/s1339x fishes for  <dig> days after fertilization; however, they subsequently started to die gradually, and none of the atrs1339x/s1339x mutants was as alive at day  <dig> after fertilization . the growth of the hatched atrs1339x/s1339x fry was slightly poorer than that of the wild type ; this was associated with a high rate of generalized edema, followed by death on days 20- <dig>  these results indicate that atrs1339x mutation produces milder phenotype in medaka than in mice. however, we also have to consider possible involvement of undetected enu-induced mutations in the phenotype observed for atrs1339x/s1339x mutant. we cannot exclude possibility that undetected enu-induced mutations still remain after several backcrossing to wild type fish and the remaining mutation affect the phenotype.

these viable fry were used to verify the knockout phenotype. we could not confirm the knockout phenotype at the protein level in the atrs1339x/s1339x, due to the lack of an appropriate anti-atr antibody that recognizes the medaka protein. however, we were able to show the knockout phenotype by quantitative pcr. quantitative pcr was carried out using two sets of pcr primers; each was designed to amplify the 5' or 3' region of the atr transcript. both primer sets yielded the same results. the atr transcript levels decreased to ~70% of the wild-type for heterozygous mutants and ~40% for homozygous mutants, presumably due to nonsense-mediated decay of the transcript containing the premature stop codon . finally, we confirmed the nonsense mutation in the transcript by sequencing the cdna from the homozygous mutant .

the atms444x mutant is sensitive to radiation, but partially infertile
patients with the recessive disease ataxia telangiectasia and atm-deficient mice are sensitive to ionizing radiation  <cit> . to determine the radiosensitivity of the atms444x/s444x mutant, we established culture cell lines from atm+/+, atm+/s444x, or atms444x/s444x embryos and determined their radiosensitivities by their ability to form colonies. as expected, atms444x/s444x cells displayed increased sensitivity to x-rays, as manifested by a profound fall in survival rate with increased exposure dose .

another apparent phenotype of atm-deficient mice is infertility due to severe disruption of gametogenesis in both males and females  <cit> . to determine the fertility of fish homozygous for the atm disruption, we mated mutant and wild-type fish. however, surprisingly, both male and female atms444x/s444x fish were only partially infertile. when mated with wild-type males, 25% of atms444x/s444x females spawned eggs. the number of spawned eggs was normal and almost all the fertilized eggs developed normally. in contrast, when mated with wild-type females, 57% of atms444x/s444x males were able to fertilize the eggs, but the fertilization rate was extremely low compared with the wild type. on average, the fertilization rate of atms444x/s444x males was  <dig> % versus  <dig> % in the wild-type male. histological examination of ovaries from wild-type adult females showed oocytes at various phases of development . in contrast, ovaries of infertile mutants contained no mature oocytes and disorganized interstitial cells , whereas those from the fertile mutant fish showed normally developed oocytes, similar to the wild type . interestingly, ovaries of the infertile mutant seemed to have hyperplastic germ cell-clusters among the disorganized interstitial cells. the cell-clusters resembled cysts formed by several rounds of pre-meiotic divisions in normal development  <cit> . differences in testicular structure were also observed between the wild type and mutants . the normal testicular architecture of the wild type showed the presence of cells in all stages of spermatogenesis ). the testes of the infertile mutants contained spermatogonia and spermatocytes, but not spermatids or sperm . the testes of fertile mutant fish contained cells in all stages of spermatogenesis, but the spermatids and sperm were abnormal in size; in the testes of the wild-type fish all spermatids and sperm were quite uniform in size, but they varied in size in the testes of the mutant fish . these results suggest the presence of a unique damage response mechanism in medaka. however, as in the case of the atrs1339x/s1339x mutant, we also have to consider possible involvement of undetected enu-induced mutations in the phenotype observed for atms444x/s444x mutant. we cannot exclude possibility that undetected enu-induced mutations still remain after several backcrossing to wild type fish and the remaining mutation affect the phenotype.

we next examined the knockout phenotype of atms444x/s444x by quantitative pcr. interestingly, the 5' and 3' pcr primer set yielded different quantitative values. the level of atm transcript determined by quantitative pcr using the 3' primer set was ~66% of the wild-type in heterozygous mutants and ~27% in homozygous mutants . the decrease was even more pronounced when the 5' pcr primer was used: ~50% of wild type in heterozygous mutants and ~7% in homozygous mutants . furthermore, the s444x mutant allele was not detected in the cdna obtained from atm+/s444x cells, as confirmed by sequencing, although both s444x and s <dig> wild alleles were detected in the genomic dna . these results suggest that transcripts containing the s444x mutation remain at very low levels in atms444x/s444x cells due to extensive decay of the transcript containing the premature stop codon, but atm transcripts containing the 3' region still remain at substantial levels in the same cells. in fact, amplification of the cdna fragment containing the s446x mutation  of atms444x/s444x cells was very difficult. only after three repeated nested pcrs we were able to obtain sufficient pcr product for sequencing . one possible explanation for the difference between the 5' and 3' quantitative pcr is the presence of a short transcript that lacks the n-terminal coding region involving the s <dig> coding site but contains the 3' atm coding region. to test this possibility and to determine which region of the atm transcript is present in atms444x/s444x cells, we amplified several exons in the atm gene by rt-pcr using cdna from the wild-type, heterozygous, and homozygous mutant cells. we successfully amplified cdna fragments containing exons 14- <dig>  exons 19- <dig>  and exons 55- <dig> in cdna from all type of cells, whereas cdna fragments containing exons 7- <dig> and exons 12- <dig> could not be amplified in cdna from atms444x/s444x cells, suggesting the presence of a short transcript that starts from the region around exon 12- <dig> . consistent with this notion, we found a full-length-cdna clone  starting from exon  <dig> by searching a full-length-cdna database . the starting sequence in the cdna was also confirmed by 5' race . taken together, these results indicate the existence of two atm transcript variants in medaka cells. these variants encode a longer isoform  <dig> and a shorter isoform  <dig> that has a truncated n-terminus compared to isoform  <dig> 

discussion
the critical step in the tilling procedure is the screening for mutations, but to successfully identify mutations in the target genes, it is necessary to have an efficient mutation discovery system. the tilling library is constructed from f1s derived from chemical mutagen-treated g0s, and thus the mutations induced in each f <dig> are heterozygous; therefore, methods that quickly distinguish heteroduplex dna from the homoduplex counterpart can be applied to the discovery of these mutations. hrm was recently introduced as a screening method for mutation detection and reported to be useful for heteroduplex detection  <cit> . it is an in-tube method that can be performed in a fast, cheap, and robust manner. to evaluate the hrm assay as an alternative mutation screening method for tilling, in this report we used the hrm assay to screen a total of  <dig>  mb in a medaka tilling library. we identified  <dig> independent mutations  and found that the average mutation frequency of the library was  <dig> mutation per  <dig> kb. the value is slightly higher than that obtained by direct sequencing the same library;  <dig> mutation per  <dig> kb  <cit> . the higher rate of mutation detection by the hrm assay relative to that by the direct sequencing method is unexpected because direct sequencing is the gold standard for identifying mutations and thus would be expected to detect mutations more efficiently than any other method. misclassification of snps by the hrm assay might be the reason for the discrepancy. the genomic dna library used contains a substantial level of snps. when the same base change was identified more than twice, it was classified not as a mutation but as a snp . in the hrm assay, screening was carried out using 96-well pcr plates. melting curve analysis was performed on each plate, but comparison between plates could not be performed. if one type of snp appeared only once in one plate and appeared more than twice in other plates, the former was misclassified as a mutation and confirmed by sequencing, whereas the latter were correctly classified as snps and not subjected to checking by sequencing. however, misclassification could not have been common because the mutation detection rate was only slightly higher in the hrm assay than in the direct sequencing method. despite this issue of classification, our results demonstrate the utility of the hrm assay for the screening of mutations in the tilling library.

in this report, we used the hrm assay to identify medaka mutants producing truncated forms of the atm or atr proteins, atms444x and atrs1339x, respectively. atm and atr orchestrate overlapping dna damage responses to different forms of dna strand discontinuities. however, knockout mouse models have also suggested that atr, in contrast to atm, is essential for viability, and that atr-null mice die at an early embryonic stage  <cit> . interestingly, atrs1339x/s1339x medaka can continue normal development during embryogenesis and hatch successfully, but the hatched fry all die before day  <dig> postfertilization. we tried to establish a culture cell line from atrs1339x/s1339x embryos, but the cells died within a few weeks and no cell line was obtained , a finding similar to results with cells from atr-null mice  <cit> . it is not clear at present why atr-deficient embryos can survive for several weeks; however, the viable atr fry provide a good model system for analyzing atr function at the organismal level.

meiosis is a specialized cell division program to generate hemizygous gametes. an important feature of meiosis is the exchange of genetic information between maternal and paternal chromatids, a process called meiotic recombination  <cit> . meiotic recombination is initiated by spo11-catalyzed meiotic dna double-strand breaks , followed by their repair using an intact homologous non-sister chromatid  <cit> . dsbs are highly hazardous for genome integrity, but meiotic cells deliberately introduce them into their genome in order to initiate homologous recombination. therefore, dsbs left unrepaired are checked by a stringent surveillance mechanism, the meiotic recombination checkpoint, which delays meiosis i until dsb repair is completed. another important genome surveillance mechanism is the dna damage checkpoint, which senses dsbs that arise at unpredictable locations as a consequence of dna damage during both mitosis and meiosis  <cit> . mechanistically, the meiotic recombination checkpoint is related to the dna damage checkpoint; however, many aspects of the meiotic recombination checkpoint are considerably less well understood than those of mitotic dna damage checkpoint. given the well established role of atm in dsb repair in mitosis, atm might play an important role in the signaling and processing of the programmed meiotic dsbs. in this study, we found defective meiosis in the medaka atms444x mutant. the striking difference between atm mice and the mutant fish is the fertility of the latter; the atm mice are completely infertile, whereas the mutant fish are partially infertile, and 25% of females and 57% of males remain fertile. in mice, atm deficiency results in early arrest in prophase i followed by apoptotic degeneration, which results in the complete absence of mature gametes and spermatocytes in various stages of degeneration  <cit> . similar premeiotic arrest was observed in tissue sections of the infertile mutant fish, but the spermatocytes did not show any stage of degeneration . instead, a high percentage of abnormally large spermatids and/or sperm were noted in the testes of the fertile mutants. these observations suggest that, in medaka, many cells bearing unrepaired meiotic dsbs are removed by apoptosis, but a substantial fraction proceed to completion of meiosis, resulting in the production of abnormal sperm. in fact, a similar partially sterile phenotype has been reported in arabidopsis atm mutants  <cit> , whose atm meiocytes did not appear to undergo apoptosis before the end of meiosis despite the observed chromosomal fragmentation during anaphase i and ii. the histology presented in the current report suggests that the infertility in atm-deficient medaka is possibly due to disorganized gonads in both males and females. at present, the precise role of the meiotic recombination checkpoint defect in atm medaka in causing the reproductive defects is not clear. more precise characterization of the abnormal sperm and oocytes should provide important information about the meiotic recombination checkpoint in atm mutant fish.

finally, we should emphasize again the possible involvement of undetected enu-induced mutations in the observed phenotype. the single major drawback of tilling as a method for reverse genetics is that a mutation of interest that is identified in any given f <dig> fish is only one of many heterozygous mutations in its genome. by multiplying the estimated size of medaka genome by the mutation rate detected in the present tilling genomic dna library, an estimate of the number of enu-induced mutations per f <dig> fish is ~ <dig>  more than 80% of these mutations were removed after backcrossing to wild-type fish three times, however significant levels of mutations still remain. as a result, we cannot exclude possibility that the remaining mutations affect the phenotype. most strong evidence for the direct relationship between the observed phenotype and the mutated gene is the phenotype rescue with the wild-type gene. further studies including the phenotype rescue with bac  clone, will clarify a possible involvement of these unknown mutations.

atm contains three domains that are important for its function, a fat domain, a protein kinase domain, and a fatc domain, which are positioned in the c-terminal half of the protein. in addition to these domains, several known atm substrates bind to the substrate binding site, a region near the n-terminus of the protein  <cit> . the n-terminus is a crucial region of the atm because its deletion inactivates the protein  <cit> . in this study, we demonstrated the presence of a short atm transcript variant in medaka cells that encodes an isoform  lacking the n-terminal  <dig> residues of the full-length atm protein. a similar short isoform has also been reported in human cells . these short isoforms lack the substrate binding site and thus cannot complement the radiosensitivity of atm-deficient mutants. mutations in ataxia telangiectasia patients are well characterized: over  <dig> different atm mutations have been described, and approximately 85% of the mutants reported in ataxia telangiectasia patients are predicted to truncate the protein, but the mutations are mapped uniformly over the gene, which includes the n-terminal region truncated in the short isoform  <cit> . therefore, at present we do not know the function of the short isoform, and there is no answer to why the short isoform is conserved in both human and fish. however, the medaka atms444x/s444x mutant provides an excellent model for analyzing the function of this short atm isoform.

CONCLUSIONS
in the present study we demonstrate that the hrm assay is useful for screening mutations in tilling. the present study also demonstrates that mutations in medaka atr affect viability and in atm affect fertility and radiosensitivity, similar to findings in mice and humans. however, the phenotypes of these mutants show milder effects in medaka than in mammals. on the basis of our results and those of others, we conclude that medaka is a useful model for the analysis of genome stability, and can be used to complement studies in zebrafish, mouse and human.

