BACKGROUND
the arabian peninsula possesses a unique assemblage of plant and animal species that result from the dynamic geologic history and shifting climate of this region. the flora and fauna range from localized temperate endemics occurring in the disjunct extensions of the horn of africa hotspot and the eastern afromontane hotspot  <cit>  in the southwest regions , to more broadly distributed arid-adapted clades occurring throughout much of the arabian peninsula . many large-scale biogeographic patterns for arabian taxa have been profoundly shaped by the complex tectonic history of the arabian peninsula . the tectonic activity ultimately responsible for the separation of the arabian plate from africa began approximately 30 ma, and rifting of the southern red sea occurred in the early miocene , and a connection to the neotethys sea and was completed by 23 ma  <cit> . the formation of the red sea represented a major vicariance event for taxa with formerly continuous afro-arabian distributions. the isolated arabian plate collided with the anatolian plate approximately 18–16 ma, forming the temporary gomphotherium bridge  <cit> . a more permanent land bridge was established after the arabian plate collided with eurasia approximately 15 ma  <cit> , which allowed regular faunal exchanges between north africa, the arabian peninsula, and eurasia. these land bridges also created opportunities for trans-continental dispersals using the arabian peninsula as a stepping-stone. sea levels dropped throughout the red sea around 10 ma, providing evidence for the closing of the strait of bab el mandeb and establishment of a southern land bridge between africa and arabia  <cit> . pliocene marine sediment deposits formed around  <dig>  ma, indicating this land bridge was subsequently lost, and although cyclical pleistocene land bridges related to glacial cycles have been proposed  <cit> , more recent evidence does not support their existence  <cit> . conversely, there is evidence the persian gulf was reduced to a series of freshwater lakes  <cit>  or completely waterless  <cit>  during the late pleistocene, providing a connection between the arabian peninsula and southwest asia. plio-pleistocene climate change is hypothesized to have driven speciation in the southwest montane regions of the arabian peninsula  <cit> , and is linked to aridification in the neogene  <cit> . this may explain additional biogeographic patterns, but on a much more localized scale.fig.  <dig> the arabian peninsula. a map of the arabian peninsula showing disjunct extensions of the horn of africa hotspot  and the eastern afromontane hotspot , along with pertinent seas and country borders. shape files for hotspots were obtained through the “biodiversity hotspots” package produced by conservation international .



the geologic activity associated with the arabian peninsula altered the historical connectivity of this landmass to surrounding continents, and as a result opportunities for faunal exchanges with particular continents occurred in temporally distinct periods. for example, taxa exhibiting disjunct afro-arabian distributions either exhibit early miocene divergences associated with vicariance resulting from the red sea formation , or dispersed more recently from the horn of africa via a southern landbridge or overwater dispersal  . if the phylogenetic placement of an arabian focal group is recovered, predictions can be made concerning the timing of speciation and tested in a temporally explicit phylogenetic framework to infer historical biogeographic patterns. the limited phylogenetic studies focusing on or including arabian species have demonstrated concordant divergence timings for taxa with similar biogeographic origins , however these biogeographic patterns remain largely understudied for most arabian taxa.

although overall levels of endemism among vertebrate groups across the arabian peninsula are moderate, arabian amphibians exhibit a high degree of endemism  <cit> . of the nine described arabian anuran species, six of these species are true toads belonging to the family bufonidae, a clade that contains close to  <dig> described species and which exhibits a nearly worldwide distribution  <cit> . the dispersal ability of toads is limited by their reliance on freshwater habitat for breeding and their intolerance to saltwater, making them an interesting system for investigating historical biogeography in this region. several broad-scale phylogenetic studies of bufonids have revealed the existence of largely discrete continental clades  that are now accepted as distinct genera or subgenera  <cit> . three such genera are currently distributed in geographic regions directly surrounding the arabian peninsula, including amietophrynus , bufotes , and duttaphrynus , allowing the possibility of multiple biogeographic origins for the arabian species.

due to a lack of molecular sampling, the assignment of the arabian bufonid species to genera, and therefore biogeographic origin, has long been problematic. one arabian toad species, bufotes cf. variabilis, is attributable to the western eurasian bufotes viridis species complex on the basis of morphology  <cit> . however, the affinities of the other arabian toads are unresolved in part due to the similar morphology among the many species of toads occurring in regions surrounding the arabian peninsula. based on molecular evidence the arabian endemic duttaphrynus dhufarensis was recently determined to be of asian origin, with its closest relatives occurring on the indian subcontinent  <cit> , although several taxa occurring across southwest asia were not included in the analysis. this discovery, and the assignment of d. dodsoni  to the genus  <cit> , implies the arabian peninsula has acted as a stepping-stone for asian-derived bufonid species to colonize mainland africa. this scenario remains to be tested in a phylogenetic framework, but has important biogeographic implications. other than b. cf. variabilis and d. dhufarensis, the remaining arabian toads could not be allocated to genera, and remain in a non-taxon bufo that is currently polyphyletic and is denoted as “bufo”. these species include “bufo” arabicus, “bufo” tihamicus, “bufo” hadramautinus, and “bufo” scorteccii. both “bufo” arabicus and d. dhufarensis possess the largest geographic distribution of the arabian toads, whereas “bufo” tihamicus is only distributed along the coastal red sea region. although “bufo” tihamicus is thought to be a close relative of the sahelian distributed african taxon “bufo” pentoni, the latter species is also currently not assigned to a genus, and therefore the phylogenetic relationships of this complex remains convoluted. the species “bufo” hadramautinus and scorteccii are restricted to one or two localities, and their validity has been questioned as they may represent isolated phenotypically variable populations of the wider ranging “bufo” arabicus and d. dhufarensis, respectively  <cit> . as a result of these hypotheses “bufo” scorteccii has been tentatively assigned to the genus duttaphrynus  <cit> , although this taxonomic assignment is certainly premature, and some authors have regarded “bufo” hadramautinus as a synonym of “bufo” arabicus  <cit> .

the evolution of arabian bufonids and their close relatives remains a challenging biogeographic and taxonomic problem, and it is unknown if the unassigned arabian toads are derived from african, southwest asian, or western eurasian lineages, or are the result of in-situ diversification on the peninsula. in addition, the biogeographic patterns of the genus duttaphrynus have not been investigated yet have important implications concerning whether amphibians successfully colonized the horn of africa using the arabian peninsula as a stepping-stone. a similar problem persists for “bufo” tihamicus and pentoni, which could be derived from african, southwest asian, or western eurasian clades, each of which has implies different biogeographic scenarios for explaining the current geographic distributions of these two species.

through several years of fieldwork, tjp obtained key samples of arabian taxa  as well as many biogeographically important species surrounding the arabian peninsula , finally allowing an assessment of their evolutionary relationships using a molecular phylogenetic framework. we seek to untangle the various biogeographic scenarios resulting in the evolution of the arabian bufonids and their close relatives. we aim to identify the closest relatives of “bufo” tihamicus and “bufo” arabicus to determine if they are derived from african, western eurasian, or south asian lineages. if they are african in origin, we predict they will have diverged from their closest mainland relatives either 1) following the formation of the red sea , or 2) as a result of dispersal across a southern afro-arabian land bridge . alternatively, if they are western eurasian or south asian in origin, we predict they will have colonized the arabian peninsula following establishment of eurasian land bridge connections . we also seek to test the stepping-stone colonization of the horn of africa by the genus duttaphrynus, and predict a sister-taxon relationship between d. dodsoni and d. dhufarensis, with a divergence time following permanent eurasian land bridge connections . we use newly generated multi-locus molecular data and a comprehensive data set of published bufonid sequences to reconstruct phylogenetic relationships to identify the origins of the arabian taxa. we use these molecular data to estimate divergence times to identify key biogeographic events that could have led to the formation of these lineages. we examine our results in the context of prior studies that have investigated historical biogeographic patterns in other arabian taxa, and highlight areas requiring further study.

RESULTS
phylogenetic relationships
the overall phylogenetic relationships within the family bufonidae are concordant across analyses and are presented in figs. 2- <dig> . we find strong support for the monophyly of the bufonidae, and relationships among the basal genera  are well resolved and consistent with previous studies . our phylogenetic analyses place anaxyrus as the sister clade to incilius with high support, and together these two genera are moderately supported as being sister to the genus rhinella . beyond this grouping, the relationships among the other derived genera  are largely unresolved . genera sampled for more than one lineage are supported as monophyletic, with the exception of pedobistes . this is true for the speciose genera surrounding the arabian peninsula, including amietophrynus, bufotes, and duttaphrynus, which are all recovered as independent monophyletic groups with strong support . in this global bufonid species data set with an emphasis on sampling surrounding the arabian peninsula, our analyses consistently place the arabian toad species within particular genera.fig.  <dig> phylogenetic relationships of global bufonids, part one. the maximum likelihood tree of the bufonidae, based on  <dig> loci and  <dig> taxa. filled circles on nodes represent high support ; circles with top half fill: mlbs > 70% and bpp <  <dig> ; circles with bottom half fill: mlbs < 70% and bpp >  <dig> ; open circles represent support values less than given threshold for both analysis types. branch lengths are proportional to substitutions/site, indicated by scale bar below, and genera are outlined in grey shading. letters below correspond to connections to fig  <dig>  the portion of the phylogeny represented is highlighted in red on the full topology.



the arabian species “bufo” tihamicus is strongly supported as the sister taxon of the african sahelian distributed “bufo” pentoni, and together these two lineages are recovered as sister to all other species of amietophrynus . our analyses recover “bufo” arabicus as the sister taxon to a grouping of two clades. one clade consists of the more arid-adapted species a. xeros and a. gutturalis, and the other consists of a. tuberosus, a. garmani, a. camerunensis, a. kisolensis, and a. gracilipes. the resolution of the relationship between “bufo” arabicus and these two clades is not strongly supported, with some results placing “bufo” arabicus as sister to a. xeros and a. gutturalis, and others placing “bufo” arabicus as sister to both clades . our results confirm the findings of van bocxlaer et al.  <cit>  in recovering the arabian species duttaphrynus dhufarensis within the asian genus duttaphrynus. our improved sampling from iran and pakistan places d. dhufarensis as sister to a clade consisting of d. hololius, d. stomaticus and d. olivaceus with strong support . duttaphrynus dodsoni, which is distributed across the horn of africa, is not recovered as a member of the genus duttaphrynus, but rather is found deeply nested in the genus amietophrynus and is a close relative of the east african species amietophrynus brauni .fig.  <dig> phylogenetic relationships of global bufonids, part two. the maximum likelihood tree of the bufonidae, based on  <dig> loci and  <dig> taxa. filled circles on nodes represent high support ; circles with top half fill: mlbs > 70% and bpp <  <dig> ; circles with bottom half fill: mlbs < 70% and bpp >  <dig> ; open circles represent support values less than given threshold for both analysis types. branch lengths are proportional to substitutions/site, indicated by scale bar below. genera are outlined in grey shading, genera containing arabian taxa are colored and arabian species are denoted by red bold text. letters above correspond to connections to fig.  <dig>  and below to fig.  <dig>  the portion of the phylogeny represented is highlighted in red on the full topology.

fig.  <dig> phylogenetic relationships of global bufonids, part three. the maximum likelihood tree of the bufonidae, based on  <dig> loci and  <dig> taxa. filled circles on nodes represent high support ; circles with top half fill: mlbs > 70% and bpp <  <dig> ; circles with bottom half fill: mlbs < 70% and bpp >  <dig> ; open circles represent support values less than given threshold for both analysis types. branch lengths are proportional to substitutions/site, indicated by scale bar below. genera are outlined in grey shading, genera containing arabian taxa are colored and arabian species are denoted by red bold text. letters above correspond to connections to fig.  <dig>  the portion of the phylogeny represented is highlighted in red on the full topology.

fig.  <dig> divergence timings of the genus amietophrynus. bayesian maximum clade credibility chronogram of the genus amietophrynus inferred in beast  with median divergence times and associated 95 % highest posterior distributions of dates in brackets. timings of relevant geologic events are illustrated: a – red sea formation ; b – gomphotherium bridge ; c – permanent eurasian landbridge ; d – southern afro-arabian landbridge . ranges of arabian species and, if relevant, corresponding sister taxon are illustrated. filled circles on nodes represent bayesian posterior probabilities >  <dig> , open circles represent support values <  <dig> .

fig.  <dig> divergence timings of the genus duttaphrynus. bayesian maximum clade credibility chronogram of the genus duttaphrynus inferred in beast  with median divergence times and associated 95 % highest posterior distributions of dates in brackets. timings of relevant geologic events are illustrated: a – red sea formation ; b - gomphotherium bridge ; c – permanent eurasian landbridge ; d – southern afro-arabian landbridge . ranges of arabian species and, if relevant, corresponding sister taxon are illustrated. filled circles on nodes represent bayesian posterior probabilities >  <dig> , open circles represent support values <  <dig> .



in addition to elucidating the relationships of arabian bufonids, our phylogenetic analyses revealed a unique bufonid lineage restricted to the horn of africa, designated as “bufo” sp. . the placement of this lineage is not well resolved and it does not appear to be a member of any currently described african genus . maximum likelihood and bayesian consensus trees show this new genus is most closely related to a clade of african genera  but this relationship is not strongly supported . an additional extensive comparison with over  <dig> unpublished 16s sequences of mainly african bufonids also failed to resolve the placement of this taxon with any described genus , and additional taxonomic work is therefore required for this unique lineage.

divergence dating estimates
the three divergence dating analyses  produced largely congruent phylogenetic topologies . divergence dating estimates varied little between analyses, though the 95 % highest posterior density regions are slightly broader in analyses a <dig> and a <dig> than those in a <dig> . all dating analyses suggest a mid-cretaceous origin of the family bufonidae, with median estimates ranging between  <dig> – <dig>  ma , but are approximately 20– <dig> million years older than dates recovered by van bocxlaer et al.  <cit>  for the group  bufonid genera occurred in a window of approximately  <dig> million years. our estimates place this rapid diversification in the eocene, as found by pramuk et al.  <cit> , though van bocxlaer et al.  <cit>  date this radiation to the oligocene.table  <dig> key results of divergence dating analyses

origin amietophrynus
tmrca a. arabicus
tmrca a. tihamicus
origin duttaphrynus
tmrca d. dhufarensis
for relevant nodes, median age and 95 % highest posterior density region are given . analysis  <dig> : inclusion of four internal calibrations with lognormal calibration prior for age of the bufonidae; analysis  <dig> : inclusion of four internal calibrations with normal calibration prior for age of the bufonidae; analysis  <dig> : inclusion of four internal calibrations with exponential calibration prior for age of the bufonidae.



based on our data, diversification of the genus amietophrynus began around the eocene-oligocene boundary  whereas comparatively diversification began more recently in duttaphrynus during the mid-oligocene  . the divergences of the arabian species  are estimated to have occurred during the miocene. an early miocene divergence is estimated between “bufo” tihamicus and “bufo” pentoni  as well as the split between “bufo” arabicus and its sister clade  . within “bufo” arabicus, the allopatric populations occurring in yemen and oman are supported as genetically distinct and are estimated to have diverged in the pliocene  . the divergence estimates for the split between duttaphrynus dhufarensis and the clade consisting of d. hololius, d. stomaticus and d. olivaceus occur in the mid-miocene, with median estimates ranging from  <dig> – <dig>  ma  . these dates are slightly older than those recovered by van bocxlaer et al.  <cit> , who estimate this divergence at  <dig>  ma . previously untested, the divergence event between closely related d. stomaticus and d. olivaceus is estimated to have occurred in the late pliocene .

discussion
evolutionary relationships of arabian bufonids
the relationships among arabian toad species have long been problematic, owing in part to the generalized morphology of these species and of lineages in surrounding regions  <cit> . the molecular delimitation of at least three speciose toad genera differentially distributed around the arabian peninsula  further highlighted the possibility of several alternative biogeographic origins for the arabian species  <cit> . prior to our study, the arabian bufonid species assemblage was recognized as having both western eurasian and asian elements , and here we identify a previously unrecognized, though not unexpected, african component. we find strong support for a sister relationship between “bufo” pentoni and “bufo” tihamicus, which together form a monophyletic assemblage with all other species in the african genus amietophrynus . the arabian lineage “bufo” arabicus is also recovered in this clade , and our results do not support a close relationship between these arabian lineages. rather, these species have independent evolutionary origins in the genus.

we recover the arabian species duttaphrynus dhufarensis as part of a largely south asian clade, represented by other species in the genus duttaphrynus , consistent with van bocxlaer et al.  <cit> . in their study, van bocxlaer et al.  <cit>  recover d. dhufarensis as sister to a clade containing d. stomaticus and d. hololius. they report d. hololius as widespread on the indian subcontinent, with d. stomaticus being restricted to the western ghats . the true distributions of these species are actually converse, though their interpretation of the biogeographic results is sound. regardless, both species were sampled from india, and together with the other species included in their analyses the westernmost sampling for the genus was limited to india. this left a vast sampling gap across pakistan and iran, a region that contains many widespread species in the genus duttaphrynus and bufotes. our sampling includes six species from this region  and includes geographically relevant localities adjacent to the gulf of oman and persian gulf in iran and pakistan. with this biogeographically improved sampling, we find d. dhufarensis is the sister taxon to a clade containing d. hololius, d. olivaceus and d. stomaticus. we find d. stomaticus exhibits a distribution throughout pakistan and india, and the d. olivaceus is distributed largely throughout iran and into pakistan .

with our broad species sampling of duttaphrynus, bufotes, and amietophrynus, our analyses do not recover duttaphrynus dodsoni as monophyletic with other members of the genus. instead, this species is strongly supported as nested within the african distributed genus amietophrynus as sister taxon to the east african species amietophrynus brauni . we discuss the biogeographic implications of this discovery and the overall historical biogeography of the arabian toad species below.

historical biogeography of arabian toads
our phylogenetic analyses have resolved the origins of several biogeographically interesting toad lineages distributed throughout the horn of africa, the arabian peninsula, and southwest asia, and here we interpret major divergence events in the context of the geological history of this region.

the species “bufo” arabicus and “bufo” tihamicus are both estimated to have diverged from their closest african relatives in the early miocene, approximately  <dig> – <dig>  ma  and  <dig> – <dig>  ma , respectively . these timings are remarkably concordant considering these two lineages have evolved independently within the genus. the age estimates are quite ancient and rule out dispersal across a southern afro-arabian landbridge  and overwater dispersal , but are consistent with the separation of the arabian plate from mainland africa as a result of the red sea formation during the oligocene-miocene boundary    <cit> . the landbridge spanning the strait of bab el mandeb, which created a dispersal route between arabian peninsula and the horn of africa, was not established until 10– <dig>  ma. many of the african-derived terrestrial vertebrate taxa present in the southwestern arabian peninsula arrived by dispersing from the horn of africa beginning in the late miocene via a southern land bridge or overwater dispersal events  <cit>  rather than originating as a result of the initial separation of the arabian plate from africa. this classifies the arabian toad species “bufo” arabicus and “bufo” tihamicus as true african relicts, a pattern that has only been demonstrated for one other taxon, the viper species echis coloratus, which also diverged in the early miocene  <cit> .

the asian derived species duttaphrynus dhufarensis is estimated to have diverged in the mid-miocene,  <dig> – <dig>  ma  . the temporary connections between the arabian plate and eurasia established 18–16 ma are thought to have allowed the first faunal exchanges between these distinct biogeographic regions, with a permanent eurasian connection being established ~15 ma . the divergence estimates for d. dhufarensis are congruent with the temporal range of these events, and the establishment of land bridges likely served as dispersal routes for this lineage to colonize the arabian peninsula.

following a stepping stone model of dispersal, if the genus duttaphrynus occurred on mainland africa, the temporal origins of these lineages would be expected to be younger than the age of d. dhufarensis . however, with the discovery of the phylogenetic placement of duttaphrynus dodsoni in the genus amietophrynus, we find no support for the genus occurring on the horn of africa, indicating south asian-derived bufonid lineages did not successfully complete trans-continental dispersals across the arabian peninsula. additionally, based on our extensive sampling of the horn of africa, arabian peninsula, and south asia, we find no evidence for the stepping-stone model of dispersal across the arabian peninsula for any african  or asian  bufonid species , as no species of amietophrynus are found in iran or pakistan. this is somewhat unexpected because this model has been invoked to explain ancient asiatic-african dispersals in multiple groups of ranoid frogs  <cit> . additionally, there is evidence suggesting the persian gulf region was greatly reduced or dry in the pleistocene  <cit> . the apparent lack of dispersals of toad lineages across the persian gulf region during this time period is surprising, as population exchanges of the viper species echis carinatus likely occurred through this route  <cit> .

taxonomic implications
based on our sampling strategy and the phylogenetic placement of key species, we recommend several taxonomic changes. the species “bufo” tihamicus and “bufo” pentoni form a monophyletic group with all other amietophrynus, and although they represent the most basal divergence in the group we recommend assignment to the genus, and recognize amietophrynus tihamicus comb. nov. and amietophrynus pentoni comb. nov. the assignment of these two species can be further tested through karyotyping, as the 20-chromosome condition is considered apomorphic for this group  <cit> . if an alternative chromosome condition is discovered in these two species, additional insight into chromosome evolution among bufonids will be gained and their generic assignment can be reconsidered. the arabian species “bufo” arabicus can be confidently assigned to the genus amietophrynus, as amietophrynus arabicus comb. nov., and duttaphrynus dodsoni is also transferred to the genus as amietophrynus dodsoni comb. nov.

the origins of several arabian bufonids have been investigated, however several lineages require further investigation. the arabian population of bufotes cf. variabilis warrants further study to determine its distinctiveness with respect to b. variabilis sensu stricto. this population shares a similar distribution with hyla felixarabica, a recently described arabian species that was previously thought to be an isolate of a wider ranging western eurasian species complex   <cit> . additionally, the relationships of “bufo” hadramautinus and “bufo” scorteccii remain speculative. although “bufo” hadramautinus is morphologically similar to amietophrynus arabicus  <cit> , “bufo” scorteccii is morphologically intermediate between a. arabicus and d. dhufarensis  <cit> . on this basis, “bufo” hadramautinus can be tentatively recognized as amietophrynus hadramautinus comb. nov., but “bufo” scorteccii remains problematic and should remain unassigned until further study. although inconvenient, there are major biogeographic implications associated with assignment to particular genera, and this action would circumvent such issues. when population-level sampling becomes available, additional phylogenetic work can clarify if these two geographically restricted lineages are: 1) intraspecific populations of one of the widespread arabian bufonid species, 2) distinct lineages derived independently from surrounding continental faunas, or 3) distinct lineages resulting from in-situ speciation of an arabian species, and further taxonomic assessments can be made.

CONCLUSIONS
the arabian peninsula is home to a unique fauna that has assembled and evolved throughout the course of major geophysical events. the arabian species assemblage represents an admixture of african, western eurasian, and south asian elements, and this pattern is exemplified even in the relatively depauperate arabian bufonids. in addition to having south asian and western eurasian lineages, we have identified two lineages independently derived from continental africa. our dating estimates strongly suggest amietophrynus arabicus and a. tihamicus did not colonize the arabian peninsula through overwater dispersal or a southern land bridge from the horn of africa, rather the formation of the red sea likely drove simultaneous divergences in these species. in this sense, they represent true african relicts in their current distribution on the arabian peninsula. more importantly, across all dating analyses the relative timing of divergence for these species is considerably older than that for the south asian derived duttaphrynus dhufarensis. these results conform to predictions based on geological events that species dispersing to the arabian peninsula across eurasian land bridges should be younger in origin than true african relicts. our investigation has revealed the stepping-stone hypothesis for trans-continental afro-asian bufonid dispersals is not accurate, and we find no evidence for amietophrynus or duttaphrynus species distributed outside of their main continental range and the arabian peninsula. further studies of the remaining arabian amphibian species can test if these biogeographic scenarios hold true for not only bufonids but also other anuran families. these amphibian studies and comparative studies of other terrestrial vertebrates can provide a clearer picture of the diversification of the unique faunal assemblage present on the arabian peninsula.

