BACKGROUND
the bacterial dna polymerase iii holoenzyme has the remarkable ability to polymerize long stretches of dna at great speeds  without dissociating from its template  <cit> . the β subunit of the holoenzyme is required for efficient processivity in bacteria. this protein factor wraps around double-stranded dna at primer-template junctions, where it serves as a sliding clamp to tether the polymerase enzyme to its dna substrate . a separate atp-dependent protein complex called the clamp loader is required to place the sliding clamp on primer-template dna . once loaded by this complex, the sliding clamp can confer processivity to the catalytic α subunit of the polymerase.

structural analysis of the e. coli β subunit showed that the bacterial clamp is a head-to-tail dimer, with two protomers that form a closed ring  <cit> . the diameter of the ring interior is large enough to accommodate duplex dna. biochemical studies indicate that one interface of the clamp is opened by the clamp loader to allow passage of a primed dna into this interior  <cit> . the bacterial clamp does not share readily detectable sequence similarity with the trimeric proliferating cellular nuclear antigen  clamps of eukaryotes and archaea. nevertheless, the overall ring-shaped architecture of sliding clamps is highly similar in bacterial, archaeal, and eukaryotic clamps  <cit>  as well as those from bacteriophage  <cit> .

here we present the crystal structure of the β subunit of dna polymerase iii from streptococcus pyogenes, a gram-positive bacterium. the subunits of the replicative machinery of gram-positive bacteria are generally divergent in sequence from those of gram-negative counterparts such as e. coli  <cit> . the β subunit of s. pyogenes shares only 23% sequence identity to the e. coli protein . we find that while the s. pyogenes clamp has a fold that is strikingly similar to that of the sliding clamp from e. coli, the s. pyogenes clamp adopts a more elliptical shape . this indicates that although the s. pyogenes clamp presumably shares ability to encircle dna, the precise details of the molecular shape of sliding clamps are poorly conserved between gram-positive and gram-negative bacteria.

RESULTS
the crystal structure of the β subunit from streptococcus pyogenes was determined by multiple anomalous diffraction  at  <dig>  Å resolution using datasets for three separate wavelengths close to the selenium absorption edge. a model built into the phased electron density maps was refined subsequently to  <dig>  Å resolution against native data . these crystals  contain one β dimer in the asymmetric unit. a non-crystallographic two-fold relates two protomers to form the dimeric clamp. this internal symmetry facilitated the initial stages of model building and refinement. the two molecules are related by a 180° rotation about an axis perpendicular to the plane of the ring with a root mean square  deviation of  <dig>  Å for cα atoms between the two protomers.

consistent with the structure of the e. coli β clamp  <cit> , the s. pyogenes clamp dimer is formed in a head-to-tail fashion. the sequence identity between the e. coli and s. pyogenes β clamp sequences is relatively low at 23% . low sequence identity is a characteristic of sequence comparisons between bacterial clamps and trimeric clamps, such as those of t4-bacteriophage gp <dig> and pcna  <cit> . interestingly, the s. pyogenes β clamp dimer has a distorted oval shape, unlike the more circular shape of the e. coli β clamp. the distortion from a more circular shape is a feature of both crystallographically-independent subunits although we cannot absolutely rule out the influence of crystal packing on the shape of these clamps. the longer of the outer oval diameters is ~ <dig> Å while the shortest diameter across the clamp is ~ <dig> Å .

the overall organization of the s. pyogenes β subunit is very similar to that of the e. coli β subunit, with three distinct domains in each protomer. the secondary structure and topology of each of these domains is also very similar to each other; a pair of four-stranded antiparallel β sheets that bracket two antiparallel α helices make up the fundamental domain that is repeated three times per protomer . domains ii and iii consist of approximately  <dig> residues. domain i contains six more residues that are inserted in a loop region between strands β <dig> and β <dig>  this region includes a small additional β-strand  not present in the e. coli structure  and several residues that are disordered  in both protomers of the s. pyogenes clamp. the additional β-strand is part of an antiparallel five-stranded β-sheet made up together of strands β <dig>  β4b, β <dig>  β <dig> and β <dig>  we note that a region comparable to residues 66– <dig> of the s. pyogenes clamp forms a fifth β-strand in the structure of yeast pcna  <cit> .

when comparing the e. coli and s. pyogenes β clamp structures, there are differences in the relative positioning of domains and their respective interconnecting linkers that contribute to the elliptical shape of the s. pyogenes clamp. this results in an overall r.m.s. deviation for cα atoms that is relatively large  between the β clamp dimers from e. coli and s. pyogenes. the r.m.s.d. in cα positions of the individual domains that make up the basic clamp fold is smaller .

despite the differences in structure, the s. pyogenes clamp, like that of e. coli, can readily accommodate duplex dna within it . the width of the central chamber is ~ <dig> Å at its longest dimension and ~ <dig> Å at its shortest dimension. as for other clamps, the electrostatic properties of the s. pyogenes clamp are a striking aspect of the structure . the interior of the central hole in the s. pyogenes clamp is lined with basic residues, many of which  are conserved between the s. pyogenes and the e. coli proteins. while these residues provide a positively-charged region of the clamp for interaction with dna, the remainder of the protein is largely acidic; the protein has a calculated isoelectric point  of  <dig> . most of the negatively-charged patches on the surface of the s. pyogenes β subunit are found on the face of the clamp that is opposite to the predicted site of interaction with the clamp loader and polymerase .

there is an interesting feature that is common to the dimeric interfaces of the structures of the s. pyogenes and e. coli clamps. in the e. coli clamp structure, helix α1"  exhibits distorted helical geometry in order to maintain the integrity of the dimeric interface  <cit>  . the distorted helix is kinked over a region spanning three residues at its c-terminus . this pronounced distortion appears to be correlated with the formation of an intermolecular ion pair  at this interface. in contrast, the α1" helix is straightened out in a monomeric form of the e. coli β clamp complexed with a clamp loader subunit  responsible for opening the clamp  <cit> . this observation led to the idea that the changes at the clamp interface in helix α1" may be part of a "spring-loaded" mechanism for clamp opening  <cit> . in this hypothesis, the energetic strain of distorting the helical geometry at the dimeric interface is released upon interaction with the δ subunit of the clamp loader complex. in the closed form of the s. pyogenes β clamp, helix α1" displays an even larger displacement from ideal geometry in comparison to the e. coli β clamp . this distortion of the interface in the s. pyogenes clamp is correlated with the presence of the sidechain of phe  <dig>  which pushes against helix α1" . thus, although the molecular determinants of this helical distortion are different in the two proteins, it appears that the structural effect is conserved. interestingly, the s. pyogenes dna polymerase iii can utilize the e. coli β clamp to achieve processivity, despite the low sequence identity between the clamps and the difference in overall shape. however, the e. coli polymerase iii is unable make reciprocal use of the s. pyogenes clamp  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
the oval shape of the s. pyogenes clamp suggests that it is the topological property of surrounding the dna template in order to maintain dna-interactions with its cognate polymerase that is a fundamental and conserved aspect of bacterial β clamps. the subunit organization and secondary structural topology of the s. pyogenes clamp is very similar to that of the e. coli sliding clamp. like in the e. coli clamp, the s. pyogenes subunits form a head-to tail dimmer, with a markedly positive electrostatic potential within the interior of the ring. the s. pyogenes clamp is therefore expected to readily accommodate duplex dna within it.

