BACKGROUND
yersinia pestis  is one of the most virulent known bacteria  <cit>  and a potential agent of bioterrorism and biowarfare  <cit>  included in the category a of biological agents for public health preparedness against bioterrorism  <cit> . yp is the etiologic agent of plague, a disease responsible for millions of human deaths during the history of civilization  <cit> . cases are reported every year in many parts of the world  <cit>  and the increasing number of worldwide cases has placed plague in the category of re-emerging diseases  <cit> .

patients with plague need prompt antibiotic treatment or else death may be unavoidable. the aminoglycosides streptomycin  and gentamicin  are the preferred antibiotics for treatment, but a number of other drugs are also effective  <cit> . tetracyclines , chloramphenicol , or selected sulfonamides are the recommended antibiotics for prophylactic therapy in the event of exposure or high risk of exposure to yp  <cit> . fluoroquinolones have also been suggested for treatment and prophylaxis and are noted as a chemotherapeutic alternative against strains resistant to the first line anti-plague drugs  <cit> .

the threat of bioterrorism-generated plague outbreaks with engineered drug-resistant yp strains  <cit>  and the documented outbreak of multidrug-resistant plague  <cit>  underscore the need to develop alternative chemotherapeutic solutions to this disease. in line with this view, we are exploring the development of anti-infectives that target the high-affinity iron acquisition system of yp  <cit>  and may offer novel therapeutic possibilities  <cit> . the plague biothreat also underscores the need to increase our understanding of the intrinsic potential of yp for developing antimicrobial resistance and to anticipate the mechanisms of resistance that may emerge in yp clinical isolates in the future. with this consideration in mind, we explored herein the use of a multicopy suppressor screening approach as a means to expose antibiotic resistance determinant candidates in yp. multicopy suppressor screening has been useful to study potential drug targets or mechanisms of antibiotic resistance in other species  <cit> . we constructed a multicopy plasmid-based, yp genome-wide expression library of nearly  <dig>  clones in e. coli , a tractable and easy-to-manipulate surrogate bacterial host, and screened the library for suppressors of the antimicrobial activity of the fluoroquinolone antibiotic ofloxacin . noteworthy, fluoroquinolones have been suggested by the working group on civilian biodefense as alternative drugs in the event of the use of aerosolized yp as a bioweapon against a civilian population  <cit> . the screen permitted the identification of a gene that reduced the susceptibility of yp to fluoroquinolones and other antibiotic classes when overexpressed from a multicopy plasmid. our study provides proof of principle for the utilization of multicopy suppressor screening using an ec host as a means to identify antibiotic resistance determinant candidates in yp.

RESULTS
a multicopy suppressor screen led to the isolation of a y. pestis genomic fragment involved in ofloxacin resistance
we constructed a plasmid-based expression library of the yp genome comprised of  <dig>  ec clones and screened the library for strains with reduced ofx susceptibility. a strain  selected in the screen exhibiting reduced susceptibility that was confirmed to be plasmid-mediated and transferable to yp was chosen for further characterization . the plasmid  carried by this strain was isolated and the restriction digestion pattern and sequence of its genomic insert were examined. this analysis revealed a  <dig> -bp fragment  . the 5' and 3' ends of the fragment included the 5' end of y <dig>  and the 3' end of y <dig> , respectively. the products of crea and slt are annotated as a conserved hypothetical protein and a putative soluble lytic murein transglycosylase, respectively, in the yp genome database. the center of the fragment encompassed four genes: y <dig> ; y <dig> ; y3725; and y <dig> . the products of gpmb and trpr are annotated as a putative phosphoglyceromutase and a putative regulator of tryptophan metabolism genes, respectively. the product of y <dig> is annotated as a conserved hypothetical protein. our in silico search for conserved domains  revealed the presence of an ntpase  domain in this protein. the ntpase domain is characteristic of proteins with pyrophosphatase activity  <cit> . this suggested that y <dig> may be involved in nucleoside triphosphate metabolism. lastly, the predicted product of robayp  is annotated as an orthologue of ec roba , a transcriptional regulator of unclear physiological function and member of the arac/xyls family  <cit> . importantly, overexpression of robaec and enterobacter cloacae roba confers low-level resistance in ec and e. cloacae, respectively, to a number of unrelated antibiotics  <cit> . thus, the analysis of the insert in pgem-ofxr <dig> suggested that robayp is responsible for the reduced ofx susceptibility observed in ec pgem-ofxr <dig> and yp pgem-ofxr <dig> . these results validate the utility of our library and suppressor screen approach as a means to identify antibiotic resistance determinant candidates in yp.

overexpression of robayp affects susceptibility to multiple antibiotics
we investigated whether overexpression of robayp alone would reduce ofx susceptibility in ec and, more importantly, in yp. to this end, we evaluated the antibiotic susceptibility of ec pgem-robyp and yp pgem-robyp. these test strains carried pgem-robyp, a plasmid constructed by inserting the fragment encompassing robayp and its promoter region  into the vector pgem-4z. the antibiotic susceptibilities of these test strains were compared to that of the corresponding ec pgem-4z and yp pgem-4z control strains. these control and test strains were isogenic, except for the lack of the plasmid-borne robayp, and their growth in ampicillin -containing liquid media was indistinguishable from that of their cognate test strains . a first examination of ec pgem-robyp and yp pgem-robyp indicated that these strains retained the reduced ofx susceptibility phenotype seen in ec pgem-ofxr <dig> and yp pgem-ofxr <dig> on solid media , thus indicating that robayp alone was sufficient to reduce ofx susceptibility. in view of this, we conducted further ofx susceptibility testing in liquid media. in addition, we compared the susceptibility of the test and control strains to two other fluoroquinolones , a quinolone , and antibiotics of other classes, including two tetracyclines , four aminoglycosides , and chl.

the ic <dig> and mic <dig> values determined for the aforementioned antibiotics are shown in table  <dig>  comparison of the ofx ic <dig> and ofx mic <dig> values of the test strains and their respective control strains revealed that overexpression of robayp reduced ofx susceptibility in both yp and ec. in yp, robayp overexpression increased ofx ic <dig> and ofx mic <dig> values by 5-fold and 23-fold, respectively. the ic <dig> and mic <dig> values of cip, lvx, and nal also increased significantly  in yp pgem-robyp compared with yp pgem-4z. the reduced ofx and lvx susceptibility of yp pgem-robyp was also revealed by time-kill experiments described below. in ec, robayp overexpression produced an increase in the ic <dig> and mic <dig> of the fluoroquinolone antibiotics , but had no significant effect  on nal susceptibility.

a ic <dig> values were calculated from sigmoidal curves fitted to triplicate sets of dose-response data. b mic <dig> values are means of triplicates. c fold change  values were calculated as the ratio of the ic <dig> or mic <dig> of the pgem-robyp transformants to the ic <dig> or mic <dig> of the pgem-4z transformants. ic <dig>  mic <dig>  and fc values < <dig> and values > <dig> were rounded to one significant digit and to the nearest non-fractional number, respectively.

in both yp and ec, robayp overexpression also correlated with an increase in the ic <dig> and mic <dig> of the two tetracyclines tested and chl . no substantial impact  on the mic <dig> values of four aminoglycosides tested was detected in yp upon overexpression of robayp. interestingly, however, the ic <dig> values of these aminoglycosides were reproducibly and consistently lower  in yp pgem-robyp compared with yp pgem-4z. these results indicated that robayp overexpression increased the susceptibility of yp to aminoglycosides. the hypersensitivity of yp pgem-robyp to aminoglycosides was also observed in time-kill experiments described below. aminoglycoside hypersensitivity was not observed in ec pgem-robyp. on the contrary, the strain had a modest decrease in the susceptibility to gen, str, and kan  relative to ec pgem-4z.

overall, the phenotypic comparison of the antibiotic susceptibility of pgem-robyp-bearing strains and pgem-4z-bearing strains clearly demonstrates that robayp overexpression affects antibiotic susceptibility in both yp and ec, yet in a noticeably species-specific manner. as discussed below, the effects on antibiotic susceptibility induced by robayp overexpression are likely due to an upregulation of efflux pumps. thus, the species-specific differences in antibiotic susceptibility are probably produced by species-specific differences in efflux pump upregulation.

overexpression of robayp in y. pestis reduces killing by fluoroquinolones but enhances killing by aminoglycosides
the comparative analysis of ic <dig> and mic <dig> values described above indicated that yp pgem-robyp has reduced fluoroquinolone susceptibility and increased aminoglycoside susceptibility compared with yp pgem-4z. to further probe these phenotypes, we examined the killing kinetics of these two strains when exposed to ofx, cip, str, and gen . the profiles of the time-kill curves for ofx and cip demonstrated that the yp pgem-4z control was more rapidly killed by the fluoroquinolones than yp pgem-robyp. conversely, the profiles of the time-kill curves for str and gen revealed that yp pgem-robyp was more rapidly killed by the aminoglycosides than the yp pgem-4z control. both strains had comparable growth in the absence of fluoroquinolone or aminoglycoside antibiotics during the time frame of the time-kill assays. the contrasting effects of robayp overexpression on fluoroquinolone- and aminoglycoside-mediated killing are consistent with the results of the comparative analysis of ic <dig> and mic <dig> values . the observed aminoglycoside hypersensitivity is somewhat unexpected and contrasts with both the reduced susceptibility observed for all other antibiotics tested and the increased tolerance to organic solvents described below.

overexpression of robayp increases tolerance to organic solvents
we investigated whether robayp overexpression affected the susceptibility of yp and ec to o <dig> --generating compounds , heavy metals , and organic solvents . no effect on the susceptibility to o <dig> --generating compounds, cobalt, and copper was observed . conversely, overexpression of robayp drastically increased organic solvent tolerance in both yp and ec  and reduced the susceptibility of yp to zinc . overexpression of robayp increased the tolerance of yp to n-hexane and cyclohexane and the tolerance of ec to cyclohexane and n-pentane. all the yp and ec strains were resistant to diphenyl ether and sensitive to p-xylene. ec was also resistant to n-hexane, a result that is in agreement with previous reports  <cit> . these findings parallel the reduction of organic solvent susceptibility induced by robaec overexpression in ec  <cit> .

overexpression of robayp in y. pestis induces changes in efflux pump gene expression
in ec, the robaec-induced multidrug resistance and solvent tolerance phenotypes have been shown to be largely dependent on the upregulation of the multidrug efflux pump acrab, which belongs to the resistance-nodulation-cell division  superfamily  <cit> . with this precedent in mind, we compared the expression of genes belonging to  <dig> drug efflux pumps between yp pgem-robyp and yp pgem-4z using quantitative real-time pcr . these pumps were identified using a variety of bioinformatic approaches  to compile an extensive list that included most, if not all, putative drug efflux pump systems encoded in the genome of yp. it is worth mentioning as a reference that there are  <dig> drug efflux pumps annotated in the ec genome  <cit> . our expression analysis detected transcripts for  <dig> of the  <dig> genes investigated and revealed that four efflux pumps were significantly upregulated  in yp pgem-robyp compared with yp pgem-4z . interestingly, two of these upregulated pumps  are ec acrab homologs. the other two upregulated pumps  belong to the major facilitator superfamily . the transcript level of hasf , encoding the ortholog of ec tolc, which is the outer membrane protein channel that partners with ec acrab and other rnd and mfs pumps  <cit> , was drastically upregulated as well .

a gene name as annotated for y. pestis strain kim and/or co <dig> or gene names  given herein based on the name of their e. coli homologs. multiple names for the same gene are separated by commas. genes of multi-component pumps are separated by dashes. the star  marks genes from multi-component pump gene clusters whose transcripts were analyzed by qrt-pcr. b gene designations in the university of wisconsin, tigr, and sanger y. pestis genome databases. the wisconsin column shows designations for all the genes in each predicted multi-component pump. tigr and sanger columns show only genes targeted in qrt-pcr. c pump families assigned based on homology to known family members from other organisms. mfs, major facilitator superfamily; smr, small multidrug resistance family; abc, atp-binding cassette superfamily; rnd, resistance-nodulation-cell division superfamily; mate, multidrug and toxic compound extrusion family; dmt, drug/metabolite transporter superfamily; cdf, cation diffusion facilitator family; arae, aromatic acid exporter family; it, ion transporter superfamily; hcc, hlyc/corc family. d fold change values  are means of triplicates ± standard errors and are presented in decreasing order. for polycistronic transcripts, qrt-pcr was conducted with primers targeting the first pump component-encoding gene of the operon. these genes are marked with a star. nd, transcript not detected in any of the three y. pestis strains examined .

inspection of the promoter regions upstream of the upregulated genes in yp pgem-robyp revealed the presence of a putative robaec binding site in each of these regions . these results suggest that robayp may act as a positive regulator for the y <dig>  y1050-y <dig>  y <dig> and y3392-y <dig> systems. this possible regulatory scenario is consistent with the upregulation in the expression levels of these pumps induced by robayp overexpression in yp.

it is likely that the multidrug resistance and solvent tolerance phenotypes induced by robayp overexpression are due, at least in part, to increases in compound extrusion by one or more of the upregulated pumps mentioned above. this idea is supported by the reported observation that the robaec-induced multidrug resistance and solvent tolerance in ec is largely dependent on the acrab-tolc efflux pump system  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
the identification of yp genes that, when overexpressed, are capable of reducing antibiotic susceptibility is a useful strategy to expose genes that this pathogen may rely upon to evolve resistance via a vertical modality. in this study, we explored the use of a multicopy suppressor, ec host-based screening approach as a means to identify antibiotic resistance determinant candidates in yp. to seek proof of principle for this approach, we constructed a multicopy plasmid-based, yp genome-wide expression library of nearly  <dig>  clones in ec and screened this library for suppressors of the antimicrobial activity of the fluoroquinolone antibiotic ofx. the screen permitted the identification of a gene that, when overexpressed, reduces the susceptibility of yp not only to ofx, but also to other quinolones, tetracyclines and chl. this gene  encodes a putative transcriptional regulator, and our results clearly demonstrate that its overexpression in yp and ec confers low-level resistance to multiple antibiotics. overexpression of robayp also increases organic solvent tolerance in both yp and ec and reduces the susceptibility of yp to zinc.

the molecular mechanism by which overexpression of robayp leads to a reduction in the susceptibility to antibiotics and other compounds remains to be determined. our results indicate that overexpression of robayp induces a drastic upregulation in the transcript levels of four of the  <dig> predicted efflux pump gene systems and of hasf  in yp. increased expression of chromosomally encoded efflux pumps is a known cause of multidrug resistance in many bacteria  <cit> . thus, it is likely that the reduction in the susceptibility to antibiotics and other compounds induced by robayp overexpression is due, at least in part, to multidrug efflux pump-mediated increases in compound extrusion.

overall, our findings provide proof of principle for the utilization of an ec host-based suppressor screen to identify antibiotic resistance determinant candidates in yp. this methodology will be useful in the identification of genetic determinants involved in target-dependent and target-independent resistance to antimicrobials with known and unknown mechanisms of action. identification of such genetic determinants will provide first insights to guide further studies to obtain mechanistic information on novel modes of antimicrobial activity and antimicrobial resistance.

