BACKGROUND
cell fate, pattern formation and morphogenesis depend on dynamic cell interactions involving a multitude of cell behaviors and cell populations. one way to gain insight into these events is to label and observe single or groups of cells over time. several approaches have been established for labeling cells in developing mouse embryos, the mammalian genetically-tractable model of choice, including dye injections, electroporation of nucleic acids or proteins into single or groups of cells  <cit>  as well as grafting of genetically-distinct tissues  <cit>  or using chimeras  <cit> . unfortunately, most of these techniques are invasive, and only effective when the tissue or cells of interest are easy accessible for manipulation. therefore, it has been a challenge to tag single or groups of cells that are not superficially located.

the advent of genetically-encoded fluorescent proteins has afforded the ability to label cells ubiquitously or selectively depending on the cis-regulatory elements used in transgene design. whereas native fluorescent proteins are cytosolic  <cit> , subcellularly-localized fluorescent proteins can be used for higher resolution image information  <cit> . for example, fluorescent proteins fused to a human histone h2b, since they are bound to active chromatin, allow the visualization and tracking of individual cells within a group  <cit> . likewise, fluorescent protein fusions that localize to the plasma membrane provide information on membrane dynamics and cell morphology  <cit> . thus in combination with increasingly sophisticated imaging technology, for example laser scanning confocal or multiphoton microscopy, and on-stage cultures, genetically-encoded fluorescent proteins can provide high resolution information on dynamic cell behaviors.

binary genetic approaches such as genetically inducible fate mapping  based on the cre/loxp system can also be used for cell labeling and fate mapping in mice. gifm is non-invasive and allows the tagging and tracking of non-superficial cell types  <cit> . however, cell type specificity relies on availability of cis-regulatory elements to drive cre recombinase transgene expression within specific populations of cells. to date, binary genetic methods have been used to gain information on large groups of cells rather than smaller groups or even individual cells in spatially-defined regions of interest . therefore, methods that combine lineage labeling through transgenesis with spatially-defined rois are likely to provide greater flexibility in cell labeling and lineage tracing.

photomodulatable fluorescent proteins should help overcome the limitations of these approaches by enabling non-invasive selective labeling of cells in rois. various photomodulatable fluorescent proteins including pa-gfp which acquires fluorescence upon activation, ps-cfp <dig> which changes color from cyan to green fluorescence upon activation, as well as kaede, kikgr and eosfp which go from a green to a red fluorescence upon activation, have been used to study cell behaviors in different organisms, including drosophila, chick, xenopus and zebrafish  <cit> , with preliminary proof-of-principle applications recently reported in mice  <cit> . for example, an alpha-tubulin pa-gfp fusion has used to investigate the dynamics of mesoderm cell migration during drosophila development  <cit> , and kikgr has been used to study the migratory behaviors of neural crest cells in chick embryos  <cit> .

with so many available photomodulatable proteins, choice of the most suitable for any given application and in any particular organism is not obvious as few direct comparisons have been reported. an extensive comparison of pa-gfp, ps-cfp <dig>  kaede and kikgr for their applicability in cell migratory behavior and cell lineage analysis in the chick embryo has been reported  <cit> . importantly, applications in mice are in their infancy and to date are limited one study in pre-implantation embryos  <cit>  and the characterization of adult transgenic mice. transgenic strains expressing kaede have been described in two independent studies  <cit> . one of these studies investigated the movement of cells of the immune system and employed flow cytometry to analyze photoconverted cells  <cit> . therefore, live cell imaging experiments using photomodulatable reporters have yet to be fully explored in mice.

recognizing the need for a comparison of commonly used photomodulatable fluorescent proteins for their prospective use in mice, we compared pa-gfp, ps-cfp <dig>  kaede and kikgr. we found the green-to-red photoconvertible protein kikgr, engineered from the coral favia favus  <cit> , to be the best suited for cell labeling and fate mapping due to its specific and efficient photoconversion and outstanding brightness compared to the other photomodulatable fluorescent proteins tested in this study. we therefore generated and characterized transgenic mouse strains constitutively expressing kikgr under the cag promoter  <cit> . we also report the generation of transgenic es cell lines exhibiting widespread expression of kikgr. we observed bright fluorescence in kikgr transgenic es cells, embryos and adult mice. we noted rapid and efficient photoconversion of kikgr at various developmental stages. to study cell dynamics in mouse embryos, groups of cells in spatially defined rois were photoconverted and followed over time.

this study therefore provides the first comparison of photomodulatable fluorescent proteins for use in es cells and mice, and reveals the potential utility of these genetically-encoded reporters for investigating individual cell behaviors, population dynamics and cell fate in the mouse embryo.

RESULTS
photoconversion of cells and ex utero culture of embryos to visualize cell dynamics in situ
since their spectral properties can be modulated in defined regions of interest, photoconvertible fluorescent proteins provide greater control of labeling specificity over conventional fluorescent proteins. they are therefore superior for precisely and non-invasively labeling single or small cohorts of cells in complex populations . our goal was to generate transgenic es cells and mice with widespread expression of a readily detectable and efficiently photoconvertible fluorescent protein reporter. these would be used for 3d time-lapse imaging cell dynamics in situ in es cell cultures and mouse embryos. once determined wild type cell behaviors can be contrasted with those resulting from experimental perturbations, for example in mutants. by using photoconversion in combination with ex utero embryo culture cells can be tracked over time providing a way to visualize the cell dynamics that direct the emergence of morphologically distinct structures or mutant phenotypes .

construction and evaluation of different photomodulatable proteins in cells
to establish if one of a series of the widely available photomodulatable proteins would be better suited for lineage studies in mouse embryos, we compared pa-gfp  <cit> , ps-cfp <dig>  <cit> , kaede  <cit>  and kikgr  <cit> . all four photomodulatable proteins were cloned under the widespread caggs enhancer/promoter, comprising the chicken beta-actin promoter and first exon/intron placed downstream of the cmv immediate early enhancer  <cit> . cos- <dig> and es cells were transfected with the four cag promoter-based plasmids and visualized pre- and post photoactivation. results are summarized in table  <dig>  comparison of expression and photoactivation or photoconversion, respectively, in cells, showed high sensitivity of pa-gfp to uv light and rapid photoactivation. however, even exposure to daylight resulted in instantaneous autoactivation or bleaching of the pa-gfp fluorophore. this was unfavourable since mouse embryos develop in utero and must be dissected from maternal tissues using a stereo dissecting microscope. they therefore require illumination of both the microscope stage and animal for removal of the uterus. ps-cfp <dig> was dim, and its photoconversion was inefficient. furthermore, given the spectral overlap between the cyan and green forms of the protein, to optimally distinguish photoconverted and unconverted cells linear unmixing of spectra is necessary . kaede was photoconverted efficiently but was dim compared to kikgr . kaede also often formed aggregates in cos- <dig> cells and was toxic in es cells when expressed at high levels . by contrast, photoconversion of kikgr was immediate and very efficient. furthermore, kikgr did not appear to be toxic when highly expressed in es cells, and was the brightest of the four evaluated photomodulatable proteins. these features made kikgr the protein of choice for use in es cells and, by extrapolation, in mouse embryos.

we next established transgenic es cell lines constitutively expressing kikgr. fluorescent transgenic es cell colonies were identified by their green fluorescence and picked under an epifluorescence stereo dissecting microscope. clones were expanded and passaged in 96-well plates, and scored for the maintenance and level of green fluorescent reporter after extended maintenance in culture in the absence of selection. clones that failed to meet these criteria were discarded from further analysis. the photoconversion and photoefficiency of kikgr was quantified in cag::kikgr transgenic es cells.

photoconversion of kikgr in es cells
imaging of photoconversion in an es cell colony constitutively expressing kikgr using short wavelength laser light  revealed complete and fast photoconversion of kikgr from green to red fluorescence . any roi could be defined and efficiently photoconverted without compromising cell viability. complete photoconversion was demonstrated by imaging z-stacks of photoconverted es cells . 2d orthogonal representation of z-stack of es cell colony shows that only photoconverted cells with no residual green fluorescence reside within the square roi in sections taken throughout the z-stack . line plots illustrating the average fluorescent intensity along a line plotted across an roi before and after photoconversion demonstrated a complete shift of emission from green to red fluorescence .

exposure of a circular roi defined within in an es cell colony to  <dig> nm light  demonstrated fast photoconversion of kikgr . complete photoconversion was reached in  <dig> seconds under the experimental conditions used. continued exposure of photoconverted cells eventually lead to photobleaching of the fluorophore and a slight reduction in red fluorescence . fluorescent intensities of the green and red channel plotted over time illustrated the rapid shift in the emission spectrum from  <dig> nm to  <dig> nm after exposure to  <dig> nm light .

expression and function of kikgr in adult transgenic mice and post-implantation embryos
the cag::kikgr construct was used to generate transgenic strains of mice with widespread expression of kikgr. three founders were characterized. each line exhibited widespread expression, however, all data presented in this article derive from a single line. to characterize the cag::kikgr mouse strains and confirm that they exhibited widespread transgene expression as detected by green fluorescence, adult organs and post-implantation embryos of various stages were imaged using wide field epifluorescent microscopy . dissection of organs from a  <dig> week old adult cag::kikgrtg/+ animal, and its wild type littermate revealed robust widespread expression of kikgr in organs of the hemizygous transgenic . in addition, embryos of post-implantation stages ranging from embryonic  day  <dig>  through to e <dig>  exhibited strong widespread green fluorescence . photoconversion of an roi in the brain of an cag::kikgrtg/+ using a uv filter and epifluorescent illumination demonstrated the functionality of the kikgr protein in the transgenic mouse . importantly, cag::kikgrtg/+ animals were indistinguishable from their littermates, both as embryos and adults, suggesting that readily detectable levels of kikgr expression are developmentally neutral and non-toxic.

live imaging population dynamics using kikgr
coordinated behaviors within cell populations are integral to a wide variety of morphogenetic events. using transgenesis to direct kikgr expression in embryos and photoconversion of rois in combination with 3d time-lapse imaging and ex utero embryo culture, the collective cell behaviors directing the morphogenesis of the mouse embryo can be probed. for example, given the precision of cell labeling using defined rois, it can be determined if collective cell behaviors such as convergence and extension occur in mouse embryos. a convergence and extension type cell behavior can be investigated through photoconversion of cells contained in a rectangular roi, and measurement of the height-to-width over time. one can then determine if the starting ratio is maintained or skews in any particular dimension over time, with the latter trend suggestive of a convergent extension type cell behavior.

live imaging of cell fate in the mouse embryo
next, to determine if cag::kikgr transgenic mice were suitable for following cell fates, we investigated the first steps during cardiac morphogenesis . a small group of  cells residing on the right side of the cardiac crescent of an e <dig>  embryo were photoconverted . after  <dig> hrs in roller culture, during which time cells of the cardiac crescent fuse at the midline and go on to form a linear heart tube, the photoconverted cells and/or their progeny became incorporated in, and restricted to, the right side of the linear heart tube . these results reveal that cells located on the right side of the cardiac crescent only contribute to the right side of the linear heart tube  <cit> . these data demonstrate that photomodulatable fluorescent protein reporters should facilitate precise labeling and fate mapping of defined cell populations during mouse embryonic development.

tracking cells over time using 3d time-lapse imaging and on-stage mouse embryo culture
ultimately, time-lapse image acquisition provides the highest resolution information on cell dynamics. therefore, we next assessed if we could photoconvert a group of cells and track them in situ in embryos that were cultured on a microscope stage as opposed to in a roller culture incubator  <cit> . our data suggest that, as with roller culture, on-stage static embryo culture as well as multiple exposures to laser light at timed intervals did not adversely affect embryonic development. still frames of the bright field channel of a 3d time-lapse imaging experiment show development of a mouse embryo cultured static from the early headfold stage  to the early somite stage  that is equivalent in timing and morphology to wild type in utero development . the image sequence depicts co-ordinate morphogenetic events including the invagination of the foregut pocket, development of the headfolds and condensation of the rostral somites. the group of photoconverted cells retains red fluorescence and can be followed throughout the 10-hour time-lapse and culture period. these data reveal the dynamics and expansion of a population of mesodermal cells migrating into the cardiac crescent .

CONCLUSIONS
we have compared four widely available photomodulatable fluorescent proteins: pa-gfp which photoactivates to produce green fluorescence, the cyan-to-green ps-cfp <dig>  and kaede and kikgr, two green-to-red photoconvertible fluorescent proteins. our data demonstrate that the photomodulatable fluorescent protein kikgr is suitable for a number of live imaging applications in es cells and in mouse embryos. kikgr is developmentally-neutral, does not autoactivate after exposure to broad spectrum white light, undergoes rapid and complete photoconversion when exposed to light of a specific wavelength, and exhibits bright fluorescence before and after photoconversion.

cag::kikgr transgenic mice lend themselves to a variety of live imaging applications for investigating individual cell behaviors, population dynamics and cell fate in the mouse embryo. defined rois permit high temporal and spatial specificity for cell labeling, yielding high-resolution information on cell dynamics in vivo. having established widespread expressing kikgr strains and demonstrated their utility, the development of strains exhibiting lineage-specific kikgr should in the future should provide greater spatial specificity for cell labeling. moreover, the future development of mouse strains expressing subcellularly-localized kikgr or monomeric kikgr fusion proteins should provide greater spatial resolution for live imaging.

