BACKGROUND
although only ~ <dig> nucleotides long, microrna are vital to the developmental process of animals and plants through post-transcriptional gene regulation. the efficiency of microrna transcription and stability is regulated in a tissue-specific manner
 <cit> . after processing from precursor microrna molecules, single-stranded microrna can bind to 3'-utr of messenger rna via its seed region, in turn affecting mrna translation or stability
 <cit> . when aberrantly expressed, microrna can lead to the progression of certain diseases
 <cit> . they also participate in pathogen-host interaction
 <cit> , and exert systemic effects through intercellular trafficking
 <cit> . due to its significant roles in a wide variety of biological processes, genome evolution of microrna structure and function have been studied extensively
 <cit> .

both duplicated sequence fragments and repetitive elements in the genome could contribute to the expansion of microrna families
 <cit> . species-specific microrna expansion could have functional importance, and it has been demonstrated recently that an expanded microrna cluster is fundamental to the maintenance of embryonic stem cell development in mice
 <cit> . however, most duplication events studied for microrna evolution are segmental or tandem duplications
 <cit> . segmental duplications are tremendously important in elucidating the evolution of protein-coding genes, and their roles in providing novel genomic mechanisms to cope with selection pressure and environmental changes
 <cit> . however, segmental duplications are defined as >  <dig> kb and > 90% identity, and computational methods are designed accordingly and limited in studying only these sequences. thus, small-scale duplication events are not covered, but which could also play important roles in the evolution of small molecules, especially for microrna. the relevance and importance of these small duplication events and their relationship with microrna evolution has not been reported.

here, we used a systematic approach, and found that small duplication events in the human genome could also contribute to microrna expansion. in total, nine novel microrna families were found to be expanded in the human genome, and additional new genomic regions were discovered to be related to the expansion of microrna families reported previously. we found that novel microrna family expanded in the human genome are located close to proteins with conserved function, and confirmed two of the microrna expansion events by fluorescence in situ hybridization. these results could render us novel insights on the evolution of human genome structure and function.

RESULTS
novel expanded microrna families in the human genome
to explore the relationship between short duplicated genomic sequences and the expansion of certain microrna families in the human genome, we used repeat-masked reference genome for pairwise comparison , since microrna associated with repetitive elements have been well characterized
 <cit> . we focused on detecting microrna paralogs enriched in short duplication events  in the human genome, which were overlooked previously by studies on the role of segmental duplications  to the origin and evolution of microrna families
 <cit> .

in total, nine novel microrna families were found to be enriched in short duplicated fragments . we detected  <dig> microrna families, previously found to be related to segmental duplications
 <cit> , in which new microrna paralogs could also be enriched in short genomic fragments .

for the nine novel microrna families, the average identity score is  <dig> %, slightly lower compared to microrna enriched in segmental duplications , and far lower than those already deposited in mirbase . these nine novel microrna families are derived from small duplications, with an average length around  <dig> bp, which could be the reason they were overlooked by previous segmental duplication analysis. furthermore, through detailed analyses on local genomic regions, microrna families previously identified by segmental duplication analyses to be expanded in the human genome could have new paralogs . for instance, for the microrna family hsa-mir- <dig>  multiple isolated and conserved genomic fragments shorter than  <dig> kb could contain potential microrna paralogs .

furthermore, our methods were able to detect  <dig> mitochondria-related microrna families , and  <dig> other microrna families already deposited in mirbase . however, three of the four mitochondria-related microrna families, hsa-mir- <dig>  hsa-mir- <dig>  and hsa-mir- <dig>  were not further curated in mirbase, since they overlap with transfer-rna  sequences. despite the exclusion of these three microrna in the mirbase, experimental evidence suggests that microrna can be derived from t-rna, and still demonstrate biological functions
 <cit> .

to see if these microrna families expanded in the human genome were specific to the primate lineage, we did further comparison to  <dig> other mammalian genomes . we found  <dig> primate-specific microrna families , and the microrna cluster on chromosome  <dig>  is the largest primate-specific cluster and may contribute to human reproduction, which has already been examined in detail
 <cit> . the hsa-mir- <dig> family appears to be further expanded in the human genome, compared to other primates. furthermore, four novel microrna families detected here were also specific to primate genomes  . in addition, nine microrna families were found to be nonspecific to primate genomes, in which four of them were novel  . investigation into the hsa-mir- <dig> family reveals that it further expanded in primates , but with lower sequence conservation rates .

patterns of emergence of microrna paralogs
we examined the location of these microrna paralogs relative to protein-coding genes, the sequence conservation rate, and the flanking genomic sequences as well, to see if there exist certain patterns related to the expansion of these detected microrna paralog families.

nearly all of the duplicated genomic fragments containing microrna paralogs were localized in intronic regions of protein-coding genes or non-coding transcripts, and only two of them were found in the 3′-untranslated region , which is in agreement with the origin of novel microrna proposed previously
 <cit>  . evidence of cdna expression for microrna paralogs was found through public database searching . furthermore, novel microrna families expanded in the human genome were found to be embedded in proteins  mostly with conservative functions, such as tubulins and keratins . for instance, the hsa-mir- <dig> family was found to be related to golgi autoantigen, golgin subfamily a,  <dig> pseudogenes, which are expressed in fetal brain  and embryonic stem cells . interestingly, we found that for the hsa-mir- <dig> family, the conserved mature microrna sequences  in all the paralogs were found to be missing from the cdna sequences deposited in the database . these 82-bp fragments in the paralogs could potentially be spliced out after processing precursor mrnas, and subsequently function as microrna.

direct analyses on microrna paralog sequence features in all expanded microrna families found that mature microrna sequences and the seed regions of microrna paralogs could be under the influence of different selective forces
 <cit> . for instance, in two microrna families, hsa-mir- <dig> and hsa-mir- <dig> , we can clearly see that most of the microrna paralogs had nearly identical mature sequences, while others demonstrate dissimilar features. these sequence changes could affect the stability of the stem-loop structure of the microrna paralogs. further examination on the flanking genomic regions of these microrna families found they are highly conserved .

furthermore, the analysis on repetitive elements in the flanking genomic regions may contribute to the understanding of the origin of these microrna families. repetitive elements, such as alu elements, were discovered previously to potentially affect the expansion of certain microrna clusters as well as the genes located in duplicated genomic segments
 <cit> . we found that alu elements are also enriched in the flanking regions of microrna paralogs  . surprisingly, the l <dig> elements have also been enriched in these sequences, which implied that they could also function in the evolutionary path of formation of certain microrna paralogs. furthermore, l <dig> elements had the highest percentage , but not significantly different with alus elements .

validation of expansion of two microrna families
we further confirmed our results for two microrna families found to be expanded in the human genome, using fluorescence in situ hybridization  . one of them was identified previously , and one novel microrna family  detected in this study. we can see that both probes hybridize to multiple locations in the human genome . furthermore, our computational methods detected that both mirna families have paralogs on the same chromosomes,  <dig>   <dig>   <dig> and y , which is evident in the merged hybridization signals being nearby each other .

discussion
using information provided by short duplication events in the human genome, we discovered novel microrna paralogs for different microrna families, which could have fundamental importance for human biology and the study of complex phenotypic traits. however, since the number of micrornas deposited in the public database are far less than predicted, new microrna paralogs and clusters may still exist in the human genome. furthermore, this method can be extended for other non-coding rnas, which can potentially reveal interesting patterns of specific important duplications in the human genome.

the study of microrna from a comparative genomics standpoint is not without some limitations. the majority of the computational prediction methods use either precursor or mature microrna sequences, combined with the examination of predicted secondary-structure
 <cit> . the drawback of this approach is that only highly conserved potential micrornas within or across species can be discovered. experimental methods to date have only sampled limited tissues at few time-points, which will restrict the identification of novel microrna
 <cit> . even though high-throughput small rna sequencing has led to the identification of numerous novel micrornas, the number and speed of discovery are still limited
 <cit> . our methods could to some degree help the identification and interpretation of novel microrna paralogs in the human genome.

alu elements have been proposed to be involved in the propagation of microrna clusters and segmental duplications
 <cit> . we also found in this study that alus is the most abundant subfamily , followed by aluj  and aluy  , which indicates that microrna expansion events discovered here could follow a similar evolutionary path as reported in
 <cit> . furthermore, we provide evidence here that in addition to alu elements, l <dig> repetitive elements are also associated with duplication of specific microrna sequences. while numerous molecular mechanisms could be hypothesized for microrna expansion, there remains a strong association that specific repetitive elements may have played important roles in the evolution of microrna containing loci in humans. these duplicated paralogs could obtain partial and/or novel functions or exert dosage effects, acquire novel regulatory elements for tissue-specific expression, possess modifications in seed sequence resulting in novel micrornas, and potentially beneficial or detrimental to certain individuals or a specific population
 <cit> . the conserved flanking sequences indicate that similar regulatory mechanisms could be involved in the tuning of these paralogs, but the changed sequences of the mature microrna paralog could target different sets of genes and affect different gene clusters. however, detailed functional analysis is still needed to understand the outcome of the duplicated microrna molecules
 <cit> .

we found that novel microrna could potentially be generated through the processing of pseudogene transcripts. these expanded microrna families in the human genome could provide novel insights on the evolution and regulation of the human genome and its interaction with the environment. particularly, these expanded microrna families could add another level of complexity into the regulatory network formed among messenger rnas, transcribed pseudogenes, long noncoding rnas, through the amplification of microrna abundance
 <cit> .

limited amounts of population resequencing data restricted our understanding of intra-species variation regarding one of the structural variations, the expansion of microrna family, which has important practical implications . however, the rapid developments in sequencing technology will alleviate this problem in the near future, as already shown in the  <dig> genomes project
 <cit> . further detailed analysis on the association of microrna expansion with features unique to each ethnic group will potentially reveal their biological importance in human diversity.

CONCLUSIONS
taken together, we found that small duplication events in the human genome may contribute to microrna expansion, which could provide novel insights on the evolution of genome architecture, in addition to the development of human diseases.

