BACKGROUND
centromeres form the points at which the spindle attaches to dna to ensure its proper segregation during cell division. this function is conserved from yeast to humans, and yet centromeres evolve rapidly  <cit> . indeed, some have proposed that rapid centromere evolution could drive speciation  <cit> . more specifically, henikoff et al  <cit>  propose that because centromeres and the genes encoding their associated proteins are essential and more rapidly evolving than other dna, their divergence is more likely than other dna to result in genetic incompatibilities in hybrids following reproductive isolation.

why would centromere sequences that are essential to proper chromosome segregation be evolving so fast? most types of centromere are not defined by their dna sequence  <cit> , so a trivial explanation is that their rapid evolution is simply a consequence of low levels of selective constraint. however, there is growing evidence that centromeres evolve more rapidly even than selectively unconstrained parts of the genome  <cit> , requiring more complex scenarios to explain this paradox of centromere evolution.

several hypotheses have been put forth to explain fast centromere evolution. first, centromere sequences may act as selfish elements in the asymmetric meioses of female plants and animals  <cit> . under this model of meiotic drive , centromere sequences have the potential to mutate in such a way that new alleles could bias their own segregation into an egg, and so centromeres evolve rapidly as a result of repeated selective sweeps as such alleles drive to fixation  <cit> . alternatively, gene conversion could lead to the diversification of repeats  <cit>  and thus facilitate rapid centromere evolution since most centromeres are repetitive  <cit> . thirdly, centromeres may simply suffer a higher rate of mutation than other parts of the genome  <cit> .

while rapid centromere evolution is observed in a diversity of species  <cit> , alternative theories cannot explain rapid centromere evolution equally well in all eukaryotes. for example, yeasts have symmetric meioses, and thus there is no obvious advantage to meiotic drive  <cit> . likewise, the point centromeres of saccharomyces yeasts are short, with their rapidly evolving core  spanning a non-repetitive region of only 80- <dig> bp . thus, gene conversion involving repetitive dna cannot directly explain rapid centromere divergence in yeasts. however, gene conversion is mutagenic in yeast  <cit> , and so a high rate of gene conversion induced mutation may explain rapid evolution even in yeast centromeres. saccharomyces yeasts therefore offer a powerful system with which to resolve the different forces governing fast centromere evolution.

in this study i address the causes of rapid centromere evolution in yeast by resequencing all point centromeres from  <dig> strains of saccharomyces cerevisiae and studying published genomic data  <cit>  for these strains and a further  <dig> strains of saccharomyces paradoxus, to show that centromere evolution is rapid in both species. using the population genetic data for s. cerevisiae, i test for the signatures of natural selection or recombination expected under meiotic drive or gene conversion models of rapid centromere evolution. i also estimate the mutation spectrum at centromeres and compare it with the spectra expected under spontaneous mutation  <cit>  or mutagenic gene conversion  <cit> . evidence presented here suggests that rapid centromere evolution in s. cerevisiae is due to a generalised increase in the mutation rate and not due to recombination or meiotic drive.

RESULTS
rapid centromere evolution in saccharomyces yeasts
the point centromeres of saccharomyces yeasts are made up of three centromere dna elements . cdei  and cdeiii  are protein-binding sites whose dna sequence is highly conserved to preserve their function  <cit> . these are separated by cdeii, which is an at-rich region of conserved length and base composition, but not primary sequence  <cit>  . consistent with a lack of any constraint on primary sequence, targeted resequencing of five cdeii sequences in s. paradoxus, the closest relative of s. cerevisiae, showed that these evolve more rapidly than other parts of the genome  <cit> . the limited sample of centromeres used leaves open the question of whether fast centromere evolution is a genome-wide phenomenon.

here i show through analysis of whole-genome shotgun data from liti et al   <cit>  that rapid cdeii sequence evolution extends to at least  <dig> of  <dig> s. paradoxus centromeres . s. paradoxus exist in diverged populations from europe, far east and america  with little or no gene flow  <cit>  and some reproductive isolation between them  <cit> . levels of sequence divergence in cdeii are similar  to past estimates from five centromeres  and much higher than past chromosome-wide estimates of divergence , or even of unconstrained synonymous sites  or transposable element  fragments   <cit> . te fragments have no obvious function and so are expected to evolve under no selective constraint, and in s. paradoxus tes do evolve at the rate expected from synonymous sites in the absence of codon usage bias  <cit> . direct comparison between cdeii and te sequences in this study also shows that cdeii sequences diverge more rapidly and show higher polymorphism than these unconstrained tes , confirming previous results  <cit> .

table showing nucleotide diversity  within the european population or pairwise distance  between populations. 95% confidence intervals  of each median are based on  <dig>  bootstrap replicates. dna sequence data are those published in liti et al  <cit>  and only 13- <dig> loci were available for s. paradoxus because palas alignment data were missing for all strains of s. paradoxus for cen <dig> and because of low coverage of the american strains for cen <dig>  cen <dig> and cen <dig> 

fast centromere evolution may transcend species boundaries, since the rate of divergence between s. cerevisiae and s. paradoxus appears so high at centromeres that centromeres and their immediate flanks do not align , although most of the genome is readily aligned between the two species  <cit> . this is also the case when s. cerevisiae centromere loci are aligned with the outgroup species, saccharomyces mikatae   <cit> , implying that rapid centromere divergence is not restricted to the s. paradoxus lineage.

consistent with rapid centromere evolution, cdeii also has exceptionally high levels of variation in s. cerevisiae, resulting from point mutations scattered throughout the cdeii region . mean nucleotide diversity in cdeii estimated from a global sample of strains  is much higher than past genome-wide estimates of unconstrained nucleotide diversity in s. cerevisiae  <cit> . indeed cdeii nucleotide diversity is higher than that for unconstrained non-coding sites  or for synonymous sites  . even the lowest estimate of nucleotide diversity observed across  <dig> centromeres  is 3-fold higher than these prior estimates for variation in unconstrained sequences. the higher variability in cdeii could be a consequence of a broader global population sample in the strains used here compared to those used by doniger et al.  <cit> . when controlling for differences in sampling by comparing nucleotide diversity for cdeii to that estimated from tes in the same strains using te data from  <cit> , i still see much higher nucleotide diversity in cdeii .

nucleotide diversity of cdeii  was estimated across the cdeii component of all  <dig> centromeres and π for tes was estimated for the  <dig> loci at which tes appeared fixed. p values are the result of wilcoxon tests comparing  <dig> estimates of π of cdeii to  <dig> estimates of π of tes for each population.

the intergenic dna flanking centromeres also has higher levels of variation  than average unconstrained non-coding sites   <cit> . this result is consistent with the finding that the intergenic dna flanking centromeres shows more rapid evolutionary divergence than other intergenic regions in s. paradoxus  <cit> , and the observation that centromere flanking dna also fails to align between saccharomyces species . this suggests that the phenomenon of rapid centromere evolution extends beyond the centromere core itself into the dna immediately flanking centromeres. however, since cdei and cdeiii are subject to selective constraint, and the intergenic regions flanking centromeres varying in length and constraint have been sampled to different extents, analyses presented here focus on cdeii. furthermore, since more is known about the mutation process in s. cerevisiae, and since i have full coverage of centromere dna sequences in s. cerevisiae, the analyses below are of s. cerevisiae data.

a high mutation rate at s. cerevisiae centromeres
if centromeres evolve rapidly because repeated selective sweeps drive new centromere alleles to fixation, then we expect levels of polymorphism to be low at centromeres, even if overall centromere divergence is high. in contrast, if centromere evolution is rapid because of higher rates of mutation at centromeres, then we expect centromeres to be highly polymorphic within species as well as diverged between species. the high levels of polymorphism observed in s. cerevisiae and s. paradoxus are therefore more consistent with a high mutation rate underlying rapid centromere evolution.

the large number base pair substitutions causing high nucleotide diversity does not appear to result from the at-richness of centromeres. although yeast centromeres are a target for slippage mutations, insertions and deletions are not included in measures of polymorphism in this study , and so these do not explain the high mutation rate at centromeres. while diversity is higher than expected compared to other regions it does not present a problem for dna sequence alignment, and nucleotide substitutions are unambiguously scored . furthermore, similarly at-rich genomic regions away from the centromere do not show higher levels of divergence and polymorphism in s. paradoxus  <cit> .

a drawback with using a global population sample of s. cerevisiae to assay levels of polymorphism, is that population structure exists within this global sample  <cit> . if new centromere alleles are driven to fixation by meiotic drive within subpopulations, divergence between subpopulations may lead to the inference of high levels of global polymorphism. to control for population structure, i examine levels of polymorphism within the populations defined by liti et al  <cit> . in all three s. cerevisiae subpopulations where there are sufficient data, centromeres show significantly more nucleotide diversity than unconstrained te sequences . likewise, analysis of s. paradoxus dna sequence data also reveals high levels of polymorphism within populations . this suggests that the rapid fixation of alleles within subpopulations expected from meiotic drive is not responsible for rapid centromere evolution in yeast. indeed the rate of cdeii evolution is approximately  <dig> or  <dig> times higher than tes whether this is estimated from diverged s. paradoxus lineages, or various s. cerevisiae and s. paradoxus populations . the constancy of this cdeii:te ratio in both divergence and polymorphism comparisons is consistent with a neutral evolutionary force like mutation.

recombination does not explain rapid centromere evolution directly
recent work suggests that recombination in the form of gene conversion may be an alternative mechanism to explain rapid centromere evolution  <cit> . therefore, i tested for evidence of recombination in centromeres using a likelihood method  <cit>  and the classic four-gamete test for recombination  <cit> . given the high density of polymorphic sites within centromeres and the number of strains studied, some identical polymorphisms will have arisen on different haplotype backgrounds by chance. under most tests of recombination these cases of homoplasy will be mistaken for recombination. the tests of recombination used here estimate the probability of recombination, given the likelihood of homoplasy  <cit>  .

the recombination events listed here show statistically significant evidence  for recombination using  <dig> or more test implemented in ldhat, as well as with the 4-gamete test followed by simulation to test the likelihood of multiple mutations. rmin is the minimum number of recombination events estimated at each locus  <cit> , and no. of sites is the number of sites showing evidence for recombination.

overall, i find no evidence for recombination in s. cerevisiae centromeres, with only one possible exception . in the one centromere that shows potential evidence for recombination, cen <dig>  the p-value is only marginally significant, and depends on only two segregating sites with evidence of either recombination or homoplasy. the removal of only one site is sufficient to remove the signal of recombination. in contrast, there is much stronger evidence for recombination in the regions flanking three out of sixteen centromeres , and some of these events appear to occur very close to the centromere .

the mutation spectrum at centromeres is similar to genome-wide spontaneous mutation
to further resolve whether high levels of variation in centromeres result from the action of gene conversion or spontaneous mutation, i investigated the mutation spectrum in centromere sequences. the data presented here are of sufficient quality for this purpose, since i expect few or no sequencing errors in the s. cerevisiae centromere data . in order to distinguish insertions from deletions and to infer the direction of change of base pair substitutions from polymorphism data, we need to know the ancestral state at each site. this inference is complicated by the fact that no useful outgroup is known for s. cerevisiae centromeres since s. paradoxus is too diverged at centromeres to align cdeii . therefore i examined the mutation spectrum of  <dig> base pair substitutions, and  <dig> indels that are each unique to one haplotype and therefore assumed to exist in the derived state. approaches that use gene genealogies or phylogenetic trees to infer the polarity of mutations include unique as well as other alleles as derived, and thus this method is conservative in terms of identifying unambiguously polarisable mutations.

in cdeii, transitions are as common as transversions, given the fact that there are two times as many possible transversions as transitions . a lack of transition bias is also the case for genome-wide estimates   <cit> , and when all data on wild-type patterns of spontaneous mutation are pooled   <cit> . moreover the transition:transversion ratio in cdeii is not significantly different from that seen from pooled counts of spontaneous mutations in wild-type cells in s. cerevisiae . in contrast, transitions are more common than transversions when levels of gene conversion are high  but this transition bias is not observed in centromeres . thus, the ratio of transitions to transversions observed in cdeii is like those generally observed for spontaneous mutation and not like that of gene conversion in s. cerevisiae .

the mutation spectrum of cdeii is compared to the wild type spontaneous mutation  inferred from various studies , and the mutation spectrum expected under gene conversion . "other" indicates indels that are ->  <dig> bp long, and in the case of cdeii also includes indels occurring in homopolymer runs that were  <dig> bp or longer , other mutations described as "other" for the wt and gc datasets are described in  <cit> . the deletion: base pair subsitution frequency  corrects for the difference in target length at which deletions could be observed compared to the target length for base pair substitutions . for cdeii the number of deletions  was compared to the number of base pair substitutions  outside homopolymer runs. * significantly different from cdeii . poisson tests showed that none of the del:bps frequencies were significantly different from that of cdeii.

there is also no significant difference in the mutation spectrum seen at centromeres compared to that seen genome-wide  <cit>  . there is however a significant bias for c-> t or g-> a transitions , suggesting that cytosine deamination is a common source of mutation at centromeres. high levels of c:g-> t:a were also noticed and discussed in the genome-wide study of mutation, along with levels of c:g-> a:t transversion that may possibly be elevated due to the conversion of guanine to 8-oxo-guanine  <cit> . cdeii is too at-rich for an accurate assessment of the levels of c:g-> a:t transversion .

apart from an unusually high transition bias, another signature of gene conversion associated mutation is a high level of single nucleotide deletions relative to base pair substitutions  <cit> , and so here i also examine deletions within cdeii. an important consideration when studying insertions or deletions  in cdeii is its unusual homopolymer run content. runs of as and ts are of functional importance within cdeii  <cit> , and such runs are known to lead to a much higher frequency of indels than in other sequence  <cit> . thus there may be significant differences in the frequency of indels between cdeii and spontaneous or gene conversion mutation spectra, simply because of differences in the homopolymer run content in the types of sequence studied. there are indeed many more homopolymer runs of  <dig> bases or more in cdeii sequences  compared with the ura <dig> sequence of kluyveromyces lactis, which was used by hicks et al.  <cit>  to characterise the mutation spectrum under gene conversion , . to control for this fundamental difference in sequence composition, indels occurring inside homopolymer runs of  <dig> bp or longer are considered separately .

although the frequency of single nucleotide deletions in centromeres is not significantly different from that seen under gene conversion, it does appear more similar to that seen in surveys of spontaneous mutation in wild-type cells . deletions within cdeii are slightly higher than other estimates, but this may result from the prevalence of short homopolymer runs in cdeii. after exclusion of homopolymer runs of  <dig> nucleotides or more, more homopolymer runs that are  <dig> bp long remain in the cdeii data , compared with ura <dig>  , and such runs may still attract a higher frequency of deletion. overall, both the point and deletion mutation spectrum at centromeres is more like that expected under wild-type spontaneous mutation than that expected if the higher mutation rate at centromeres resulted from high levels of gene conversion .

discussion
this study extends the past finding that s. paradoxus shows rapid evolution in five centromeres  <cit>  to all centromeres of this species and to a second species with point centromeres, s. cerevisiae . s. cerevisiae is an especially useful species in which to study the cause of rapid centromere evolution because its point centromeres are easy to sequence and patterns of recombination and mutation within its genome are exceptionally well characterised  <cit> . the population and comparative analyses of centromere dna sequences presented here lead to the conclusion that rapid centromere evolution is caused by a generalised increase in the mutation rate and not by meiotic drive or recombination.

under the meiotic drive theory of rapid centromere evolution, we expect low polymorphism within centromeres. point centromeres, the one type of centromere where this is easily and accurately assayed, show the opposite pattern; high diversity within species or populations . this is the case for at least three populations of s. cerevisiae  and one population of s. paradoxus . whether levels of divergence or polymorphism are measured, cdeii seems to evolve  <dig> or  <dig> times faster than selectively unconstrained dna . high levels of polymorphism suggest that rapid centromere evolution is not the result of the sweeps of natural selection predicted by meiotic drive. the exceptionally high levels of polymorphism seen here, and the constant level at which centromere polymorphism or divergence is increased relative to other parts of the genome, are expected if high mutation at centromeres causes their rapid evolution.

the proteins that bind to animal and plant centromeres also contain rapidly evolving regions, and this could be because of positive selection for mutations that suppress meiotic drive of centromeres during female meiosis  <cit> . in contrast, there is no such evidence of positive selection in the centromere binding proteins of yeast  <cit> , and this is consistent with a high mutation rate as a mechanism for rapid centromere evolution in yeast. if there is no evidence for compensatory mutations in yeast centromere binding proteins, then perhaps this implies that the rapid divergence of cdeii sequences has no functional consequences. experimental replacement of cdeii sequences with random sequence of the same length and base composition does however appear to increase rates of segregation distortion in s. cerevisiae  <cit> . therefore it is possible that the high mutation rate at yeast centromeres has functional consequences, but these could only contribute to yeast speciation under a simple dobzhansky-muller model  <cit> : centromeres diverge so that they are no longer bound by their associated binding proteins, as opposed to a meiotic drive model for speciation  <cit>  in which meiotic drive at centromeres and its suppression by centromere binding proteins leads to post-zygotic reproductive isolation.

recent evidence suggests that gene conversion at centromeres could contribute to rapid centromere evolution in maize  <cit> , leading to the proposal that this force could generally explain rapid centromere evolution in eukaryotes  <cit> . the findings of the study in maize came as a surprise, since it has long been thought that recombination is suppressed at centromeres  <cit> , and this has been confirmed in yeast  <cit>  and other species  <cit> ). using population data in yeast and some of the same approaches used for maize  <cit> , i find evidence for recombination very close to centromeres though not within them . a number of recombination events may have occurred close to cen <dig> , where a double-stranded break hotspot is also predicted  <cit> . high-resolution genome-wide mapping of the crossover and non-crossover events from a large number of meioses in s. cerevisiae also shows that crossovers sometimes occur close to centromeres, but not within them, and that gene conversion does not occur close to centromeres at all  <cit> . the absence of a detectable signature of recombination events within centromeres, together with the lack of an obvious mechanism by which gene conversion would increase diversity in non-repetitive point centromeres, suggests that gene conversion does not lead to rapid centromere evolution, at least in the way proposed in maize.

gene conversion is mutagenic  <cit> , so even if the signatures of gene conversion have been obscured in yeast centromeres, perhaps their high mutation rate does result from high rates of gene conversion as a result of this mutagenicity, if not as a result of the products of recombination. analysis of the mutation spectrum at s. cerevisiae centromeres, suggests this too is not the case. the mutation spectrum in cdeii is more like that seen genome-wide and in wild-type strains in studies of spontaneous mutation than it is like the spectrum expected specifically under gene conversion . thus the rapid evolution of yeast centromeres may not rely on the action of a specific dna repair system like that involved in gene conversion.

in summary, it appears that a generalised increase in the mutation rate is responsible for the rapid evolution seen at point centromeres, and this is not the result of gene conversion as recently proposed  <cit> . given that rapid centromere evolution occurs in a broad range of eukaryotes  <cit> , it is possible that high mutation rates could also contribute to the rapid evolution of other eukaryotic centromeres.

apart from rapid evolution, another general characteristic of centromeres is that their dna is wound round a histone specific to centromeres, cenh <dig>  <cit> . this leads to a nucleosome structure that is fundamentally different at centromeres compared to other parts of the genome  <cit> . there is evidence in yeast, human and fish that rates of evolution are higher in dna that is bound in canonical nucleosomes than in flanking linker regions  <cit> . in addition, experimental studies on s. cerevisiae and human show increased mutation rates at nucleosomes because dna repair proteins have reduced access to dna once dna is packaged on histones  <cit> , so this may explain the elevated evolutionary rates observed for dna in nucleosomes  <cit> . it may be especially difficult to unwind dna from a relatively rare histone variant, such as cenh <dig>  with an unusual nucleosome structure, and this could lead to inefficient dna repair at centromeres. similarly, the subtelomeres of s. cerevisiae show accelerated base-pair substitution and also have a non-canonical chromatin structure  <cit> . the alternative conformation of chromatin at centromeres may be necessary for centromere inheritance in the case of regional centromeres or more generally for centromere function  <cit> , but may also expose centromere dna to higher rates of mutation and sequence evolution.

CONCLUSIONS
in this work i present a complete dataset of sequences for all  <dig> centromeres in  <dig> strains of the model yeast species, saccharomyces cerevisae, including more than  <dig>  nucleotides of centromeric dna sequence. using population genetics theory and methods to test for the past effects of natural selection and recombination at centromeres, i rule these forces out as major contributors to rapid centromere evolution in yeast. moreover, as s. cerevisiae is also a model for the study of mutation, i compare the mutation spectrum at centromeres to those expected under different modes of dna repair. these analyses collectively support a model of high mutation rate, rather than meiotic drive or gene conversion, as being the principal force driving rapid centromere evolution in yeast. yeast centromeres are simpler than those of plants or animals and yet they have several characteristics in common with them, such as rapid centromere evolution and an unusual chromatin structure. the results from this study imply that other eukaryotes, such as animals and plants, probably also suffer a high rate of spontaneous mutation at their centromeres.

