BACKGROUND
what fraction of mammalian genomes is transcribed has been the subject of intense debate in the scientific literature as different genome-scale platforms have availed themselves to the question  <cit> . in analyzing the transcriptome, non-coding rnas and products from interspersed genomic repeats have lagged in their characterization as compared to annotated genes. the latter highly repetitive sequences are copies of transposable elements . though often dismissed as ‘junk dna’, cap-selected rna analyses have suggested that substantial portions of mammalian transcripts originate within these sequences  <cit> , and so they may play significant roles in shaping the functional transcriptome.

while only about 5-10% of our dna is attributed to coding sequences and putative functional elements, as much as two thirds  <cit>  is recognizable as te derived. mammal genomes have been hosts to several kinds of transposons, broadly classified by their method of propagation . retrotransposons transcribe an rna intermediate which is then reverse transcribed into dna inserted at a new location within the genome. retrotransposons can be subdivided into autonomous and non-autonomous classes based on whether or not they encode proteins that mediate transposition. major autonomous retrotransposon families include lines  and ervs . although in modern mammalian genomes most retrotransposon copies reflect ancient insertions rendered incompetent for future transposition, active members exist and promote genetic diversity by generating new insertions  <cit> . these include lines in humans and mice, and intracisternal a-particle  ervs in mice. major non-autonomous families use line-encoded proteins for transposition and include sines  such as alu elements in primates, and b <dig> and b <dig> in rodents. dna transposons propagate through a dna based ‘cut-and-paste’ mechanism and are extinct in human and mouse. the genomic contribution of transposons varies between organisms. figure 1a shows the percentage of the ‘mobilome’ owed to each major type of transposon in mouse and human genomes. these proportions reflect homologies of genomic sequence to a manually curated database of repeat consensus sequences, repbase  <cit> .

hosts have evolved several lines of defense to curb the activity of transposons, including barriers to transcription and means to process transposon-encoded rnas, though their effectiveness in curbing expression of specific tes in different contexts are not well described. there are several reasons for researchers to survey te expression. these include better characterizing pathologic states. for example, massive te derepression is thought to be cytotoxic, and is associated with male germ cell loss in experimental models and retinal epithelium damage in macular degeneration in humans . effects of repeat expression on perhaps a smaller scale may play roles in other diseases - for example, promoting genomic instability in tumors  <cit> . additionally, derepression of tes in tumors can generate tumor specific antigens and chimeric transcripts with oncogenic or tumor suppressor activities. thus, te-encoded rnas and proteins may have utility as diagnostic or prognostic markers or as targets for therapy, independent of the ability of the associated te to promote its own transposition  <cit> .

to describe transposon expression in a variety of normal and diseased states, we developed a custom microarray, which we term te-array. traditional gene expression microarrays have proved capable of identifying altered te expression  <cit> , but most do not systematically survey numerous types of tes. we developed platforms tiling all mouse and human te sequences in both sense and antisense strands. the approach has the advantages of being fairly comprehensive and easily scaled with costs and turn-around times comparing favorably with rnaseq. we envision te-array as an efficient modality for screening mouse phenotypes and human disease states for changes in patterns of te expression.

RESULTS
design of te-array
to varying degrees, most gene expression microarrays and genomic tiling arrays used for chromatin immunoprecipitation  studies ‘mask’ repeat sequences from consideration in probe design or exclude probes without unique matches to the reference genome. rationales for this include concern that these probes will not behave technically like unique sequence probes  and that they will fail to provide desired information reflective of a specific gene or genomic locus. we are interested in studying transposon-derived sequences, and so we designed an array in which these repetitive probes are the main features.

we designed te-array probes using annotated consensus sequences of mus musculus or homo sapiens specific repeats from repbase  <cit> . probes were obtained using a custom perl script to collect 60 bp sequences across the length of each repeat consensus. overlapping probes were collected with offsets of 14-15 bp increments over short repeats, and every 30-45 bp for long repeats. for the sense strand arrays, the probes are the same strand  as the consensus sequence found in repbase  <cit> . we also created counterpart arrays for antisense strand detection by using the reverse complement of each probe sequence. we did not duplicate highly similar probe sequences, culling probes from the list with fewer than 3 bp mismatches to an already accepted probe using bowtie and un-gapped blast alignments. the contribution of different te families to total genomic repeat content for the two species is shown . the representation of each family with respect to probes on te-array mirrors these proportions . for all of the experiments described, we prepared labeled rna samples for hybridization to te-array in accordance with standard methods for gene expression arrays. a schematic of both te-array design and rna sample labeling is shown in additional file 1: figure s <dig> 

array reproducibility
to test the reproducibility of te sequence probe behavior, we carried out a series of technical and biological replicates. technical replicates involved multiple hybridizations of single rna preparations. we used rna from breast cancer cell lines derived from balbc mice overexpressing rat her2/neu for these studies, n3d and n1g. briefly, adherent cells were expanded, total rna extracted, cdna labeled in parallel cy3-dctp and cy5-dctp reactions, and sense strand te-arrays hybridized for 17 hours. variability in dye behaviors was normalized using the widely applied local regression  method  <cit> . the m value, defined as the log <dig> ratio of the normalized cy <dig> and cy <dig> fluorescent intensities, was evaluated at each probe. as expected, the m values from technical replicate comparisons scatter at m value =  <dig> . additional file 2: figures s2a and b show the pairwise correlation plots within each replicate type and cell line.

two types of biological replicates were performed; the first compared different rna preparations from independent cultures of the same cell line. in these studies, we labeled one rna sample using cy <dig> and its corresponding sample using cy5; and hybridized these together . the second approach used rna isolated from different dissections of the same mouse organ compared to rna from a pool of different mouse organs; results of these studies are described further below. additional file 3: table s <dig> describes the number of replicates used in each phase of this study.

detection of expressed genes and transfected transposons
we included gene-specific probes on the microarray as positive controls for reverse transcription and hybridization conditions. as expected, these probes showed previously described patterns of gene expression. tissue specific expression was most striking for several testis genes .

as a positive control for te expression detection, we transfected human hela cells with a plasmid to exogenously express long interspersed element  <dig> . l <dig> sequences account for about 17% of the human genome, and l <dig> is of special interest as a subset are active today in humans and mice  <cit> . there are an estimated  <dig>  copies of l <dig> in the human genome, although most are small fragments. endogenous l <dig> transcripts and splice products have been reported as a series of faint bands in northern blots of hela cells using a 5′utr l <dig> probe  <cit> .

to test the ability of te-array to detect ectopically expressed l <dig>  l1hs  and  gfp- expressing plasmids were transiently transfected into hela cells. polyadenylated rna was extracted from both cultures, and an rt-pcr was performed to verify l <dig> expression from the plasmid. this assay generates an amplicon only from the ectopically expressed l <dig> transcript, which includes non-l <dig> 5′utr sequence before sharing the remainder of its sequence  in common with endogenous l <dig>  each rna sample was then fluorescently labeled with either cy <dig> or cy <dig>  and these were co-hybridized to the te-array. results are shown in figure 2a-c. as expected, we detected l <dig> as the “top hit” in l1hs plasmid transfected cells  as compared to cells with the control plasmid. figure 2a shows an ma plot of all probes on the array. this graph plots a measure of the change in expression, the m value , against the average of the log <dig> of the fluorescence intensities, the a value. probes with very high signals in the control changed relatively little , while significant shifts in m values were seen for other l1hs probes . while most non-l <dig> tes and repetitive sequences did not change in this study , l <dig> transfection was also associated with downregulation of the spliceosomal u <dig> snrna. this may be related to decreased l1-snrna chimeric rnas  <cit> , though we have not tested this.

to better understand why a subset of l1hs probes showed changes in expression in this experiment, we plotted the m value of each probe verses its copy number in genomic dna . full length  l <dig> genomic copies are infrequent, and most are 5′ truncated. this observation has been ascribed to interruptions in the reverse transcription  and integration of new l <dig> sequences; rt initiates at the 3′ l <dig> end  <cit> . thus, the 3′ l <dig> end is present in several hundred thousand genomic copies, whereas the 5′ end occurs a few thousand times in our genome  element average at  <dig> copies in the human genome) . we saw the highest m value increments with l <dig> expression selectively at 5′ l <dig> probes . the effect was pronounced; probes mapping to the 3′ end were not significantly different in the cells transfected with l <dig> as compared to control gfp-transfected cells. since many of the latter probes showed high fluorescence intensity in both transfected and untransfected samples, we propose that these probes reflect chimeric transcripts or non-specific ‘read through’ rnas that incorporate the 3′ end of l <dig>  a schematic of these presumptive products  and the relatively greater increase in 5′ l <dig> rna sequences with transfection is shown .

te-array ‘top hits’ show concordance with nanostring® and rnaseq analyses
 nanostring® concordance
nanostring is an rna quantification method based on the ability of rna molecules to bridge complementary, sequence-specific ‘capture’ and ‘reporter’ probes  <cit> .

to test concordance between this method and te-array, we selected  <dig> te regions found to be significantly differentially expressed in te-array experiments in at least one tissue as compared to the somatic tissue pool. abundance of these regions in polya rna from individual tissues  was then measured using nanostring probes. polyadenylated rna from the same pool of tissues used in the te-array studies was used for comparisons. log <dig> ratios of te sequence counts in the individual tissue rnas verses in pooled rna were calculated and compared to te-array log <dig> ratio . the correlation plot comparing these two methods is shown in figure 3a; pearson’s correlation coefficient was  <dig>  .

 rnaseq concordance
the same  <dig> te regions were also evaluated using publicly available rnaseq data  <cit> . te aligning read counts were acquired using sequencing of polyadenylated rna from individual tissues as well as an in silico generated rna pool. the log <dig> ratios of read counts were compared to te-array m values. the average pearson’s correlation coefficients between all tissue comparisons is  <dig> ; data are shown in figure 3b.

strand bias in te rna levels
antisense specific te arrays have special utility to reveal transcription initiated from internal te antisense promoters as well as instances of repeat-containing transcripts generated by ‘read-through’ transcription with te ‘exonization’, which can happen in either direction along the length of a repeat unit. in some cases, internal te antisense promoters  are known and may be expected to reproducibly generate signal at corresponding probes. an example is an asp in the 5′ end of human l1s  <cit> . exonization events, in which an intronic or gene proximal te is expressed by ‘read through’ and retention of te sequence in a cellular transcript would map in a highly locus-dependent manner, with intervals of expression bounded by any functional splice sites along the length of the te.

to compare global sense verses antisense profiles of te expression, we ran testis, lung, breast, and brain samples on both antisense and sense detecting microarrays. antisense array probes showed overall lesser intensities and far fewer examples of differential te expression than did the sense arrays. the relative gap in intensities is illustrated by figure 4a. probes corresponding to l <dig> and ltr retrotransposons in antisense showed average raw signal intensities of approximately 30-40% the values measured for sense probes of the same elements. for short interspersed repeat families , this effect was more pronounced; average antisense signal intensities were only 5% of sense signals. the top  <dig> probes as ranked by signal intensity detecting l <dig>  ltr, and sine rna in sense had  <dig>  fold,  <dig>  fold, and  <dig>  fold, respectively the average intensity of the top  <dig> antisense probes. this suggests that the bulk of te expression occurs in a sense strand specific manner relative to the te. alignments of ultra-high-depth, stranded rnaseq data to the mouse repbase consensus sequences reflect a more modest overall  strand bias in our hands, most evident in species-specific repeat types as opposed to ancestral repeats in the mouse genome .

similarly, most instances of differential  te expression were seen in the sense orientation. an example expression plot shows this . here, distinct portions of the iapey4_i endogenous retrovirus consensus sequence can be seen to be expressed in heart. this is unique to the sense strand  and not evident when the antisense strand is considered . the m value  is used as the metric for differential expression in this plot.

m values for more tes are represented by red/green color intensities for sense and antisense detecting arrays . of the tissues studied, testis showed relatively more expression of antisense te transcripts as compared to somatic tissues, an effect we consider further in the discussion.

te transcripts show tissue-specific expression patterns
to investigate how expression patterns vary with tissue type, we profiled sense te expression in a panel of normal mouse tissues, including lung, heart, liver, kidney, brain, breast, and testis.

te expression profiles of individual samples were compared using a euclidean distance function. the resulting dendrogram showed tissue types could be delineated based on their expression of repeat-containing rna . the profile is most distinct in comparing germ line  tissue to the various somatic tissues. to generate a different visual, the same euclidean distance matrix was used for a multidimensional scaling  plot .

deviations of m values  away from zero of contiguous te probes were used to identify highly tissue specific te expression. figure  <dig> shows expression maps of several highly differentially expressed mouse endogenous retroviruses as well as a representative murine l <dig> and sine. these graphs show m values  on the y-axis plotted against the te consensus sequence length.

finally, we tested whether te sequences may be expressed in a tissue-specific manner because of co-regulation with surrounding tissue-specific genes. disproportionate numbers of these te sequences embedded in differentially expressed gene loci would be an indication of such co-regulation. to assess this, we recovered genomic positions corresponding to differentially expressed te segments and annotated each for occurrence within a gene transcript unit. for a given tissue type, this provided a list of gene loci containing sequences of differentially expressed tes. we saw no overrepresentation of differentially expressed genes as compared to randomly selected genes in these lists .

CONCLUSIONS
measuring expression from highly repetitive genomic sequences is complex. part of this is owed to inherent features of genomic repeats. many te families have populated mammalian genomes over evolutionary time, and members of each type have shown fragmentation and degenerating homology with aging. a second layer of complexity stems from variant transcript structures. interspersed repeat sequences can be transcribed actively as well as passively as a part of a cellular pre-mrna or other forms of cellular rna, and can then be processed by rna splicing machinery with a variety of outcomes  <cit> . thus, though methods like northern blots  <cit> , rnase protection assays  <cit> , rt-pcrs  <cit> , and race pcrs  <cit>  all suggest interesting patterns of repeat expression in human tissues and cells, they thus far have focused on a very minor subset of elements . they cannot be practicably scaled to capture the complexity of the ‘mobilome’ in a variety of tissue types.

we thus approached the task of designing a te expression microarray platform. for both human and mouse repeats, we have designed an  <dig>  probe, two array set that is available for distribution to laboratories through the manufacturer. probes have been designed against all annotated transposons - approximately  <dig> mouse and  <dig> human te consensus sequences - in both sense and antisense orientations. coverage is dense and deep , with probes sequences designed in overlapping intervals along the length of each te consensus sequence. we address numerous technical concerns in this publication, showing that these probes do not generate arbitrary irreproducible signals and that there is agreement between te-array and other state-of-the-art rna detection modalities, including nanostring and rna-seq.

using te-array to profile transposon expression in a variety of normal mouse tissues, we make two encompassing observations. the first is that transposon expression is detectable most frequently from probes for sense strand transcripts. this expression is most often segmental or involving short series of contiguous probes along the length of longer repeat sequences. we interpret the strand bias as evidence that sequences intrinsic to the interspersed repeats themselves are directing much of this transcription, consistent with the observation that many transcripts originate in this portion of the genome  <cit> . in contrast, exclusively ‘read through’ transcription of intronic tes as directed by gene promoters would be expected to give comparable signals in sense and antisense for most element types where there is random orientation of each te within its gene locus.

our second major observation is that there are highly distinct patterns of retroelement expression in crosswise comparisons of different mouse tissues. specific intervals of a broad complement of te families appear differentially expressed in any given tissue. these patterns of sense strand repeat expression appear pervasive; they do not only typify testis, where specific te repression pathways have been described or brain, where l <dig> line expression has been studied . interestingly, although testicular samples adhere to the sense strand bias we describe above, examples of intense signals from antisense probes are more prevalent in this tissue. it is possible these signals reflect primary antisense transcripts from tes or pirna clusters which initiate pirna biogenesis  <cit> . pirnas in turn are critical for imposing te silencing during gametogenesis. spermatogenic tubule dissection experiments may demonstrate stage specificity for these antisense species and provide insights into their regulation.

our work complements and extends observations made with the first generation of microarrays to detect interspersed repeats, reparray, designed by horard et al.  <cit> . using  <dig> oligonucleotides, their design designates a single oligonucleotide target and its reverse complement for each type of transposable element. each probe appears in duplicate on the array. the key advantage of our platform design relates to probe quantity; te-array comprises in contrast  <dig>  probes. a ten kilobase retrovirus is given a single sense-oriented and antisense-oriented probe pair on reparray chosen to maximize specificity for that family. the same element is represented by more than  <dig> overlapping, sense and antisense oriented probes on te-array. given how te expression can be seen over discrete intervals within a larger consensus sequence, this density of coverage appears vital to capture. excitingly, reparray has proven useful not only as an expression array, but also in transcription factor chromatin immunoprecipitation  and methylated dna immunoprecipitation  experiments  <cit> . although these applications may be highly sensitive to the lack of probe coverage on this platform, the experiments are a demonstration of how microarrays can give insights into te regulation at multiple molecular levels.

our discovery of regulated, differential te expression in tissues – from sequences incapable of transposition and in somatic cells where there is no consequence for te propagation in the population – might be viewed as an unexpected result from the perspective of transposon biology. whether these are ‘exapted’ elements with functional roles in tissues is unknown, though their discovery begins to make this question experimentally tractable. moreover, outside of normal cell differentiation and function, profiling te expression in cancers, infertilities, and degenerative conditions where repeat derepression has been described may suggest functional roles in disease or provide new markers of a disease state.

in summary, we show that a wide diversity of transposon sequences can be incorporated in expression microarray designs to provide more comprehensive profiles of te expression. first applications of the technology suggest that control of te expression is determined by repeat encoded sequence features and regulated in a highly tissue-specific manner.

