BACKGROUND
the domesticated pig  is an obvious choice for genome sequencing, because of its important economic value for meat production and its relevance to biomedical research. the evolutionary position of the pig as an artiodactyl, where no other large scale sequencing efforts have so far been published, makes it valuable for comparative genomics.

comparative vertebrate genome analysis – e.g. with the aim of understanding evolutionary pressures on the human sequence – is most cost-effective with relatively low coverage, genome wide sequencing of species at different evolutionary distances  <cit> . the mouse and rat genomes  <cit>  and the chimpanzee genome  <cit>  have offered sequences, which are evolutionary quite distant and very close to the human genome sequence, respectively. the evolutionary close chimpanzee sequence can pinpoint significant recent changes in genes, but is not efficient for identification of important regions by comparative approaches because many regions are extremely conserved by chance effects and differences in mutation rates over the genome. the more distantly related rodent sequences are useful in the search for conserved regions of biological importance. however, more species are needed, and an artiodactyl like pig is an obvious choice for the following reasons. 1), by comparing rodents and human, it is not possible to determine whether observable differences, e.g. difference in isochore structure, are mainly due to changes in the rodent or primate lineage since their divergence ; 2) rodents have only a subset of the biological functions important to humans. by including pig additional functions will be covered; 3) even though rodents, artiodactyls and primates diverged at approximately the same time  <cit> , molecular evolution has been faster in the rodent branch, thus the pig is expected to be closer in sequence to human than mouse is. the importance of these points is generally appreciated and comparative genomics sequencing initiatives focusing on restricted regions of the genomes have recently provided much insight .

the chinese-danish pig sequencing consortium has generated about  <dig>  million high quality sequences from  <dig> pig breeds. the present study releases these data and reports an initial evolutionary analysis which confirms that pig and human are closer in sequence space and quantifies the rates of evolution in the pig, rodent and human lineages for various categories of the genome sequences.

RESULTS
the alignments were used to generate the phylogenetic trees in figure  <dig>  as the pig, mouse and human lineages are believed to have diverged at approximately the same time, the trees allow for separate studies of evolution on the human and mouse branches since the divergence of the two species . due to a generally lower rate of nucleotide substitutions in the pig and human lineages, the porcine sequences are more similar to the human than to the mouse sequences. overall, the exonic sequences show the slowest evolution, followed by 5' utr, 3'utr, intergenic and intronic regions, reflecting different levels of selective constraint on these domains.

ultra-conserved sequences
by aligning the set of ultra-conserved regions against the pig genome reads using blast, we were able to find  <dig> of the  <dig> known regions reported in bejerano et al.  with a significant hit of at least  <dig> bp. only  <dig> of these regions were less than 98% conserved . this result agrees very well with the expected 48% of the pig genome being covered and the assumption that these regions are very well conserved within mammalia.

by aligning the pig shotgun data against all human transcripts  we found  <dig> completely conserved sequences exceeding  <dig> bp in length. of these,  <dig> were also found to be completely conserved in the mouse genome, while  <dig> were less conserved . blasting human transcripts vs. the fully assembled mouse genome , we found  <dig> ultra-conserved regions. when aligning this set of sequences against the artificially fragmented mouse genomic dataset using blast it was only possible to classify  <dig>  as ultra-conserved – less than the  <dig> elements found in the human-pig comparison.

mirna
the set of pig mirnas  was compared to human and mouse and it was possible to obtain  <dig> three-way alignments. the evolutionary tree in figure  <dig> was constructed using the hky+gamma model from these alignments with gap positions removed. by construction, the mirnas are more conserved than even the protein coding sequences, but with pig and human being phylogenetically closest. for the  <dig> triple-alignments, we obtained  <dig> cases where pig is closer to human than to mouse,  <dig> cases where pig is closer to mouse than to human, and  <dig> cases where pig is equally distant to human and mouse.

gc content
the intra-genomic variation in gc content among the individual alignments reflects the isochore structure of the genome. thus, from the three species alignments, we calculated the gc content for each functional sequence class for each aligned fragment. for a given type of sequence, only alignments having more than  <dig> nucleotides of the specific type were used. table  <dig> shows that the mean gc content is similar among the three species. the variance among alignments in gc content is generally lower in mouse than in pig and human, but mostly so for coding sequences, followed by the utr and intron regions . figure  <dig> shows the distribution of gc% for the coding alignments. the reduced variability in gc content in mouse compared to human has been shown previously, e.g. figure 8a in  <cit> . the results presented here suggest a very similar pattern in human and pig.

discussion
even though divergence between pig and human occurred approximately at the same time as the divergence between human and mouse, the pig sequence is much more similar to the human sequence. thus, the availability of the pig sequence effectively subdivides the human-mouse evolutionary branch at a position closest to human. this implies that one can determine which changes occurred on the human and mouse branches, respectively, since their divergence. the results of the phylogenetic analysis show that the relative length of the mouse, human and pig branches are different for the different types of data. intronic sites and intergenic sites show a similar pattern, which also closely resembles that of synonymous sites , reflecting that purifying selection is probably weak and similar for these regions. it is noteworthy that intergenic branch lengths are slightly shorter than intronic ones . this may reflect either 1) more selective constraints on intergenic sequences than intronic, i.e. parts of the annotated intergenic sequences are indeed genic, or 2) a bias in the construction of the human-mouse alignment that make it easier to align sequence close to the conserved exons so that somewhat more divergent intronic sequence can be detected. the differences in evolutionary rates among the three species are most likely attributable to differences in generation times since they diverged. non-synonymous sites show shorter branches that are much more similar in lengths among the species  <cit> . this reflects purifying selection, which has been strongest in the mouse lineage, followed by pig and then human  <cit> . the reason for this may be the larger average population size in the mouse since divergence. the utr regions shows more selective constraint than introns.

the similarity between human and pig adds to the recently reported ultra-conserved regions  <cit> . pig and human share more ultra-conserved regions than human and mouse, and  virtually all of the ultra-conserved elements defined by bejerano et al.  <cit>  are also found in pig and therefore most likely in the artiodactyls lineage.

variation in gc content along the genome  is more pronounced in primates than in rodents  <cit> . the present results extend these findings and put artiodactyls in line with primates – lending further support to the suggestion that isochore evolution in rodents deviates from all other lineages, possibly because of extensive genome rearrangements  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
a  <dig> x coverage pig genome survey is hereby released. even though it is only a beginning, the data offer many analytical possibilities and should also stimulate the international initiatives to generate a complete draft of the pig genome. the initial analysis of the data adds to our understanding of the evolutionary relationships of humans, mice and pigs. further comparative genomic studies and more detailed genetic analyses will greatly improve our ability to elucidate pig as well as human biology and medicine.

