BACKGROUND
according to market research, the potential of peptide therapeutics has recently intensified  <cit> . worldwide, there are more than  <dig> marketed peptides, with about  <dig> peptides in clinical phase testing, and about  <dig> peptides in advanced preclinical phases  <cit> . natural peptides, such as insulin, vancomycin, oxytocin, and cyclosporine, and synthetically produced peptides, such as fuzeon  and integrilin , are among the approved peptide-based drugs. compared to low-molecular-mass chemical drugs, peptide drugs offer several advantages, such as high specificity, minimization of drug-drug interactions, lower accumulation in tissues, lower toxicity, and biological diversity. however, peptides also have some disadvantages, which include low oral bioavailability, lower stability, higher risk of immunogenic effects, difficulties associated with delivery due to rapid clearance from the body, and costly synthesis. recently, several novel and interesting approaches to deliver protein-based drugs through the skin have been reported  <cit> . since peptides require costly synthesis, high-throughput screening  of numerous peptides from combinatorial libraries is inefficient. therefore, novel procedures that require less effort for the screening of peptide ligands are required. from this point of view, structure-based computational drug design is an effective methodology. recent advances in protein structure determination, achieved either through x-ray crystallography or nmr, are providing informative data related to the design of useful drugs based on these proteins. the identification of the binding sites on these newly determined protein structures have led to the development of a variety of docking strategies. there are numerous reports of drug discovery from small molecule ligand libraries  <cit> , although it is difficult to calculate the docking energies of all the peptide sequence patterns, as they show enormous diversity. therefore, we focused on the use the genetic algorithms  to reduce the redundancy of the selection procedure.

gas represent a class of algorithms that mimic some of the major characteristics of darwinian evolution  <cit> . gas are based on the process of genetic evolution observed in biological systems, in which three successive operations, selection, crossover, and mutation, are performed on a set of strings. gas provide an effective means of exploring the conformational space of flexible molecules. gas also provide an effective approach to protein folding  <cit> , identification of the biomolecular conformation space  <cit> , docking methodology  <cit> , optimization of lead compounds  <cit> , chemical evolution of combinatorial chemistry  <cit> , and identification of receptor-ligand binding sites  <cit> .

we have previously reported the application of gas to select a peptide inhibitor  <cit> , an α-helix-forming peptide  <cit> , and a dna aptamer with higher-order structure  <cit> . from the result of those studies, it is clear that gas are useful for the efficient selection of molecules that have a desired property or function, since we can reduce the number of rounds of evaluation. in the present study, we have focused on the application of gas for effective peptide ligand selection from a docking simulation. belda et al.  <cit>  have also reported a combination of computational docking and combinatorial experimental screening but have not provided experimental data. we propose an effective approach to derive peptide ligands, which we call 'in silico panning'. by combining the docking study and gas, we are able to identify promising peptide ligands from a small virtual peptide library with less effort .

to demonstrate in silico panning, we chose the water-soluble quinoprotein glucose dehydrogenase  from acinetobacter calcoaceticus as the target protein. mainly due to its high catalytic activity and non-dependence on oxygen as an electron acceptor, pqqgdh has replace glucose oxidase  as the major enzyme used in glucose sensor systems  <cit> . the only aspects in which pqqgdh is inferior to god are substrate specificity and operational stability. pqqgdh shows high activity not only for glucose, but also for disaccharides, such as lactose and maltose, as substrates. improvements in substrate specificity are expected to lead to the development of more-sensitive glucose sensors. therefore, pqqgdh engineering has been carried out in our research group  <cit> . we have already reported mutants of pqqgdh  that show improved substrate specificities  <cit> .

we have also been proposing quaternary structure engineering of proteins, which is the control of protein function using an artificial subunit. in nature, several enzymes are composed of subunits that form an active quaternary structure, which endows a higher order of function. the strategy of quaternary structure engineering is to mimic the native enzyme using a peptide ligand as an artificial subunit with a novel function. from a phage display peptide library, we previously identified a peptide with seven amino acids  that narrowed the substrate specificity of pqqgdh without significant loss of enzyme activity  <cit> . in the present study, in silico peptide evolution was performed to investigate a new methodology for protein modification. our ultimate objective is the selection of a non-competitive peptide ligand that does not interrupt glucose binding but inhibits the interaction between disaccharides, such as maltose and lactose. the disaccharides appear to access a large pocket structure next to the catalytic site of pqqgdh, which comprises arg <dig>  arg <dig>  arg <dig>  arg <dig>  and lys <dig> . we defined this large pocket as the docking field. from size of this pocket, tetra peptide was designed to be the most suitable size as initial tetra peptide library. then, the peptide ligand was selected through a combination of the docking simulation and gas on the basis of binding indicators.

we chose the molecular operating environment of docking  system with simulated annealing method as a starter system  <cit> . simulated annealing is a global optimization technique that is based of the monte carlo method. it explores various states of a configuration space by generating small random changes in the current state and then accepting or rejecting each new state according to the metropolis criterion  <cit> .

RESULTS
docking energy transition in combination with in silico evolution
one of the key steps in docking is how to define the user-specified three-dimensional docking box . to select the non-competitive peptide ligand, we designated the large pocket next to the glucose-binding site . then the peptide ligand was selected by in silico panning; a combination of the docking simulation and gas on the basis of binding indicators. in all, four rounds of selection were carried out from the beginning of ten virtual peptide library on the computer. the docking energy  results for each selection round are listed in table  <dig>  in moe-dock, electrostatic energies and van der waals energies between the target and ligand are calculated by simulated annealing. the docking energy values were calculated as the sum of the electrostatic, van der waals energies and the flexibility of the ligand itself. low docking energy indicates high binding ability. the distributions of the docking energies in each generation are illustrated in figure 3; each docking energy decreased gradually as peptide evolution progressed. after 4th round of peptide evolution, the docking energies of most of the peptides were lower than those in the 1st–3rd round. peptide evolution and the direction of the selection proceeded successfully using the ga.


homologies of highly ranked peptide ligands from the docking simulation
in comparisons of the homologies of high-scoring peptides, the sequences appeared to converge . the peptide homologies converged almost completely after the 4th round of peptide evolution. a negatively charged residue was revealed at the third position with a probability of 80%. furthermore, 60% of the peptides contained positively charged residues at the fourth position. on the other hand, lysine residues did not appear at the fourth position during the four rounds of selection due to deflection of evolution. for this reason, we designed additional peptides, and re-calculated their docking energies. finally, the top three peptides and negative controls were synthesized for further analysis. figure  <dig> displays an image of pqqgdh interacting with peptide gekd, which was derived by moe-dock.

the homologies of selected peptides ranked in the top  <dig> after the 4th round of evolution were listed to the left. additional peptides that contained a lysine  residue at the third position were also listed on the middle. the final rank and the synthetic peptide sequences were shown on the right. the dddd peptide was used as a negative control.

effects of synthetic peptide ligands on pqqgdh activity
as shown in figure 5a,  <dig> μm of peptide serg showed the strongest inhibitory effect on the target enzyme. the same concentration of gekd or gerd also showed higher inhibition than the control peptide dddd. the velocity at maximal concentrations of substrate value of serg  was 3-fold lower then that of the wild-type enzyme , while the affinity of the enzyme for the substrate  values were the same . gekd and gerd gave only slight inhibition of the target, with vmax values of  <dig> u/mg and  <dig> u/mg, respectively. based on the results of the lineweaver-burk plot , serg was deemed to show non-competitive inhibition of the substrate. non-competitive inhibitors do not affect the combination of the substrate with the enzyme, but it does affect the velocity. in a pure non-competitive system, the substrate has an identical affinity for both the enzyme-inhibitor complex and enzyme. unlike the enzyme-substrate complex, the e-i-s complex cannot convert the substrate to product. therefore, the km value is unchanged while vmax is lowered. the data show that serg decreases the rate constant for product formation, while km shows a constant value. it follows that serg is not a glucose competitor. on the other hand, gerd and gekd showed 'mixed-type inhibition' . the peptide serg showed dose-dependent inhibition  and its enzyme inhibition constant value was calculated as  <dig> μm from the dixon plot . all of the ki values were calculated using the kaleidagraph software . although the selected peptides showed potent inhibition, they did not show significantly decreased substrate specificities for disaccharides .

the ki values were derived from the dixon plot. the kd values were determined from the scatchard plot.

binding parameters of selected peptides by surface plasmon resonance 
during the spr experiments, the binding assay for the biotinylated peptides  and pqqgdh was processed by the biacorex instrument . the equilibrium dissociation constant  value used to evaluate the enzyme-peptide binding affinity was determined by scatchard plot . for each trial, the signal was corrected for the control surface response. we were able to confirm peptide binding to the enzyme, and the kd values of peptides gekd and serg were calculated as  <dig> μm and  <dig> μm, respectively.

discussion
in this paper, we introduce the idea of in silico panning, which is a novel strategy to select peptide inhibitors by combining a docking simulation and ga. setting the docking field next to the substrate binding site, we were able to obtain a non-competitive peptide inhibitor from a small virtual peptide library. in this study, the non-competitive peptide inhibitor was successfully and with less effort selected from a small virtual peptide library using in silico panning. this methodology can be used to screen an allosteric binding peptide inhibitor at an early stage.

information derived from x-ray crystallography, nmr spectroscopy, and homology modelling greatly facilitates the rational design of selective and potent inhibitors. in addition, rapid identification of lead molecules and optimization of inhibitors are facilitated by large combinatorial libraries and high-throughput screening. however, successful virtual screening of chemical libraries in the drug discovery process requires a sufficiently large and chemically diverse library of compounds. in addition, the selection of promising peptide inhibitors from such large libraries involves significant cost and effort  <cit> . therefore, we focused on the use of the gas to reduce redundancy during the selection procedure.

in in silico panning, all of the selection processes are carried out by the computer. first, we calculate the affinity of the peptide ligand from docking simulation, and then evolve the sequence by ga, which mimic darwinian evolution. in the present study, the initial group involved ten virtual tetrapeptides designed randomly from seven different amino acid residues . the arg, lys, asp, glu, and ser residues were mainly chosen to form the electrostatic and hydrogen interaction. in addition, hydrophobic pro residues were appeared frequently in a phage display peptide library in a previous study  <cit> , so we chose this residue. gly was chosen to increase the flexibility of the ligand. the large pocket next to the glucose binding site of pqqgdh is mainly composed of hydrophilic residues, including arg <dig>  arg <dig>  arg <dig>  arg <dig>  and lys <dig>  in this study, to simplify the experimental method and concentrate on the hydrophilic interactions, we chose mainly hydrophilic residues for designing the initial peptide library. in the near future, a more complex library, containing several hydrophobic residues, will be used. totally, four rounds of selection were carried out, and  <dig> types of tetrapeptide encompassing seven different amino acid residues were evolved by the computer. since this covered only  <dig> % of the  <dig> possible tetrapeptide combinations, we conclude that the peptide ligands were efficiently selected from this small library by in silico panning. this is the first study to demonstrate the usefulness of in silico evolution using experimental data.

we have reported previously the identification from a phage display peptide library of a 7-mer peptide that causes pqqgdh substrate specificity towards disaccharides to decrease significantly  <cit> . we expected that some of the evolved tetrapeptides would improve the substrate specificity of pqqgdh. although we were not able to obtain a peptide that improved substrate specificity, we obtained a non-competitive peptide inhibitor of the target protein. the selected peptide inhibits the enzyme activity not only for glucose, but also for disaccharides . thus, the substrate specificity does not change in the presence of the peptide ligand. to overcome these problems, we have to select peptide ligands that bind to the target pocket without inhibiting glucose binding. it is possible to calculate the binding of glucose or disaccharides to target area after derivation of a candidate peptide using the docking simulation. thus, we may be able to choose a ligand that decreases only the reactivities for disaccharides.

in this study, we present a valuable method for the selection of a non-competitive peptide inhibitor. for target enzyme that are highly homologous, particularly at the catalytic site, target-specific inhibition is possible through the use of an allosteric or non-competitive inhibitor, which does not bind to the catalytic site but has inhibitory activity. thus, a non-competitive inhibitor sometimes became a specific inhibitor for protein having high homogeny  <cit> . although an rna aptamer and peptide inhibitor with non-competitive and specific inhibitory activities have been selected from a pooled random sequence library  <cit> , a method that allows one to choose a non-competitive inhibitor de novo is more efficient. in our study, by setting the enzyme pocket, which appears to be an allosteric binding site, as the docking area, the non-competitive peptide inhibitor was obtained as expected. the top three selected peptides that were evolved by binding index in the docking study showed much greater inhibition compared to the negative control, dddd. the most effective peptide, serg showed potent inhibition with a ki value of  <dig> μm and kd value of  <dig> μm. in moe-dock, the docking energies were calculated as the sum of three energies, electrostatic energies, van der waals energies and energy of the  ligand. analysis of the individual components of the calculated binding energies  shows that the top three peptides have lower electrostatic energies and energies of flexibility than the negative control peptide dddd. all of the ten peptides that were expected to have high affinity also showed low electrostatic energies and energy of flexibility . we initially expected that the peptide dddd might show high affinity since the pocket next to the glucose-binding site in pqqgdh contains five positively charged residues. however, the docking energy of dddd was ranked 38th in the docking study . the peptide dddd showed weak electrostatic interaction with pqqgdh due to the low flexibility that comes from the intramolecular ionic repulsion . in fact, the peptide dddd did not show remarkable inhibitory effect, suggesting that flexibility of a peptide inhibitor may play an important role in the interaction with the target molecule.

u-ele = electrostatic energies between target and ligand

u-vdw = van der waals energies

u-int = energy of the  ligand

the docking energy was calculated for the sum of three energy, electrostatic energies, van der waals energies and energy of the  ligand. each energy listed in the table was rounded off to the whole number.

in future studies, the use of longer sequences that form higher-order structures will generate more specific peptide inhibitors from in silico panning. this method has strong potential to become a useful tool for structure-based non-competitive inhibitor screening.

CONCLUSIONS
we have demonstrated the potential of in silico panning for selecting non-competitive peptide inhibitors in a more efficient manner. by choosing a target region next to catalytic site in the docking study and then evolving the peptide ligand on the basis of binding indicators, we succeeded in obtaining a non-competitive peptide inhibitor. the most effective peptide showed potent inhibition with a ki value of  <dig> μm and kd value of  <dig> μm. our in silico panning approach should become a useful tool for screening structure-based enzyme inhibitors. this methodology has excellent potential for the screening of non-competitive peptide ligands for allosteric binding sites of an enzyme in the early stages.

