BACKGROUND
osteoarthritis  is one of the most common joint diseases and is characterized by the gradual degeneration of cartilage over a long time . this disease commonly develops in the weight-bearing joints of the lower limbs, such as the knee and hip joints, and onset shows a close correlation closely with age. oa is thus one of the main causes of pain and joint dysfunction among the elderly, and is also often seen in young people after traumas such as a fracture, anterior cruciate ligament transection , meniscus injury or in the presence of an underlying disease such as hemophilia  <cit> . currently, pharmacotherapies for oa focus mainly on the alleviation of pain and consist of systemic analgesic therapies and local intra-articular treatments. nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs  are widely used as systemic analgesic therapies  <cit> . however, pathological progression of oa can be accelerated by the use of nsaids  <cit> . similarly, hyaluronan  injection therapy is a widely recognized part of local intra-articular treatments, inhibiting the destruction of articular cartilage by increasing the viscosity of synovial fluid  <cit> .

the presence of a thin membrane layer on the articular cartilage surface is believed to protect against external impact and reduce friction. this membrane is formed from glycoproteins with a mucin-type domain, some of which have been identified in humans, including tribonectin and lubricin  <cit> . these glycoproteins in the joints show tandem repeat regions composed of 7- <dig> amino acids in the mucin domain; more than 90% of the threonines and serines can form o-glycosyl bonds and are glycosylated. the sugar chains are short, consisting of 2- <dig> monosaccharides , with very little diversity  in the sugar chains. these mucins display characteristics very similar to those of qniumucin, the jellyfish mucin analyzed in this study.

at present, no methods have been established to produce mucins artificially on a sufficiently large scale for therapeutic use. chemical synthesis is not very practical, as the cost of producing a mucin-type polymer is high, even when the structure is very simple. although o-glycosylation is a typical posttranslational modification in biological systems, occurring in the golgi apparatus, synthetic versions of this procedure, in which sugar chains are attached after the expression of core proteins, can only be performed in a limited manner. under these circumstances, extraction of natural abundant mucins from organisms is most often used. in the industrial production of mucins, only extraction from the gastric juices or saliva of domestic animals has proven commercially successful. however, the purity and homogeneity of these mucins are insufficient for use as a single substance and they have been further avoided since the discovery of bovine spongiform encephalopathy   <cit> . mucins have also been extracted from marine creatures, such as starfish  <cit>  and squid  <cit> , but this technique is also ineffective in terms of efficiency and cost.

stomolophus nomurai is the world's largest jellyfish, growing to over  <dig> m in diameter and weighing more than  <dig> kg . vast proliferation of this species has been reported in the coastal regions of the sea of japan. massive smacks of jellyfish  are caught in fishing nets, significantly interfering with the fishing industry. removal of these jellyfish has now become a routine practice for power plants, industrial facilities, fisheries and harbors in coastal areas, and handling such large quantities of jellyfish is extremely difficult. on the positive side, ushida et al. have discovered and successfully isolated a novel mucin derived from many species of jellyfish, including s. nomurai  <cit> . this compound, qniumucin, is low in diversity and high in purity and constitutes an exceptional mucin that can be obtained industrially as a homogeneous product.

in this study, we discuss the effects of intra-articular injection of qniumucin on cartilage degeneration in a rabbit model of oa.

RESULTS
macroscopic study
advanced cartilage defects extending to the subchondral bone were observed on both the medial and lateral sides in group c . similar results were observed in group m, with no apparent differences between groups c and m . in a comparison of groups h and mh, less cartilage degeneration was observed in the groups treated with qniumucin and ha than in the group treated with ha alone .

histological study
exposure of subchondral bone was detected by safranin-o staining in group c . no cartilaginous layer with metachromasia shown by toluidine blue staining was observed in group c . fissures in the cartilage layers and reduced stainability were observed in group h . slight metachromasia in the cartilage layer was observed in group h . in group m, minimal residual cartilage layers were present, but no staining was observed and the cartilage cells had been destroyed . as in group c, no metachromatic cartilage layer was observed in group m . erosion of the cartilage, fissures and reduced staining were observed in group mh. however, compared with group h, the fissures were shallower and more cells were present . no metachromasia was observed in the cartilage layer in group mh .

average oa scores were: group c,  <dig>  ±  <dig> ; group h,  <dig>  ±  <dig> ; group m <dig>   <dig>  ±  <dig> ; group m <dig>   <dig>  ±  <dig> ; group mh <dig>   <dig>  ±  <dig> ; and group mh <dig>   <dig>  ±  <dig> . groups c, m <dig> and m <dig> did not differ significantly. significant differences were observed between groups h and c, between groups h and m <dig> or m <dig>  between groups h and mh <dig>  and between groups m <dig> or m <dig> and groups mh <dig> or mh <dig>  .

sem, standard error of the mean; ci, confidence interval.

discussion
this study examined the effects of intra-articular injection of qniumucin in a rabbit model of oa using resection of the anterior cruciate ligament. the results were as follows. first, when qniumucin alone was injected, cartilage degeneration did not differ from that in the control group. second, only minor cartilage degeneration was observed when a mixture of ha and qniumucin was injected compared with the degeneration present after injection of ha only. third, no significant difference in the effects of qniumucin isolated from different species of jellyfish was apparent in this study.

ha is responsible for the viscosity and elasticity of synovial fluid and thus plays roles in lubrication and shock-absorption. an increase in low molecular weight ha reportedly reduces the viscosity and elasticity of synovial fluid under inflammatory conditions such as oa  <cit> . however, various other effects have been attributed to ha, including anti-inflammatory and analgesic effects, inhibition of cartilage degeneration and an ability to enhance damage repair  <cit> .

safranin-o staining reflects the accumulation of proteoglycan and acts as an index of cartilage degeneration in tissues. although a reduction in safranin-o staining of the extracellular matrix was seen in our study, cartilage degeneration was clearly inhibited in groups h and mh compared with the degeneration observed in group c.

in recent years, a glycoprotein with a mucin region called lubricin  has been identified in the synovial fluid and on the articular surface. the presence of lubricin in both areas contributes to reductions in articular friction. this substance is characterized by a mucin-type region in which o-glycans are connected to the protein backbone, with nonmucin-type sequences at both ends. this nonmucin region has been suggested to interact with the cartilage surface to facilitate the adherence of lubricin. the mucin and nonmucin regions are assumed to play different roles, with the former extending the sugar chains outward like a brush to reduce friction and the latter promoting adhesion of lubricin to the cartilage surface. this is referred to as the "brushing model", based on the inferred shape of the molecule  <cit> . no such mechanism has been suggested for tribonectin, but this substance shares some common characteristics with lubricin insofar as it also displays a mucin-type sequence that reduces friction together with a nonmucin region. the mucin region is believed to adsorb densely to the cartilage tissue surface  to reduce friction. however, adhesion of these mucin-type glycoproteins to the articular surface after injection has yet to be directly confirmed.

mucin or mucin-like substances are likely to form a self-assembled film  on both hydrophobic and hydrophilic surfaces. one significant example of a saf in biological systems is the mucin film on the ocular surface that protects the eyeball  <cit> . although the bond created by each single sugar chain makes only a small contribution to the total adsorption energy, cooperative interaction of many glycan chains concentrated in a small area provides a sufficient gain in free energy  to immobilize the polymer chain of the mucin. adhesion and saf formation on the surface are possible without any selective interaction, such as that suggested for the nonmucin sequence of lubricin, which may be the first trigger of adhesion. therefore, if the goal of treatment is to reduce friction, any kind of mucin that lacks a nonmucin region could be used instead of lubricin or tribonectin. jay mentioned the synergic effects of lubricin and ha in an in vitro study  <cit> . mucin may have potential synergic effects with ha, as mucin is one component of lubricin. in this study, we first demonstrated that exogenous mucin derived from natural jellyfish showed synergic effects with ha using an in vivo animal model. these effects might be induced by improving the viscosity and friction properties of synovial fluid and enhancing the self-assembly capacity of cartilage.

many different kinds of mucins are known. as no large-scale production of artificial polymeric mucins has been achieved with biotechnology or chemical synthesis, extraction from the natural environment remains the most appropriate method for provision as commercial substances. mucins are widely distributed in animals and plants as components of mucus. for example, in plants mucins are found in extracts of lotuses, okra and yams. however, the structure of plant mucins is completely different from that of animal mucins, with a short peptide connected to long sugar chains, such as galactan and mannan  <cit> . we have therefore focused on animal mucins as candidate materials for therapeutic injection.

animal mucins are produced and retained as components of mucus by all living animals, regardless of taxonomy. huge potential variations exist in components such as the core peptide sequence, nonmucin domain sequence and structure of the sugar chains  according to the animal species. however, there are very few examples of animal mucins that are mass produced by domestic animals  <cit> . these are broadly classified as gastric mucins  <cit>  and submaxillary salivary gland mucins  <cit> . gastric mucins constitute a mixture harvested from the lavage fluids of internal organs as low-purity materials. only total monosaccharide  and amino acid analyses have been performed, with no further characterization, so gastric mucins constitute an inexpensive material suitable for mass production. in contrast, submaxillary mucins are very pure and detailed structural analyses of their amino acid sequences and saccharide compositions have been performed  <cit> . a monoclonal antibody directed against submaxillary mucins known as sialyl tn antigen has been produced and used as a tumor marker  <cit> . however, these animal mucins risk contamination with foreign substances unless thorough purification is performed, so use tends to be avoided. for example, prions causing bse cannot be eliminated. mucins from snails  <cit> , starfish  <cit>  and squid  <cit>  are currently available on the market, but production volumes are limited. among these mucin alternatives, qniumucin, which is harvested from jellyfish, was discovered in recent years by our colleagues  <cit> . as mass production is inexpensive, qniumucin is a candidate mucin for wide application in many patients as a treatment for oa. qniumucin is characteristically an almost pure monotonously repeated sequence of short mucin regions called "tandem repeats". the tandem repeat unit consists of eight amino acids  and the sugar chains are short , with only a few types of monosaccharides and no sialic acid. since qniumucin seems to have very few peptide sequences other than the mucin portion, only mild biological reactions are expected from the immune system in the form of allergies. this low potential for biological rejection is a further advantage of the use of this mucin. the risks involved in providing a mass product on an industrial scale are thus significantly reduced.

in a preliminary experiment to test the effects of injection with qniumucin, no elevation of the blood cell count or c-reactive protein and no swelling of the joints were observed . no histological findings of synovium have been detected among normal and injected joints . the possibility that an endogenous endotoxin, identified in this preliminary experiment, might cause adverse effects is a concern, but no such effects have yet been observed. after the purification method was improved to preclude any contamination with the solvent from high-performance liquid chromatography, the concentration of endotoxin in qniumucin purified by ion-exchange chromatography and in unpurified qniumucin were both < <dig> eu/ml when characterized by endosafe-pts . based on these considerations, we proceeded with the intra-articular injection of this qniumucin, expecting a friction-reducing effect. the present results represent a promising step in the development of a new treatment for cartilage degeneration.

CONCLUSIONS
after injecting a mixture of mucin and ha, cartilage degeneration was significantly inhibited compared with that in rabbits injected with ha alone. this effect might be induced by improving the viscosity and friction properties of the synovial fluid and enhancing the self-assembly capacity of the cartilage.

