BACKGROUND
homeobox-containing genes regulate many aspects of development in bilateria. based on sequence similarities, the presence of specific protein motifs, genomic arrangement and other characteristics these genes have been classified into several families. among the best-characterized families are the hox and the parahox. while the hox family is best characterized in segmented animals , where they play patterning roles in the three germ layers, little is known about the role of parahox in most taxa, although it is agreed that they serve an integral role in endoderm development.

a key property of hox genes in most bilateria is their genomic arrangement in clusters. the position of different genes within the cluster is related to their relative domains of expression along the major body axis. this property, called spatial colinearity is observed in most animals, even in those with a clearly derived morphology . some taxa also exhibit a different form of colinear expression of genes, temporal colinearity, in which genes located in different positions within the cluster are activated progressively during development. while temporal colinearity seems to be strictly dependent on the presence of an intact cluster, spatial colinearity seems to be more permissive with cluster breaks. in fact, there are cases of extreme cluster disintegration, for instance in larvaceans  <cit>  or acoelomorphs  <cit> , where the relative spatial domains are still well conserved . this form of colinearity, in the absence of a genomic cluster, has been named trans-colinearity  <cit> .

the general features exhibited by the parahox genes in animals are less clear. while many parahox genes have been identified in different animal groups, little is known about their genomic arrangements and developmental roles. a general agreement is that the parahox genes, gsx, xlox and cdx, are an ancient sister group to the hox genes. both groups probably evolved from a primitive protohox cluster that was duplicated, giving rise to the hox and parahox clusters  <cit> . surprisingly, while the presence of a hox cluster has been demonstrated in many animal groups, ‘intact’ parahox clusters are only known from chordata. it is presently unclear whether there are complete parahox clusters in any protostome group  or in any non-chordate deuterostome. it is interesting to note that in some groups, such as sea urchins, the absence of cluster organization has not prevented the parahox genes from showing signs of correlative expression . moreover, in that system, two of the genes  are clearly interlinked within a gene regulatory network that controls endoderm regionalization and exhibit mutual regulatory interactions  <cit> . whether this property is a product of an older  cluster association is not yet known.

the role of bilaterian parahox genes ) seems to relate to both the cns and endoderm patterning processes. the orthologs of the gene gsh, the most ‘anterior’ of the parahox genes, are expressed in different domains of the bilaterian nervous system. a glance at the expression of the three parahox genes within the bilateria shows their broad commonalities, most probably a reflection of ancestral roles. for instance, the mice gsh <dig> and gsh <dig> paralogs are mostly active in the developing brain  <cit> . the related gene in amphioxus, amphigsx, appears first in four cells in the neural tube at the level of somite five, and later only in the cerebral vesicle  <cit> ; likewise, in the ascidian ciona intestinalis, its ortholog is expressed in the sensory vesicle  <cit> . in the sea urchin embryo the gene spgsx is detected in a small ectodermal domain, probably neural  <cit> . within the protostomia, gsx has been analyzed in a few phyla. in insects  the gene is expressed in the intermediate columns of the cns  <cit> . in nereid worms  gsx is expressed in two domains, one in the cns and another in the stomadeum plus some cell clusters of the posterior foregut and midgut  <cit> . interestingly, in other polychaete worms, such as capitella teleta, the gut domain has been lost  <cit> . dual domains of expression, in the cns and the gut, are similarly observed in the mollusk gibbula varia <cit> . interestingly, in this last case it has been observed that after torsion, the domains of gsx expression are localized to the mouth and foregut, somewhat reminiscent of the pattern seen in platynereis. all these patterns observed in different bilaterian taxa suggest a primitive function of gsx in patterning the cns and the most anterior gut.

the central parahox gene, xlox, has been also described in different groups of bilateria. strikingly, the gene seems to be lost from all insect genomes . in vertebrates, xlox is expressed in both the developing gut  <cit>  and the cns  <cit> . in the chordate amphioxus, amphixlox is detected in the gut and in two cells of the neural tube  <cit> . similar domains of expression  are described for the sea urchin xlox ortholog  <cit> . in protostomes the patterns are, again, very similar. in the mollusk gibbula, xlox is expressed in the middle part of the digestive tract and in some neuroectodermal cells  <cit> . also in the polychaetes nereis virens and p. dumerilii this gene is expressed in the midgut and in several cells of the neuroectoderm  <cit> . in some other protostomian taxa the domains are more restricted. in the leech  it has been reported that xlox is only expressed in the midgut  <cit>  while in the platyhelminth schmidtea polichroa the ortholog gene is only expressed in the nervous system  <cit> . we see again that xlox seems to be dedicated to the patterning of the gut  and some areas of the cns.

cdx  is the most ‘posterior’ of the parahox genes. it has been cloned and studied in many taxa. three mouse paralogs  are expressed in the posterior part of the gut and some areas of the cns  <cit> , domains that are shared by most vertebrates. the amphioxus ortholog, amphicdx, is also expressed in the posterior part of the gut and in the developing neural tube  <cit> . in the sea urchin, spcdx is active in the hindgut  <cit> . urochordates express cdx in cells of the neural plate and the posterior gut  <cit> , although, in at least one case , both domains appear at different phases of their life cycle  <cit> . in several arthropods, the caudal gene patterns the posterior end of the animal  <cit> . in polychaetes cdx is expressed both in the posterior region, including the gut, in addition to areas of the cns. the mollusk gibbula expresses its cdx gene in the posterior end of the digestive tract, whereas in the veliger larva, expression is localized specifically in the hindgut and rectum  <cit> . here, again, it is demonstrated that the cdx genes are involved, as observed for gsx and xlox, in the patterning of structures located within the endoderm  and the neuroectoderm.

the commonalities shown in the expression of parahox genes have prompted some investigators to propose an ancestral role for this group of genes in the patterning of endoderm  <cit>  . an important issue remains to be clarified: how do these commonalities together with the taxon specificities, reflect the history of the original cluster in every clade. the problem is accentuated by the paucity of information related to the genomic organization of these genes in most phyla.

previous analysis of a sea urchin cluster revealed that the echinoid parahox genes were dispersed in the genome. this finding correlates with the rearrangement that occurred within the hox cluster in the sea urchin genome and represents a clearly derived condition for parahox genes. in order to understand the origin of this disruption of genomic links we decided to analyze the history of echinoderm parahox clusters and the roles of its genes. here we present a detailed investigation of parahox gene expression and genome organization in a representative of an earlier branching group of echinoderms, the sea star p. miniata. asteroids and echinoids diverged around  <dig> million years ago   <cit> . we find interesting differences in the genomic organization of the parahox genes in both groups. while, as previously shown, echinoids have all genes dispersed in the genome  <cit> , here, in asteroids we find that all of them form a single, compact, cluster. moreover, we find partial conservation and some remarkable divergent features in parahox gene expression patterns when compared with those of chordates and sea urchins.

RESULTS
identification of the patiria miniata parahox genes: pmgsx, pmlox, and pmcdx
cloning of p. miniata parahox genes was carried out by a combination of pcr methodology with 3′rapid amplification of cdna ends  and sequencing of bacterial artificial chromosome  genomic clones . the orthology assignment of the three parahox genes was determined by phylogenetic analysis, as provided in additional file 1: figure s <dig>  the alignment of parahox homeodomains with those of selected deuterostome and protostome orthologues and the intron-exon structure of the three genes are shown in figure  <dig>  the homeoboxes of the three genes show clear deuterostome affinities, with closest similarities  to their echinoid counterparts. the conservation of residues is obvious in the homeodomain, extending to a few residues in both the 3′ and 5′ directions. pmlox and pmcdx possess, upstream of the homeodomain, a hexapeptide with a sequence very similar to other deuterostomian hexapeptides . pmgsx lacks this conserved peptide. in both pmgsx and pmlox predicted proteins there is a group of amino acids at the n-terminus that is well-conserved, a fact that has been observed before in other echinoderm homeobox genes  <cit> , but also described in the chordate orthologs .

the case of pmlox is particularly interesting since the hexapeptide is followed by a long stretch of  <dig> amino acids that seem to be unique to sea star xlox , since we do not find it in the published orthologs of the sea urchin strongylocentrotus purpuratus, the mouse or the mollusk g. varia <cit> . however, a peptide of similar size is located in the same position in the cephalopod sepia officinalis ortholog , suggesting the possibility that the presence of this feature might be an old one, and perhaps has been overlooked in the xlox genes of other animals. this sea star short peptide is encoded in an extra exon, which is not found in the equivalent position of the sea urchin genome. since the distance between the hexapeptide and the homeodomain  seems to be critical for the function of the protein, we suggest that the presence of this long peptide within the linker may have an important impact on its biological function . it is also possible, moreover, that via alternative splicing, the two forms, with and without the extra exon, are both produced in the embryo .

pmgsx, pmlox and pmcdx are in cluster in the sea star patiria miniata genome
sea star parahox genes are located in a continuous region of  <dig> kb , without any intervening orfs in between, as determined by sequencing of clones from a p. miniata bac library. the intergenic distances are  <dig> kb between pmgsx and pmlox and  <dig> kb between pmlox and pmcdx. as in other deuterostome clusters, the transcriptional orientation of pmgsx and pmlox are the same while that for pmcdx is reversed. as shown in figure 1b, pmgsx is composed of two exons while pmlox and pmcdx contain three. in the case of the cdx gene, the homeobox is split by one intron . in pmlox and pmgsx, the homeobox is located integrally in the last exon . all exon  and intron sizes are listed in the additional file 1: table s <dig> 

our results demonstrate that gsx, xlox and cdx are clustered in the sea star genome, a situation radically different from what we have seen in the sea urchins  <cit> . how does this arrangement relate to the situations in other bilaterian taxa? while parahox genes are present in all bilaterian phyla, their cluster arrangement has been demonstrated for a limited number of taxa. intact clusters appear only in some deuterostomes . however, a non-intact parahox cluster is clearly present in the annelid p. dumerilii <cit> . in this latter case, the orthologs of the gsx, xlox and cdx are located within the same chromosome but while the pdu-gsx and pdu-xlox genes are neighbors , the pdu-cdx gene is located at the opposite end of the chromosome. interestingly, hui and collaborators  <cit>  have shown that genes located in the neighborhood of the platynereis parahox genes can also be found in close proximity to the parahox genes in humans, indicating a unique origin of the parahox clusters within the bilateria . in fact, a thorough analysis of syntenic regions around the parahox cluster suggests that the parahox cluster was already present in the ancestor of the bilaterians plus the cnidarians  <cit> . nonetheless, the parahox cluster has been broken repeatedly in different lineages, perhaps due to the activity of transposable elements  <cit>  or other sources of genomic instability . within the protostomes we find that, for instance, while platynereis has a  intact cluster, other polychaetes such as capitella teleta have lost any signs of clustering among their parahox genes. it is possible that the ancestral condition within the lophotrochozoa was that of a pair of tightly linked gsx and xlox genes and a dispersed cdx. this is supported by the fact that the genome of the limpet lottia gigantea also shows this parahox arrangement . within the ecdysozoa the situation is more simplified, with genes lost in many lineages  and the genomic dispersion of gsx and cdx orthologs.

the deuterostomia, a monophyletic group, comprises four phyla , with the xenoacoelomorpha ostensibly as its putative fifth phylum  <cit> . while, as mentioned, clusters of parahox genes have been detected in all these phyla , there are multiple simplifications occurring in the respective lineages. intact clusters are seen in vertebrates such as humans, mouse and xenopus  but in teleost fishes the parahox cluster was apparently lost  <cit> . interestingly, in the bichir polypterus senegalus, the most basal extant ray-finned fish, the cluster is intact, as it is in the immediate outgroup of the teleost fishes . in all these cases, the gene organization and composition of parahox clusters resemble the condition described originally in the amphioxus genome  <cit> . the transcriptional orientations of the gsx and xlox paralogs are the same, and opposite to that of cdx. a case of disintegration in the cluster is observed in the urochordate ciona intestinalis where the three genes are dispersed in two chromosomes, gsx on chromosome 2q and xlox and cdx on chromosome 14q. xlox and cdx are separated, however, by  <dig> kb with many intervening genes in between, a sign of progressive dispersion  <cit> . hemichordates have kept their cluster intact, at least in the ptychoderidae .

temporal expression pattern of the three parahox genes during sea star embryonic development
in order to examine the dynamics of p. miniata parahox gene expression during embryonic development, we analyzed the temporal expression profiles using quantitative pcr, as described in methods. one striking finding is the pmgsx maternal expression, something that has never been reported in any other taxon. gsx transcript levels do not change significantly during the first  <dig> hours, with some fluctuations imposed by the procedural detection limit . given the constancy of this level it is very possible that we are just detecting the maternal message over the whole period . after  <dig> hours post fertilization   pmgsx expression levels drop progressively over the next day until it is undetectable for the subsequent developmental stages. a possible activation of gsx transcription in later larval stages or in the adult sea star cannot be excluded. pmlox expression is not maternal and starts from  <dig> hpf when a slow accumulation of messages is detectable. from  <dig> hpf, pmlox levels of expression strongly increase reaching a maximum at  <dig> hpf. after this stage and until the last time point analyzed  transcript levels decrease continuously but some expression of the gene is still detectable. the pmcdx mrna is not present in eggs. after the first  <dig> hours of embryonic development the levels of pmcdx transcripts increase progressively reaching maximum accumulation at  <dig> hpf. after this time the levels start to drop, and they do so for the next  <dig> hours, until  <dig> hpf. during the next three days, until day five post fertilization, a second wave of expression of pmcdx is detectable. the expression levels increase again reaching a maximum ) that is less than half of what was detected at  <dig> hpf. subsequently, up until day six, the levels of pmcdx mrna seem to decrease although the transcription of the gene is still ongoing.

clearly, during the time frame of these experiments, which spans embryogenesis in its entirety, pmlox has a single peak of maximum accumulation at day three, while pmcdx seems to accumulate in two different waves, with peaks of accumulation at days one and five, respectively. the levels of pmgsx mrna are always low, due most probably to solely maternal contribution. based on the qpcr data, and understanding that pmgsx is only maternal, although detectable until  <dig> hpf, we would suggest that pmcdx is the first parahox gene to be activated during sea star development, followed by pmlox, which is turned on more than one day later. moreover, a possible role for pmgsx in advanced larval stages or in adult body formation would indicate that gsx is the last parahox gene to be activated. our data show that the sea star parahox transcription factor temporal activation resembles the sequence of activation observed in chordates  <cit>  while it is inverted for the sea urchin orthologs  <cit> . moreover, the sea star parahox cluster characteristics support the theory that mechanisms producing temporal colinearity are likely the major constraining forces on gene cluster maintenance  <cit> . in the sea star, both the temporal order of expression  and the cluster organization, typical of chordata, seem to be conserved, while in the sea urchin, the temporal colinearity  is inverted and the cluster is broken.

the spatial expression domains of the parahox genes during sea star embryonic development
pmgsx, pmlox and pmcdx spatial expression patterns have been analyzed by whole mount in situ hybridization experiments at different stages of development, from egg until six-day larva, and the results are shown in figure  <dig>  pmlox transcripts are detectable in sea star embryos only after  <dig> hpf and the first expression domain is localized in the ectoderm of the mid-gastrula stage embryo. the detailed description of pmlox ectodermal expression during p. miniata development is provided below. from  <dig> hpf pmlox starts to be expressed in a group of cells localized in the posterior region of the archenteron . in the 60-hour embryos, the transcript levels increase in both the ectodermal and endodermal domains of expression and at  <dig> hpf, when the archenteron is completely invaginated, xlox expression is confined to the midgut-hindgut boundary region  where it is detectable also in the completely differentiated 4-day larval gut . in the 5- and 6-day larvae the gene is strongly expressed in the ectodermal domain  and a very weak signal is visible in cells localized between the stomach and intestine, a region where a pyloric sphincter is usually present in other animals. pmcdx expression is first detected in a ring of cells localized in the vegetal half of the 24-hour embryo and surrounding the blastopore . following the description of vital staining results performed in another sea star species, asterina pectinifera <cit> , the cells expressing pmcdx likely represent veg <dig> descendants. pmcdx expression persists in the vegetal side of the embryo and it is restricted to the blastopore region in the mid-gastrula embryos . at late gastrula stage, when the archenteron is completely invaginated, pmcdx expression is detectable in the portion of the gut that will give rise to the hindgut and in the anus . in the 4-day larva, when the gut is completely differentiated, the signal is clearly detected in the intestine and it extends until the anus . in the 5- and 6-day larvae, the expression is reduced in the intestine and remains strong in the anal cells . the expression of pmgsx is visible in the egg  as maternal message, without any regional localization. later on, the levels remain low, barely above the minimum levels needed for in situ detection until  <dig> hpf . after  <dig> hpf no expression is detectable through in situ hybridization at any of the examined stages , thus corroborating the temporal expression profile obtained by qpcr .

considering all our results together, some very interesting features can be highlighted. first of all, conservation in the expression domains of the sea urchin and sea star orthologs is of note. further, the expression of the sea star cdx in the blastula stage, well before gastrulation has been initiated, implicates a function for cdx that is not present in sea urchins. however, an early activation of cdx in development, prior to its recruitment in posterior gut patterning, appears as a common feature among chordates: in murine embryos the first embryonic territory of expression for cdx genes is the posterior primitive streak  <cit> ; moreover, in xenopus tropicalis the three orthologs cad <dig>  cad <dig> and cad <dig> are first expressed in the early gastrula around the blastopore and later in the posterior embryo, including the gut  <cit> ; finally, the first expression of the amphioxus cdx orthologue is detected in a ring of cells surrounding the blastopore opening  <cit> . the conservation of cdx gene expression around the primitive streak of the early mouse and the blastopore of frog, amphioxus and sea star embryos, suggests the existence of an ancestral role for cdx in the early stages of deuterostome development. this function has been lost in the sea urchin embryo where only a late role for cdx in patterning posterior structures, in this case the gut, has been found  <cit> .

pmlox and pmcdx dynamic relative expression along the sea star developing gut
in figure  <dig> a double fluorescent in situ hybridization experiment performed on 2- to 3- and 4-day sea star embryos is shown. pmlox  and pmcdx  occupy distinct territories of expression in the gastrula embryo: both genes are expressed in the posterior portion of the archenteron with pmcdx positive cells positioned toward the posterior side of the gut  and pmlox expressing cells adjacent to pmcdx but localized more anteriorly. in the 3-day larva, pmlox and pmcdx extend their domains of expression with pmcdx covering most of the intestine, until the blastopore, and pmlox being localized in the anterior part of the hindgut . in the 4-day bipinnaria larva, when a large distinct stomach is visible, pmcdx transcripts occupy most of the intestine, showing a posterior to anterior gradient of abundance ; the gradient decreases along the intestinal tube reaching the minimal levels in the cells positioned at the boundary between stomach and intestine, where both pmcdx and pmlox genes are expressed . a gradient of expression for pmcdx along the embryonic antero-posterior  axis has been described in several animals both at the mrnas level  <cit>  and at the protein level  <cit> . in this context, cdx proteins are considered as possible morphogens whose gradient is responsible for a proper distribution of target gene transcription along the a-p axis of the embryo; this role is probably conserved for the sea star ortholog pmcdx. moreover, the partial overlapping of cdx and xlox transcripts in the intestine of the sea star larva opens a number of hypotheses about the possible regulatory interactions between the two parahox genes. in sea urchins, a necessary role for splox in the activation of spcdx transcription and for spcdx in the repression of splox transcription within hindgut cells has been demonstrated  <cit> . we cannot exclude the existence in the sea star embryo of a similar function for pmlox on pmcdx, although, since no co-expression with pmcdx is detected at the onset of pmlox expression in the posterior gut we would have to invoke a signaling event mediating such regulation. in fact, pmcdx dynamic of transcript accumulation consists of two waves of activation, the second happening after pmlox onset of transcription. on the other hand, a repressive function for pmcdx on pmlox transcription in the posterior larval intestine is likely occurring in the sea star, as it happens in the sea urchin and apparently in the mouse: a similar dynamic has been described in cdx <dig> mouse null mutants where ectopic expression of pdx <dig> was found in the intestine  <cit> .

pmlox ectodermal domain of expression
xlox expression in neural territories has been reported in many animals, protostomes and deuterostomes alike  <cit> . within the echinoderms it has been shown that in the sea urchin strongylocentrotus purpuratus splox is specifically expressed in cells localized below the ciliary band, in a position corresponding to the lateral ganglion  <cit> .

in this study we demonstrate that xlox ectodermal recruitment in development is also conserved in the asteroid p. miniata. in figure  <dig>  a detailed analysis of pmlox transcript localization in the ectoderm of the sea star embryo and larva  is shown, with respect to the position of the developing ciliary band . the in situ hybridization experiments revealed that the first expression for pmlox is detected in a group of ectodermal cells in the 2-day gastrula embryo. pmlox positive cells are localized in the oral ectoderm of the embryo, arranged in a semicircle located at the level of one third of the invaginated archenteron  . acetylated tubulin immunostaining in the 2-day embryo clearly shows the absence of a distinctive ciliary band , as previously reported for the sea star a. pectinifera <cit> . our results show that although at the cell type level no specialization is detectable in the ectodermal cells of the 2-day gastrula embryo, a differential regulatory state is already present in a subpopulation of ectodermal cells expressing exclusively pmlox. in fact, the existence of subdomains in the ectoderm of the pre-larval sea star embryo has already been described by yankura and collaborators  <cit>  where a number of exclusive gene expression domains have been identified in sub-regions of the ectoderm. a few hours later, at  <dig> hpf, pmlox positive cells lose the aligned organization, probably migrating in opposite directions, and finally reaching separate locations in the ectoderm that will contribute to the formation of the postoral ciliary band , which subdivides the ectodermal epithelium in oral and aboral epidermis. in the 4-day bipinnaria larva, pmlox ectodermal expression is localized in a relatively large number of cells of the poc in each of the two symmetric sides of the larva ; the ectodermal cells expressing pmlox are localized in a restricted region of the poc, localized at the level of the vegetal folds . in the 8-day brachiolaria larva, the pmlox ectodermal domain extends to a larger number of cells distributed along the vegetal portion of the poc, following the ectodermal lateral loops that will give rise to the future appendages; no pmlox transcripts have been detected in the frontal fold of the poc . the pmlox domain of expression in the 8-day brachiolaria larva clearly corresponds to a sub-domain of the poc , suggesting a potential role of the pmlox transcription factor in the development of the sea star larval nervous system and possibly reflecting an ancient function for this gene in the specification of neural cell types.

evolutionary implications: changing the genomic organization and the activities of parahox genes within the echinodermata
over the last few years it has been shown that parahox genes are arranged in genomic clusters in several bilaterian taxa, a fact that might have important consequences for their regulation. however, this sometimes tight arrangement is broken in many lineages. one clear example of this evolutionary phenomenon is shown in the echinoderms. we have shown in the past that the three parahox genes are not clustered in the sea urchin genome  <cit> . here, instead, we demonstrate that a member of the asteroids  has kept the ancestral condition, the presence of a tight cluster of genes  <cit> , a condition retained in the sister group of all echinoderms, the hemichordates  <cit> . the evolutionary history of these genes and their putative ancestral roles merit some further comments, which are given in the next paragraphs.

when evaluating the dynamics of some genomic arrangements, we think it is interesting to note that the partial break of parahox clusters, or their eventual disintegration, seems to occur in parallel, in the various taxa where these events take place, to the break and dispersion of its sister cluster, the hox. the modification of the cluster seems to be related to the average substitution rate of the different taxa, as seen in some metazoan phylograms  <cit> , such that faster evolving clades are more prone to cluster modification. an example in this context would be the sea urchins  where the hox cluster has been reorganized through breaks and the loss of genes  or the fusion of transcriptional units . in parallel, a dispersion of the three parahox genes within the genome has occurred. interestingly, one break point in the echinoid hox cluster occurs at the hox <dig> locus, with the consequence that this gene is lost  <cit> . in sea stars, hox  <dig> is retained  <cit>  suggesting that, perhaps, this break is not present in asteroids. if this were the case, and taking into account what we now observe in the patiria parahox, we would be facing another case of parallel hox/parahox clusters evolutionary histories. hox and parahox clusters would be retained in asteroids but broken  in echinoids.

an essential issue in our current understanding of the role that clustering has in the expression of genes is whether there is a correlation between gene positions within the cluster and their respective spatial domains of expression. this has been amply debated within the context of hox gene activities and the evolution of the hox cluster, but it is equally relevant to the workings of the smaller bilaterian parahox clusters. we have investigated here the relationships between parahox gene activities and the presence of a cluster arrangement. it is remarkable that what we observe in asteroids, with respect to the gene order and activities, is notably different from what has been observed in the echinoids, a fact that needs a clear analysis. it has been demonstrated that xlox and cdx genes in the sea urchin genome are localized on two different scaffolds of at least  <dig> kilobases  <cit>  but a correlation between the temporal and the spatial sequence of activation is still observed: splox is expressed earlier during development and in a domain of expression anterior to spcdx that is activated  a few hours later. in the sea star we found a similar relative transcript distribution of pmlox and pmcdx along the antero-posterior axis of the larval gut, with cdx expressed in a more posterior domain than xlox . what is different is the temporal sequence of activation of the two genes, in the sea star resembling the chordate typical order while in the sea urchin the pattern is inverted. as mentioned above, the analysis of the bac clones isolated from a p. minata genomic library shows that all three parahox genes are clustered in the sea star genome. the relative domains of expression in the two echinoderm classes, as well as in other bilaterian phyla, are schematically shown in figure  <dig>  this scheme includes all the phyla for which complete information is available. the comparison of genome organization and expression patterns of all parahox genes included in figure  <dig> is allowing us to engage in some speculative considerations.

given the presence of an intact cluster in deuterostomes and of a partially intact cluster in protostomes, we can infer that the common ancestor of all bilateria had a parahox cluster composed of three genes, gsx, xlox and cdx. this fact is supported by the shared presence of similar genes in the genomic neighborhood of platynereis and human parahox genes  <cit> . the cluster itself might have originated from a single precursor gene that was duplicated in cis, or, alternatively, it was derived, as a whole, from the duplication of a protohox ancestral cluster  <cit> . this tight genome arrangement was kept in several lineages although in others, perhaps as a result of a relaxed selection, it was broken into pieces. within the echinoderms, we have a clear example of the dynamics of the cluster in evolutionary time. we show that asteroids  maintain a tight chromosomal arrangement of the three genes while in the echinoids  the genes are dispersed in the genome . interestingly, and independently of the genomic arrangements, there are some aspects of parahox gene regulation that are kept, even in the absence of an intact cluster. the most important of these aspects is the nested nature of their endodermal expression domains. when it comes to spatial domains within the gut, in almost all cases studied the expression patterns of the genes  are maintained, with xlox being expressed anteriorly to cdx. the presence of gsx in the bilaterian guts is less conserved. it is very possible, as it has been shown for the hox genes, that a tight cluster arrangement is a prerequisite for a strict temporal control of the genes expression, while the relative spatial domains can be preserved in the absence of tight clustering. this suggested hypothesis has not been tested for the parahox genes, since most of the observations are purely circumstantial at this point. no clear kinetic studies allow us to confirm or reject such an assumption at the moment.

given the use of parahox genes in gut patterning, and their historical birth in the cis-duplication of a precursor gene, it is reasonable to assume a scenario in which the bilaterian ancestor used a single proto-parahox gene  to control the specification of the gut tissue . this precursor gene was duplicated in cis, giving rise to the three extant parahox genes, gsx, xlox and cdx, linked in the genome. these genes evolved their functions by sub-functionalization  <cit>  and, perhaps in parallel, giving rise to different functional domains within the gut. in some cases the domains were maintained by cross-regulatory interactions , although this could also be maintained even in the event of cluster disintegration. the cluster in itself proved quite flexible, in terms of size, as can be seen clearly in figure  <dig>  strikingly, the changes in gene spacing within the parahox cluster occurred without the incorporation of new orfs inside it. however, the few analyses we have on the occurrence and nature of the intervening sequences have demonstrated the presence of many repetitive elements, or rests of transposable elements in these regions, suggesting that one mechanism controlling the cluster size might be through the expansion of repetitive sequences or the inclusion  of new mobile elements  <cit> . at the same time these elements could provide the structural basis for the later cluster disintegration in specific lineages .

we should emphasize, once more, that it is becoming clear, from the analysis of different animal genomes, that there is a parallel disintegration of hox and parahox clusters in some lineages. this might not be so surprising being most probably the reflection of the evolutionary rates of change in the dnas of each lineage . the cases of tunicates, or acoels, are paradigmatic, but it is a fact also demonstrated here for the echinoderms, where a disintegration of the parahox cluster has accompanied the parallel rupture of the hox clusters. this leads us to the inescapable conclusion  that the dynamics of cluster evolution are a consequence of the global dynamics followed by the genome over evolutionary time.

CONCLUSIONS
recent advances in genome sequencing technologies have produced a flurry of genomic data from many, previously inaccessible, animal systems. this has generated a renewed interest in the dynamics of genome evolution and in the relationship between changes in the genome and different morphological transformations.

among those features that are now being thoroughly investigated, the relationship between gene clustering and regulation is of special relevance. hox and parahox genes have been classical examples of vectorial patterning systems with complex regulation. however, most of the data supporting current models of hox and parahox function have been obtained in a relatively small group of animals, mainly insects and chordates. it is clear that a full understanding of how these gene families  have evolved over time will be possible only when a wider selection of animal models is considered.

here, we present a thorough investigation of one such group of genes, the parahox. we have cloned and thoroughly characterized the parahox group of genes in the sea star p. miniata. moreover, we have studied their genomic organization and the expression domains of each gene, in space and time, during embryogenesis. we show that sea stars organize the parahox genes in a single, compact cluster, reflecting their basal position within the echinodermata and highlighting the more derived nature of the related group of echinoids. we show that both gene cluster disruption and the changing patterns of gene expression are happening within one single phylum, a clear sign of the dynamic nature of genomes during evolution.

