BACKGROUND
bioluminescence is observed in a wide variety of organisms across the tree of life. luminous organisms include bacteria, dinoflagellates, radiolarians, fungi, ctenophores, cnidarians, annelids, mollusks, arthropods, echinoderms, tunicates, and fishes  <cit> . these organisms utilize bioluminescence for essential functions ranging from defense to reproduction. the ability to produce light always entails a chemiluminescent reaction where the light-emitting substrate - a luciferin - is oxidized by a specific enzyme - a luciferase. luciferins and luciferases are highly variable in their chemical structure and protein sequence. for this reason, it is thought that bioluminescence arose independently many times throughout evolution  <cit> .

coelenterazine is the predominant luciferin observed in the ocean environment  <cit>  and is the specific type of luciferin used in the bioluminescence of jellyfish  and comb jellies, or ctenophores . because the complete biosynthesis pathway of coelenterazine is not yet known, it is unclear whether ctenophores synthesize coelenterazine or obtain it from external sources, such as through their diet, as is seen with other species  <cit> , including hydrozoan cnidarians  <cit> .

calcium-activated photoproteins are a special class of luciferase found in cnidarians and ctenophores. in these organisms, the factors required for light emission, including the luciferin  and oxygen, undergo a covalent reaction in which a peroxy intermediate of the coelenterazine is formed. this is bound to the photoprotein as one complex that, in turn, produces light upon binding another cofactor, ca2+. cells containing photoproteins are capable of emitting light in proportion to the amount of photoprotein complex present within them  <cit> , which is in contrast to a typical luciferin-luciferase reaction, where turnover occurs. in those cases, there may be an excess of luciferase, or one luciferase may catalyze multiple reactions, but the total amount of light emitted is proportional to the amount of luciferin present. importantly, the term photoprotein can refer to the photoprotein complex or to the luciferase alone , excluding the substrate and oxygen. it is in this latter sense that we use the terms photoprotein and photoprotein gene from here onwards. the best-known photoproteins are aequorin, from the hydromedusan jellyfish aequorea victoria, and mnemiopsin, from the ctenophore mnemiopsis leidyi, both of which were first purified in the 1960s and 1970s  <cit> . aequorin was subsequently cloned and sequenced  <cit> . since then, photoproteins have been cloned from a number of hydromedusan  species. these include mitrocomin from mitrocoma cellularia  <cit> , clytin from clytia gregarium  <cit> , and obelin from both obelia longissima and o. geniculata  <cit> , as well as other photoproteins from aequorea species such as a. coerulescens, a. macrodactyla, and a. parva. berovin and bolinopsin from the ctenophores beroe abyssicola  <cit>  and bolinopsis infundibulum  <cit>  were subsequently cloned and sequenced. recently, sequences for two photoproteins from mnemiopsis leidyi, named mnemiopsin  <dig> and mnemiopsin  <dig>  have been reported  <cit> .

photoproteins are also ef-hand calcium-binding domain proteins related to calmodulin, troponin c, myosin, spectrin, and sarcoplasmic binding protein  <cit> . ef-hand proteins are distinct from other calcium-binding proteins in that they have calcium-binding helix-loop-helix motifs characterized by a 'canonical' sequence loop region of  <dig> contiguous residues that provides the oxygen ligands needed for calcium ion coordination  <cit> . ef-hand domains are usually present in pairs in proteins; this pairing seems to be important for proper protein folding and may increase the affinity of each ef-hand for calcium  <cit> . all photoproteins have three functional ef-hand domains  that are used to bind calcium. the crystal structures of aequorin and clytin showed that a fourth putative ef-hand domain  has the characteristic structural features of an ef-hand motif but not the canonical sequence normally seen within the calcium-binding loop  <cit> . in addition, its sequence does not conform to ef-hand profiles catalogued in domain databases such as pfam and smart.

biochemical isolations have shown that native photoproteins consist of a mixture of 'isoforms'  and that there can be differences in properties among isoforms from a single taxon. aequorin, for example, consists of at least a dozen isoforms that differ in isoelectric point but not in molecular size  <cit> . mnemiopsin was found to consist of two major isoforms , each with two or three minor isoforms  <cit> . the different isoforms can have measurable functional differences; for example, the rate constant for decay of light emission in  <dig> mm ca2+ was greater for mnemiopsin- <dig> than for mnemiopsin- <dig>  <cit> . over two decades ago, it was suggested that some of the aequorin isoforms may actually represent different gene products  <cit> . the sequencing of the mnemiopsis genome offers the first definitive evidence that all of the different photoprotein isoforms are indeed products of different  individual genes. furthermore, these data allow for an examination of the genomic organization of these photoprotein genes.

the evolutionary history of the photoprotein gene family has not been systematically characterized to date. previous studies have explored photoprotein phylogenetic relationships within jellyfish  species  <cit> , comparing both their sequences and structures  <cit> . recently, aghamaali et al.  <cit>  performed sequence comparisons of ctenophore and hydromedusae photoproteins. however, no investigations have gone beyond the hydromedusan and ctenophoran representatives, potentially obscuring the evolutionary history of this gene family by omitting sequences from other phyla. here, we have combined all publicly available photoprotein sequence data with the new set of mnemiopsis photoprotein sequences generated through our whole-genome sequencing project  <cit> , as well as with photoprotein-like sequences we identified through bioinformatic searches of genomes of additional non-bilaterian taxa, to reconstruct the phylogeny of this gene family. this approach allowed us to determine when the origin of the gene family occurred in relation to the emergence of the metazoa, and, for the first time, to demonstrate its presence in non-bioluminescent organisms.

nearly all ctenophores are capable of bioluminescence  <cit> , producing flashes of light in light-producing cells  upon stimulation in dark conditions. interestingly, comb plate cilia diffract light to produce a rainbow of colors and give ctenophores their characteristic iridescent appearance  <cit> , which is often mistaken for bioluminescence. the literature regarding bioluminescence in mnemiopsis dates back to at least the early 20th century  <cit> . in mnemiopsis, light production is confined to photocytes, which are associated with the eight meridional canals underlying the longitudinal comb rows and where they extend onto the lobes. waves of luminescence can propagate in either direction from the point of the stimulation  <cit> . the distribution of photocytes within the meridional canals is asymmetric and discontinuous; photocytes are only found on one side of each canal adjacent to the minor body axes, on the same side as the testes, but not on the side containing the ovaries  <cit> . during gamete differentiation and embryonic development, light production is first detected in eggs  <cit> , and again at a stage during embryonic development that is closely correlated with the initiation of comb plate growth, approximately  <dig> h post-fertilization   <cit> .

one property of ctenophore photoproteins that distinguishes them from hydromedusan photoproteins is that they are photoinhibited upon light exposure  <cit> . this phenomenon is reversible in vivo by returning animals to the dark, but photoinhibition of photoprotein extracts cannot be reversed in the same way. the inhibition has been shown to destroy the intermediate photoprotein complex but does not result in the release of oxygen  <cit> . several investigators have suggested that the luminescent response to electrical or mechanical stimulation in mnemiopsis involves a nerve net  <cit> , and that luminescence is neurally controlled  <cit> .

in this study, we used a model ctenophore species to investigate the evolutionary history, genomic organization, and developmental expression patterns of the photoproteins - a gene family that represents a special class of luciferases involved in bioluminescence emission. in a similar manner, we explored the mnemiopsis opsins - genes involved in light sensing. by virtue of its early-branching position on the animal tree, mnemiopsis provides a valuable perspective on the evolution and function of gene families and cell types in early animals. our observation of co-expression of opsin and photoprotein genes in developing ctenophore photocytes led us to hypothesize a dual role for mnemiopsis photocytes in light sensing and light production. bioluminescence by bacterial symbionts  and host squid gene expression of phototransduction cascade genes  <cit>  have been shown to occur together in the squid light organ. tong et al.  <cit>  hypothesize that the two phenomena are functionally linked in the light organ in that system. although there is no microbial involvement in the ctenophore luminescence system, our results led us to hypothesize a similar dual role for photocytes in both light production and light sensing in mnemiopsis.

RESULTS
ten photoproteins are located in two tandemly arrayed clusters in the mnemiopsis genome
the availability of the whole genome sequence of mnemiopsis provided us an opportunity to examine the genomic content and context of the luciferases involved in bioluminescence in an early diverging metazoan phylum. this is the first genome available for any species known to utilize calcium-regulated photoproteins for bioluminescence, and, to our knowledge, the first genomic sequence from any bioluminescent animal. we identified  <dig> photoprotein genes in the mnemiopsis genome organized in two clusters and comprising three sequence similarity groups . all predicted photoproteins are single exon genes. in some cases, putative photoprotein genes were mispredicted or missed entirely in our original set of predicted gene models. in these cases, we made adjustments based on manual curation and then updated the set of gene models. rather than adopt the traditional naming scheme for these genes , we propose to name them mleipp <dig> through mleipp <dig> . we opted for this naming scheme to clearly convey the function of the protein, as well as to avoid confusion with the names previously used for photoproteins from mnemiopsis - specifically, those used for purified proteins mnemiopsin- <dig> and - <dig>  <cit>  and cloned genes mnemiopsin  <dig> and  <dig>  <cit> , which may or may not correspond directly with the purified proteins of the same name. this new naming scheme will also serve to avoid any confusion between mnemiopsins and the mnemiopsis opsin genes discussed in this paper. furthermore, none of the  <dig> photoproteins were exact nucleotide matches to mnemiopsin  <dig> or  <dig> from jafarian et al.  <cit> . mnemiopsin  <dig> is most similar to mleipp <dig> ). mnemiopsin  <dig> is most similar to mleipp <dig> ). the  <dig> sequences have been deposited . they also have been assigned identifiers specific to the mnemiopsis genome project .

one cluster of photoprotein genes located on genomic scaffold ml <dig>  includes seven full-length predicted genes, with six found in tandem in a head-to-tail orientation . these six genes are spaced at regular intervals . there are also two partial photoprotein gene predictions  on ml <dig>  each containing a gap in the scaffold where sequence is missing between two contigs joined in the draft assembly. these two partial predictions are located in tandem with a seventh full-length photoprotein gene on ml <dig> . a second cluster located on scaffold ml <dig>  has three full-length photoprotein genes found in tandem, also with head-to-tail orientation and regular spacing  . there is one partial predicted photoprotein gene on ml <dig> that is located directly next to mleipp <dig>  a third scaffold, ml <dig> , had one full-length photoprotein gene plus three partial predictions. a fourth scaffold, ml <dig> , had one partial prediction. the predictions on ml <dig> and ml <dig> have very high sequence similarity to the genes on ml <dig>  the short length of these scaffolds  and the sequence similarity with genes on ml <dig> strongly suggested that these sequences should be assembled with ml <dig>  when the individual sequence reads used to assemble ml <dig> and ml <dig> were analyzed manually using consed , we found multiple reads that had sequence exactly matching that on ml <dig>  we concluded that these scaffolds represent misassemblies by the phusion assembler and that they should, in fact, be assembled with scaffold ml <dig>  thus, we did not include sequences from ml <dig> or ml <dig> in any further analyses and have not included them in figure  <dig> 

confirmation of individual mnemiopsis photoprotein sequences
misassemblies of genomic scaffolds can result from the presence of multiple copies of closely related repetitive sequences that inappropriately collapse onto one or a few regions  <cit> . alternatively, false gene duplications or expansions can also occur due to assembly errors  <cit> . because of the complex nature of assembling genomic regions with a high level of repetitive sequence, as seen in the photoprotein gene clusters, we chose to confirm the presence of individual photoprotein genes using two complementary approaches: a 5' and 3'-rapid amplification of cdna ends-pcr  screen; and a manual inspection of the individual sequence reads used to assemble each photoprotein gene in the genome. alignments of the sequences obtained from the 5'-race-pcr screen  with the predicted photoprotein genomic sequence successfully confirmed seven out of ten of the predicted full-length photoprotein genes on ml <dig> and ml <dig> . the 3'-race-pcr screen confirmed one full-length photoprotein gene on ml <dig> and one partial photoprotein gene on ml <dig>  overall, the race-pcr screening approach confirmed eight of ten  full-length photoprotein genes and one of three  partial photoprotein genes predicted from the draft assembly. this gave us confidence that most of the identified photoprotein genes are not only present but are also transcribed in mnemiopsis, indicating that they are likely functional genes. we suspect that the partial photoprotein genes are likely full-length genes, but that the full sequence cannot be determined from the current data. further refinements of the draft assembly and targeted re-sequencing may help to determine the full-length sequence of these partial photoprotein genes. another result obtained from both the race-pcr screen and the manual inspection was that two predicted full-length photoprotein genes , which had single nucleotide deletions leading to frame shifts in the draft assembly, have been correctly annotated, confirming that they are full-length photoprotein genes rather than pseudogenes. another predicted gene that contained a  <dig> bp sequence gap in the draft assembly  was finished using data from both the race-pcr screen and the manual inspection, confirming another full-length photoprotein gene.

the manual inspection of the assembly confirmed that there was evidence  supporting all  <dig> of the predicted photoprotein genes, therefore confirming  <dig> out of  <dig> full-length genes. examining the individual reads also allowed us to identify polymorphic sites within each predicted protein that represent allelic variants of each . in a few cases, examination of the flanking region surrounding photoprotein genes indicated high levels of variation beyond what would be expected for allelic variants, suggesting that there may be some photoprotein sequences that have been inappropriately collapsed into a single region. this is why we have chosen to report that there are 'at least'  <dig> full-length photoprotein genes in mnemiopsis.

we hypothesize that clusters of photoprotein genes allow mnemiopsis to quickly produce and maintain a large quantity of photoprotein  by producing transcripts at a faster rate. observations of mnemiopsis indicate that, unlike in most bioluminescent systems, it is difficult to exhaust the capacity of whole animals for light production by continuous stimulation  <cit> . in addition, it has been noted that, as the frequency of stimulation is increased, total light production by mnemiopsis does not decrease  <cit> . these observations led chang  <cit>  to conclude that 'his probably indicates that photogenic material is continuously being produced.' this could easily be achieved by having multiple functional photoproteins encoded within the mnemiopsis genome, as described above.

green fluorescent protein is not present in the mnemiopsis genome
calcium-activated photoproteins are often co-localized in photocytes with gfp family members, such as in aequorea and obelia  <cit> , allowing the wavelength of bioluminescent light emission to be shifted from blue to green. photocytes themselves can also be autofluorescent, partially due to blue fluorescence in the spent photoprotein  <cit> . the autofluorescence is different from the fluorescence of gfp, which has not been observed in mnemiopsis  <cit> . we performed several blast searches with various gfp query sequences but did not find evidence for any gfp homologs in the mnemiopsis genome. this is consistent with previous evidence that mnemiopsis is not fluorescent and that its bioluminescence emission spectrum shows no sign of characteristic gfp-type emission.

sequence analysis of the mnemiopsis photoproteins
each of the  <dig> mnemiopsis photoproteins are  <dig> or  <dig> amino acids in length. we generated a table of percentage amino acid sequence identity and similarity among full-length photoproteins and their close homologs . among mnemiopsis photoproteins, there is 87% to 100% protein sequence identity. mnemiopsis photoproteins share 85% to 91% sequence identity with other ctenophore photoproteins . ctenophore photoproteins share just 21% to 24% sequence identity and 41% to 46% sequence similarity with known hydromedusan cnidarian photoproteins. within all hydromedusan photoproteins there is 60% to 94% sequence identity. we identified two photoprotein-like sequences in the cnidarian nematostella vectensis , which code for proteins that share 25% to 27% amino acid sequence identity with ctenophore photoproteins and 20% to 23% amino acid sequence identity with hydromedusan photoproteins. we identified four photoprotein-like sequences in the poriferan amphimedon queenslandica , which code for proteins that share 15% to 25% amino acid sequence identity with ctenophore photoproteins and 16% to 27% amino acid sequence identity with hydromedusan photoproteins. the predicted molecular weight for the mnemiopsis photoproteins ranges from  <dig>  to  <dig>  kda and the predicted isoelectric point for this set of proteins ranges from ph  <dig>  to  <dig>  .

an alignment of photoproteins from hydromedusan cnidarians and ctenophores reveals several regions of sequence similarity . specific residues that make up the coelenterazine binding cavity and the ef-hand domains  are noted on the alignment. within the mleipps, there is conservation of nearly all of these key functional residues, with a few notable exceptions. one interesting substitution in ef-hand i of all sequence group b sequences  is a glutamic acid residue at residue  <dig> of the loop instead of the conserved glycine that is found in this position in each of the ef-hands of all other photoproteins. also, compared with other mnemiopsis photoproteins, sequence group c has a substitution in residue  <dig> of ef-hand iv , indicating that this calcium coordinating position may tolerate this substitution without significantly disrupting function. other differences in key residues between mnemiopsis sequence groups are either conservative substitutions that are likely to retain function or are also seen in hydromedusan photoproteins .

comparing hydromedusae and ctenophore photoprotein protein sequences, similarity is especially high within the three ef-hand domains . at the n-terminus, there are two regions where the ctenophore photoproteins have insertions of six to nine amino acids relative to the hydromedusae photoproteins. there are several differences in important functional residues, especially in residues that make up the coelenterazine binding cavity, between the two groups of photoproteins, which have been previously discussed  <cit> . these amino acid substitutions may be partially responsible for the functional differences seen between the two groups, such as the property of photoinactivation present in ctenophore photoproteins but not in hydromedusae photoproteins. future studies that examine functional and structural differences among photoproteins will help confirm what effect these and other residues have on function and determine what makes these two groups distinct.

dn/ds analyses indicate strong purifying selection is acting on mnemiopsis photoprotein genes
dn/ds analyses compare the rate of substitutions at synonymous  sites  to the rate of substitutions at nonsynonymous sites  between a pair of coding sequences, and are used to examine rates of sequence evolution for evidence of natural selection at the molecular level  <cit> . if the dn/ds rate ratio is < <dig>  there is evidence for purifying  selection, and the duplicated genes are thought to be under selective constraint. furthermore, the smaller the dn/ds ratio, the greater the selective constraint under which the two genes have evolved. the rate of nonsynonymous substitution is generally much lower than that of synonymous substitution because changes at coding sites are often constrained, as they may alter protein function  <cit> . we performed a maximum likelihood estimation of pairwise dn/ds ratios for all mnemiopsis photoprotein gene pairs. for these genes, the ratios range from  <dig>  to  <dig>  , indicating that strong purifying  selection is acting on these sequences and that the function of the duplicated gene copies is being selectively maintained.

evidence of concerted evolution within the mnemiopsis photoprotein family
the evolution of multigene families can be explained by different models, including birth-and-death evolution and concerted evolution  <cit> . in birth-and-death evolution, new genes are created by gene duplication, with some duplicate genes remaining in the genome, whereas others are inactivated  or deleted from the genome outright. in concerted evolution, all family member genes evolve as a unit. a mutation occurring in a repeat spreads throughout family members via recombination events such as unequal crossover or gene conversion. the evolution of tandemly arrayed multigene families has often been attributed to concerted evolution. current evidence supports this evolutionary model for some families, including many rna genes in prokaryotes and eukaryotes, but in others, new analyses have shown that they are subject to birth-and-death evolution with strong purifying selection ; still others are subject to a mixed process of concerted and birth-and-death evolution   <cit> .

we tested the mnemiopsis photoproteins for evidence of recombination events indicative of concerted evolution using geneconv and found some evidence to support this model - namely, nine pairs of sequences on scaffold ml <dig> with evidence for recombination from a global comparison of fragments . the top three resulting pairs  are all within-sequence group pairs that have global permutation-test p-values and global bonferroni-corrected karlin-altschul p-values < <dig> . our results suggest that the high level of sequence conservation in this multigene family is likely maintained through a combination of strong purifying selection and mechanisms of concerted evolution, though further analysis will be required to determine the relative contribution of each process.

analysis of photoprotein-like genes in the genomes of amphimedon and nematostella
we aligned the ef-hand domains coded by ctenophore, anthozoan cnidarian , hydrozoan cnidarian, and poriferan  photoprotein and photoprotein-like genes . we analyzed the two nematostella photoprotein-like sequences and found that some key residues have been substituted that likely disrupt calcium binding and, presumably, any ability to function as a luciferase. in the calcium-binding loop of ef-hand i, the first aspartic acid  has been replaced with a valine in both sequences. in ef-hand iv, the second aspartic acid  in the calcium-binding loop has been replaced with a lysine in both nematostella sequences. these substitutions are not conservative and may be disruptive enough to prevent calcium from binding to these proteins. in fact, hmmer searches of the pfam and smart databases do not predict the presence of ef-hand iv in the nematostella sequences, likely due to the disruptive substitution we identified in this domain.

we also analyzed the four amphimedon  sequences and found that none of the key residues in the calcium binding loops have major substitutions . this suggests that these sponge proteins may have retained a calcium binding function, although the ability to produce visible light may not be intact given that there are no reports of light production from this species. in ef-hand i, a glutamic acid residue replaces the final aspartic acid  in three amphimedon sequences. this is, however, a very conservative substitution, as both aspartic acid and glutamic acid have acidic side chains, and thus would probably not significantly disrupt calcium binding. hmmer searches of pfam successfully identify ef-hands i, iii, and iv in all four amphimedon photoprotein-like sequences. aque_pp <dig> has some minor differences compared with the other sponge proteins in key binding loop residues, but all of the residues that are substituted are found in at least one other functional photoprotein .

although we found that amphimedon has four photoprotein gene homologs, visible bioluminescence has not been substantiated for that or any other sponge  <cit> . ultra-weak luminescence has been reported for suberites domuncula and that species also possesses an acyl-coenzyme a synthetase gene, which is similar to firefly luciferase  <cit> . however, this series of findings is not conclusive evidence of a functional bioluminescence system in porifera, using either coelenterate- or firefly-type luciferin. bioluminescence has also not been observed in the cnidarian nematostella, yet we found that these organisms have photoprotein-like genes. there are at least three possible scenarios that might explain their existence in these organisms: these are functional photoprotein genes that are either rarely utilized or are used at stages or in situations that have not been witnessed by researchers; these genes encode calcium-binding proteins with functions not involved in bioluminescence; or they represent a kind of evolutionary intermediate or 'proto-photoprotein' that does not have all of the structural machinery in place to allow the protein to properly fold or coordinate calcium ion binding. in the case of the two nematostella genes, there are substitutions in the ef-hand domains that make it unlikely that they can properly bind calcium. in the case of amphimedon, it is possible that the genes encode functional photoproteins, but that these gene products are ultimately inactive because amphimedon may not synthesize coelenterazine or obtain coelenterazine from its diet. this hypothesis could be tested by performing a luciferase activity assay on the purified proteins.

nematostella photoprotein-like mrna expression
in situ hybridizations of two photoprotein-like genes from nematostella during a series of developmental stages reveal a pattern of mainly endodermal expression, with a specific region of endodermal expression in the tips of budding tentacles through the six-tentacle stage . the expression pattern of the two genes is not entirely overlapping. for example, nvecpp <dig> has a diffuse pattern of expression in the endoderm in the larval stage , whereas the corresponding pattern for nvecpp <dig> shows a distinct endodermal expression pattern in the developing tentacle buds . additionally, for nvecpp <dig> only, at the six-tentacle stage, there is some expression in the basal disc of the anemone. given that nematostella does not exhibit bioluminescence, this pattern may indicate that these genes acquired a role in development. it would be informative to look at the expression pattern of the amphimedon genes during various life stages as well, given that there is evidence in publicly available est sequences ) that all four amphimedon photoprotein-like genes are expressed during the larval stage. expression patterns may help to narrow down possible functions for these proteins.

analysis of three putative mnemiopsis opsins
we identified three putative mnemiopsis opsin genes. these sequences were named mleiopsin <dig> to mleiopsin <dig> and have been deposited . they also have been given identifiers specific to the mnemiopsis genome project . the protein encoded by mleiopsin <dig> is  <dig> amino acids in length and the gene is comprised of eight exons. the protein encoded by mleiopsin <dig> is  <dig> amino acids in length and the gene has  <dig> exons. the protein encoded by mleiopsin <dig> is  <dig> amino acids in length and the gene has seven exons. full-length cdna sequences of the orfs of mleiopsin <dig> and mleiopsin <dig> were extended by race-pcr. we generated a table of percentage amino acid sequence identity and similarity among the mnemiopsis opsins and their close homologs based on the transmembrane region alignment . the mnemiopsis opsins share 17% to 36% amino acid identity and 38% to 59% amino acid similarity. mleiopsin <dig> shares the highest percent identity with an opsin from pleurobrachia pileus, another ctenophore species . mleiopsin <dig> shares the highest percent identity with ppilopsin <dig> . mleiopsin <dig> shares the highest percent identity with human peropsin .

we analyzed mleiopsins <dig> to  <dig> in relation to several residues known to be important to opsin function and found that mleiopsin <dig> has retained all but two of these important amino acids, while mleiopsin <dig> and  <dig> have additional substitutions . lys <dig> is a residue that serves as the site for the schiff base linkage with the chromophore and is conserved in all known opsins, including mleiopsins <dig> to  <dig>  the counterion is a key functional residue within the opsin family, responsible for stabilizing the inactive dark state pigment by helping to stabilize the protonated schiff base and tuning the wavelength absorbance into the visible spectrum  <cit> . the counterion is usually glu <dig>  in vertebrate visual and non-visual opsins and glu <dig> in many other opsins. interestingly, in mleiopsins <dig> and  <dig>  there is a glu in both positions, suggesting that the ancestral metazoan opsin may have had a glu at both positions. in mleiopsin <dig>  glu is retained only in position  <dig>  suggesting that, if functional, this protein may have the ability to stabilize the protonated schiff base through this position. a disulfide bond, conserved in most g-protein coupled receptors, normally found at residues cys <dig> and cys <dig>  is not present in mleiopsins  <dig> to  <dig>  presenting the possibility that either the proteins can fold and function properly without this conserved bond, or that their function is disrupted due to the substitution of these residues. finally, conserved motif glu134-arg135-tyr <dig>  involved in the propagation of the transduction signal once a photon has been absorbed, is retained in mleiopsin <dig>  partially substituted to glu-gln-tyr in mleiopsin <dig> and fully substituted to arg-arg-ala in mleiopsin <dig>  overall, mleiopsin <dig> has retained many conserved functional residues and has the greatest potential to be a functional opsin. this is further substantiated by the cloning and characterization of mleiopsin <dig> .

phototransduction pathway components are present in mnemiopsis
ciliary photoreceptors  employ a phototransduction cascade that includes ciliary opsins, gi/gt proteins, phosphodiesterase, and cyclic nucleotide gated ion channels, whereas rhabdomeric photoreceptors  utilize a cascade involving rhabdomeric opsins, g-protein alpha-q, phospholipase c, and transient receptor potential ion channels. both cascades can be deactivated by arrestin and rhodopsin kinase, and regenerated by retinal binding protein. we searched for and identified putative homologs to several ciliary and rhabdomeric phototransduction pathway proteins  <cit>  in the mnemiopsis genome . these sequences have been deposited into genbank . the mnemiopsis homologs had blast hits to query sequences with significant e-values . their reciprocal best blast hits were to proteins with annotations that closely correspond to the query proteins in nearly all cases. exceptions include a guanine nucleotide-binding  protein specific to the ciliary pathway , which resulted in a top hit of g subunit alpha-2; the guanylyl cyclase gc-e precursor, which gave a top hit of a natriuretic peptide receptor; and retinal-binding protein, which gave a top hit to a sec14-like protein. overall, these results indicate that components comprising a complete ciliary phototransduction cascade are present in mnemiopsis. in addition, assembled rna-seq transcript data available through the mnemiopsis genome project web site  <cit>  via the 'cl'  track on the mnemiopsis genome browser support the developmental mrna expression of all but two of the identified sequences .


and
jx564545
recoverin ;
gcap <dig> guanylyl cyclase-activating protein  <dig> ;
1e-32;
for each query protein, the corresponding mnemiopsis protein model is listed with the e-value of the top blast result. the mnemiopsis protein model was then used as a query in a reciprocal best blast search of the non-redundant protein database  and the top result is listed along with the e-value of the blast result. rna-seq data supports the developmental mrna gene expression of each of these protein models. blast: basic local alignment search tool; ml: mnemiopsis leidyi; pde: phosphodiesterase; trp: transient receptor potential.

ciliary phototransduction is more likely than rhabdomeric in mnemiopsis because the putative photoreceptors in the apical sensory organ of ctenophores have a ciliary morphology  <cit> , cyclic nucleotide gated ion channels  are the probable ancestral ion channels  <cit> , and rhabdomeric phototransduction seems to have evolved with the emergence of bilaterians  <cit> . it would be interesting to determine the organismal function for the rhabdomeric phototransduction cascade components  that we identified in the mnemiopsis genome, and to determine if the rhabdomeric line of photoreceptor evolution also dates back to early metazoans. although we have rna-seq-based evidence that these genes are expressed during embryonic development, we do not know if their expression is limited to the photocytes and/or the four putative photoreceptors in the apical sense organ. future studies that explore the expression patterns of these genes will help verify whether a phototransduction pathway is functioning in these specific regions and whether it is specific to ciliary components. further analysis of the phototransduction pathway genes in this early branching metazoan will help shed light on the origin of these pathways and their function in a non-bilaterian animal.

metazoan phylogeny of photoproteins
the phylogeny based on full-length photoprotein amino acid sequence alignments yielded four major groups in a well-supported clade - specifically, ctenophoran, anthozoan cnidarian, hydrozoan cnidarian, and poriferan groups . related proteins, including functionally related coelenterazine-binding proteins from renilla , form a sister group to this clade. a sarcoplasmic calcium binding protein from the marine worm nereis diversicolor  branches just outside the renilla coelenterazine-binding proteins group. other sarcoplasmic calcium binding proteins from a variety of taxa, as well as calmodulin proteins from various taxa , form their own groups outside of this clade . the difference in likelihood values among resulting trees from the multiple runs was very small, indicating that our methods produced several nearly equally likely trees. the relationships presented in figure  <dig> are maintained in the 50% majority rule consensus tree of all of the result trees .

interestingly, the cnidarian photoproteins are not monophyletic; the two nematostella photoprotein-like genes branch next to the ctenophore photoproteins with moderately high support , followed by the hydrozoan group and then by the four amphimedon photoprotein-like genes, which fall at the base of all of the other photoprotein and photoprotein-like groups with low support . it is not unusual for trees based on single genes to form clusters that are incongruous with taxonomy because of selection acting on a single locus, the presence of homoplasic characters, incomplete lineage sorting, or as a result of long-branch attraction  <cit> .

within the ctenophore photoproteins, the mnemiopsis sequences do not form a monophyletic group . all sequences from scaffold ml <dig> group together, with ml <dig> group a forming one subgroup  and ml <dig> group b branching in a ladder-like fashion from the a subgroup. the sequence from beroe branches next to the mnemiopsis ml <dig> cluster with low support, followed by two sequences from bolinopsis. the mnemiopsis photoproteins on scaffold ml <dig> form a subgroup  at the base of all of the other ctenophore photoproteins with 94% support. bioluminescence is widespread among ctenophores  <cit> , however, since genomic data are not yet available for any other ctenophore species, it remains to be seen if tandemly arrayed clusters of photoprotein genes will be identified in other ctenophores. the availability of genomes or transcriptomes from additional species will provide the basis for a more complete understanding of photoprotein evolution within the ctenophora. we also note that the ctenophore photoproteins are quite distinct from the hydromedusae photoproteins. our phylogenetic tree separates these two groups into distinct clusters; however, the groups are clearly evolutionarily related compared with other calcium-binding proteins, indicating that there may have been relatively rapid diversification of these proteins in the time since ctenophores and cnidarians diverged .

photoproteins arose at the base of the metazoa
searches of the recently sequenced genomes of unicellular eukaryotes , including monosiga brevicollis and salpingoeca rosetta , and capsaspora owczarzaki , did not reveal any photoprotein genes. however, blast searches revealed that homologs to other ef-hand superfamily proteins are present in the genomes of these groups, including calmodulin , centrin or caltractin, myosin, calcineurin, spectrin, and actinin . we found that photoproteins are altogether absent from the placozoan trichoplax. photoproteins are known to be present in many hydrozoan cnidarians in the orders leptothecatae, trachymedusae, narcomedusae, and siphonophorae, but it appears that they have been lost from another hydrozoan, hydra . because photoproteins or photoprotein-like genes are present in the earliest branching groups  on the animal tree of life, and not in their closest non-metazoan relatives, we infer that the origin of the gene family was at the base of the metazoa, followed by lineage-specific losses in trichoplax and hydra . this conclusion is based on currently available sequence data and should be revisited when sequence data become available for additional bioluminescent non-metazoan eukaryotes, such as radiolarians, which may have homologous calcium-activated photoproteins  <cit> .

opsin phylogeny reconstructs a ctenophore-specific clade
we identified six major groupings in the opsin phylogeny we reconstructed , which was based on an alignment of the seven-transmembrane  region of opsin sequences from a variety of taxa . two putative mnemiopsis opsin sequences  form a well-supported clade  with opsins from the ctenophore pleurobrachia, falling outside of the well-defined ciliary, rhabdomeric, and go-coupled plus retinochrome, retinal g protein-coupled receptor  groupings of bilaterians. the ctenophore-specific clade branches closer to the ciliary-opsin and go/rgr groups than to the rhabdomeric-opsins. a third putative mnemiopsis opsin  does not group with the other ctenophore opsins, and instead branches on its own at the base of all opsins with low support. the leaf stability index  and branch attachment frequency value  are both very low for this branch, further supporting the uncertainty of the placement of this sequence in our phylogeny. cnidarian opsins, represented by  <dig> nematostella sequences, are found in three major groupings: a subgroup that falls next to the go/rgr group; a group with seven nematostella sequences that branches next to the ctenophore-specific clade; and a group with two nematostella sequences that branches outside all opsins other than mleiopsin <dig>  likelihood values among resulting trees from the multiple runs were all very similar, indicating that our methods produced several equally likely trees. the relationships presented in figure  <dig> are maintained in the 50% majority rule consensus tree of all of the result trees . we also repeated the analysis after removing mleiopsin <dig> and all of the groupings and relationships among the groups remained the same .

the major clades identified in our opsin tree are in agreement with results seen in recent studies  <cit>  where cnidarian opsins occur in multiple locations across the tree. one recent study by porter and colleagues did not obtain this result, instead finding that all cnidarian and one ctenophore opsin  form a monophyletic clade referred to as cnidops  <cit> . in that study, only three nematostella sequences  and a single ctenophore sequence were included in the analysis; by contrast,  <dig> nematostella and four ctenophore sequences were included in our own analysis. the porter study also included several putative opsin sequences from the cnidarian hydra that we did not include in our analysis due to the extraordinarily long branches produced by these sequences during our preliminary phylogenetic analyses. additionally, the single ctenophore sequence included in that study  was derived from est data and is truncated. these differences could explain why the branching pattern seen in porter et al.  <cit>  differs from the position seen in our own tree. overall, the phylogeny we reconstructed does not suggest a simple one-to-one correlation between the non-bilaterian  opsin groups and the well-defined bilaterian groups. with the addition of the ctenophore sequences to the opsin phylogeny, the evolutionary path leading from prebilaterian opsins to the bilaterian ciliary, rhabdomeric, and go/rgr opsins remains unresolved, and it appears that additional sequence data will be required to fully resolve these relationships.

mnemiopsis photoprotein expression and spectral analysis
we expressed, purified, and characterized a subset of the mnemiopsis photoproteins that included one protein from each sequence group: mleipp <dig> , mleipp <dig> , and mleipp <dig> . the emission wavelength maximum  at ph  <dig>  for mleipp <dig> and mleipp <dig> was  <dig> nm and for mleipp <dig> was  <dig> nm. all emission wavelengths were maintained within  <dig> nm at ph  <dig> ,  <dig> , and  <dig>   for each protein. although noteworthy, the slightly longer emission maximum for the group c photoproteins would likely not have a functional impact on any organism detecting the luminescence. these values are slightly shifted from the in vitro value of mnemiopsin- <dig> and mnemiopsin- <dig> presented by ward and seliger  <cit>  of  <dig> nm, which were determined at ph  <dig>  and ph  <dig>  respectively. this could be due to differences in ph and the purification methods used between the two studies. although we only expressed three of the mleipps, it is likely that all  <dig> are functional, considering the very high amino acid identity present within each sequence group and, in particular, the conservation of key functional residues across all mnemiopsis photoproteins. although group b sequences have a substitution in an important residue in ef-hand i, we show that one member of this group, mleipp <dig>  is a functional photoprotein, so it is likely that this substitution does not disrupt function in the other group b proteins.

mnemiopsis opsin protein expression and characterization
we purified and determined the absorption spectrum of mleiopsin <dig> bound to 11-cis-retinal. the wavelengths of maximal absorption  of the resulting visual pigment were measured from the dark spectrum and dark-light difference spectrum . this protein has an absorption peak at  <dig> ±  <dig> nm . when the regenerated pigment was exposed to light, it showed a new absorbance spectrum peak at around  <dig> nm , indicating that 11-cis-retinal in the pigment was isomerized by light and all-trans-retinal was released. these results indicate that mleiopsin <dig> is able to form a functional photopigment. the absorption spectrum overlaps with the emission spectrum of the photoproteins , suggesting that the opsin could function to absorb light produced by the ctenophore. further experimentation will be necessary to rigorously test this hypothesis.

mnemiopsis photoprotein mrna expression
we examined mrna expression patterns of mnemiopsis photoprotein genes through embryonic development by in situ hybridization. we used probes generated from each of the photoprotein sequence groups ; because the patterns were identical for all three probes, representative patterns are shown in figure  <dig>  photoprotein expression begins during late gastrulation  in migrating photocyte precursors  and continues in cells associated with the endodermal meridional canals beneath the developing comb plates where photocytes are located . expression coincides closely with the onset of light emission in developing photocytes, which starts around  <dig> hpf.

although three separate probes were designed from the photoprotein sequences , identical expression patterns were observed from each probe. this could be due to true co-expression or may have resulted from the probes cross-hybridizing with multiple transcripts, given that the sequence is so similar among the photoproteins. the pattern of expression of mnemiopsis photoproteins matches the site of light production in developing embryos, which begin to emit light in these same regions upon stimulation starting around  <dig> hpf  <cit> , although mrna expression is first detected at  <dig> hpf.

mnemiopsis opsin mrna expression
expression of two opsin homologs  was detected in migrating photocyte precursors  and in developing photocytes at  <dig> hpf . mleiopsin <dig> exhibits expression early in development that looks strikingly similar to the photoprotein expression pattern , although it is not as strong or well-defined as the photoprotein expression pattern itself. expression of mleiopsin <dig> continues into the cydippid stage, where it is weakly expressed in photocytes . mlopsin <dig> is not expressed in early developmental stages , but exhibits strong expression in photocytes that overlaps with photoprotein expression at the cydippid stage . at about  <dig> hpf, mleiopsin <dig> expression is also found in four small groups of neural cells in the floor of the apical organ . these groups of neural cells coincide with structures described as lamellate bodies that were suggested over  <dig> years ago to be photoreceptors  <cit> . mleiopsin <dig> is expressed in the apical sense organ at the cydippid stage as well, although it is not as well defined . we did not examine expression patterns of mleiopsin <dig>  overall, these patterns suggest that there are photoreceptors located in the apical sense organ and that photocytes may also function as photoreceptors in this species.

mnemiopsis photoprotein and opsin mrna co-expression in photocytes
double in situ hybridization of photoprotein mleipp <dig> and mleiopsin <dig> shows a clearly overlapping expression pattern . reflective confocal microscopy of the same double in situ specimen  demonstrates that the mleiopsin <dig> expression is punctate and is located within the same photocyte cells exhibiting photoprotein expression . this pattern lends support for the hypothesis that photocytes function in bioluminescence and photoreception.

light responses in mnemiopsis
previous research has examined responses to light in mnemiopsis, and there is some experimental evidence that light influences its spawning behavior. under natural conditions, spawning normally occurs approximately  <dig> h after sunset in specimens collected in woods hole, ma, usa  <cit>  and  <dig> to  <dig> h after onset of darkness in specimens collected in miami, fl, usa  <cit> , with the miami specimens representing a genetically distinct population  <cit> . thus, the signal to spawn corresponds to the absence of light or onset of darkness and may be temperature dependent. it is unclear, however, if mnemiopsis exhibits phototactic behavior at any life stage . the organismal function of opsin-mediated phototransduction likely to occur in the photoreceptors of the apical sense organ and in the photocytes remains to be determined through experimentation.

do ctenophore photocytes have a dual role in light production and light sensing?
the co-expression of opsin and photoprotein genes in photocytes of mnemiopsis suggests a dual role for photocytes in both light sensing and light production. whether the two phenomena are functionally connected in this organism remains to be definitively determined through experimentation, although overlapping emission and absorption spectra of the two proteins suggests that it is a viable hypothesis. although light-induced bioluminescence has been demonstrated previously in a few bilaterian taxa, including pyrosomes  and in several crustaceans  <cit> , the mechanism for this type of stimulation of light production has not been well investigated in any system. further investigation will be required to determine whether light sensing stimulates light production in mnemiopsis or if the two phenomena are linked in any way.

it is clear that mnemiopsis bioluminescence is under neural control  <cit> , but the co-localization of photoproteins and opsins in the same cells suggests that the cascade of events leading to and/or inhibiting bioluminescence may be more complex. photoinactivation of photoproteins that is typical of ctenophores adds an additional layer of complexity to the system.

here, we have shown that a ctenophore expresses a protein that senses the environment , and proteins that produce light , establishing that ctenophore photocytes are capable of sensing as well as responding to stimuli. our results suggest that there is a non-visual function for opsin-mediated phototransduction in this early-branching metazoan species. further study will be necessary to determine how the bioluminescence cascade operates in mnemiopsis, and whether or not opsin and other phototransduction pathway genes play a role in regulating  luminescence production under different conditions.

CONCLUSIONS
here, we present a comprehensive analysis of the genes involved in light emission and photoreception in the ctenophore mnemiopsis leidyi. with respect to light emission, we identified two genomic clusters of tandemly arrayed photoproteins genes in mnemiopsis containing a total of at least  <dig> full-length genes with high sequence conservation; we have also shown that they are likely maintained through purifying selection and concerted evolution. we were able to confirm that the multiple photoprotein isoforms previously reported by others are, indeed, products of different  individual genes. further, our understanding of the evolution of the calcium-regulated photoprotein gene family has significantly improved as a result of having full-length genomic sequence data from early-branching non-bilaterian taxa in-hand. based on these data, we have constructed the first metazoan-wide phylogeny for the photoprotein gene family, identified photoprotein-like genes in non-luminescent taxa , and demonstrated that the family likely arose at the base of the metazoa. regarding photoreception, we identified three putative opsin genes in mnemiopsis, reconstructed a phylogeny that suggests ctenophore opsins do not group clearly with traditional bilaterian rhabdomeric, ciliary, or go/rgr opsin groupings, and have identified a complete ciliary phototransduction cascade in the mnemiopsis genome. we have demonstrated that one ctenophore opsin  forms a functional photopigment that absorbs light at wavelengths that closely overlap with maximum photoprotein light emission. we believe that mleiopsin <dig> represents the most ancient animal opsin with a demonstrated ability to absorb light. expression patterns showing co-localization of photoprotein genes and two putative opsin genes in developing mnemiopsis photocytes indicate that these cells have the capacity to both sense and produce light. opsin expression was also detected in the apical sensory organ in neural ciliary cells identified over  <dig> years ago as putative photoreceptors. this study sets the stage for future experimentation that will be necessary to test the intriguing possibility of a functional linkage between light reception and light production in this ctenophore species.

