BACKGROUND
most phylogenetic trees represent the evolutionary history of groups of organisms, with the leaves representing species  and internal nodes representing speciation events. in contrast, molecular phylogenies for gene families  usually display sequences for different orthologous groups of proteins  <cit>  from one or more species. these trees can thus show a complicated tapestry of orthology and paralogy, and nodes on such trees may represent either gene duplications or speciations : both are splitting events, producing daughter lineages that henceforth have independent evolutionary histories . this similarity between gene duplication and speciation allows similar tools to be used to study the two analogous processes, and techniques developed to investigate speciation and extinction may give some insight into the pattern of gene duplication and gene loss  <cit> .

tree shape has been used to make inferences about the processes of speciation and extinction that govern the birth and death of organismal lineages  <cit> . we can similarly investigate the processes of gene duplication and gene loss, or deletion, on phylogenies where all the nodes represent gene duplication events, such as those containing homologous genes from a single genome . in particular, gene sequences from a completely sequenced genome allow inferences about the process of deletion to be made without confounding this with the absence of a gene from the sequence databases.

 tree balance, bias and macroevolution
much of the large literature on tree shape has focused on the balance of trees – how 'comb-like' or 'bush-like' the tree is, ignoring branch length information. in particular, a great deal of work has investigated how the balance of real phylogenies matches that expected under more-or-less simple models of the speciation process  <cit> . the simplest realistic model is the equal-rate markov model  or yule model  <cit> . under the erm model, every lineage has an identical and constant rate of splitting to form new lineages . this is often contrasted with the proportional-to-distinguishable arrangements  model  <cit> , under which every different labelled tree is equally probable. the pda model may not be realistic  <cit> , but is useful because it represents the case in which a tree-building method is selecting randomly from all possible trees. many models are relaxations of the assumptions of the erm model, while inaccurate estimation will bias tree shape towards the pda model.

previous investigations of tree shape have established that empirical phylogenetic trees are significantly more unbalanced than expected under the erm model  <cit> . a number of different explanations for this have been put forward, falling into two categories. the first set of explanations claim that this deviation from the null model is an artefact due either to errors in phylogenetic reconstruction or bias in data collection. previous work has found that poorly supported maximum-parsimony trees tend to be less balanced than well-supported ones  <cit> , while upgma  trees change little in balance despite being as prone to error as parsimony trees  <cit> , while it seems likely that there is no significant difference between the two for fairly robust data  <cit> . mooers  <cit>  demonstrated that complete trees  are more balanced than incomplete trees, as expected if taxon selection across a set of trees is clumped  <cit> . a second category of explanations claim that deviation from the erm model accurately reflects that the speciation process is more complex than this model allows. more complex  models of the speciation and extinction process have been proposed by a number of authors, including heard  <cit>  and kirkpatrick & slatkin  <cit> , who both propose models in which diversification rates evolve through time, producing unbalanced trees, although extremely high rate variation is required to produce the degree of imbalance observed in real data.

 duplication mechanisms and tree balance
while accurate modelling of species trees has proved complex, the gene duplication process is likely to be even more complicated. gene duplications within a single gene family are not always independent events, as duplications can occur by a number of different molecular mechanisms , some of which copy large quantities of dna in a single event – duplication by polysomy  and polyploidy  will copy many or all genes in a genome. there is substantial evidence  <cit>  that two rounds of whole-genome duplication occurred early in vertebrate evolution . duplication of multiple members of a gene family by a single event of these kinds will produce more symmetrical trees than expected under the erm model if other duplication has occurred at a constant rate , or at least shift trees towards greater balance than the underlying process. an equivalent suggestion has been made that balanced species trees may be produced by "synchronous speciation caused by vicariance events that affect most or all of the species in a clade"  <cit> , but whereas large-scale gene duplication is known to occur in a range of different groups, sufficiently large biogeographic events are likely to be rather rare.

another peculiarity of gene duplication will have the opposite effect on tree balance, tending to produce less balanced trees. tandem gene duplications, where a piece of dna is duplicated adjacent to the original copy, will produce arrays of related genes, such as observed in the developmental hox gene clusters of metazoans  <cit> . these repeats of similar sequence will themselves tend to increase the rate at which illegitimate meiotic recombination occurs, and so lead to further tandem duplications . while we know of no suitable quantitative evidence from gene family arrays, this process certainly occurs in minisatellites  <cit> . any tendency for the rate of duplication to increase following a duplication will produce unbalanced tree topologies  – it is the opposite situation to that modelled by losos & adler  <cit> . in fact, the problem is rather more complex than this, as only a small proportion of possible tree shapes could actually represent the history of tandem-duplicated genes. while techniques for randomly generating these trees are available  <cit> , it is not clear what the equivalents to the pda and erm distributions are for tandem duplication trees.

 shape of gene family phylogenies
in this paper, we make an initial attempt to use tree balance to make inferences about the process of gene duplication. we compare the imbalance of trees for human gene families with expectations from the erm model and with the imbalance of species phylogenies collated by other workers. this latter comparison is useful because of the uncertainty surrounding how tree construction might affect balance: to the extent that both are constructed from similar data, differences between the balance of gene trees and species trees will be due to differences in the branching processes of duplication and speciation. we can effectively use the species tree data as an informal control to highlight whether the balance of gene trees requires explanation in terms of the mechanism of gene duplication. previous work on the imbalance of gene family trees looked exclusively at using four-member gene families to test the 2r hypothesis. in the absence of other duplication and gene deletion, two consecutive genome duplications should amplify a single gene into a 4-member gene family with a perfectly balanced tree topology  <cit> . hughes  <cit>  and martin  <cit>  both found that most 4-member gene families are unbalanced, and hence rejected the 2r hypothesis. our dataset enables us to put these earlier results in context by comparison with gene families of other sizes.

RESULTS
the single-linkage clustering approach divided the protein-coding genes from the human genome into  <dig>  gene families . the distribution of gene family sizes was consistent with previous work  <cit> . trees were constructed for  <dig>  gene families with reasonable alignments for more than  <dig> members. colless's index is undefined for polytomous trees, and  <dig> trees were excluded because they contained at least one zero-length internal branch, leaving a total dataset of  <dig> gene families.

gene family data were compared with existing datasets of species phylogenies using glms as described in methods. these data support the finding of stam  <cit>  that transformed pim scores are not independent of tree size. using the categorical models as described, our data were found to be significantly more unbalanced than real trees for two out of three incomplete-tree datasets for which full information was available  <cit>   f =  <dig> , df = 34/ <dig>  p <  <dig> , dataset f =  <dig> , df = 1/ <dig>  p =  <dig> ; harcourt-brown  <dig> data , glm of arcsine-transformed pim scores with number of leaves and dataset as factors: nleaves f =  <dig> , df = 27/ <dig>  p <  <dig> , dataset f =  <dig> , df = 1/ <dig>  p =  <dig> ; for heard  <dig> data , glm of arcsine-transformed pim scores with number of leaves and dataset as factors: nleaves f =  <dig> , df = 19/ <dig>  p <  <dig> , dataset f =  <dig> , df = 1/ <dig>  p =  <dig> ). imbalance measures for all of these sets of trees are shown on figure  <dig>  the only dataset that is not significantly different from our gene family trees by this test is that of morphological trees from harcourt-brown  <cit> . this is probably because half of the trees from this dataset include fossil taxa, which make these trees more unbalanced than trees containing only contemporaneous leaves  <cit> .

data for complete trees was available from two different compilations  <cit> . comparison with mooers  <cit>  data is difficult as neither topologies or im scores for individual trees were available, but our gene family trees are more unbalanced than the ones compiled by mooers . stam  <cit>  collected a larger set of  <dig> complete species trees, including larger trees than mooers. a statistical test as above confirms that human gene family trees show significantly less balance than the trees collected by stam .

for all the glms summarised above, there was no significant interaction between tree size and dataset, so the interaction term was not included in any analysis. treating tree size as continuous, an 8th-order polynomial was needed to model the relationship between tree size and pim . these analyses gave identical results to those reported above  in that it made no difference to the significance or otherwise of any terms in the models, and confirms the direction of the effect – that gene family trees are less balanced than species trees.

for four-member gene families,  <dig> out of  <dig> gene families, or 73%, are unbalanced, while two-thirds of such trees should be unbalanced under the erm model. tests based on pim scores have little power for small gene families, but a binomial test confirms that significantly more trees are unbalanced than the erm expectation , reflecting the general trend of human gene family trees.

discussion
human gene family phylogenies are more unbalanced than species trees compiled from the literature and than expected under the erm model, suggesting that the process of gene duplication occurs similarly, but not identically, to that of speciation. this difference in balance may be due to different biases acting on gene trees than on species trees. taxon sampling seems unlikely to be the explanation as our gene family trees are complete  and our gene family trees are more unbalanced than complete species trees. the difference between our trees and published cladograms is unlikely to be due to differences between morphological and molecular data as our trees are less balanced than a compilation of molecular trees  <cit>  and studies have found no significant difference between the balance of trees from morphological and molecular data  <cit> . it seems that the imbalance of gene family trees demands a mechanistic rather than methodological explanation.

many differences between the processes of gene duplication and speciation might explain the different shapes of the trees produced and, in principle, any of the models that have been invoked to explain deviations of observed species trees from erm expectations could be acting on gene duplications to a greater extent. for example, if the model of evolving rates suggested by heard  <cit>  applied to duplication rates with greater variation than for speciation rates, this would predict the sort of difference observed. it is unclear what molecular mechanism could cause this. given that the processes of regional, large-scale gene duplication and tandem duplication through recombination are known to occur in genomes, we interpret our results in terms of these mechanistic models.

seen in this light, the high imbalance of gene family trees suggests that large-scale duplication has not played a sufficiently large role in gene family evolution to leave any signal in the cladistic balance of gene family trees, or that the rate of gene shuffling after tandem duplication is high enough to move duplicated genes apart before regional duplication occurs  <cit> . the continuous process of duplication and loss that appears to have occurred during the evolution of many genomes  <cit>  produces highly imbalanced gene family trees. our data do not provide a powerful test of the 2r hypothesis, as gene deletion may have erased any trace of this event from many of our gene families, particularly if massive gene loss quickly followed the polyploidy events  <cit> . similarly, it is not surprising that the balance of four-taxon trees from our data supports previous work  <cit>  as we would expect these trees to be shaped by a variety of gene duplication events and show similar imbalance to larger gene families.

if many of our gene families do sample duplications from the 2r event, our results are even more striking, as gene family trees are highly imbalanced despite this large event, but there are further caveats. the simulations of figure  <dig> are probably an inadequate model of how the 2r event occurred: furlong and holland  <cit>  have suggested that the two genome duplications of the 2r-event may have been closely spaced in time, leading to a period of auto-octoploidy. this octoploid genetic system would break down through a gradual and random return to diploidy as chromosomes pair increasingly preferentially with particular other homologues. in this case, the phylogeny of the duplicated genes will reflect the process of diploidisation rather than the pattern of polyploidisation that produced the duplicate copies. for example, if diploidisation occurred by pairs of homeologues diverging from the pool of chromosomes sequentially, it could lead to imbalanced gene family trees, while if it occurs through a pseudo-tetraploid intermediate stage, it would tend to produce balanced topologies. if furlong and holland are right, and the two '2r' events occurred almost consecutively, then the balance of gene families will be a product of the background duplication process superimposed over the signal from the diploidisation process, which will be hard to disentangle.

we have identified two processes – large-scale gene duplication and tandem duplication – that have shaped gene family phylogenies and do not apply in the analogous process of speciation. more sophisticated models of regional gene duplication would show the different effects that the size, number, and timing of such events could have on the balance of phylogenetic trees, as we have modelled only two very simple situations . the balance of gene family trees may reflect the relative rates of large-scale duplication and tandem duplication, but other processes can also affect tree balance. while tree balance provides a method to study these processes, further progress will also require a better understanding of the background birth-death processes of speciation and extinction and gene duplication and loss.

CONCLUSIONS
gene family trees are significantly less balanced than would be expected under the equal-rate markov  model and are even more unbalanced than published species trees. the different balance of gene family trees and species phylogenies suggests some difference between the processes of gene duplications and speciation. this difference is surprising, as regional duplication is known to occur, leading to non-independent gene duplications, which should produce more balanced trees. the imbalance of gene family trees suggests that relatively few gene duplications have occurred as segmental duplications affecting multiple loci. some models of tandem duplication suggest that this process should produce unbalanced gene family trees, so our results might indicate that tandem duplications are more common, or at least have had a greater impact on the shape of gene trees. one important complication is the uncertainty over the effect the 2r event could have had on the evolution of vertebrate gene families.

