BACKGROUND
identification of transcription factor binding sites is crucial to the understanding of gene regulation at the transcriptional level and for deciphering gene regulatory networks. in recent years, the power of bioinformatics and the emergence of complete genome sequences from a variety of species have made it possible to perform global in silico surveys for putative binding sites of individual transcription factors.

the cyclic-amp response element binding protein  belongs to the bzip family of transcription factors that contain basic leucine zipper motifs. creb activates target genes by binding to the camp-response element  most frequently located in the promoter region  <cit> . examples of bzip proteins binding to cre and cre-like motifs have been described in eukaryotes from yeast to human  <cit> . in mammals, creb plays an important role in many biological processes  <cit>  and can be activated through several signaling pathways . for instance, creb has been implicated in multiple functions essential to the brain, including responses to emotional stimuli  <cit> , learning and long-term memory formation  <cit> . dysfunction in creb-regulated transcription also contributes to neurodegeneration  <cit> . the canonical cre is a palindromic octamer, tgacgtca. however, degenerate cres and half-cres  are also found to be functional in many of the creb targets identified so far  <cit> , suggesting a tolerance of creb for cres in terms of sequence recognition and binding. more than  <dig> mammalian creb target genes have been identified to date , and there are thousands of putative creb binding sites that are likely to be functional  <cit> .

it has been observed that, in mammalian genomes, the canonical cre shows a positional bias  <cit>  towards the proximal promoter region  <cit> , although it remains unclear how this feature has evolved. mammalian genomes, as is typical of vertebrate genomes, are globally methylated  <cit>  and contain many cpg islands  <cit> . cpg islands are  <dig> bp or longer dna regions with gc-content greater than 50% and a higher than expected number of cpg dinucleotides  <cit> . approximately  <dig> percent of human genes  have cpg islands in their promoters  <cit> . most cpg dinucleotides in mammalian genomes contain 5-methylcytosine  <cit> . however, although cpg dinucleotides in cpg islands can be methylated, they are typically maintained in an unmethylated state  <cit> . cpgs are usually methylated on both complementary strands, but are sometimes maintained in a hemi-methylated state  <cit> . the central dinucleotide of the canonical cre motif, cpg, is known to be methylated in some cases  <cit> . such methylation inhibits creb binding  <cit>  and presumably also increases the rate of c to t transition due to spontaneous deamination of methyl-c. these transitions are often not corrected by dna repair mechanisms and can be retained as single nucleotide polymorphisms that may cause altered gene expression and changes in phenotype. these transitions may persist through evolution, potentially resulting in differences in cre function in orthologous genes. cres with a central tpg  have lower affinity for creb binding compared to the canonical cre  <cit> , but have been shown to be functional in some genes  <cit> . deamination of both complements of a fully methylated cpg dinucleotide results in a change from cpg to tpa. the tgatatca motif is not known to function as a cre.

in this study, we performed genome-wide searches for the canonical cre and a variant cre motif  in promoter regions of human, mouse, rat, dog, chicken, fish, frog, fruit fly, sea squirt and worm, to determine if the positional bias of cres is present in other genomes and to establish the point in evolutionary history that the positional bias of cres started to appear. we also performed comparative genomics analyses to investigate the conservation of orthologous cre motifs in human, mouse, rat and dog. we focused on differences in the central dinucleotide of the cre motifs, which is critical for strong creb binding. since, in mammals, methylation of sites other than the cpg dinucleotides is rare, tg-variant cres are not expected to be affected by methylation mechanisms. using pairwise comparisons of human cres with orthologous sequences in mouse, rat and dog, we identified known and putative cres that show cpg to tpg transitions in the core of the cre motif between orthologous genes. such differences between cres in the promoter regions of orthologous genes may cause significant differences in temporal or tissue specific expression in these orthologs.

RESULTS
positional bias of cre-like motifs
we performed a search of the literature to obtain information on the sequence of cres in known creb target genes. a total of  <dig> cres in  <dig> known creb target genes were retrieved. although in some cases sequences longer than the  <dig> bp core motif were reported, only the core motifs were considered in this study. a total of  <dig> distinct cre variants were identified. we searched a set of genomic sequences containing more than  <dig>  human sequences spanning - <dig>  bp to + <dig>  bp with respect to the tss, defined as "tss spanning regions"  . the searches were performed on both the forward and reverse strands with respect to the direction of transcription. using these sequences we computed representation index  values in  <dig> ×  <dig> bp windows along the tss-srs  for the  <dig> reported cre variants and a non-cre motif tgatatca . the canonical cre motif was highly over-represented in  <dig> adjacent  <dig> bp windows over the - <dig> to - <dig> bp region   <dig> ), but under-represented outside this region   <dig> ). the difference between these two mean ri values was used as a measure of positional bias towards the region from - <dig> to - <dig> bp. positional bias values of all  <dig> motifs were computed and motifs with positional bias values greater than  <dig>  standard deviations from the mean  were classified as significant. figure  <dig> shows the representation index  profiles of  <dig> cre motifs with the highest positional bias values and the non-cre ta-motif. the canonical cre and the tg-variant  showed the highest positional bias  and were the only motifs to have significant positional bias. when considered separately, tg-variant motifs on the forward and reverse strand  were found to have similar positional bias values . we selected the canonical cre and the tg-variant to investigate the evolution of positional bias of cres.

evolution of the positional bias of the canonical cre
since cres have been described in a broad range of eukaryotes, we performed bi-directional searches for canonical and tg-variant cres in the genomes of  <dig> organisms to see if the cre positional bias is conserved. we computed ri values in  <dig> bp windows in the tss-sr regions. plots of normalized ri values of the canonical cre versus distance from the tss revealed a strong positional bias toward the tss in the genomes of human , mouse , rat , chicken , frog  and zebrafish   but not in the genomes of the sea squirt , fruit fly  and worm  . positional bias was also observed for the tg-variant in human, mouse, and rat . little or no positional bias was observed for the tg-variant in chicken, frog and zebrafish  and no positional bias was seen in the sea squirt, fruit fly and worm . the cre positional bias likely evolved after the separation of urochordata and vertebrata.

it would seem that selective conservation of canonical cres located close to the tss occurred during evolution. it is known that activated creb is involved in the recruitment of other transcriptional co-activators, such as creb binding protein, to promoter regions close to the tss to facilitate transcription  <cit> . we postulate that this requirement for creb to be in close proximity to the tss might have imposed functional constraints on the location of the cre and contributed to the evolution of cre positional bias. we hypothesize that the positional bias of the tg-variant motif is a consequence of cpg to tpg transitions in canonical cres due to cytosine methylation-deamination events. we explore this hypothesis in the following sections.

conservation of cres in mammalian genomes
using pair-wise comparisons, putative cres from our survey in the human genome were checked for conservation of the motif sequence in mouse, rat and dog using the "liftover" tool  <cit> . over  <dig>  human cres were mapped to orthologous sequences in mouse, rat or dog. the frequency of identical orthologous sequences found in mouse, rat or dog was used as a measure of conservation of the cre motif variants. table  <dig> shows the five most highly conserved cre motifs between human and the other mammals. the canonical cre had the highest motif conservation value  and the tg-variant was the second most conserved . using the pair-wise comparisons of human canonical and tg-variant cres with orthologous sequences in mouse, rat and dog, we investigated the frequency of occurrence of all possible octet motifs. table  <dig> shows the five most frequently occurring motif pairs for human canonical and tg-variant cres. we found that when human canonical cres are not conserved in the other species they are most frequently the tg-variant  or its reverse complement, tgacatca  . this is not surprising since, due to the high frequency of deamination of methylated cytosines in cpg dinucleotides to thymidine, cpg to tpg or cpa transitions are the most frequent dna mutation in mammals  <cit> . interestingly, the ta-motif, which can result from double-deamination of methylated cpg, was rare . human tg-variants are most frequently found in the canonical form in the other mammals when they are not conserved . interestingly, for human tg-variant cres, the third most frequent motif pair was the reverse complement, ca-variant cre. such differences may occur when the central cpg of an ancestral canonical cre is methylated and deaminated on different strands during divergent evolution. in fact we identified  <dig> cases where canonical, tg-variant and ca-variant cres are found in orthologous sequences in human, mouse, rat and dog. one of these was located  <dig> bp upstream of the tss of human calca, a known creb target gene. this cre was canonical in human and rat, tg-variant in mouse and ca-variant in dog. the fourth most frequent motif pair in human tg-variant cres was the non-functional ta-motif. these motif pairs could have been generated from an ancestral canonical cre that was methyl-cpg deaminated on only one strand in human, but on both strands in the other species. taken together these data show that both canonical and tg-variant cres are highly conserved among mammals and that mutations involving cpg to tpg transitions are the most commonly occurring differences found in orthologous cres.

cre methylation and cpg islands
many mammalian promoters contain cpg islands, which are regions of high cpg density and hypomethylation. in order to investigate the frequency that cre variants occur within cpg islands, we mapped the positions of human canonical and tg-variant cres and the ta-motif onto the human cpg island track using the ucsc table browser data retrieval tool  <cit> .

we found that 62% of human canonical cres, but only 7% of tg-variant cres and 2% of ta-motifs, were found in cpg islands. we looked at a subset of the canonical and tg-variant cres that are conserved in at least one other mammal  and found that 81% of canonical, but only 13% of tg-variant cres are located in cpg islands in human. therefore, the cres within the cpg islands appear to be more conserved. since cpg islands are less methylated than other genomic dna regions, cpg dinucleotides in cpg islands are less prone to spontaneous methyl-c deamination. this in turn may reduce the rate of mutation of canonical cres in cpg islands to the tg- or ca-variants, or to the ta-motif. cres that are outside of cpg islands are not protected from methylation and many of these may have been subject to deamination during evolution. we also found that the positional bias was stronger for both canonical and tg-variant cres in cpg islands versus those not in cpg islands .

to address the question of whether the rate of cpg to tpg transitions is different for cres within or outside of the cpg islands, we analyzed the cpg island status of four subsets of human and mouse orthologous cres:  cres that were canonical in both human and mouse ;  cres that were tg-variants in both human and mouse ;  cres that were canonical in human, but tg-variants in mouse ; and  cres that were tg-variants in human, but canonical in mouse  . these sets were then partitioned according to whether the cre pairs were or were not in a cpg island in human. we found that 80% of the cg:cg cre pairs, but only 16% of tg:tg cre pairs were in cpg islands in human. this is consistent with our findings above . sixty percent of the cg:tg pairs and 32% of the tg:cg pairs were found in cpg islands. according to these results, when human canonical cres are located outside a cpg island, they are twice as likely to be paired with tg-variants  than with canonical cres  in mouse . similarly, the percentage of tg:cg pairs in human cpg islands is almost double the percentage of tg:tg pairs . we also found that 80% of human canonical cres that are conserved in mouse are in a cpg island in human versus only 57% of those not conserved in mouse. taken together these data suggest that although cpg to tpg transitions within canonical cres do occur in cpg island regions, the rates of transition are much higher when the cres lie in non-cpg island regions.

tissue specific methylation of canonical cres has been shown to inhibit creb binding  <cit>  and methylation-dependant regulation of creb activity has been demonstrated  <cit> . most variants of the canonical cre contain the motif tgacg, which are considered to be half-site cres  <cit> , and can also be methylated at the cpg. such regulation, however, is not likely to function on tg-variant cres since they lack the cpg dinucleotide that is the usual target of dna methyltransferases in mammals. it has been established that tg-variant cres are functional in a number of mammalian genes including plat, cga, rara, rarb, nts and cftr  <cit> , but they may have lower specificity for cre-binding proteins than canonical cres  <cit> . thus, a gene that is regulated by a canonical cre in one species and a tg-variant in another species may show differences in basal, temporal or tissue specific gene expression. from the pair-wise comparisons of human cres to orthologous sequences in other mammals we identified  <dig> human canonical cres that were tg-variant cres in at least one other species and  <dig> human tg-variant cres that were canonical cres in at least one other species . further investigation is required to establish whether these putative cres contribute to differences in gene expression that are relevant to human development or disease.

the appearance of heavily methylated genomes and cpg islands both coincide with the evolution of vertebrates  <cit> . cpg islands tend to associate with the 5'-end of genes, often spanning proximal promoter regions  <cit> . the urochordate, ciona intestalis, has a fractionally methylated genome and shows examples of sequence resembling vertebrate cpg islands  <cit> , which may hint at the beginning of the evolution of the cpg islands seen in vertebrates. we found that, unlike all the other chordates in our study, ciona has no positional bias of the canonical cre, suggesting that the positional bias of cres evolved after the separation of vertebrates from the other chordates. antequera  <cit>  proposed a model for cpg island evolution in vertebrates that involves protection of cpg island regions from dna methylation by the initial assembly of the replication machinery. since vertebrate cpg islands are hypomethylated regions in a sea of cpg methylation, it follows that the evolution of this feature was dependent on the evolution of genome-wide methylation. most of the canonical cres identified in this study were found to be located within cpg islands. we propose that, in addition to the selective pressure for cres to be in close proximity to the tss, the evolution of positional bias of canonical cres was also assisted by the maintenance of cpg islands in a hypomethylated state in vertebrates. cres that lie outside of the boundaries of cpg islands are more likely to be methylated and are vulnerable to methyl-cytosine deamination to thymidine. our finding that most tg-variant cres, which can be formed by cpg to tpg transition in canonical cres, were found outside cpg islands supports this hypothesis.

we speculate that early vertebrates had many more canonical cre motifs distributed throughout the genome than today's vertebrates and that genome-wide methylation and deamination of methyl-cpg has removed many of these motifs from vertebrate genomes. a whole genome survey showed that the human genome contains only 25% of the expected number of canonical cre motifs . cpg islands may have preserved cres  as functional transcription factor binding sites in regions close to the core promoter. the result of this process is the observed positional bias of the canonical cre. cpg islands however are not necessarily stable over time. there is evidence to suggest that mouse cpg islands have eroded  <cit> . evolutionary changes in the cpg island status of genes could leave canonical cres exposed to methylation and trigger conversion to the tg-variant. also, cpg islands are not devoid of methylation. canonical cres in cpg islands can still be methylated, in some cases in a tissue dependent or temporal manner. in fact, we found that  <dig> out of  <dig> canonical cres recently identified as always methylated or differentially methylated  <cit>  were located in cpg islands. we further speculate that the weaker positional bias observed in the tg-variant is simply a consequence of deamination of methyl-c in the core of the canonical cres.

CONCLUSIONS
in summary, our data suggest that a positional bias of canonical cres towards the tss evolved in vertebrates after the separation from urochordates. the weaker positional bias observed in the tg-variant is likely a consequence of deamination of methyl-c in the core of the canonical cres. the canonical cre is the most highly conserved cre variant in mammals and shows the strongest positional bias toward the tss. the most frequent mutations in canonical cres are likely due to methyl-c deamination events. we observed that most canonical cres lay within cpg islands where they are likely maintained in an un-methylated state, thus protecting them from methyl-c deamination. conversely, tg-variant cres were generally found in non-cpg island regions. many of these tg-variant cres may have been formed from canonical cres through methyl-c deamination. our discovery of orthologous cres with different dynamic methylation potential amongst mammals may help to uncover important differences in the regulation of orthologous creb target genes relevant to human development and disease. in future work we would like to extend our study to other transcription factors that show positional bias and bind to sites with methylation-sensitive cpg dinucleotides.

