BACKGROUND
mesenchymal stem cells are plastic-adherent, fibroblast-like cells that differentiate into mesodermal cells - osteocytes, adipocytes and chondrocytes  <cit> . although first isolated from bone marrow, mesenchymal stem cells have been identified in numerous tissues including, but not limited to; adipose tissue, skeletal muscle, dental pulp, dermal tissue  <cit> . numerous clinical trials have been completed or are currently underway utilizing the advantageous properties of mesenchymal stem cells to treat an array of disorders  <cit> . it seems apparent that these remarkable cells have significant therapeutic potential. although, to be accepted in routine clinical practice, standardized techniques for the exclusive isolation of mesenchymal stem cells are required. consequently, the identification of specific extracellular markers is crucial.

however, to date, there are no conclusive extracellular marker  for the specific isolation of mesenchymal stem cells. since the initial work of haynesworth et al   <cit> , an abundance of markers / marker combinations have been suggested to enrich for mesenchymal stem cells, in vitro . additionally, most studies that examine the phenotype of mesenchymal stem cells, assess only one tissue type or compare mesenchymal stem cells from various tissues  <cit> . the majority do not contrast the phenotype of mesenchymal stem cells with non-stem cell mesenchymal cells. therefore, the aim of this project was to identify markers differentially expressed between mesenchymal stem cell and non-stem cell mesenchymal cell cultures by comparing and contrasting the phenotype of populations of cells from tissues in which mesenchymal stem cells are rich and rare. we took an inclusive approach to this exploratory work to avoid inadvertent exclusion of mesenchymal stem cells. hence, no selection or sorting techniques were applied to our tissue cultures, save for those prescribed by dominici et al  <dig>  <cit> ; plastic adherence and proliferation in standard tissue culture conditions.

cells from bone marrow, olfactory tissue, foreskin fibroblasts and breast adipose were assessed for tri-lineage differentiation potential  and their phenotype extensively evaluated utilizing flow-cytometry, immuno-fluorescence, proteomics, antibody arrays and qpcr. differentiation experiments revealed cultures in which mesenchymal stem cells are rich and rare . phenotypic analysis demonstrated that all tissue cultures exhibited remarkably similar phenotypes and that common mesenchymal stem cell markers, and fibroblast-associated markers, do not discriminate between mesenchymal stem cell and non-stem cell mesenchymal cell cultures. meticulous examination and comparison of the phenotypes of mesenchymal stem cell and non-stem cell mesenchymal cell cultures revealed few differentially expressed markers.

RESULTS
bone marrow and breast adipose cultures are rich in mesenchymal stem cells, while olfactory tissue cultures represent non-stem cell mesenchymal cells
one of the hallmarks of mesenchymal stem cells is their tri-lineage differentiation potential . to assess the differentiation of tissue cells, standard differentiation techniques were applied. bone marrow and breast adipose cells demonstrated extensive adipocyte, osteocyte and chondrocyte differentiation . foreskin fibroblasts exhibited chondrocyte and rare adipocyte and osteocyte differentiation . however, olfactory tissue cells displayed no chondrocyte and very rare adipocyte and osteocyte differentiation . qpcr for aggrecan , adiponectin  and osteopontin  confirmed cytochemical staining results . these data indicate that bone marrow and breast adipose cells demonstrated differentiation properties consistent with populations rich in mesenchymal stem cells. the differentiation potential of foreskin fibroblasts and olfactory tissue cells indicated populations in which mesenchymal stem cells are rare. in particular, olfactory tissue cells represent non-stem cell mesenchymal cells .

bone marrow, breast adipose, olfactory tissue and foreskin fibroblast cells were tested for their ability to function as mesenchymal stem cells by examining their tri-lineage  differentiation potential. extensive , moderate , rare  and negative  differentiation is indicated.

differential phenotypic analysis
having established the differentiation potential of the various tissue cultures, attempts were made to identify markers differentially expressed between mesenchymal stem cell  and non-stem cell mesenchymal cell  cultures. to achieve this flow-cytometry, immuno-fluorescence, proteomics, antibody arrays and qpcr were employed.

common mesenchymal stem cell markers do not discriminate between mesenchymal stem cell and non-stem cell mesenchymal cell cultures
flow-cytometry was used to assess the tissue cells for the expression of markers associated with mesenchymal stem cells, as well as other extracellular markers. flow-cytometry data indicated that common mesenchymal stem cell markers cd <dig>  cd <dig>  cd <dig>  cd <dig>  cd <dig> and cd <dig> were expressed by very high percentages of cells across all four tissue groups . amongst the  <dig> markers tested, four demonstrated significant differences in the percentage of positive cells ; cd <dig>  cd49a, cd <dig> and stro- <dig> . none demonstrated significant differential expression between mesenchymal stem cell  and non-stem cell mesenchymal cell  cultures. additionally, all tissue cells tested were negative for endothelial marker cd <dig> and hematopoietic markers  – data not shown.

fibroblast-associated markers do not discriminate between mesenchymal stem cell and non-stem cell mesenchymal cell cultures
as markers associated with mesenchymal stem cells largely could not distinguish between mesenchymal stem cell and non-stem cell mesenchymal cell cultures, it was hypothesized that fibroblast-associated markers may prove more discriminatory.

immuno-fluorescence studies revealed that most cells amongst the various tissue cultures expressed fibroblast-associated markers; collagens i and iii, fsp and p4hb . no significant difference was observed between all tissue cells in regard to the expression of these markers .

all tissue cultures displayed a remarkably similar phenotype
flow-cytometry and immuno-fluorescence experiments were ineffective in distinguishing between cultures in which mesenchymal stem cells are rich and rare, highlighting the phenotypic similarity of the tissue cultures. antibody array and proteomic experiments further emphasized this phenotypic similarity. proteomic analysis of whole cell lysates  and pair-wise analysis of quantitative expression levels of protein spots from all tissue cells revealed correlation coefficients equal to or greater than  <dig>  for all tissue pairs . no significant difference in the correlation coefficients was found between the four tissue groups .

likewise, antibody array experiments established that cells from all tissues demonstrated congruent expression of  <dig>  out of  <dig>  antibodies tested. pair-wise comparison of antibody expression, in which wells were considered as either positive  or negative  , revealed greater than 90% similarity between all tissue pairs .

identification of markers differentially expressed between mesenchymal stem cell and non-stem cell mesenchymal cell cultures
meticulous examination and comparison of the proteomic and antibody array profiles of mesenchymal stem cell  and non-stem cell mesenchymal cell  cultures revealed differentially expressed markers. analysis of proteomic data revealed six intracellular proteins expressed more highly in tissue cultures rich in mesenchymal stem cells; actin - cytoplasmic  <dig> and  <dig>  alpha internexin, alpha enolase, endoplasmin and neurofilament light polypeptide . similarly, investigation of antibody array data uncovered nine extracellular markers; cd <dig>  cd <dig>  cd49d, cd51/ <dig>  cd <dig>  cd <dig>  cd <dig>  cd <dig> and ssea- <dig> expressed in tissue cultures rich in mesenchymal stem cells and absent in olfactory tissue cultures . of these markers only cd <dig>  cd <dig>  cd <dig>  cd <dig>  neurofilament light polypeptide and endoplasmin demonstrated qpcr expression profiles consistent with antibody array or proteomic analysis . significantly increased expression  between cultures rich in mesenchymal stem cells and non-stem cell mesenchymal cells was only detected in cd <dig> and cd <dig> .

analysis of proteins expressed more highly in non-stem cell mesenchymal cell cultures  than tissue cultures rich in mesenchymal stem cells  presented six intracellular proteins; annexin ii, desmin, tropomyosin alpha  <dig>  and  <dig> chain and vimentin. antibody array data disclosed five potential markers, expressed only by olfactory tissue cells; cd <dig>  cd107a, cd120a, cd <dig> ligand and cd <dig> . of these markers only cd <dig> illustrated a qpcr expression profile with significantly increased expression  between non-stem cell mesenchymal cell cultures and cultures rich in mesenchymal stem cells .

discussion
the aim of this project was to identify markers differentially expressed between mesenchymal stem cell and non-stem cell mesenchymal cell cultures. this was achieved by comparing and contrasting the phenotype of populations of cells from tissues in which mesenchymal stem cells are rich and rare. by assessing the tri-lineage differentiation potential of tissue cultures, we demonstrated that bone marrow and breast adipose cultures are rich in mesenchymal stem cells while, in our hands, foreskin fibroblasts and olfactory tissue cultures contain rare mesenchymal stem cells. in particular, olfactory tissue cells represent non-stem cell mesenchymal cells. phenotypic analysis revealed that all tissue cultures, irrespective of differentiation potential, exhibited remarkably similar phenotypes. importantly, it was also revealed that common mesenchymal stem cell markers, and fibroblast-associated markers, do not discriminate between mesenchymal stem cell and non-stem cell mesenchymal cell cultures. examination and comparison of the phenotypes of mesenchymal stem cell and non-stem cell mesenchymal cell cultures revealed few differentially expressed markers.

despite a plethora of markers/marker combinations being proposed to enrich for mesenchymal stem cells , to date, there is no conclusive extracellular marker  for the specific isolation of mesenchymal stem cells. our data also suggests that some reported mesenchymal stem cell markers may not discriminate between mesenchymal stem cell and non-stem cell mesenchymal cells. to ensure the inclusion of mesenchymal stem cells in this exploratory work no selection or sorting techniques were applied to our tissue cultures. subsequently, it is inevitable that there is a degree of heterogeneity amongst our tissue cultures. the ‘all-or-nothing’ differentiation  and immuno-staining patterns  exhibited in our tissue cultures however, would suggest a degree of homogeneity.

ideally, homogeneous, clonal, mesenchymal stem cell and non-stem cell mesenchymal cell cultures would be compared to identify differentially expressed markers. however, as there are no conclusive, specific, extracellular markers for mesenchymal stem cells it would be difficult to ensure that clonal cell lines are ‘true’ mesenchymal stem cells. also the additional expansion required from clonal cells to achieve sufficient cell numbers for all our experiments would increase the emergence of spontaneous phenotypic heterogeneity, even amongst clonal populations  <cit> . therefore, unselected cultures were utilized in this exploratory study.

tri-lineage differentiation potential
both bone marrow and breast adipose cultures demonstrated the tri-lineage differentiation potential expected of populations rich in mesenchymal stem cells; extensive differentiation into adipocytes, chondrocytes and osteocytes  <cit> . however, foreskin fibroblast cultures only indicated a potential to differentiate into chondrocytes. the vast majority of foreskin fibroblast cells did not differentiate into adipocytes and osteocytes. as yet, there is little consensus on the tri-lineage potential of foreskin fibroblasts  <cit> . the data presented here is consistent with other reports that suggest that foreskin fibroblast cultures may contain cells with tri-lineage differentiation potential, but in our hands this population appears to be rare  <cit> . therefore, we considered these cultures to contain rare mesenchymal stem cells and that the predominant population are non-stem cell mesenchymal cells.

olfactory tissue cultures ostensibly failed to differentiate into adipocytes, osteocytes and chondrocytes. few studies have examined olfactory tissue for the presence of mesenchymal stem cells. direct comparison of these studies is made more difficult by discrepancies in both the source of nasal cells as well as culture techniques  <cit> . to date, convincing, extensive tri-lineage potential of olfactory cells has not been demonstrated. however, recent reports suggest that olfactory cells are able to differentiate into osteocytes, rarely differentiate into adipocytes and may or may not differentiate into chondrocytes  <cit> . overall, our data suggests that if olfactory tissue cultures contain tri-potent mesenchymal stem cells they are very rare and that, in our hands, they represent non-stem cell mesenchymal cells.

phenotypic analysis
attempts were made to distinguish between mesenchymal stem cell and non-stem cell mesenchymal cell cultures by examining common mesenchymal stem cell markers and fibroblast-associated markers. the majority of reports evaluating the immuno-phenotype of different tissue sources of mesenchymal stem cells accentuate their similarity. in particular the high expression of mesenchymal stem cell associated markers such as cd <dig>  cd <dig>  cd <dig>  cd <dig>  cd <dig> and cd <dig> are often emphasized  <cit> . here we clearly show that non-stem cell mesenchymal cells from olfactory tissue and foreskin fibroblasts demonstrate the same expression of these markers as mesenchymal stem cells derived from bone marrow and breast adipose. hence, the expression of these markers may be indicative of mesenchymal cells, in general, but are not specific to mesenchymal stem cells. likewise, the expression of fibroblast-associated markers did not discriminate between mesenchymal stem cell cultures and non-stem cell mesenchymal cell cultures.

while flow-cytometry and immuno-fluorescence experiments did not distinguish between cultures in which mesenchymal stem cells are rich and rare, they did indicate the phenotypic similarity of the different tissue cultures. proteomic  and antibody array  data further emphasized the remarkable phenotypic similarity of the tissue cultures, regardless of their ability to differentiate as mesenchymal stem cells.

proteomics allowed the comparison of ~ <dig> protein spots per sample and identified, actin - cytoplasmic  <dig> and  <dig>  alpha internexin, alpha enolase, endoplasmin and neurofilament light polypeptide as being upregulated in mesenchymal stem cell cultures. while cytoplasmic actin  <dig> and  <dig> are ubiquitous, alpha internexin and neurofilament light polypeptide are both associated with neural cells. interestingly, other studies have revealed that mesenchymal stem cells express neurofilament light polypeptide as well as other neural markers  <cit> . however, none of these proteins were validated as differentially expressed between mesenchymal stem cell and non-stem cell mesenchymal cell cultures by qpcr.

antibody arrays afforded an examination of  <dig> extracellular antibodies. amongst these markers, only three were validated by qpcr to be significantly differentially expressed between mesenchymal stem cell and non-stem cell mesenchymal cell cultures. cd <dig> and cd <dig> were found to have significantly increased expression between mesenchymal stem cell and non-stem cell mesenchymal cell cultures. cd <dig> is reportedly expressed by a variety of cell types  <cit> . however, the association of cd <dig> with immune regulation  <cit> , angiogenesis  <cit>  and bone cell differentiation  <cit>  is consistent with the function of mesenchymal stem cells. cd <dig> is also expressed by a range of cell types , but it is commonly affiliated with cancer stem cells  <cit> . renal  <cit>  and neural  <cit>  stem cells also express cd <dig>  more importantly, sonoyama et al  <dig>  <cit>  suggested cd <dig> as a specific marker for a population of mesenchymal stem cells in the human tooth.

only cd <dig> was identified as significantly increased in non-stem cell mesenchymal cultures compared with cultures rich in mesenchymal stem cells. cd <dig> is expressed by a variety of immune and non-immune cells. consistent with our findings, numerous reports have identified cd <dig> expression amongst fibroblasts from a wide variety of tissues  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
mesenchymal stem cells have unique properties that make them amenable to a variety of clinical applications. in order to be accepted as routine clinical devices standardized techniques for their exclusive isolation need to be developed. the identification of extracellular markers specific to mesenchymal stem cells is crucial for their isolation. by highlighting the remarkable phenotypic similarity of mesenchymal stem cell and non-stem mesenchymal cell cultures we demonstrate the importance of comparing and contrasting mesenchymal cell types in order to determine stem cell specific markers. using this approach we revealed that commonly reported mesenchymal stem cell markers do not discriminate between mesenchymal stem cells and non-stem cell mesenchymal cells. however, by thoroughly analyzing and comparing the phenotypes of mesenchymal stem cell and non-stem cell mesenchymal cell cultures we identified only three differentially expressed markers – cd <dig>  cd <dig> and cd <dig>  to our knowledge, this study is the first to thoroughly analyze differential expression between human mesenchymal stem cell and non-stem cell mesenchymal cell cultures incorporating flow-cytometry, immuno-fluorescence, proteomics, antibody arrays and qpcr.

