BACKGROUND
chronic pain can be classified into three categories: nociceptive pain caused by tissue damage, neuropathic pain caused by nerve injury, and mixed pain  <cit> . patients with neuropathic pain usually experience abnormal sensations, including allodynia, which is defined as pain in response to non-nociceptive stimuli and hyperalgesia, which is defined as increased pain sensitivity to nociceptive stimuli  <cit> . although opioid receptor agonists are the most widely used therapeutic agents for neuropathic pain, the effectiveness of opioid analgesia is controversial. several studies have shown that neuropathic pain can be effectively attenuated by morphine and other μ-opioid receptor  agonists  <cit>  as well as delta-opioid agonists  <cit> . by contrast, some studies have indicated that opioid peptides and morphine do not possess potent analgesic efficacy against neuropathic pain in humans  <cit>  and that this ineffectiveness of morphine can be attributed to a down-regulation of central μ-opioid transmission  <cit>  and a reduced number of presynaptic opioid receptors due to the degeneration of primary afferent neurons  <cit> .

the midbrain periaqueductal gray  is believed to be an important component in the endogenous pain control system  <cit> . several studies have shown that administration of morphine or opioid peptides, either systemically or directly into the pag, produces antinociception, which is thought to be associated with inhibition of neuronal activity in the pag  <cit> . the inhibitory interneurons in the pag are thought to contain gaba as an inhibitory neurotransmitter and inhibit tonically the output neurons  <cit> . opioid agonists have been shown to inhibit gabaergic inhibitory synaptic input to pag neurons in rat slice preparations  <cit> . in previous studies, we have shown that mor activation inhibits presynaptic gaba release in acutely isolated pag neurons from normal young rats  <cit> .

although many studies have investigated the analgesic effects of opioid agonists on neuropathic pain, it is not clear whether opioidergic modulation of the endogenous pain control system in the pag is altered by neuropathic pain. therefore, in the present study, we isolated pag neurons with intact synaptic terminals from rats with neuropathic pain to examine the effects of neuropathic pain on presynaptic gaba release, the kinetics of postsynaptic gaba-activated cl- currents, and the opioid-induced inhibition of gabaergic synaptic action.

RESULTS
gabaergic mipscs in pag neurons isolated from neuropathic rats
there were no differences in morphological characteristics between normal and neuropathic rats. mechanically dissociated pag neurons retained short portions of their proximal dendrites and usually presented an ovoid soma , although some neurons presented a triangular soma.

we recorded and measured the mean amplitude and frequency of mipscs  <dig> min after the rupture of the patch membrane because it took 10- <dig> min for synaptic currents to stabilize . in most neurons, recordings of these mipscs were stable for approximately  <dig> min, which indicated that the presynaptic nerve terminals attached to the dissociated pag neurons were functional and that their spontaneous activity was stable for at least  <dig> min. in normal rats, the application of  <dig> μm bicuculline, a gabaa receptor antagonist, completely and reversibly blocked mipscs . reversal potentials and the slopes of the current-voltage  curves were almost identical in both groups. the reversal potential  of these mipscs, as estimated from the current-voltage  relationship, was very similar to the theoretical cl- nernst equilibrium potential  of - <dig>  mv, calculated using extracellular and intracellular cl- concentrations of  <dig> and  <dig> mm, respectively . the conductance of mipscs was  <dig>  ±  <dig>  μs for normal rats and  <dig>  ±  <dig>  μs for neuropathic rats . these results indicate that spontaneous mipscs in normal rats are mediated by gabaa receptors.

effect of mor activation on gabaergic mipscs in neuropathic rats
in a previous report, we indicated that mor activation reduces gabaergic mipsc in pag neurons of young rats  <cit> . in normal rats, application of  <dig> μm damgo, a specific mor agonist, also reduced the frequency of gabaergic synaptic events in the majority of pag neurons tested . in the remaining  <dig> neurons, damgo did not significantly alter the frequency or amplitude of mipscs. the damgo-induced decrease in mipsc frequency was reversible  and could be blocked by pretreatment with  <dig> μm naloxone, a non-specific opioid receptor antagonist . damgo decreased the mipsc frequency to  <dig>  ±  <dig> % of the control , but did not alter their amplitude distribution . these data indicate that damgo inhibits presynaptic gaba release via mor activation at presynaptic terminals in pag neurons of normal rats.

although statistically not significant, the number of neurons showing the inhibitory effect of damgo on the frequency of mipscs was lower in neuropathic rats  than in normal rats . the shape of these damgo-responsive neurons was similar in both the neuropathic and normal rats. the damgo-induced inhibition of mipsc frequency was also reversible and could be blocked by pretreatment with  <dig> μm naloxone . in neuropathic rats, damgo decreased the frequency of mipsc to  <dig>  ±  <dig> % of controls , but did not change the distribution of their amplitudes . the inhibitory effect of damgo on mipsc frequency was very similar in the neuropathic and normal rats. these results indicate that neuropathic pain does not alter the inhibitory effect of mor activation on presynaptic gaba release in pag neurons.

effect of neuropathic pain on presynaptic gaba release
to investigate whether neuropathic pain alters presynaptic gaba release in pag neurons as a mechanism of hyperalgesia and/or allodynia, we compared the frequencies of presynaptic gaba release in neuropathic and normal rats. as shown in figure  <dig>  the frequency of mipscs in neuropathic rats  was higher than that in normal rats . in the presence of the inhibitory effect of damgo, neuropathic pain increased the frequency of mipscs from  <dig>  ±  <dig>  hz in normal rats  to  <dig>  ±  <dig>  hz in neuropathic rats . these results indicate that neuropathic pain may increase presynaptic gaba release.

effect of neuropathic pain on the kinetics of postsynaptic gaba-activated cl- channels
to elucidate the effect of neuropathic pain on the kinetics of postsynaptic gaba-activated cl- channels, the kinetics of gabaergic mipscs were analyzed by fitting the currents with two exponential functions and were then described with time constants . the 10-90% rise time constant of normal rats  was not different from that of neuropathic rats . the weighted mean decay time constant of neuropathic rats  was significantly faster than that of normal rats . in particular, while there was no difference between the slow decay time constants  in both groups , the fast decay time constant  of neuropathic rats  was faster than that of normal rats . due to the reduced fast decay time constant, the half-width time of mipscs in neuropathic rats could be shortened. indeed, the half-width time constant in neuropathic rats  was shorter than that in normal rats . in addition, we calculated the area under the mipscs , which indicates the integration of the single channel open time and the duration of the open time of cl- channels  <cit> . the synaptic charge transfer was significantly reduced in neuropathic rats . by contrast, mor activation with damgo showed no effect on mipsc kinetics in neuropathic rats . these results indicate that neuropathic pain may promote faster inactivation kinetics of postsynaptic gaba-activated cl- channels.

values are mean ± s.e. † p <  <dig>  for neuropathic rat compared to that of normal adult rats .

discussion
the present study was performed to examine whether neuropathic pain alters presynaptic gaba release and postsynaptic gaba-activated cl- currents and whether opioidergic modulation of the gabaergic inhibitory synaptic response might be affected by neuropathic pain. our results show that neuropathic pain increases the frequency of presynaptic gaba release and decreases both the fast decay time constant and the synaptic charge transfer of postsynaptic gaba-activated cl- currents, regardless of whether mor agonists are present. in addition, neuropathic pain did not alter the inhibitory effect of mor activation on gabaergic mipscs.

neuropathic pain associated with peripheral neuropathy can manifest as severe and intractable pain. however, the mechanism of this severe and intractable pain remains unclear. the pag is an important component of the endogenous pain control system and is the main site of the powerful analgesic effects by morphine or opioid peptides  <cit> . in a previous report, we suggested that mor-induced inhibition of gabaergic inhibitory synaptic influence in the pag is the main mechanism of the opioidergic endogenous pain control system  <cit> . if gabaergic synaptic inhibition of pag neurons is potentiated by neuropathic pain, this may represent a potential mechanism of neuropathic pain. although the exact mechanisms are not clear, there have been reports supporting this hypothesis. activation of the descending pain control system was shown to be important in the maintenance of neuropathic pain  <cit> . the pag-mediated inhibition of nociception may be activated by persistent nociceptive input, possibly reflecting the long-term changes in the nociceptive circuitry that occur in neuropathic pain states  <cit> . in this study, neuropathic rats showed an increase in the frequency of presynaptic gaba release in pag neurons . this finding indicates that endogenous pain control mechanisms in the pag may be inhibited in animals suffering from neuropathic pain. thus, this study suggests that neuropathic pain inhibits the efficiency of the endogenous pain control system in the pag, thereby inducing severe and intractable pain.

although neuropathic pain does not alter the amplitude of postsynaptic gabaergic response, the kinetics of mipsc was slightly inhibited in neuropathic rats . neuropathic rats showed a reduction in the fast decay time with a reduced half-width time and synaptic charge transfer of mipscs. these findings might indicate that gabaergic inhibitory input to the pag neurons can be decreased in neuropathic rats, which means that endogenous pain control mechanisms in the pag may be activated in neuropathic rats. however, the decrease in the fast decay time and synaptic charge transfer of mipscs  was significantly less than the increase in presynaptic release of gaba . thus, the changes in mipsc kinetics in neuropathic rats may not show a significant influence to the inhibitory effect of the decreased presynaptic gaba release in neuropathic rats on endogenous pain control mechanisms in the pag.

morphine and opioid peptides exert their powerful analgesic effects through the endogenous pain control system, especially in the pag  <cit> . the efficiency of opioid receptor agonists, especially the mor agonist morphine, has been reported in recent studies of central and peripheral neuropathic pain disorders  <cit> . however, the development of long-term side effects, such as immunological problems, physical dependency, and misuse or abuse, is a limitation to the use of opioid analgesics in patients with neuropathic pain  <cit> . furthermore, and the effectiveness of opioid agonists on neuropathic allodynia and hyperalgesia remains controversial. several studies have supported the effectiveness of opioid receptor agonists on neuropathic pain  <cit> . however, some studies have raised questions about the efficiency of opioid analgesics on neuropathic pain in humans  <cit>  and animals  <cit> . other studies have indicated that the pag is important in opioidergic analgesia of neuropathic pain. neuropathic pain that is induced by peripheral nerve injury has been effectively alleviated by electrical stimulation of the pag  <cit> , microinjection of opioid agonists into the pag  <cit> , and supraspinal administration of morphine into the pag  <cit> . although the analgesic mechanisms have not been clearly elucidated, these studies suggest that the endogenous pain control system, including the pag, is very important in the control of neuropathic pain syndrome and that opioid receptors are involved in this system. in the present study, mor agonists inhibited gabaergic inhibitory synaptic activity in the pag of neuropathic rats, and this inhibitory effect of mor activation was not significantly different between neuropathic and normal rats . thus, the results of this study suggest that mor agonists can effectively exert an analgesic effect on neuropathic pain through the modulation of the endogenous pain control system in the pag and that the analgesic effectiveness of opioid peptides in neuropathic animals is similar to that in normal animals. however, because neuropathic pain may inhibit the endogenous pain control mechanism in the pag in the resting state , it is possible that the analgesic action of exogenous opioid agonists is less effectively in a neuropathic pain state.

while the majority of proximal dendrites are still attached to the neurons, the mechanical dissociation can alter the majority of distal dendrites. although the remaining dendritic as well as somatic synapses are well elucidated to be still functioning  <cit> , it cannot be ruled out that the dendritic synapses may be modulated in a different manner shown in the present study.

CONCLUSIONS
the results of this study suggest that neuropathic pain inhibits the endogenous pain control system through an increase in presynaptic gaba release in the pag, which then induces severe and intractable pain. thus, although the effect of mor activation on presynaptic gaba release in neuropathic rats is similar to that in normal animals, exogenous opioid agonists may exert their analgesic actions less effectively in neuropathic rats.

