BACKGROUND
retroviral vectors are widely used to stably express any protein of interest. they potentially can transduce a large variety of primary or immortalized cells types, either in vitro, ex vivo or in vivo. selection of transduced cells is generally accomplished by the co-expression of a fluorescent protein, a membrane protein or a gene encoding a drug-resistance. the more the expression of the two proteins correlates, the more the relevant cells in the selected population will be enriched. one way to obtain coupled expression in cells is to express both proteins from a single bicistronic mrna: the 5' cistron encodes the protein of interest while translation of the 3' cistron is initiated by an ires  element and gives rise to the selection protein. the pap <dig> plasmid  <cit>  belongs to this kind of retroviral vector since it contains egfp as a selectable marker just downstream of the ires element from the emcv . moreover, while many retroviral vectors harbor two complete ltr sequences, the u <dig> region of the pap <dig> 5' ltr has been replaced by the cmv immediate early enhancer/promoter. hence pap <dig> allows a potent cmv-driven expression upon transient transfection while retrotranscription  restores a complete, ltr-controlled, pro-viral sequence. however, despite this improvement, the pap <dig> vector suffers from two major flaws: 1) its multicloning site  is limited; and 2) its ires sequence is weak as a result of the creation of a hindiii site in its 3' terminus, which corresponds to two point mutations with respect to the original emcv sequence. these mutations, though widely found in ires containing vectors, destroy the last ires atg, normally used by the ecmv virus  <cit> .

we thus constructed an improved derivative of pap <dig> termed pprig  which keeps the advantages of pap <dig> while eliminating its shortcomings. first, the pap <dig> mcs had been replaced by a much more complete mcs which contains unique sites for twenty different restriction enzymes. this new mcs was optimized to allow directional cloning whatever the orientation of the cdna since sites for compatible enzymes  have been inserted quite symmetrically with respect to the center of the mcs. a t <dig> and a sp <dig> sequence were introduced at each extremity of the mcs to facilitate sequencing and allow in vitro transcription. second, the ires sequence had been changed to restore a wild type sequence, which enhances the translation of egfp about  <dig> fold without affecting any other important parameters . finally, three pprig derivatives, termed pprig haa/b/c, were also created. each of these three derivatives contains an upstream ha tag encoding sequence in one reading frame with respect to that of the complete open orf encoded by the pprig mcs  <cit> .

given these improvements, we reasoned that pprig is a very convenient basic vector to generate new useful retroviral tools. we provide here  <dig> novel pprig derivatives, collectively referred to as prigs, which keep the advantages of their founding member, but extend and facilitate the possibility of their uses to a wide range of studies.

RESULTS
3'ha prigs
in addition to the basic pprig vector , we had previously described three derivatives bearing the ha tag coding sequence just upstream of the 5' site  of the mcs  <cit> . the 5' ha coding sequence was inserted in the three reading frames relative to the mcs, giving the pprig haa/b/c  <cit> .

as a first step to design novel prig vectors, we created reciprocal constructs by inserting the ha coding sequence just downstream of the last restriction site  of the basic pprig vector mcs in the three reading frames . importantly, although the 5' and 3' ha are symmetrically positioned relative to the mcs in our two sets of prig vectors, they are not fully equivalent. indeed, given the scanning model ruling the choice of the initating atg by the ribosome, the 5' ha is translated no matter what the sequence of the inserted cdna is, while the 3'ha is optional since it is not translated if a stop codon is present in the inserted cdna. a 3' tag may be especially useful if, for instance, the n-terminus of the protein of interest contains a cleavable signal peptide.

"modular" prigs
expression of conditional alleles
the usual way to express a conditional version of many proteins is to fuse them to the hormone binding domain of the estrogen receptor. consequently, the activity of the resulting chimeric protein is usually dependent upon the presence of ligand  <cit> . we thus cloned the hormone binding domain of the mouse erα  281–599) downstream of the mcs of pprigp aha, leading to pprigp er . this insertion therefore allows for the generation of x-er chimera . the presence of the g525r point mutation in the cloned er sequence abrogates its binding to 17β-estradiol while keeping its full sensitivity to the synthetic ligand 4'hydroxytamoxifen   <cit> . thus pprigp er makes possible the culture of transduced cells expressing chimeric proteins in the presence of natural er agonists without triggering basal activity  <cit> . moreover, 4oht does not activate the transactivating domain  of the cloned er region  <cit> , which therefore minimizes the risk of altering the function of the x protein moiety upon hormonal treatment. although only one reading frame is available to construct x-er chimera, we underline the presence of restriction sites for compatible enzymes in different reading frames within the prig mcs . thus, the pprigp er mcs provides different reading frames in a single sequence, provided that the 3'extremity of the x cdna is clonable in one of the shifted compatible restriction sites. the same remark holds true for the fusions with any open sequence cloned in only one reading frame just upstream the prig mcs , although in these cases the compatible restriction site has to be at the 5'end of the cdna .

expression of transactivating or transrepressing chimera
the functional study of transcription factors frequently includes their fusion to potent transactivating or transrepressing domains. these fusions provide either dominant negative or dominant positive alleles, and help to determine whether a given dna binding protein acts through transactivation, transrepression, or both  <cit> . to make possible such studies in prig vectors, we next constructed two derivatives by inserting the sequence encoding either the transactivating domain of the human herpes simplex virus vp <dig> protein  <cit>  preceded by a short nuclear localization signal , or the n-terminal krab transrepressing domain of the human kox <dig> protein  <cit>  just upstream of the mcs of the pprig cha, generating pprigp vp16ha or pprigp krabha, respectively . both domains are relatively short , highly potent, transferable and widely used to generate chimeric transregulatory proteins  <cit> . the unique restriction sites of the mcs are entirely preserved, with the exception of sphi in pprigp vp16ha . these two modular prig vectors provides an in-frame 3'ha coding sequence  and are therefore engineered to create krab-x or vp16-x chimeras with or without a c-terminal ha tag depending upon the absence or presence of a stop codon in the inserted cdna.

« single-color/resistance » prigs
"single color" prigs
though egfp is widely used to track transduced or, more generally, genetically modified cells, it has also several yellow or blue shifted suitable derivatives  <cit> . moreover, highly performant red fluorescent proteins were generated by directed evolution of mrfp, which is itself a monomeric derivative of the dsred protein  <cit> . we reasoned that prigs harboring one of these fluorescent proteins instead of egfp may extend the number of issues amenable by these vectors. hence, three other prigs were generated in which the egfp of pprigp aha has been replaced by either ecfp containing the h148d mutation, eyfp or mcherry, generating ppricp aha, ppriyp aha and pprichp aha, respectively . ecfp is a blue shifted egfp derivative  <cit> . introduction of the h148d mutation  increases two-fold its quantum yield and brightness without affecting its spectral properties  <cit> . eyfp is a bright and widely used yellow shifted egfp derivative. mcherry is a monomeric  red fluorescent protein which displays very similar spectral properties, but improved photostability, compared with its ancestor, mrfp  <cit> . moreover, we also replaced egfp by ecfp* in pprigp bha, leading to ppricp bha, which is required for another derivative . each of these fluorescent proteins is compatible  with a distinct set of fluorochromes. thus, these three novel single-color prigs provide convenient tools to combine an identification  of transduced cells together with other fluorescent-based analyses . moreover, ecfp* and eyfp can be well separated spectrally from each other, and mcherry is readily distinguishable from ecfp*, egfp and even from eyfp because of its red-shifted spectral properties as compared with dsred  <cit> . the four single color prigs are therefore also suitable for performing double or even triple transductions, which may be required in many situations to induce biological changes  <cit> .

« drug-selectable » prigs
in addition, since facs-based selection of transduced cells is efficient and rapid but requires expensive materials, we also constructed two other prigs that contain the puro-resistance gene instead of egfp in either pprig or pprig haa, leading to ppripu or ppripu haa, respectively . puromycin inhibits translation elongation, and is a relatively cheap drug for selecting transduced cells and acts rapidly even at very low concentrations. ppripu and ppripu ha vectors can also be used with any of the fluorescent protein expressing vectors  further extending the possibility of multiple transductions with prigs.

« dual color/selection » prigs
« double color » prigs
cells transduced with any of the prig vectors described above express a bicistronic cdna, the ires-controlled translation of the 3' cistron giving rise to a fluorescent or selectable protein. although the expression of the ires-controlled protein usually correlates with that encoded by the 5' cistron, a direct detection of the protein of interest in transduced cells can be valuable. the best way to make this direct detection easy and quantitative is to express chimeric fluorescent proteins from the 5' cistron, keeping in mind that the second cis-coupled fluorescent protein  should be spectrally separated from the first one. both mcherry and eyfp have been used as convenient tags in chimeric proteins  <cit> . moreover, as stated above, eyfp and ecfp* on one hand, and egfp and mcherry on the other hand, constitute two pairs of fluorescent proteins fitting the criteria of spectral separability  <cit> . we thus created two double color prigs by inserting either an open mcherry or an open eyfp cdna just upstream of the bamhi site of either the pprigp bha or ppricp bha, generating pprigp mchha and ppricp eyfpha, respectively . in these two vectors, the 5'fluorescent proteins and the 3'ha tag are in-frame but separated by the entire intact mcs. thus, these two double color prigs are designed to express a mcherry -x or a eyfp-x as a chimeric protein of interest, containing or not a 3'ha tag, together with a spectrally separated fluorescent protein, either egfp or ecfp*, respectively.

"dual selection" prig
finally, we wished to make possible the combination of both a drug-based selection of transduced cells and a facs-based method to detect and quantitate the expression of the protein of interest in these cells. thus, we further introduced an open egfp cdna just upstream of the bamhi site of the intact mcs of the ppripu vector, leading to ppripu egfp vector  designed to express egfp-x chimeric proteins in transduced, puro-resistant cells.

versatility of the prig vectors
double color prig vectors provide the possibility to identify transduced cells both on the basis of the ires-controlled fluorescent proteins , as well as by the expression of the protein of interest fused to a distinct and spectrally separable fluorescent protein. this may be valuable if the fluorescence emitted by the chimeric protein of interest is too faint  for a facs-based sorting but sufficient  for microscopical studies. however, the expression of the ires-controlled xfp provides redundant information when both transduction and expression of the protein of interest can be evidenced by the signal emitted by the upstream, fused, fluorescent protein. in this case, the presence of the ires-xfp cassette both unnecessarily increases the size of the vector and may complicate a further fluorescent characterization of the transduced cells because of the spectral overlap between xfp signal and several usual fluorochromes . thus, to increase the versatility of our vectors, we created the possibility to delete the ires-xfp cassette. to this end, we inserted a site for the paci restriction enzyme just downstream of the stop codon of the 3'ha coding sequence, and added another paci site just upstream of the 3' ltr. consequently, the ires-xfp cassette is flanked by two paci sites, not present elsewhere in prigs, and is thus readily and precisely removable from any of the double color prigs. given that paci is a very rare cutter, deletion of the ires-xfp sequence will most likely be possible even when a cdna is already cloned into these vectors. interestingly, the paci deletion of our two double color prigs generates two novel vectors which maintain spectrally separated fluorescent proteins , therefore remaining suitable for co-expression studies. moreover, not only do the two double color prigs harbor the two paci sites flanking the ires-xfp cassette, but all other prigs designed with a « p » suffix in their name , namely the 3'ha prigs, the modular prigs, and the novel single color prigs . accordingly, once cloned in any of the prigp vectors, the chimeric and/or tagged cdna will be both suitable for a trackable  transfection/transduction, as well as for a transient expression from a non-fluorescent cmv-driven vector. finally, the paci-deleted prigps, except pprigp krabha, gain another available cloning site in the mcs, hindiii, which is otherwise not unique.

ppricp aha
priyp aha
vp16ha
pprigp
krabha
mchha
ppricp
modularity
in summary, the new prig vectors presented here combine the following elements: i) five 5'modules ; ii) four 3' modules , all of them being designed to tag and/or to functionally modify the protein of interest; iii) and four selectable markers of transduction  . clearly, we have not constructed all the possible combinations. for example, the three possible reading frames of the 3'ha tag are present only in the pprig background, i.e. in ires-egfp containing vectors. yet, all the prig vectors are identical in most of their sequences, which allows easy swappings to design novel prigs. moreover, the presence of the two paci sites in most of our vectors permits the generation of new combinations even after the cloning of the cdna of interest. this modularity may be convenient i) if a fluorescent protein distinct from egfp is desired in prigs containing any regulatory module ; ii) if another pair of fluorescent proteins  is desired; or iii) to obtain the correct reading frame for the 3'ha in any single color prigs.

pmpi  counterparts of the new prig vectors
pmigr is a retroviral vector  <cit>  related to pprig since it also contains an egfp cdna 3' of the wild-type  emcv ires sequence. however, pmigr is distinct from pprig in two aspects. first, it contains two ltr sequences, while pprig harbors a cmv promoter replacing the u <dig> region of the 5' ltr; pmigr is therefore less adapted than prigs for transient expression. second, the ltr sequences of pmigr are of mscv/mesv  origin while those of pprig are of pcmv  origin. consequently, pprig and pmigr ltrs differ by several point mutations in the r and u <dig> regions, while they are identical in the u <dig> region. in addition, the two vectors also differ by several point mutations in the 5'part of the δgag region. pmigr vector has been commonly used to transduce pluripotent cells especially hematopoietic stem cells and embryonic stem cells  <cit> . only four contiguous cloning sites are present in the original pmigr mcs. we designed an improved pmigr derivative, termed pmpi , which harbors some features of the prig vectors. specifically, pmpi contains the mcs of prigs, as well as the t <dig> and sp <dig> flanking sequences, but is otherwise identical to pmigr, notably in all the viral-derived sequences . we also designed the pmpi haa/b/c vectors that contain the 5'ha tag coding sequence in the three reading frames with respect to the mcs. either pmpi or its first 5'ha derivatives have been previously used to transduce primary embryonic hematopoietic cells  <cit>  or to transfect hek293t  cells  <cit> , respectively. while designing the above described prig vectors, we also constructed the pmpi counteparts for some of them, namely: i) three derivatives bearing the 3' ha sequence in the three reading frames; ii) four pmpi derivatives in which the ires-egfp cassette has been replaced by either the ires-ecfp*, ires-eyfp, ires-mcherry or ires-puro ; and iii) a pmpipuro derivative containing an open egfp sequence 5' of the mcs . again, the « p » suffix indicates that the ires-xfp cassette is flanked by two paci sites.

functional tests
to validate our novel prigs, transfection and transduction studies were performed. first, we tested the ppripu egfp derivative. to this end, mouse nih3t <dig> cells were transduced with this vector, and plated  <dig> hours later in medium alone or in medium containing puromycin. we observed that transduced cells readily grew in medium containing up to  <dig> μg/ml of puromycin while control nih3t <dig> cells died in approximately  <dig> hours under the same conditions. after  <dig> to  <dig> days, no difference was observed between transduced cells exposed to  <dig> or  <dig> μg/ml of puromycin and transduced cells grown in medium without puromycin with respect to cell viability and morphology . this indicates that ppripu egfp indeed confers resistance to puromycin. as expected, facs analyses showed that all transduced cells exposed to puromycin express egfp, while some cells are egfp-negative in the population not treated with puromycin , confirming that puromycin efficiently eliminates rare untransduced cells. the same results were obtained upon transduction of nih3t <dig> cells with pmpipu egfp . expression of puro-resistance and egfp were also confirmed by fluorescence microscopy for ppripu egfp transfected hek293t cells . finally, the expression of the puro-resistance gene from the ppripu vector was verified in transiently transfected human hek293t cells using microscopy .

next we verified that each single color prig vector indeed gives the expected fluorescence in transduced cells. by facs analyses we observed that ppriyp aha-, ppricp aha-, pprichp aha- transduced cells emit yellow, blue and red fluorescence respectively, which are readily separated on a lsrii cytometer equiped with the lasers and filters described in the methods section . as expected, the pprig hab-transduced cells are heavily positive for egfp expression . the expression of each single color prigs was also confirmed in transfected hek293t cells and in transduced primary rat osteoblasts using fluorescence microscopy .

we next took advantage of the clear separation of each fluorescent signal in facs analyses to demonstrate the feasability of either double  or triple  co-transductions. these experiments show that cells exposed to the mixtures of viral supernatants can be characterized for each signal whose origin is unambigously ascribed to one of the fluorescent proteins . thus, single color prigs are potentially suitable to simultaneously express up to three genes in transduced cells, with the possibility to identify the subpopulations expressing any of them or any combination  of them. for all these experiments, similar results were obtained using the pmpi counterparts of these single color prigs . moreover, ppripu can be used together with any of the single color prigs, further extending the possibilities of multiple transductions. again, the same results were obtained upon transduction with the ppmi counterparts of the single color prigs, namely pmpipec aha, pmpipey aha, pmpipch aha, and mpi haa . it is worth noting, however, that in order to improve the balance between the different fluorescent signals, we had to correct for the relatively weak ecfp* and mcherry fluorescences compared to eyfp or egfp, by exposing the cells to greater amounts of ppricp aha or pprichp aha viral supernatants ). the difference in fluorescence intensities is probably due to either the intrinsically low brightness of ecfp* compared to egfp or eyfp, or to the non-optimal excitation of mcherry by our  <dig> nm laser  <cit> . indeed, when translated from the same mrna in double color prig transduced cells, the fluorescent signals exhibit similar differential intensities  ruling out that the differences observed among single color prig-transduced cells stem from differential viral titer.

finally, we show that the vast majority of nih3t <dig> cells transduced with one of the double color prigs  is positive for the two expected fluorescences . in these cases, it is impossible to experimentally balance the fluorescent signals emitted by the proteins of each couple, since the two proteins are coded by a single vector. consequently, though most cells are doubly positive, egfp appears stronger than mcherry upon transduction with pprigp mchha and eyfp appears stronger than ecfp* upon transduction with ppricp eyfpha.

during the course of these experiments, we also observed that mouse nih3t <dig> fibroblasts or rat osteoblasts transduced with pprigp mchha display a predominant cytoplasmic localization of the red signal , while egfp exhibit a normal, uniform, distribution . this unexpected mcherry localization is also observed in hek293t cells transfected with this vector , but not in ppripch aha-transduced or transfected cells , which display an uniform mcherry localization. we strongly suspect that the disturbed localization of mcherry originating from the pprigp mchha is caused by its fusion to the mcs. indeed, in one reading frame, the mcs encodes a short peptide in its 5' part which somehow disturbs the localization of mcherry. accordingly the same effect, although less pronounced, is observed for the 5' fluorescent proteins of ppricp eyfpha and for ppripu egfp which fuse eyfp or egfp, respectively, to the same reading frame of the mcs . moreover, the insertion of mcherry 5' of the mcs in the two other reading frames leads to an uniform mcherry distribution. finally, mcherry expressed from the pprigp mchha recovers a normal homogeneous localization upon the in-frame pvuii/stui deletion of the 5' part of the mcs , but not upon the in-frame clai/asuii deletion . thus, users may want to delete the 5' part of the mcs  upon cloning when this reading frame is in phase with their cdna.

CONCLUSIONS
we describe here a new generation of prig vectors. they keep the original improvements of the pprig vector with respect to its ancestor pap <dig>  i.e. a far more complete and convenient mcs and a wild type strong emcv ires element, and provide several modifications to extend their use to a wide variety of experimental settings or biological issues, as detailed above. moreover, we introduced some other changes to enhance their versatility, and duplicated eight of them in a pmigr  background for their use in stem cells. all constructs were generated by restriction and modification enzymes and all cloning modifications were verified by sequencing. in addition, the viral parts  of the ancestor pap <dig> vector and of two of its final descendents  were entirely sequenced and show no discrepancy with respect to the expected sequence. finally, their reliability was further demonstrated by the experimental validations we show here. all these vectors are made freely available to the scientific community and all the maps and sequences will be posted on our website in the near future  <cit> .

