BACKGROUND
metagenomics enables the genomic study of microbial communities that are sampled directly from their environment, eliminating the need for isolating and cultivating specific microbes  <cit> . metagenomic analyses of human flora samples  <cit>  are a new type of assay with intriguing potential applications for the diagnosis and prediction of clinical outcomes  <cit> . studies of human vaginal bacterium during pregnancy so far include the use of direct culture methods and conventional pcr studies of clinically suspected infectious microorganisms. although infection and inflammation likely play a major role in the pathogenesis of preterm labor and delivery  <cit> , these studies reveal only a fraction of the potential microorganic inhabitants. a comprehensive identification and catalog of these organisms will enable future investigators to target a defined population of species that may be correlated with preterm labor, premature rupture of amniotic membranes, chorioamnionitis, and other complications of pregnancy  <cit> .

metagenomics analyses will become increasingly practical as dna sequencing costs fall dramatically with the advent of new technologies  <cit>  including pyrosequencing™  <cit> . one challenge common to these revolutionary sequencing technologies is the short length of reads, which limits the amount of unique, discriminating sequence available within each read. sequencing the 16s rrna gene  using conventional sanger sequencing produces reads of at least  <dig> bp in length, which is sufficient to identify the precise source species for each gene  <cit> . in fact, though there is a danger of producing chimeras, the reads are often long enough that they can be assembled into near-complete 16s rdna sequences  <cit> . despite the promise of high-throughput technologies like pyrosequencing, current versions produce short reads, making the accurate identification of the source of these reads a daunting task. one solution used chip-based pyrosequencing targeted at a small variable region within the 16s rdna to show that there exists a much greater variety of rare microorganisms than previously thought  <cit> .

we describe a methodology for phylogenetic classification based on short, 16s rrna gene sequence reads and apply the technique to reads obtained via high-throughput, chip-based pyrosequencing of human vaginal flora samples during pregnancy. the resulting phylogenetic trees reveal the vast diversity of bacterial inhabitants seen in other studies, and will assist in future investigations of the link between microorganisms and pregnancy complications. next, we examine the ability of our methodology to classify reads at different levels in the phylogeny and discuss limitations of our technique. using simulations, we study the effect of read-length on our methodology to understand the consequence of using high-throughput pyrosequencing instead of conventional technologies. finally, we explore the effectiveness of isolating specific 16s variable regions using validated universal primers. our methodology for analyzing short 16s rdna sequence reads will enable the accurate and informative study of human flora samples using new, high-throughput sequencing technologies.

RESULTS
methodology overview
twelve samples from vaginal epithelial tissue and discharge from pregnant women in all three trimesters were collected. dna extraction was performed, followed by target-specific pcr amplification of approximately  <dig> bp of the 16s rdna using universal primers. the products were subjected to nebulization and clonal amplification, followed by pyrosequencing of six samples with the genome sequencer  <dig> system . as a result,  <dig>  to  <dig>  sequence reads of  <dig> bp average length were obtained for each of the six samples .

in this paper, we independently determine for every read the most specific classification within the bacterial phylogeny, and produce a weighted tree that expresses the phylogenetic makeup of the sample. for each read, we use blat, the blast-like alignment tool  <cit> , to search for homology against a database of bacterial 16s rdna sequences obtained from the ribosomal database project  <cit>  and archaeal 16s rdna sequence from prokmsa  <cit> . we score each resulting homology between the read and a 16s rdna sequence from the database, filter out weak homologies, and thus produce a set of possible organisms from which the read was obtained. finally, we assign the read to the most specific location within the phylogeny that includes all these potential organisms . by assigning all reads to the phylogeny with the above procedure, we construct a weighted phylogeny representing the 16s rdna content of the sample. this process is depicted in figure  <dig> 

further analysis of bacterial samples involving the translation of read counts to organism concentrations must be undertaken conservatively due to the following caveats. first, there may be an amplification bias of 16s rdna sequence due to differences in primer annealing preference. also, variation in 16s rdna multiplicity in diverse bacterial genomes, among other complications, may result in the over- or under-representation of certain organisms' 16s sequences  <cit> .

our ability to place reads in the phylogeny has two distinct limitations, namely short read-length and unrepresented organisms in the 16s rdna sequence database. short read-lengths often lead to high-fidelity matches to multiple 16s sequences in the database. this situation occurs whenever the region from which the read was sampled is highly similar across species of a given genus, family, or even phylum. in this case we are resolution-limited in placing a read below a certain depth in the phylogeny. on the other hand, because of the incomplete nature of the 16s rdna database, a read may not match in its entire length to any known 16s sequence. however, since we believe a priori that all reads are derived from amplified 16s rdna sequences, the closest partial matches of the read to known organisms still allow us to assign the read to the subtree that contains these organisms, although its placement below that level is labeled unknown.

sample analysis
samples subjected to the above analysis demonstrated substantial overlap with similar studies previously reported  <cit> , as well as significant differences between the samples. weighted phylogenetic trees obtained from applying our analysis to the six samples are shown in additional file  <dig>  figure  <dig> presents a composite tree generated by accumulating these six trees in equal proportions. starting from the top, the width of the tree edges represents the proportion of reads that can be confidently placed at that level in the phylogeny. a tree edge that fades into white represents reads that were resolution-limited below that level, while reads whose placement is unknown below a particular node are represented by tree edges that fade into black. in figure  <dig> we list the top  <dig> genera discovered in the six samples and identify the proportions of reads belonging to these genera within each sample. corroborating other studies performed on vaginal bacterial flora, we identified lactobacillus as the dominant genus and detected a significant presence of other genera, including psychrobacter, magnetobacterium, prevotella, bifidobacterium, and veillonella  <cit> . aside from the common presence of lactobacillus, each sample exhibited a unique profile of other bacteria, which may be useful in the future for diagnosing abnormal conditions such as vaginosis  <cit>  or predicting the onset of preterm labor  <cit> . additional file  <dig> lists the top  <dig> genera identified in each sample along with the percentage of reads classified within the genera.

in figure  <dig> we graph our ability to classify reads into a particular branch at each level of the phylogeny. for those reads that cannot be classified we show the proportion that is resolution-limited versus unknown. figure  <dig> plots these results for each sample separately. our methodology recognizes  <dig> – 97% of the reads in each sample as bacterial and fewer than 2% as archaeal; the remaining reads are unrecognizable in our database. while we were able to categorize the genus of  <dig> – 39% of the reads, only  <dig> – 12% could be identified with a particular species. under-representation of 16s rdna sequence in the database appears to be our dominant limitation in identifying reads at the levels of domain through genus. fortunately, we expect this limitation to diminish as more 16s rdna sequences are added to the database. our ability to identify a particular species, however, is primarily resolution-limited due to the overwhelming similarity between species within a genus.

effect of read-length
to study the effect of read-length on our ability to place reads in the phylogeny, we simulated the sampling of reads from hypothetical profiles of bacteria for a range of read-lengths from  <dig> to  <dig> bp. we analyzed reads sampled from two distinct profiles of bacteria: a random profile of  <dig> diverse bacteria selected from across the entire known phylogenetic tree and a sample profile with concentrations of  <dig> bacteria derived from the analysis of our six samples. the results of applying our methodology to these samples are graphed figure  <dig>  solid lines show the proportion of reads that were placed within a particular branch at each level of the phylogeny. dotted lines with the same color show the proportion of reads that were correctly placed at each level. as both graphs illustrate, read-lengths of  <dig> and  <dig> bp are not very effective for discriminating between different bacteria, even at such a broad level as phylum and class.

for the sample profile of bacteria our ability to identify genera improves substantially when read-lengths are increased beyond  <dig> bp due to the high degree of similarity between bacteria in the actual samples we examined . at  <dig> bp, we are able to accurately determine almost all of the reads at the genus level, and also correctly determine the species for over half of the reads. as demonstrated in figure 6b, running the simulation for  <dig> bp read-lengths closely reproduced the read resolution graph obtained from our six samples, which lends confidence to the stability of the methodology.

for the more diverse, random profile of bacteria, the 16s rdna sequences are sufficiently different that read-lengths greater than  <dig> bp do not provide much additional benefit . a read-length of  <dig> bp, which corresponds to sample data presented here, appears to be competitive with even the longest read-length of  <dig> bp. thus, with a very wide diversity of bacteria, it seems that our methodology does not require much greater read-lengths than  <dig> bp. in practice, however, the sample profile may be more relevant, and therefore longer reads are desirable to improve the resolution of read placement.

there is evidence to suggest that the classification of species within the rdp phylogeny has errors that limit the ability of our methodology to unambiguously classify reads down to the lowest levels of the phylogeny. as an example, suppose we have two species a and b that truly belong to the same genus x, but that species b was misclassified in genus y. then, a read that matches both species a and b will be assigned to the family of genera x and y or an even broader classification. a more accurate database classification will improve the ability of our methodology to identify the genera of the reads.

restriction to variable regions
our reads often sampled regions in the 16s rdna that are indistinguishable between species, genera, and even phyla. restricting the sequencing to short, specific variable regions within the 16s sequence can provide more informative reads  <cit> . we performed further simulations to assess the effectiveness of such an approach for  <dig> bp-long pyrosequencing reads, designing primers for amplifying seven regions each containing one of the 16s rdna variable regions v <dig> – v <dig> and v <dig>  and one region containing v <dig> and v <dig>  <cit> . we describe the construction and verification of the primers in methods and list the eight amplified regions in table  <dig>  figure  <dig> graphs the read resolution and accuracy results. in both graphs, the bold, black line shows the simulation results when we sample the reads from across the entire 16s rdna sequence instead of restricting it to a particular variable region.

regions were chosen to be mostly non-overlapping, each containing one or two variable regions. coordinates are given relative to the  <dig> bp e. coli k <dig> 16s rdna sequence.

for the random profile of bacteria we could slightly improve our resolving power by restricting reads to shorter variable regions, particularly with region v <dig> . for the more realistic sample profile, by choosing the appropriate variable region we could improve results dramatically and achieve a resolution similar to  <dig> –  <dig> bp reads sampled from across the entire 16s gene. when reading from region v <dig> we were able to identify the genus of 79% of the reads instead of 57% when sampling across the entire 16s sequence and 44% of the species instead of only 14% . region v <dig> was best able to determine the classification for the reads at the level of order, correctly identifying 84% of the reads compared to 70% when sampling from across the entire 16s gene. thus, our study suggests that identifying the phylogenetic content of bacterial communities with short reads will be best achieved by targeting variable regions that are specifically chosen for each class of bacterial environment.

CONCLUSIONS
by combining high-throughput pyrosequencing with a novel analysis methodology, we identified phylogenies of bacteria present in the human vagina during pregnancy. previous studies of the correlation between identified bacteria and preterm labor, and attempts to treat such microorganisms have produced conflicting results  <cit> . our methodology for studying in-depth the ecology of human pregnancy will assist in understanding the correlation between vaginal microorganisms and complications in pregnancy.

our simulations indicate that the methodology is currently limited by two factors: short read-lengths of pyrosequencing and the incomplete nature of 16s rdna databases. as more bacteria are sequenced and added to the database, the effects of the second limitation will decrease. improvements in sequencing technology will increase read-lengths and enhance our ability to distinguish between genera. in order to best identify particular species, using our methodology we can identify and isolate the most informative 16s variable region.

