BACKGROUND
biological phenomena at different organismic levels have revealed some sophisticated systematic architectures of cellular and physiological activities implicitly. these architectures were built upon the biochemical processes before the emergence of proteome and transcriptome  <cit> . under the molecular machinery, the biochemical processes are mostly interpreted as frameworks of connectivity between biochemical compounds and proteins, which are synthesized from genes to function as transcription factors binding to regulatory sites of other genes, as enzymes catalyzing metabolic reactions, or as components of signal transduction pathways  <cit> . this implies that, in order to understand the molecular mechanism of genes in the control of intracellular or intercellular processes, the scope should be broadened from dna sequences coding for proteins to the systems of genetic regulatory pathways determining which genes are expressed, when and where in the organism and to which extent  <cit> . in the experience of engineering field, the systematic architecture and dynamic model could investigate the characteristics of signaling regulatory pathways  <cit> . therefore, how to construct the dynamic model of a signaling pathway from the system structure point of view might be the first key to the door of system biology. most biological phenomena directly or indirectly influenced by genes such as metabolism, stress response, and cell cycle are well studied on the molecular basis. thus, identification of a signal transduction pathway could be traced back to the genetic regulatory level. the rapid advances of genome sequencing and dna microarray technology make possible the quantitative analysis of signaling pathway besides the qualitative analysis. more particularly, the embedded time-course feature of microarray data would promote the system analysis of signal regulatory pathways as well, which is very mature in the field of engineering.

in addition to northern blots and reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction , which study a small number of genes in a single assay, the transcriptome analysis has, via dna microarray technology  <cit> , managed to achieve high-throughput monitoring of the almost genome-wide mrna expression levels in living cells or tissues. two types of available microarrays, the spotted cdna and in situ synthesized oligonucletide  <cit>  chips, which permit the spatiotemporal expression levels of genes to be rapidly measured in a massively parallel way, are used in different experimental requirements and stocked in the databases on net, such as stanford microarray database   <cit> , gene expression omnibus  <cit>  in ncbi, and arrayexpress  <cit>  in ebi. microarray experiments are now routinely used to collect large-scale time series data that facilitate quantitative genetic regulatory analysis while qualitative discussion is the traditional thinking  <cit> .

several analytic methods have been proposed to infer genetic interrelations from gene expression data. in the coarse-scale approach of clustering, the underlying conjecture is that co-expression is indicative of the co-regulation, thus clustering may identify genes that have similar functions or are involved in the related biological processes. the most widely used method is the unsupervised hierarchical clustering  <cit> . this approach has an increasing number of nested classes by similarity measurement and resembles a phylogenetic classification. if we know the number of clusters in advance, the k-means clustering  <cit>  could assign gene elements into a fixed number k of clusters in a way to minimize the overall pearson or euclidean distances of each member internally in the same cluster. other algorithms such as the neural-network-based self-organizing maps   <cit> , singular value decomposition  or principal component analysis   <cit> , and fuzzy clustering methods  <cit>  also have their own advantages and limitations. alternative supervised clustering algorithm of support vector machine  <cit> , which uses prior biological information of cluster for training, would enhance the accuracy of clustering. however, the nature of clustering algorithms apparently cannot uncover the causal interactions between genes just by grouping. regarding the causality of pathways, the clustering analysis needs to cooperate with sequence motif detection  <cit> . it is also important to note that models using clustering analysis are static and thus can not describe the dynamic evolution of gene expression, even in the type of time-course microarray data.

a statistical model of bayesian network  <cit>  was proposed to model genetic regulatory networks. basically, the technique uses a probabilistic score to evaluate the networks with respect to the expression data and searches for the network with the optimal score. the dynamic bayesian network  <cit>  was proposed to learn the network structure and parameters by maximizing the posterior probability via bayes rule of prior probability and marginal likelihood. another algorithm of boolean networks  <cit>  can also be employed to model the dynamic evolution of gene expression, where the state of a gene can be simplified to being either active  or inactive . the probabilistic nature of bayesian networks is capable of handling noise inherent in both the biological processes and the microarray experiments. this makes bayesian networks superior to boolean networks, which are deterministic in nature. the validity of dynamic bayesian networks is evaluated by the sensitivity-specificity score ratios  <cit> , which depend on the training size, the degree of accuracy of prior assumption. a genetic regulatory network based on the first order differential equation with given decay rates was discussed in  <cit> .

in this study, the dynamic system approach could be employed to model how a target gene's expression profile is regulated by its upstream regulatory genes from the system causality point of view. then, with the causal dynamic model, the upstream regulatory function can be extracted from the expression profile of the target gene by the optimal estimation method, i.e. maximum likelihood estimation. since merely the second-order differential equation is employed to model the dynamic evolution of the target gene, only a few parameters need to be estimated. furthermore, the derived regulatory function is closely related to the causal upstream information of the pathway and will create a basis for inferring the regulatory pathway from the system biology point of view.

in either eukaryote or prokaryote, signaling regulatory pathways are considered as responses to the physiological activities or the deviation from homeostasis, which would affect the normal states of an organism. among these signaling regulatory pathways, cell cycle  <cit>  is one of the most conspicuous features of life which plays an important role in growth and cellular differentiation in all organisms. in plants, the stress-induced pathways  <cit>  are very important to survivability under the abiotic environmental treatment such as drought, salinity and cold <cit> . if these critical pathways can be identified from quantitative analysis in silico, the defect of biological processes would be predicted and corrected before hand. our aim is to construct signaling regulatory pathways quantitatively by the system inference approach with a dynamic model and microarray data.

in this study, a second-order differential equation, which has been widely used to model many physical dynamic systems with good characteristics, is proposed to model the time-profile evolutional behavior of a target gene. the regulatory function is taken as the driving input of the dynamic equation of the target gene. using the dynamic equation and microarray data, we first extract the regulatory function for each target gene. according to the extracted regulatory function, we deduce their upstream regulators to trace back upstream signaling pathways. then, upstream regulatory genes are taken as target genes to trace back their upstream regulatory genes. iteratively, we can construct the whole regulatory pathway to the genome wide using the dynamic regulatory model and microarray data from the system biology point of view. finally, we give some independent validation of our approach by repeating the analysis with randomly reshuffling the time order of microarray data and see if the proposed pathways are destroyed.

we have applied our dynamic system approach to two genetic regulatory pathways with microarray data sets publicly available on net  <cit> . one is the circadian regulatory pathway in arabidopsis thaliana  <cit> , and the other is the metabolic shift pathway from fermentation to respiration in yeast saccharomyces cerevisiae  <cit> . the circadian system is an essential signaling pathway that allows organisms to adjust cellular and physiological processes in anticipation of periodic changes of light in the environment  <cit> . according to the synchronously dynamic evolution of microarray data, we have successively identified the core signaling transduction from light receptors to the endogenous biological clock  <cit> , which is coupled to control the correlatively physiological activity with paces on a daily basis. on the other hand, the diauxic shift  <cit>  from the exhausted fermentable sugar of anaerobic metabolism to aerobic growth is correlated with widespread changes in the expression of genes involved in fundamental cellular processes such as carbon metabolism, protein synthesis, and carbohydrate storage.  <cit>  the architecture of the signaling pathway correlative to glycolysis or gluconeogenesis during the diauxic shift is properly built up. with the dynamic system approach, not only the regulatory abilities between causal genes could be derived, but also the delays of regulatory activity are specified. these quantitative characteristics will help determine the intrinsic frameworks of connectivity in the above interesting pathways from the system biology point of view.

RESULTS
the proposed methods in this study would be divided into four steps. in the first step, a dynamic model using the second-order differential equation is developed to describe the expression profile data as output and the regulatory function as input to denote the implicit characteristics of each gene with some parameters. with the help of the second-order dynamic model, we would then extract the upstream regulatory function from the expression profile of the target gene using the optimal estimation method. in the third step, the regulatory function estimated will help seek the correlative regulatory signals from the upstream paths. iteratively, we can reconstruct the whole signaling regulatory pathway by linking up the upstream regulatory paths. finally, some biological filters using available biological knowledge are employed to prune the constructed signaling regulatory pathway to improve the accuracy of the proposed method.

i. dynamic system description of signaling regulatory model
the second-order differential equation is well used in the description of dynamic system evolved from the causality of gene regulatory function. let xi  denote the expression profile of the i-th gene at time point t. the following second-order differential equation is proposed to model the expression level of the i-th gene,



where gi is the upstream regulatory function to influence the expression profile xi of the i-th gene while ai, and biare the parameters that characterize the dynamic inherent property of the gene like degradation and oscillation, and εi is the noise of current microarray data or the residue of the model. in general, the second-order differential equation has been widely used to model dynamic systems to characterize efficiently the dynamic properties of damping and resonance of systems in physics and engineering.

obviously, the clue of upstream regulatory pathways is in gi. thus, the first step is to detect the upstream regulatory function gi from both dynamic equation in  and microarray data. however, to detect the input regulatory function gi from both equation  and microarray data directly is not easy. in this situation, a fourier decomposition technique is employed to decompose gi as a synthesis of some harmonic sinusoid functions so that the signal detection problem of gi is reduced to a simple parameter estimation problem.

accordingly, we can decompose gi by the following fourier series,



then the detection of gi becomes how to estimate the fourier coefficients of αn and βn, which are the magnitudes of different harmonics of cos and sin, for n =  <dig> ..., n in equation , respectively. in science and engineering, the fourier series has been widely employed to synthesize any continuous functions with finite energy. the estimation of αn, βn and the detection of gi in equation  are given in methods in the sequel.

as a result of parameter estimation in methods, the detection  of regulatory function gi could be derived as follows,



since the input regulatory function gi of a target gene is usually due to the transcriptional binding or some physical interactions from the upstream regulatory genes, in the following, we would trace back to the corresponding regulatory genes from input regulatory function  of the target gene.

ii. inference of the regulatory pathway via 
apparently the input regulatory function gi in equation  contains the driving information for the target gene's expression from the upstream regulatory genes. the identified regulatory function  from equation  could be interpreted as the regulatory connectivity through transcriptional binding or protein-protein interaction imposed on the i-th target gene. nevertheless, the expression data of protein type which should be considered directly in practice are by now unavailable and unreliable to trace back upstream regulatory genes. instead, the expression data on mrna level which is now widely available from microarray assays would make tracing back the upstream regulatory pathway possible under proper assumptions. all along the paper we assume that the expression levels of mrna transcripts are proportional to the actual number of corresponding proteins in the cell. this assumption is indeed a strong approximation since post-transcription is known to play a very important role in down regulating the number of the transcription factor in the cell.

before the inference of upstream regulatory genes, it is reasonable to confine the effect of the regulatory genes on the regulated target gene. the saturated activity of expression level reveals that the regulatory ability cannot extend unlimitedly. the sigmoid function is often chosen to express the nonlinear saturation with proper parameters. here, we apply the sigmoid transformation to represent the 'on' and 'off activities of the regulatory genes on binding or not to motifs of the target gene. so the regulatory signal  shown below with the parameter set of θj = {γ, mj, τj} is the sigmoid transformation of xj, the expression profile of the j-th regulatory gene.



where γ is the transition rate, mj is the mean expression of the j-th regulatory gene's profile, and τj is the corresponding signal transduction delay.

the delay activity should be considered in order to describe the signal transduction delay τj from the j-th regulatory gene to the target gene. the delay τj would be computed by statistical correlation between the regulatory signal  transformed from the j-th regulatory gene and the identified regulatory function  of the target gene. the delay τj is determined by the following maximum correlation criterion,



where rτ is the correlation between  and  under variable delay τ. if there are many τ to achieve the maximum correlation in , then only the smallest one is chosen.

using the correlation method, we trace back ri regulatory genes whose regulatory signals  are most correlated with the regulatory function  of the ith target gene, i.e. choose ri genes with maximum correlation but with smaller τj in . the determination of number ri will be discussed later. then, we construct the regulatory pathway by tracing back ri regulatory genes from the identified regulatory function  of the target gene as the following kinetic relationship,



where cij is the pathway kinetic parameters from the regulatory gene j to the target gene i, ri are the searched upstream regulatory genes, the constant ci <dig> represents the basal level to denote the regulatory function other than upstream regulatory genes, and ei is the residue of the model.

furthermore, to estimate the pathway kinetic parameters cij, equation  for m time points should be written in the following regression form,



where , .

we assume that each element in the error vector, ei, k = { <dig> ..., m}, is an independent random variable with a normal distribution with zero mean and variance σ <dig>  by maximum likelihood parameters estimation method , the estimates of σ <dig> and Ωi are given as follows, which is solved as



and



it should be noted that with the combination of biological knowledge about the transcriptional factors, protein phosphorylation, post-transcriptional and specific enzyme regulation of target genes, lots of putative and verified genes correlated with the target genes are pruned by this biological filter for the more efficient and accurate searching of ri upstream regulatory genes in equation . for example, suppose the expression profile of gene j has a high correlation with regulation function gi of target gene i. however, if gene j is not a transcription factor, protein phosphorylation, post-transcription or specific enzyme of target gene i, it will be deleted from the candidates of ri upstream regulatory genes because it may be only a co-expressed gene with the target gene corregulated by the other gene. on the contrary, a verified regulatory gene should be recruited into the candidates even with small correlation with gi.

finally, we take the well-known akaike information criterion  into account for determining the number ri of regulatory signal  <cit> ,



the first term in aic is the residual variance and the second term ri is the number of regulatory genes. aic includes both the estimated residual variance and model complexity in one statistic, which decreases as σ <dig> decreases and increases as ri increases. aic has been widely employed to determine the complexity of system modeling science and engineering  <cit> . the optimal number ri of the upstream regulatory genes will be determined by the minimization of the aic value in equation.

now, for the selected target genes in the interesting pathway, we could search for the optimal ri upstream regulatory genes by aic in equation  after the biological filtering and determine their pathway kinetic parameters cij of regulatory signal by equation . after biological filter pruning, if the number of candidates of regulatory genes is still less than ri determined by aic, then some genes, which are highly correlative to gi but not of transcription factors or signaling proteins of target gene i, should be recruit into candidates to uncover regulatory relationships that were not suspected to be connected. after the combination of equations  and , the whole regulatory pathway is obtained as



for i = {l,  <dig> ..., l}, and l is the number of target genes in the pathway. the sub-paths related to the i-th target gene in the interesting pathway could be detected by the inference algorithm. then, it is natural that the whole regulatory pathway would be constructed by the links of all the sub-paths. we also outline the whole flowchart of our dynamic inferring algorithm as shown in figure  <dig> for an overview.

discussion
data set of analysis
the two famous modeling organisms, arabidopsis thaliana and yeast saccharomyces cerevisiae, have been well studied biologically and their microarray assays are abundant. thus, we chose different types of pathways, one is the plant behavior under environmental variation and the other is the cellular metabolism in response to exhaustion of external source, as examples in this study. in other words, two signaling pathways, i.e. circadian regulatory pathway in arabidopsis thaliana and metabolic shift pathway from fermentation to respiration in yeast saccharomyces cerevisiae, are constructed from microarray data to confirm the accuracy of our proposed method.

for cells grown in the light/dark cycle according to circadian rhythm, harmer and colleagues  <cit>  used highly reproducible oligonucleotide-based arrays representing about  <dig> different genes to determine steady-state mrna levels in arabidopsis thaliana that are measured in replicate hybridization of  <dig> samples harvested every  <dig> hours over  <dig> days. with their investigation on the circadian regulatory system, harmer et al. have provided an abundance of correlated genes for the regulatory pathway inference.

as for the metabolic pathway, an cdna microarray assay from derisi et al.  <cit> , containing approximately  <dig> distinct expression sequence tags  in yeast saccharomyces cerevisiae, is harvested at seven successive 2-hour intervals after an initial nine hours of growth under the diauxic shift. adoption of the diauxic shift data set would make possible the inference of metabolic shift pathways.

process of raw microarray data
with the second-order equation and the optimal estimation method, the dynamic model should be developed first for the regulatory scheme of target genes in the signaling regulatory pathway. because the raw microarray data sample of the biological assays that will be analyzed is small with less than  <dig> data points for an individual gene, the cubic spline method is used to interpolate the observed data to increase the data points of each gene's time-course microarray data. as shown in figure  <dig>  the expression profiles of cry <dig>  and phya  genes in the circadian regulatory pathway of arabidopsis thaliana are interpolated by the cubic spline method among raw data points on the left-hand side. similarly, pgi <dig>  and pgm <dig>  genes in the metabolic shift pathway of yeast saccharomyces cerevisiae are on the right-hand side. after the expression profiles are smoothed by the cubic spline technique, we can obtain the data of the first derivative  and the second derivative  more accurately and abundantly.

extraction of regulatory information
after data expansion by the cubic spline method, we would have enough data to estimate the parameters of the regulatory dynamic model of the target gene from equation . following the dynamic model in equation , the parameters which characterize the dynamic regulatory mechanism are estimated successfully for each target gene in the pathway. by dynamic model fitting, the expression profiles of the mentioned genes in figure  <dig> can be reconstructed in figure  <dig> with time progression again. hence, we not only could predict the dynamic evolution of the target gene's expression profile accurately, but also deduce the regulatory function  simultaneously as the scheme of figure  <dig>  the regulatory information between target genes and their upstream genes can be extracted properly with this method.

inference of the regulatory pathway
for illustrations, the inferring strategy is applied to the selected core genes  in two pathways of the circadian regulatory system in arabidopsis thaliana and the metabolic shift pathway in yeast saccharomyces cerevisiae to recognize their upstream regulatory genes, respectively. their regulatory abilities with signal transduction delays are shown in the form of dynamic equation in table  <dig> and table  <dig>  respectively. these regulatory abilities implying different degrees of influence are converted into a red-colored line as positive regulation  and a blue-colored line as negative regulation  for each target gene. then, according to the dynamic regulatory equations in table  <dig> and table  <dig>  the pathways of the circadian regulatory system and the metabolic shift pathway are described in figure  <dig> and figure  <dig>  respectively.

a. pathway of circadian regulatory system
the circadian rhythm controls processes ranging from cyanobacteria cell division to human wake-sleep cycles. in plant, especially for arabidopsis thaliana, the growth and development have adapted to the diurnal cycling of light and dark  <cit> . the ability of plants to respond to light is achieved through some photoreceptors. two classes of photoreceptors are well known to form the photo-transduction pathway under the circadian regulatory system in arabidopsis thaliana  <cit> . one is the crytochrome of blue-light photoreceptors, containing cry <dig> and cry <dig>  the other is the phytochrome of mainly red-light photoreceptors, including phya, phyb, phyd and phye.

in the photo-transduction related genes , containing both crytochrome  and phytochrome , cry <dig>  and cry <dig>  are commonly regulated by lhy   in reciprocal ways with significant values  and - <dig> , eq. of table  <dig>  respectively), implying the essentially regulatory role of lhy on crytochrome genes. in addition, from eq. in table  <dig>  we further observe that ccal   has the greatest positive regulation  on cry <dig>  meaning that cry <dig> is jointly regulated by lhy and ccal. because the binding sites of lhy and ccal found in the promoter regions of cry <dig>  <cit>  are consistent with our inference, the transcriptional binding might be the mechanism of cry <dig> affected by both lhy and ccal. in addition, the mutual activations of phosphorylation between cry <dig>  and phya  in eq. and eq. of table  <dig> are specifically identified consistent with the previous work  <cit> . at present, little is known about the nature of interactions between these two classes of photoreceptors. from eq. in table  <dig>  cry <dig>  is also positively regulated by phya  with  <dig> -hr activation delay similar to that in cry <dig>  in table 1). therefore, phya is considered as a post-transcriptional regulator of phosphorylation to crytochrome within  <dig> -hr after transcription. on the other hand, phyb  down-regulates cry <dig> with a significant effect  while cry <dig>  up-regulates phyb  weakly by feedback ,  in table  <dig> ). the mutual interactions between cry <dig> and phyb in nuclear speckles that are formed in a light-dependent fashion are also confirmed by mas et al.  <cit> . because cry <dig> and cry <dig> are both negatively co-regulated by phyd  and phye  significantly ,  in table 1), phya has apparently different behavior from phyb, phyd, and phye in activating crytochrome. this might suggest the mechanism that phya mediates the blue light by up-regulating cry <dig> and cry <dig>  whilst phyb, phyd, and phye would mediate the red light by inhibiting blue photoreceptors  <cit> .

in the mainly red-light photoreceptors of phytochrome  in figure  <dig>  undoubtedly lhy  and ccal , well-known biological clock genes in the circadian system  <cit> , are core regulators involved in the transcriptions of both phytochrome , , , and  in table 1) and crytochrome ,  in table 1) via feedback transcriptional binding. similarly, gi   in figure  <dig> has been identified as a manifested regulator to all the phytochromes , , , and  in table 1), although gi sequence lacks any motifs suggesting that it is a transcription factor of phytochromes  <cit> . hence, gi might be a post-transcriptional regulatory factor. however, there is another gene elf <dig>   opposite to gi on phytochrome, especially for phya, phyb and phye ,  and  in table 1). because of lower regulatory ability than transcription factor lhy or ccal, elf <dig> might play the same role as lhy and ccal. just as expected, elf <dig> contains glutamine-rich motif suggesting that it is a transcription factor  <cit> .

before entrance of the biological oscillator of the circadian system formed by toc <dig>  lhy, and ccal, a crucial gene of pif <dig>   is mediated significantly by phya   and phyb    in table 1). this is consistent with the post-transcriptional interactions of pif3-phya and pif3-phyb complexes. as a core gene in the biological oscillator, toc <dig>  is transcriptionally regulated by lhy   and ccal   whilst pif <dig>   is presumably considered as the bridge between toc <dig> and phytochrome , table 1). from lhy and ccal point of view, they are both positively affected simultaneously by pif <dig> implying the regulation on the transcriptional level  <cit> . in addition, toc <dig> inhibits both lhy and ccal to form the structure of mutual transcriptional regulation ,  with eq. in table 1). so we conclude that lhy and ccal function as principal transcription factors.

we also infer some downstream pathways of chs  , pap <dig> , and co   in figure  <dig>  chs is known as correlated with uv-b protection. it seems that ccal and lhy have greater effect  on chs than pap <dig>  as a transcription factor  in table 1). this might mean that chs is regulated by pap <dig> in a small scale with amplifying effect on the cis-regulatory level. co is recognized as a pivotal gene of photoperiodic regulation of flowering. indeed, strong regulations from ccal and lhy are identified to show that co is regulated with a large-scale attenuation effect on the cis-regulatory level  in table 1).

in the overview of the circadian system in figure  <dig>  most red lines of activating regulation are found in the photo-transduction pathway between phytochrome  and crytochrome  implying the chain interactions after the external light input. by the feedback regulations of lhy and ccal , represented by black lines with more linking to upstream genes, the photo-transduction pathways are stabilized to provide oscillation. on the other hand, more blue lines of inhibitive interactions are revealed in the biological-clock regulatory pathways relevant to co, pap <dig>  and chs  underlying the anti-phase functional regulation between these output pathways and the oscillator. in addition, the essential signal transduction factors of fkf <dig>  gi, elf <dig>  and pif <dig>  make some critical links between the functional blocks mentioned above in the circadian system <cit> . finally, in order to validate the proposed approach, an independent validation is also given by randomly reshuffling the time order of microarray experiment  but with the same choices of target gene and regulatory genes, as shown in figure  <dig>  it is seen that the proposed circadian regulatory pathway in figure  <dig> is destroyed by reshuffling the experimental data.

b. metabolic shift pathway
sugars, such as glucose and sucrose, are excellent carbon sources for yeasts and almost all of the energy requirements of the cell can be satisfied by glycolysis  <cit> . saccharomyces cerevisiae can switch from fermentatioon at high levels of glucose to respiration at low levels of glucose with major changes in metabolic activity . in their experiment on the diauxic shift  <cit> , derisi et al. inoculated cells from an exponentially growing culture into fresh medium and grew them at  <dig> for  <dig> hrs. this offers a resource to infer the possible allosteric regulation of enzymatic activities, protein modification and transcriptional regulation as shown in table  <dig>  in addition, the scheme of the corresponding inferred pathway is shown in figure  <dig>  in the overview of the inferring relationships in table  <dig>  the gluconeogenesis from pyk <dig> to pgm <dig> and the partial fermentation from pyk <dig>  to adh <dig> and adh <dig>  are unraveled as a result of the diauxic shift, so two sub-pathways in opposite directions are concluded.

in the fermentation direction, pykl  encoding an enzyme, which catalyzes pep  to pyruvate, is negatively regulated  by pck <dig>   in table 2). pck <dig> could be intepreted here as an indirect upstream transcription factor or regulatory gene for pyk <dig> due to its function of decarboxylation and phosphorylation of oxalacetat in the presence of a nucleoside triphosphate and a divalent metal ion to yield pep. another gcrl  gene is also identified as the strongest positive regulation  to pyk <dig>  in table 2), which is putatively considered as a transcription factor. this candidate transcription factor gcrl of pdc <dig>   plays a more essential role  in table 2) than rap <dig>  , and pyk <dig>  is an upstream regulatory factor coding an enzyme with the most positive effect  on pdc <dig> according to the production of acetaldehyde from pyruvate. in the last kernel of the fermentation, adh <dig>  and adh <dig>  are involved in the ethanol metabolism of carbohydrate storage. adh <dig> is implicated to up-regulate adh <dig>  in table 2) under the catabolism from ethanol to acetaldehyde and is significantly up-regulated by adh <dig>  in table 2) to produce ethanol reversely. the mutual regulations of these two isozymes are within a tiny activation delay of  <dig> -hr implying their close relationship. in addition, gcr <dig>  and sfp <dig>  with consistently dominant negative influences on adh <dig> and adh <dig> respectively would be at the transcriptional level presumably ,  in table 2).

in the sub-pathway of glyconeogenesis, eno <dig>   is regulated by pck <dig>   in the same way as pyk <dig> while the main transcription factor is stp <dig>  with significantly positive regulation  in table 2). as seen in table  <dig>  a causal cascade of eno <dig>  gpm <dig>  , tpi <dig>  , fba <dig>  , and pgi <dig>   indicates the construction of a trunk of the glyconeogenesis , , , and  in table 2). among them, rap <dig>  and gcrl  are the common regulators of gpm <dig>  pgi <dig>  and tpi <dig>  this means that rap <dig> and gcrl might be the most important regulators in the glyconeogenesis pathway by the transcriptional binding. finally, pgm <dig>   co-regulated by glk <dig>  , hxk <dig> , and hxk <dig>   significantly confers another pathway leading to the synthesis of udp-glu from glucose-6-p  in table 2).

in the overview of the metabolic shift pathway in figure  <dig>  extremely significant regulations  from most transcription factors  means that transcriptional regulations are feasibly identified. however, in the fermentation sub-pathway , the mutual regulations between adh <dig> and adh <dig> are apparent when compared with the obscure relationships in glyconeogenesis . interestingly, three transcription factors gcr <dig>  gcr <dig> and rap <dig>  appear to have very significant effects on the metabolic shift pathway. finally, in order to validate the proposed method, an independent validation is also given by randomly reshuffling the time order of microarray experiment but with same choices of target gene and regulatory gene, as shown in figure  <dig>  obviously, the proposed metabolic shift in figure  <dig> is destroyed by reshuffling the experimental data.

CONCLUSIONS
microarray expression analysis by the dynamic system approach offers an opportunity to generate functional regulation interpretation on the genome-wide scale. the crucial ontology behind using dynamic system techniques is that the causality between gene expression profiles could be identified according to the differential equation underlying a dynamic system. therefore, because the microarray data were harvested with time progression, the simultaneously varied gene expressions implicated in a genetic regulatory system would be detected to infer the regulatory pathways in spite of the versatile interactions such as transcriptional control, protein phosphorylation, or specific enzyme regulation.

the clustering method answers the problem of what is the functional catalogue of a specific gene by the identification of resembling patterns of gene expressions. similarly, the co-regulations of upstream genes in our method also imply their concurrent functions. in contrast to the clustering algorithm, the causality of time-course data has been smoothly drawn by our dynamic method. the bayesian networks were used merely for forward probabilistic estimation with time transition lacking in the feedback linkages. this unidirectional problem would not happen in our algorithm. owing to the quantitative regulatory abilities of our model, we have a greater diversity of regulatory influence than the boolean networks, which are deterministic with merely two states.

in our dynamic system approach, we not only can link qualitatively the upstream genes to the downstream ones iteratively, but also indicate quantitatively their regulatory relationships, including the regulatory abilities and the activation delays. in terms of the regulatory abilities, the comparison between the upstream regulatory genes of a target gene can inspire us to ask which one is significant biologically and whether it is a positive or negative influence on the investigated gene. moreover, the speculation of activation delays benefits the empirical reference by providing us when the upstream regulatory genes might interact with their target genes. since any gene can be considered as a target gene to trace back its upstream regulators, these regulators are then considered as target genes to trace back their upstream regulators. iteratively, the genetic regulatory pathway  can be constructed to the genome-wide. according to the qualitative and quantitative features imbedded, two regulatory pathway examples are characterized as in figure  <dig> and figure  <dig> for the identification of the proposed method. in addition, using the akaike information criterion , a proper number of regulatory genes would be affirmed. as a result, many links overlap with well-known regulatory and signaling pathways in the previous literature and several putative ones are also found. furthermore, the activation or repression relationships inferred via the microarray data would distinctly uncover the overall effect of regulatory interactions among casual genes in pathways on the transcriptional level.

in the two pathways under investigation, we have a more detailed understanding about the regulatory interactions among phytochrome, crytochrome and biological clock in the circadian regulatory system. on the other hand, the sophisticated knowledge of the metabolic pathway after the diauxic shift can be unfolded properly in our analysis. furthermore, the independent validation of our approach is also given by randomly reshuffling the time order of microarray experiment. we found that the proposed pathways in figures  <dig> and  <dig> are all destroyed as shown in figures  <dig> and  <dig>  respectively. the successful analysis of these two pathways implies the development of a valid and high-throughput method. all of the programs have been released 

there are some shortcomings in our study. first, although the time-course microarray data are available, its lower samplings will distort the real changes of gene expressions, especially for quick dynamic evolution. a more sampling experiment with respect to the intrinsic turnover rate is expected to have more precise analysis. secondly, a regulatory gene with larger activation delay would not be recognized because the less activation delay criterion is used, but this might be overcome by properly relaxing the criterion. thirdly, activation profiles under the proteome should be highly correlated with the transcriptional profiles to elevate the interpretation of our system model. in general, the synchronous time-course microarray assay is more suitable to underlie the transcriptional binding among causal genes, but an inference of physical interactions in the post-transcriptional level also has sufficient feasibility in our study.

in the near future, the most pressing task is to investigate our presumed paths in the laboratory. as the pathway construction algorithms are further developed, we expect this system approach to have immense impact in elucidating the underlying molecular mechanisms of pathways in a variety of organisms, especially after the maturation of the protein chips. ultimately, we envision that biologists will perform routine pathway inference to seek some novel regulations and to identify the evolutionarily conserved links.

