BACKGROUND
transfer of genes between different genomes is now recognized as widespread and has been postulated to play an important role during evolution  <cit> . gene transfer between different species is generally termed horizontal gene transfer  or lateral gene transfer . hgt is especially common in prokaryotes  <cit> , however, it has become recently clear it also occurs frequently in phagotrophic protists  <cit> . in addition, in eukaryotes a large number of genes were transferred from the evolving plastid and mitochondrion to the nuclear genome. this type of gene transfer has been named intracellular gene transfer  or endocytotic gene transfer . hgt or egt leads to an exchange of genes between distantly related organisms creating genetic chimeras. it allows the recipient to acquire new characters de novo and therefore challenges the traditional evolutionary concept that evolution proceeds by modification of existing genetic information. as is evident most clearly in egt no gene appears to be immune to transfer, however, most of the recently transferred genes  appear not to include housekeeping genes  <cit> . hgt is generally detected by phylogenetic analyses  and is generally considered as a form of noise, obscuring phylogenetic signal and therefore interfering with the reconstruction of the evolution or a group of organisms  <cit> . however, huang and gogarten  <cit>  suggested that ancient horizontal gene transfers are helpful for elucidating the evolutionary history of a group of organisms.

chlamydiae are well known donors for horizontal gene transfer events  <cit> . chlamydiae are an ancient group of obligate intracellular bacteria  <cit> , probably most closely related to the verrucomicrobia  <cit> . the presence of chlamydia-type genes in plants  has been reported repeatedly  <cit> . three different explanations have been forwarded: 1) hgt of plant genes to a chlamydial ancestor  <cit> , 2) hgt of chlamydial genes to plants  <cit>  and 3) an ancient phylogenetic relationship between chlamydiae, cyanobacteria, and chloroplasts  <cit> . a list of chlamydial proteins with high similarity to plant proteins by brinkman et al.  <cit>  included  <dig> proteins involved in diverse functions such as protein and fatty acid synthesis, glycolysis, and nucleotide metabolism. whereas a list by horn et al.  <cit>  using proteins of the parachlamydia-related symbiont of acanthamoebae  as query in blast searches found  <dig> proteins from protochlamydia with high similarity to plant proteins. recently, a list of  <dig> chlamydial genes present in viridiplantae and cyanidioschyzon merolae  has been published by huang and gogarten  <cit> . these authors postulated an ancient egt event to explain the large number of genes transferred  <cit> . several additional genomes , and a large number of additional ests  have been recently sequenced. therefore, we have reinvestigated the phylogenetic relationships between plastids, cyanobacteria and chlamydiae using an extended taxon sampling. we show that  <dig> chlamydial type genes are present in glaucoplantae, rhodoplantae, viridiplantae and bacillariophyta indicating an ancient origin for these chlamydial genes. however, the distribution of chlamydial proteins among different photoautotrophic eukaryotes is complex requiring an in depth phylogenetic analysis.

RESULTS
a significant number of chlamydial genes occur in eukaryotic algae
to search for genes of putative chlamydial origin in eukaryotic algae, the genomes of two diatoms , three green algae , and the red alga cyanidioschyzon merolae were screened for the presence of protein-coding genes most similar to genes in the genome of candidatus protochlamydia amoebophila . the initial screen identified  <dig> putative chlamydial proteins in these algae . maximum likelihood phylogenetic analyses were performed with each of the  <dig> proteins using a taxon sampling that included other eukaryotic algae and chlamydiae, embryophytes, cyanobacteria, and other bacteria ;  <dig> proteins revealed a monophyletic lineage  for  <dig> proteins, and 57–68% bs for  <dig> proteins) consisting of chlamydiae and at least one of the three plastid-containing eukaryotic lineages represented by genomes  to the exclusion of all other proteins. for two additional proteins , hypothetical protein pc <dig> ), the phylogenetic trees contained only chlamydiae and plastid-containing eukaryotes because proteins with significant similarities to the chlamydial proteins could not be retrieved from any other taxa. among the remaining  <dig> phylogenetic trees, several trees also displayed a topological sister group relation between chlamydiae and plastid-containing eukaryotes, however, without bootstrap support .

 <dig> proteins were identified by ml analyses. the proteins are grouped according to the observed tree topologies in the maximum likelihood analyses. the bootstrap support  for the indicated clades is given. for  <dig> genes  this is to our knowledge the first detailed phylogenetic analysis. see additional file  <dig> for an extended version of table  <dig> including tree topologies.

1) the accession number and annotation for the gene from protochlamydia is given. n. a. not applicable, a apicomplexa, b bacillariophyta, c chlamydiae except protochlamydia, cb cyanobacteria, cp chlorophyta, f firmicutes, g glaucoplantae, p protochlamydia, r rhodoplantae, sp streptophyta, v viridiplantae.

the proteins of putative chlamydial origin in plastid-containing eukaryotes perform a broad spectrum of functions with isoprenoid, fatty acid and carbohydrate metabolism, and phosphate homeostasis featuring prominently . all are encoded on the host's nuclear genome, and most  are predicted to be targeted to the plastid. metabolic pathways involving putative chlamydial proteins reveal a chimerical origin .

complex distribution of chlamydial genes among plastid-containing eukaryotes
the distribution of the  <dig> chlamydial proteins among four groups of photosynthetic eukaryotes , rhodoplantae , glaucoplantae , and bacillariophyta ) is shown in a venn diagram . the largest number of chlamydial proteins  was found in the viridiplantae, followed by the rhodoplantae , bacillariophyta  and glaucoplantae . it should be noted that the low number of chlamydial proteins recovered from the glaucoplantae presumably relates to that fact that no genome of this small, yet phylogenetically important, algal lineage has been sequenced to date and the chlamydial proteins had to be retrieved from the limited est  data available for two glaucoplantae, cyanophora paradoxa and glaucocystis nostochinearum. the viridiplantae contain the largest number of unique chlamydial proteins , followed by the bacillariophyta , whereas no unique chlamydial proteins were recovered from the rhodoplantae and glaucoplantae. viridiplantae and rhodoplantae share  <dig>  viridiplantae and bacillariophyta  <dig>  and rhodoplantae and bacillariophyta  <dig> chlamydial proteins. both viridiplantae and rhodoplantae share the same  <dig> chlamydial proteins with the glaucoplantae . seven chlamydial proteins are unique to viridiplantae and rhodoplantae,  <dig> to viridiplantae and bacillariophyta, and  <dig> to rhodoplantae and bacillariophyta. chlamydial proteins involved in the same biosynthetic pathway may be differentially distributed in the different algal lineages. in the plastidic isoprenoid pathway, the chlamydial genes ispd and ispe  are present in the rhodoplantae and viridiplantae, whereas the chlamydial ispg  is only present in the viridiplantae and bacillariophyta; the rhodoplantae and glaucoplantae contain the cyanobacterial homologue of ispg. similarly, in the fatty acid synthesis pathway, the chlamydial gene fabb  is present in both rhodoplantae and viridiplantae, whereas the chlamydial fabi  is restricted to the viridiplantae ; the rhodoplantae contain the cyanobacterial fabi. the complex distribution pattern of chlamydial proteins in the different lineages of photosynthetic eukaryotes called for an in depth analysis of the phylogeny of each chlamydial protein using a broader taxonomic sampling that included diverse chlamydiae, cyanobacteria and other groups of bacteria such as proteobacteria and firmicutes .

chlamydial genes in photosynthetic eukaryotes signal an ancient, horizontal gene transfer event
the presence of a relatively small number of genes from another domain of life in a genome is usually regarded as signalling horizontal gene transfer . if a large number of foreign genes that have a single origin are involved, an endosymbiotic gene transfer  is often the favoured hypothesis. egt is a special case of hgt, in which the donor  transfers its genome or part of it to the acceptor  and physically persists for an extended period of time within the host. if the donor disappears from its host, it may be difficult, if not impossible, to distinguish between hgt and egt. as hgt involves two genomes, the direction of gene flow is not a priori known, e.g. the presence of chlamydial proteins in photosynthetic eukaryotes could either signal hgt from chlamydiae to eukaryotes or hgt from eukaryotes to chlamydiae. phylogenetic analyses can often resolve this conundrum. however, in photosynthetic eukaryotes an additional level of complexity is added by the presence of nuclear-encoded cyanobacterial genes. since the  <dig> chlamydial proteins are, with a few notable exceptions , confined to plastid-containing eukaryotes, it is also conceivable that the presence of proteins of putative chlamydial origin in these eukaryotes simply reflects their phylogenetic relationship to the respective cyanobacterial homologues rather than an hgt between chlamydiae and eukaryotes, the former perhaps obscured by loss or modification of the respective genes in extant free-living cyanobacteria. again phylogenetic analyses can help to reach an informed decision. the presence of cyanobacterial genes in the host genome has another connotation; it may indicate that hgt perhaps did not take place between the chlamydial and eukaryotic genomes directly but between chlamydial and cyanobacterial genomes either before or after the cyanobacterial endosymbiosis . in this case the chlamydial genes were transferred to the nuclear genome by egt from the genome of the cyanobacterial endosymbiont.

for  <dig> of the  <dig> chlamydial proteins detected in plastid-containing eukaryotes, a cyanobacterial homologue could not be recovered . analyses of the remaining  <dig> chlamydial proteins revealed no specific phylogenetic relationships of the cyanobacterial and chlamydial proteins to the exclusion of other bacterial homologues . in fact, the cyanobacterial proteins sometimes formed strongly supported clades with proteins of other bacteria to the exclusion of proteins from chlamydiae . often, but not always, the cyanobacterial proteins were recovered as sisters to the respective proteins of the firmicutes  and aspartate aminotransferase ). the cyanobacteria/firmicutes sister group relationship had previously been inferred from multigene phylogenies  from  <dig> different bacterial strains)). although this result does not rule out an ancient relationship between cyanobacteria and chlamydiae, it strongly suggests that the chlamydial proteins present in photosynthetic eukaryotes are not simply modified cyanobacterial proteins and thus are not of cyanobacterial but of chlamydial origin. that cyanobacterial homologues of chlamydial proteins can be readily identified as such when present in photosynthetic eukaryotes, is exemplified by three proteins with differential distribution in photosynthetic eukaryotes, the cyanobacterial homologue being associated with glaucoplantae and/or rhodoplantae , while the chlamydial homologue is present in bacillariophyta and/or viridiplantae.

phylogenetic analyses of the  <dig> chlamydial proteins also provide insight about the direction of hgt between chlamydiae and plastid-containing eukaryotes. although two chlamydial proteins occur only in chlamydiae and plastid-containing eukaryotes , and another chlamydial protein  is present only in intracellular bacterial parasites and plastid-containing eukaryotes, all other chlamydial proteins have homologues among several major groups of bacteria and are thus embedded in the bacterial radiation. conversely, the chlamydial proteins identified here are confined to plastid-containing eukaryotes among the eukaryote radiation . the presence of chlamydial genes in eukaryotes with secondary plastids ), and chlorarachniophytes ) suggests that these genes have spread from plantae  to other eukaryote supergroups such as heterokonts, alveolates, and rhizaria together with their secondary, eukaryotic endosymbionts. in conclusion, chlamydial proteins in plastid-containing eukaryotes are most likely derived from chlamydiae by hgt/egt.

when and how often did hgt/egt between chlamydiae and plastid-containing eukaryotes occur? for chlamydial proteins with homologues in all three lineages of the plantae , a sister group relationship was recovered between chlamydiae and plantae for each protein . this suggests that hgt from chlamydiae to plastid-containing eukaryotes predated the divergence of the glaucoplantae, rhodoplantae and viridiplantae.

for  <dig> additional proteins, a sister group relationship between chlamydiae and rhodoplantae+viridiplantae was observed  strongly suggesting that hgt for these proteins predated the split between rhodoplantae and viridiplantae. it is anticipated that most, if not all of these  <dig> proteins will also contain homologues in the glaucoplantae, which are, however, currently unknown reflecting the paucity of genome information in the glaucoplantae . for another  <dig> chlamydial proteins in which a monophyletic origin of chlamydiae, rhodoplantae, and viridiplantae was recovered , either the branching order among chlamydiae, rhodoplantae and viridiplantae was unresolved  or the  protein occurred only in chlamydiae and plastid-containing eukaryotes . with the addition of more taxa, in particular from the glaucoplantae, the branching order between chlamydiae and plastid-containing eukaryotes for these  <dig> chlamydial proteins may be resolved and a monophyletic origin of the chlamydial proteins in plastid-containing eukaryotes likely be revealed. only one chlamydial protein  deviates from this scheme .

for chlamydial proteins that display a sister group relationship between chlamydiae and viridiplantae , either the homologue from rhodoplantae is missing  or the rhodoplantae homologue is specifically associated  with cyanobacteria . the first situation may reflect selective loss of chlamydial genes in the rhodoplant lineage, the second offers several contrasting explanations .

chlamydial proteins that reveal a sister group relationship between chlamydiae and rhodoplantae  also display homologues in the viridiplantae, whose positions, however, remained unresolved in the phylogenetic trees .

finally, chlamydial proteins showing a sister group relationship between chlamydiae and bacillariophyta to the exclusion of plantae  and transketolase; nos  <dig> and  <dig> respectively; table 1) either contain the three lineages of plantae in a monophylum together with cyanobacteria  or two lineages of plantae  together with cyanobacteria, firmicutes and other bacteria in an unresolved radiation . it is likely that at least the transketolase of the bacillariophyta originated by an hgt involving a chlamydial donor different from the donor that contributed the chlamydial genes in the plantae .

the overall conclusion from the phylogenetic analyses is that the vast majority of the  <dig> chlamydial proteins detected in photosynthetic eukaryotes during this study  presumably entered the plantae by hgt from chlamydiae before the divergence of the glaucoplantae, rhodoplantae and viridiplantae.

another important question relates to the possible nature of the donor in the hgt/egt of the chlamydial genes into plastid-containing eukaryotes. for  <dig> chlamydial proteins, candidatus protochlamydia amoebophila was the only member of the chlamydiae in the trees; proteins from other chlamydiae could not be retrieved from the data bases . the phylogenetic tree for one of these proteins, asparaginyl-trna synthetase , also included all three lineages of the plantae, and in this case, p. amoebophila formed a weakly supported sister group to the plantae + bacillariophyta . for the other  <dig> proteins, p. amoebophila was either in an unresolved position among the photosynthetic eukaryotes , was the only bacterial protein in a tree, that, in addition to p. amoebophila, comprised only one lineage of plantae  or was a sister group to the bacillariophyta .

four of the  <dig> trees that contained all three lineages of plantae, displayed, in addition to p. amoebophila, other chlamydiae . in one of the  <dig> trees , the chlamydiae were paraphyletic , in two others  they were monophyletic, with p. amoebophila as their first divergence, and the chlamydiae in sister group position to the plantae. in one tree  relationships among the chlamydiae were unresolved. in the  <dig> trees, the chlamydiae  exhibited relatively long branches, and in the case of the aspartate aminotransferase, this may have caused artificial attraction of these chlamydiae to a very long branch comprising all other bacteria  rendering the chlamydiae paraphyletic .

extending the comparison to the other  <dig> phylogenetic trees that contained chlamydial proteins from both p. amoebophila and other chlamydial taxa, again two topologies emerged: a monophyletic chlamydiae  in which p. amoebophila always represented the first divergence within the chlamydiae , or a paraphyletic  divergence of the chlamydiae  with p. amoebophila either in a sister group position  to the chlamydial proteins of the plastid-containing eukaryotes , or positioned  within the plantae . for  <dig> chlamydial proteins a sister group topology between the chlamydiae  and either a single clade of plastid-containing eukaryotes , and once with rhodoplantae ; in nos  <dig> and  <dig> without bootstrap support; table 1) or with two clades of plastid-containing eukaryotes  was observed. in all  <dig> phylogenetic trees in which the chlamydiae were paraphyletic and p. amoebophila was sister to the plastid-containing eukaryotes , the chlamydiae  exhibited much longer branches than the branches of both p. amoebophila and the plastid-containing eukaryotes , again likely rendering the chlamydiae paraphyletic . support for the monophyly of the chlamydiae is strongest  in cases in which the branch lengths of p. amoebophila and the other 4– <dig> chlamydiae are of comparable lengths  or in which branch lengths of the plastid-containing eukaryotes and the bacteria  are of similar lengths -isopentenylpyrophosphate transferase; additional file 3b; no 4; table 1). when support for the monophyly of the chlamydiae was strong , so was support for the sister group relationship between chlamydiae and plastid-containing eukaryotes .

from these data it is concluded  that the chlamydiae are monophyletic,  that the apparent paraphyly  of chlamydiae seen in some trees is the result of a long branch  attraction artifact because of largely differing evolutionary rates between the genes of p. amoebophila and the later diverging intracellular chlamydial parasites of animal hosts,  that the later diverging chlamydiae lost several genes that p. amoebophila  retained,  that the donor of the chlamydial genes found today in the plastid-containing eukaryotes was related to the common ancestor of p. amoebophila and other chlamydiae, and thus  that the hgt/egt of chlamydial genes into plastid-containing eukaryotes occurred more than  <dig> mya, the estimated time of divergence of p.amoebophila from other chlamydiae  <cit> . the apparent ancient origin of the chlamydial genes in plastid-containing eukaryotes is independently supported by the recovered monophyly of five chlamydial proteins found to date in all three lineages of plantae . the divergence time between rhodoplantae and viridiplantae has been variously estimated, based on molecular clock analyses, to be at least  <dig>  mya  <cit> .

phylogeny of chlamydial proteins supports the monophyly of the plantae, but can chlamydial proteins also shed light on subsequent algal evolution?
because chlamydial genes apparently entered the nuclear genome of plastid-containing eukaryotes before the divergence of the three major lineages of plantae , their fate can be traced through algal evolution and subsequent secondary endosymbioses in much the same way as that of plastidial proteins of cyanobacterial origin. whereas the monophyly of the plantae is rarely questioned today , the sequence of evolutionary divergence of the three principal types of plastids that correspond to the three lineages of plantae, namely cyanelles , rhodoplasts  and chloroplasts  still remains unresolved. all possible topologies of the three lineages of plastids  have been recovered in phylogenetic analyses, i.e. a sister group of rhodoplantae and viridiplantae , a sister group of glaucoplantae and rhodoplantae , or a sister group of glaucoplantae and viridiplantae  or apparently long-branch attraction artefacts prevailed.

chlamydial proteins do not  shed light on the sequence of divergence of the three lineages of plantae, likely because too few such proteins are currently known from the glaucoplantae. for the  <dig> chlamydial proteins present in all three lineages of the plantae, none of the three topologies obtained for the plantae was significantly supported by bootstrap values . two proteins supported a g+r sister group , whereas two other proteins supported a r+v sister group . the fifth chlamydial protein  supported a g+v sister group, however the viridiplantae were paraphyletic in this analysis . for two additional proteins, chlamydial homologues were present only in the viridiplantae, whereas the glaucoplantae and rhodoplantae contained the cyanobacterial homologues . the distribution of the latter two proteins among the three lineages of plantae is most parsimoniously explained by either a g+r or r+v topology. to further evaluate the different topologies, phylogenetic analyses with concatenated data sets using p. amoebophila and two other chlamydiae as outgroup were performed. in a 4-protein analysis -isopentenylpyrophosphate transferase and diphosphate-fructose-6-phosphate 1-phosphotransferase; nos 2– <dig>  table 1) using  <dig> aa positions, a moderate  bs support for a sister group relationship between rhodoplantae and viridiplantae  was obtained . when more protein sequences of chlamydial origin will become available from the glaucoplantae, chlamydial proteins may provide a unique opportunity to address the pattern of evolutionary divergence in the three lineages of plantae.

the complex distribution pattern of chlamydial proteins in the plastid-containing eukaryotes in combination with the detailed phylogenetic analyses , suggest that chlamydial proteins were differentially lost from individual lineages of plantae. of the  <dig> chlamydial proteins recovered from viridiplantae only, in seven cases chlamydial homologues were absent from rhodoplantae suggesting that these were lost in the rhodoplantae after their divergence from the viridiplantae. for two of these proteins , the chlamydial homologues were also absent and thus presumably lost in the chlorophyte sublineage of the viridiplantae, perhaps indicating that these proteins perform specific functions confined to the streptophyte sublineage of the viridiplantae. it should be noted that taxon sampling in the rhodoplantae was mostly limited to cyanidioschyzon merolae and galdieria sulphuraria, two members of a specialized group of thermophilic red algae with extremely small genomes . it is thus possible, although not perhaps likely, that the absence of these chlamydial proteins may be confined to this sublineage of the rhodoplantae and that more "typical" rhodoplantae will be shown to contain them. for the other  <dig> chlamydial proteins confined to the viridiplantae, the rhodoplantae contain a cyanobacterial homologue . this can be interpreted in different ways. it may be argued that this is indicative of a separate origin of chlamydial proteins in the viridiplantae . alternatively, it indicates that both the cyanobacterial and the chlamydial homologues were present in the ancestor of the plantae and persisted until after the divergence of rhodoplantae and viridiplantae, when they were differentially lost ). in case of the phosphate transporter , it is likely that the cyanobacterial homologue was lost only from the streptophyte sublineage of the viridiplantae as the chlorophyte sublineage contains a cyanobacterial homologue . it is important to stress that in no case cyanobacterial and chlamydial homologues of the same protein have been found in a single taxon of plantae  suggesting that their functions  are redundant and their occurrence thus mutually exclusive. although several different scenarios may explain the simultaneous presence of cyanobacterial and chlamydial homologues of a larger number of proteins throughout the early history of the plantae, the most intriquing is certainly the simultaneous presence of two different intracellular bacteria throughout the early history of the plantae, i.e. cyanobacteria and chlamydiae .

origin of chlamydial proteins in the bacillariophyta: a hidden secondary endosymbiosis
for  <dig> chlamydial proteins putative homologues were identified in the two sequenced genomes of the bacillariophyta . two of these chlamydial proteins apparently occur exclusively in the bacillariophyta and not in the plantae  which instead contain cyanobacterial homologues of these proteins . since it is well established that the bacillariophyta  obtained their plastids through a secondary endosymbiosis involving a rhodoplant symbiont , either the rhodoplant symbiont of the heterokonts still contained both homologues  or, at least in the case of transketolase  more likely, the chlamydial protein was independently acquired by hgt in the bacillariophyta. the latter scenario is favored for transketolase because dictyostelium is a sister to the two bacillariophyta, and all three lineages of plantae lack the chlamydial homologue.

for the remaining  <dig> chlamydial proteins, the bacillariophyta formed a sister group with either the rhodoplantae  or the viridiplantae . both topologies received similar support values, however, bs values were sometimes low. the four chlamydial proteins that were detected in all lineages of the plantae, revealed exclusively an rb clade with variable bs support . of the  <dig> chlamydial proteins that occurred in both rhodoplantae and viridiplantae,  <dig> were also present in the bacillariophyta . of those  <dig> proteins, one protein  revealed a strongly supported rb clade , four proteins a vb clade , and the remaining  <dig> proteins exhibited either one or the other topology, but without bs support . of the  <dig> chlamydial proteins that were found only in the viridiplantae, four were also detected in the bacillariophyta , for two of which the bacillariophyta formed a clade with the viridiplantae  or a sister group with the streptophyte sublineage of the viridiplantae , for one protein, the vb topology was unsupported  and for the remaining protein, the bacillariophyta were sister to the apicomplexa . all three chlamydial proteins that were detected only in the rhodoplantae , also displayed homologues in the bacillariophyta: for two proteins, a well-supported rb clade was recovered , for the third protein, the rhodoplantae and bacillariophyta formed a clade that also included p. amoebophila with 100% bs support . it should be noted that in two of the chlamydial proteins revealing a well-supported rb clade , the rb clade contained, in addition to the two cyanidiophyta, also members of the rhodophyta .

to study the phylogeny of the chlamydial proteins from the bacillariophyta in more detail, unrooted maximum likelihood phylogenetic analyses of concatenated data sets were performed . in the first analysis ,  <dig> chlamydial proteins that individually had revealed an rb topology  were concatenated and subjected to phylogenetic analysis using  <dig> taxa . the taxa were selected to maximize taxon congruence with the second data set of proteins displaying a vb topology , i.e. two bacillariophyta, the chlorophyte and streptophyte sublineages of the viridiplantae , the rhodoplantae  and, if possible,  <dig> sequences of chlamydiae were included. the rb clade was recovered with 95% bs values  and  <dig>  posterior probability in the bayesian analysis . in a second analysis ,  <dig> chlamydial proteins that had individually revealed a vb topology  were concatenated and subjected to phylogenetic analyses using the same  <dig> taxa as in the concatenated analysis of the proteins with an rb topology . in this analysis, the vb topology was strongly supported . although in the individual analyses of the  <dig> chlamydial proteins, the position of the bacillariophyta with respect to the sublineages of the viridiplantae was not resolved and bs values for  <dig> of the  <dig> proteins were below 50% , the concatenated data set clearly indicated that the  <dig> chlamydial proteins of the bacillariophyta were sister to the respective proteins of the viridiplantae, i.e. they diverged before the split of the viridiplantae into its chlorophyte and streptophyte sublineages .

from these data the following tentative conclusions are drawn:  the bacillariophyta obtained chlamydial genes from two sources of photosynthetic eukaryotes, the rhodoplantae and the viridiplantae,  it is very likely that the chlamydial proteins forming rb clades were obtained during the secondary endosymbiosis of a rhodoplant symbiont into a heterokont  host,  there is preliminary evidence that the endosymbiosis of the rhodoplant occurred before the rhodoplantae diverged into cyanidiophyta and rhodophyta ,  chlamydial proteins of the bacillariophyta forming vb clades were obtained by hgt or egt from a viridiplant alga before the viridiplantae diverged into streptophyta and chlorophyta,  since the number of chlamydial proteins forming vb clades in the bacillariophyta found so far is roughly equivalent to the number of chlamydial proteins forming rb clades, it is suspected that egt rather than hgt was the source of the viridiplant genes, the endosymbiont  being no longer present in extant heterokonts ,  it cannot currently be decided which of the two secondary endosymbioses preceded the other. if the above conclusions are valid, the two secondary endosymbioses may have taken place during the same time period. two chlamydial proteins involved in essential plastidic pathways  occur in the bacillariophyta and viridiplantae, but not in the rhodoplantae , which harbor the cyanobacterial homologues . for ispg, two glaucoplantae also contain the cyanobacterial homologue. if the rhodoplant symbiont of the bacillariophyta also contained the cyanobacterial homologues , the latter must have been replaced in the bacillariophyta by the chlamydial homologue from the viridiplant symbiont, requiring the simultaneous presence of both eukaryotic symbionts in the host.

discussion
chlamydiae are a group of obligate intracellular bacteria that are well-known pathogens of animals and humans and have been studied for decades  <cit> . more recently, a large diversity of previously unrecognized chlamydiae was discovered in the environment , where they have been found in intracellular associations with diverse eukaryotic hosts ranging from amoebae to invertebrates. phylogenetic and phylogenomic analyses of chlamydiae indicated that "environmental chlamydiae" represent a sister group of present-day chlamydiae pathogenic in animals, that separated from their common ancestor more than  <dig> million years ago  <cit> , suggesting that the ancestor already lived intracellularly in eukaryotes. recently, the verrucomicrobia, which have been estimated to comprise up to 10% of the soil bacterial flora and have also been found in aquatic systems including lakes, marine sediments and hot springs but also live associated with eukaryotes, were identified as the closest known free-living relatives of chlamydiae  <cit> .

while chlamydiae are obligate intracellular pathogens/symbionts in many eukaryotes, they have not been discovered to date in plantae or secondary plastid-containing eukaryotes. however, when the first chlamydial genomes were sequenced, a surprisingly high proportion of genes with highest similarity to plant genes were discovered  <cit> . this finding, in conjunction with the obligate intracellular lifestyle of chlamydiae, sparked a number of studies that aimed to elucidate the phylogenetic history of the plant-like chlamydial genes. the conclusions ranged from proposals that the chlamydial proteins in plants simply reflected an ancient phylogenetic relationship between chlamydiae and cyanobacteria   <cit>  to an hgt between chlamydiae and plants with either the chlamydiae  <cit>  or plants  <cit>  proposed as donors.

while the present work was in progress, huang and gogarten  <cit>  published data, based on phylogenomic analyses of the rhodoplant cyanidioschyzon merolae to identify chlamydial homologues, which suggested that at least  <dig> genes were transferred between chlamydiae and the ancestor of rhodoplantae and viridiplantae. they concluded that the donor was most similar to present-day protochlamydia and that the relatively high number of genes transferred suggested an ancient chlamydial endosymbiosis with the ancestral primary photosynthetic eukaryote. these authors also hypothesized that the chlamydial endosymbiont was perhaps necessary to facilitate the establishment of the cyanobacterial endosymbiont, explaining the apparent uniqueness of primary plastid evolution and providing independent evidence for the monophyly of eukaryotes harboring primary plastids. the results and conclusions by  <cit>  are corroborated by the present analyses . using an extended phylogenomic analyses that included three chlorophyte , a second rhodoplant , and two diatom genomes , and sequences retrieved from est databases , as well as model-specified phylogenetic analyses of all proteins recovered, the number of chlamydial proteins now identified in photosynthetic eukaryotes has doubled , which is still likely an underestimate. this is corroborated by a recent study that provided a list of  <dig> genes in plantae of putative chlamydial origin  <cit> , including  <dig> of the  <dig> proteins of likely chlamydial origin described in this study. different data mining strategies including different e-value cut offs in the initial blast analyses, different phylogenetic methods used and the overall more conservative approach taken in this study may account for the observed different numbers of genes reported.

most significantly, five chlamydial proteins  are now represented in the three lineages of plantae and their phylogenetic analyses all revealed monophyly of the plantae as well as their sister group relationship to chlamydiae. although p. amoebophila was often recovered as a sister to the plantae, in such topologies other chlamydiae were either absent  or the chlamydiae were paraphyletic, the latter likely an artifact of long-branch attraction . it is concluded that the donor of presumably all  of the chlamydial genes found today in plastid-containing eukaryotes was related to the common ancestor of p. amoebophila and other chlamydiae, and thus that the hgt/egt of chlamydial genes into plastid-containing eukaryotes was an ancient event that occurred more than  <dig> mya, the estimated time since divergence of p.amoebophila from other chlamydiae  <cit> . evidence has also been presented  that the acceptor of this hgt/egt event was related to the ancestor of the plantae, i.e. that hgt/egt of chlamydial genes occurred before the divergence of the glaucoplantae, rhodoplantae and viridiplantae.

the simultaneous presence of cyanobacterial and chlamydial homologues of a larger number of proteins throughout the early history of the plantae can, in principle, be explained by four alternative scenarios :  the first scenario  can be rejected , because it is in conflict with the presence of chlamydial genes of the same origin in the common ancestor of the plantae .  the second scenario  assumes that chlamydial genes were transferred from a chlamydial donor by a massive single or by multiple hgts into the cyanobacterial ancestor of plastids before primary endosymbiosis, followed by multiple losses of chlamydial genes in the different lineages of photosynthetic eukaryotes. this scenario fails to explain the complete absence of chlamydial genes in any extant cyanobacterium  and cannot provide a rationale for retention of two functional homologues  of a protein over extended periods of time in the cyanobacterial symbiont . although hgt among prokaryotes is rampant  it is difficult to envision what kind of adaptive advantage would be gained in a free-living cyanobacterium upon acquisition of, e.g., the atp/adp translocase  <cit> .  in the third and fourth scenario , hgt or egt of chlamydial genes occurred during the same time period as egt of the cyanobacterium into a eukaryotic host. either there was massive bulk transfer of genes from an intracellular chlamydial bacterium to the host or cyanobacterial endosymbiont with subsequent differential loss of these genes in the different lineages of plantae  or the chlamydial bacterium persisted as an intracellular symbiont/parasite over extended but varying periods of time in the three lineages of plantae  and different chlamydial proteins were successively recruited by the eukaryotic hosts. the latter scenario is favored because the simultaneous presence of chlamydial and cyanobacterial homologues of enzymes with the same function over an extended period of time presumably requires compartmentalization, i. e. residence in their original environment, the respective symbionts. whether gene transfer occurred first from the intracellular chlamydial bacterium to the host nucleus with later retargeting of the protein to the cyanobacterium , as hypothesized by  <cit>  or directly between the two types of intracellular bacteria , with gene transfer from the plastid to the host nucleus occurring later  or perhaps using both routes, remains unknown and possibly depended on the exact timing of the two endosymbioses and the intracellular location of the symbionts relative to each other.

a co-existence of a chlamydial bacterium and the evolving plastid in the eukaryotic host over an extended time period may seem unlikely; however, multiple intracellular bacteria occur in extant protists, and recently, heinz et al.  <cit>  provided evidence for the beneficial association of two intracellular bacteria  in a free living acanthamoeba. there is also evidence for mobile dna in intracellular bacteria of eukaryotic hosts  <cit>  and the recent discoveries of conjugation machineries in intracellular rickettsiae and chlamydiae have been particularly enlightening  <cit> . based on phylogenetic and bioinformatic analyses, ogata et al.  <cit>  concluded that genes involved in conjugative dna transfer have been exchanged by hgt between the ancestors of rickettsiae and environmental chlamydiae in a eukaryotic host, likely an amoeba. this may have been the same hgt event that resulted in the transfer of atp/adp translocase , the hallmark enzyme of the intracellular atp-parasitism of rickettsiae and chlamydiae, from the ancestor of chlamydiae to the ancestor of rickettsiae  <cit> . although it has recently been suggested that the plastid paralogue  of the atp/adp translocase might have been derived from the mitochondrial ancestor , this is unlikely because almost all of the  <dig> chlamydial proteins identified to date in plastid-containing eukaryotes presumably originated in an intracellular chlamydial symbiont/parasite residing in the plantae , while the origin of mitochondria occurred much earlier .

this study also offered the first opportunity to trace the spread of chlamydial proteins through secondary plastid endosymbioses using phylogenomic information from the two diatoms thalassiosira pseudonana and phaeodactylum tricornutum. phylogenetic analyses of the  <dig> chlamydial proteins recovered from the diatom proteomes led to the conclusion that chlamydial proteins originated by two separate secondary endosymbiotic events, one involving a viridiplant and a second involving a rhodoplant symbiont, only the latter surviving in extant photosynthetic heterokonts. it is also concluded that both secondary endosymbioses were ancient, presumably occurring before the major radiations in both lineages of plantae took place .

analysis of the genome of thalassiosira pseudonana gave the first indication that the diatom proteome contained a surprisingly large number of proteins that matched only to viridiplantae , more than four times as many as to the rhodoplant cyanidioschyzon merolae  <cit> . even when one considers that the a. thaliana proteome is more than four times larger than the c. merolae proteome, there would still be about equal numbers of diatom proteins matching either to viridiplantae or rhodoplantae. the numerical ratio of diatom proteins with similarity to either viridiplantae or rhodoplantae was even more biased towards viridiplantae, when animals  were replaced by the cyanobacterium nostoc sp. pcc  <dig>  in proteome comparisons, perhaps suggesting that the contribution of viridiplant proteins to the diatom proteome extends well beyond the plastid proteome. these results were corroborated in a comparative proteome approach using more than  <dig>  non-redundant est sequences from the pennate diatom p. tricornutum  <cit> . the genomes of the early diverging heterokonts phytophthora sojae and p. ramosum displayed a large number of genes  supporting a photosynthetic ancestry of these presumably aplastidial protists, and again a significant portion of these genes revealed best matches to viridiplantae  <cit> .

although the origin of the heterokont plastid from a red alga has been established beyond doubt using phylogenetic and phylogenomic approaches  <cit> , phylogenomic analyses of the "green" proteins in heterokonts/chromalveolates have only recently been initiated  <cit> . li et al.  <cit>  used  <dig>  expressed sequence tags of the haptophyte emiliania huxleyi and a phylogenomic approach including genome and est data from other algae, animals, plants and bacteria to identify the source of endosymbiotic gene transfer for  <dig> non-paralogous proteins using maximum-likelihood phylogenetic analyses:  <dig> genes were of the expected red algal origin, whereas for two genes  viridiplantae were the sister group of the heterokonts/chromalveolates to the exclusion of the rhodoplantae. similar results regarding the phylogeny of prk were obtained by petersen et al.  <cit> . whereas petersen et al.  <cit>  suggested that prk in heterokonts/chromalveolates originated by a single non-endosymbiotic hgt from a green alga to a rhodoplast-containing protist, li et al.  <cit> , referring to the earlier controversial discussion about a putative green algal ancestry of the apicoplast-encoded elongation factor tufa  <cit>  and the apicomplexan mitochondrial-targeted cox2a and cox2b subunits  <cit> , raised the possibility that "green" proteins in heterokonts/chromalveolates may have originated by egt from a green alga that was endosymbiotic in a heterokont/chromalveolate. from their data, li et al.  <cit>  concluded that the red algal contribution, however, was at least an order of magnitude larger than that of green algae. in a related study, nosenko et al.  <cit>  identified  <dig> different plastid-targeted proteins from two est-libraries of the tertiary plastid-containing dinoflagellate karenia brevis. of  <dig> proteins whose evolutionary origins could be resolved,  <dig> were of rhodoplant, while  <dig> were of viridiplant origin. these authors suggested that a major influx of viridiplant genes occurred early in the evolution of heterokonts/chromalveolates, and since all "foreign" genes acquired by chromalveolates before their divergence into heterokonts/alveolates were derived from a single donor , one possible explanation would be the presence of a green algal endosymbiont in the chromalveolate ancestor prior to the rhodoplant endosymbiosis  <cit> . the phylogenetic trees derived to date from most of the "green" proteins in chromalveolates  suggest that egt occurred before the divergence of chlorophyta and streptophyta, in accordance with the results presented in this study. in conclusion, heterokonts/chromalveolates seem to have obtained chlamydial proteins from two sources, both signaling ancient secondary endosymbiotic events involving symbionts from two of the three lineages of plantae. an ancient "shopping for plastidial eukaryotes"  <cit>  in the heterotrophic ancestor of the heterokonts/chromalveolates could explain the origin of the metabolic versatility that may have subsequently contributed to the ecological success of this group of organisms irrespective of whether photosynthesis was retained or not  <cit> . as in the case of the primary acquisition of chlamydial proteins by the ancestor of the plantae , it is suggested that in the heterokont/chromalveolate ancestor, genes were also transferred from the old to the new "shopping bag", or to phrase it differently, "you are what you shop".

CONCLUSIONS
we identified  <dig> proteins of chlamydial origin in photosynthetic eukaryotes. most likely chlamydiae invaded the ancestor of the plantae and intracellular chlamydiae persisted throughout the early history of the plantae, donating genes either directly or via the cyanobacterial endosymbiont/plastid to their hosts before they eventually vanished. the transferred genes replaced their cyanobacterial/plastid homologs thus shaping early algal/plant evolution. chlamydial proteins spread through secondary endosymbioses to other photoautotrophic eukaryotes. heterokonts/chromalveolates seem to have obtained chlamydial proteins from two secondary endosymbiotic events involving symbionts from the rhodoplant and viridiplant lineages.

