BACKGROUND
masticatory ability has been reported as one of the predictive factors of general health, including cognitive function  <cit> . impaired masticatory function due to tooth loss causes dietary deficiencies among older adults , and the consequent malnutrition status increases the risk of developing cognitive impairment  <cit> . experimental results in young adult rodents also demonstrate that permanent loss of functional teeth for months impairs digestive and absorptive function by altering the maxillomandibular relationship  <cit>  and by reducing secretion of saliva and gastric acid  <cit> , even though having teeth extracted does not reduce food consumption  <cit> . however, the relationship between impaired masticatory function and cognitive deficit for younger individuals remains unclear.

recently, we showed that sustained interference of masticatory function for  <dig> days significantly decreased long-term potentiation  in hippocampal ca <dig> neurons in young adult rats  <cit> . interestingly, these rats also showed increased plasma concentrations of corticosterone and noradrenaline, suggesting that sustained impairment of masticatory function may induce a chronic psychological stress. a recent pet study demonstrated that paralyzing the temporal muscle, a masticatory muscle, for several days results in significant hyperactivation of the hippocampus of young adult rats in a resting state, indicating an increased stress response to uncontrollable mastication  <cit> . although our previous study  <cit>  reported that a temporal reduction of masticatory function  did not alter the cognitive function of young adult subjects, the above evidence raises a hypothesis that long-term interference of masticatory function from a young age causes a complex combination of physical and psychological stress, which may synergistically induce cognitive impairment along with the malnutrition status.

the present study examined the hypothesis that permanent loss of teeth at a younger age affects cognitive function along with growth. we employed the senescence-accelerated mouse prone  <dig>  as a rodent model for age-related cognitive deficits. samp <dig> mice have a median life span of  <dig> months and begin to show deficits in learning and memory at  <dig> months after birth  <cit> . all upper molar teeth of half of the mice were extracted at  <dig> weeks of age. at  <dig> and  <dig> weeks of age, we performed the object-recognition test  and the open-field test  to characterize how long-term reduced mastication modifies the hippocampal-dependent cognitive function of novel object recognition and the general behavior of these mice, respectively. we also conducted follow-up examinations of their body weight through the experimental period to determine whether permanent loss of molar teeth at younger stage of life affects physical growth.

RESULTS
loss of teeth decreases body weight
mean body weight was comparable between the two groups on the day of surgery. the body weight of molar-intact mice increased continuously after the sham operation . on the other hand, the body weight of molarless mice was decreased at  <dig> week after the extraction, and gradually increased afterwards. molarless mice showed a significantly smaller mean body weight compared to molar-intact mice over the entire experimental period after the operation.

loss of teeth increases locomotor activity without changing the number of entrances to subdivisions of the field
a statistical comparison of total path length in molarless and molar-intact mice in the oft showed no interaction between age and group, but there were significant main effects of age  =  <dig> , p =  <dig> ) and group  =  <dig> , p =  <dig> ; table 1). further, multiple comparisons showed a significantly increased total path length in molarless mice at  <dig> weeks of age compared to those in molar-intact mice . at  <dig> weeks of age, the total path length was still larger in molarless mice than in molar-intact mice, although the difference did not reach statistical significance . both molar-intact and molarless mice showed age-related reduction of total path length . no significant differences of the number of entrances to subdivisions between groups both at  <dig> and  <dig> weeks old were observed.

data are presented as means ± sem. asterisks indicate statistically significant differences between groups of the same age . daggers indicate statistically significant differences between ages in the same group .

loss of teeth causes early impairment of the ability to recognize objects
table  <dig> shows the search time for each object in the encoding and recall sessions of the ort. at  <dig> weeks of age, molar-intact mice showed significantly prolonged search time for a novel object than for a familiar object in the retrieval session. however, search time for a novel object of molarless mice was not significantly different from that of a familiar object in the retrieval session. at  <dig> weeks of age, mice in both groups showed comparable search time for novel and familiar objects. this was expected since samp <dig> mice decline in learning and memory ability from  <dig> months of age  <cit> . interestingly, molarless mice showed an uneven search time for two identical objects in the encoding session. they spent significantly more time with the object placed on the right than with that on the left at both  <dig> and  <dig> weeks old .

in the encoding session in which two identical objects were presented, time spent with object placed on the left and on the right  are shown. in the retrieval session, time spent with the familiar object and the novel object are shown regardless of its location. data are presented as means ± sem. asterisks indicate a statistically significant prolonged search time compared to its counterparts .

loss of teeth develops lateralized behavior
during the encoding session of the ort, at which two identical objects were placed in the field, molarless mice did not spend an equal amount of time exploring the two objects, but they spent more time exploring one of the two objects. in contrast, molar-intact mice spent the same amount of time exploring each of the two objects under similar circumstances. since the mouse was always placed between the two objects at the beginning of the session , the preference in object location may originate from a turning-direction preference related to rotational behavior. therefore, we examined the turning-direction preferences during exploration and its relationship to preference for object location. the directional preferences of rotation and object location were significantly and positively correlated for molarless mice , but not for molar-intact mice at  <dig> weeks of age . these results indicate that molarless mice, which prefer to turn toward the right, explored the two objects unequally in the encoding session, spending more time with an object placed on the right side. even though the correlation was significant for neither molarless mice  nor molar-intact mice  at  <dig> weeks of age, the correlation coefficient tended to increase with age for molarless mice , but not for molar-intact mice .

discussion
the key finding of the present study is that sustained loss of masticatory stimulation since an early age not only accelerated the aging process of hippocampal-dependent cognitive function, but also developed abnormal behavior of locomotor hyperactivation and lateralized behavior at their advanced age. previous studies using the same strain of mice revealed that  <dig> to  <dig> days of reduced mastication, caused either by extraction or reduction of molar teeth, impairs spatial learning ability in aged subjects  with morphological and functional deterioration of hippocampal neurons  <cit> , although the same duration of reduced mastication in young subjects  did not affect their cognitive function  <cit> . our results further demonstrated that, even in younger subjects, the sustained reduction of masticatory stimulation for more than two weeks impairs hippocampal-dependent cognitive function in this strain.

permanent loss of teeth causes loss of somatosensory stimuli from the oral cavity, as well as malnutrition, both of which induce sustained increase of circulating corticosterone concentration  <cit> . our result in the ort demonstrated that loss of molar teeth for a long period of time may be a chronic stress that accelerates age-related cognitive impairment. the sustained hyperactivation of the hippocampal neurons via activation of stress-induced glucocorticoid receptors  causes the functional and morphological decline of these neurons  <cit> . attenuated neuronal responsiveness to new stimuli in the hippocampus impairs the spatial-learning ability, possibly interfering with the induction of ltp in hippocampal neurons  <cit> . tsutsui et al.  <cit>  reported that the sustained reduction of masticatory stimulation induced loss of pyramidal cells in the hippocampal ca <dig> and ca <dig> regions. as ca <dig> and ca <dig> regions are critical to recognizing familiar item or familiar spatial information  <cit>  and to detecting a novel visual object in a spatial-temporal context  <cit> , respectively, permanent loss of teeth may impair hippocampal cognitive functions of both spatial and episodic memory.

attenuated hippocampal function may further cause over-secretion of corticosteroids as the hippocampus is a target brain region of corticosterone regulating its negative-feedback system  <cit> . nyakas et al.  <cit>  reported that activation of gr is essential for the expression of exploratory activity in a novel environment, and that animals with partial lesions in their hippocampi engage in enhanced exploratory activity with increased uptake of glucocorticoids in the remaining neurons in the hippocampus. the locomotor hyperactivation observed in molarless mice in the oft suggests that chronic stress impairs the function of hippocampal neurons, resulting in hyperactivation of grs.

chronic stress derived from reduced mastication has also been reported to enhance oxidative stress  <cit>  and reduce the response of the dopamine  neurons in the hippocampus, impairing the learning ability in the step-through passive avoidance test  <cit> . the da projection from the midbrain dopamine cells of the ventral tegmental area  to the hippocampal neurons mainly regulates the late phase of ltp, which is essential for the settlement of long-term memory  <cit> . although we did not measure the hippocampal ltp in this study, accumulating results suggest that the chronic stress caused by reduced mastication has at least two possible neuronal pathways to impair the hippocampal-dependent learning ability:  increased corticosterone directly interferes with the induction of hippocampal ltp, and  reduced da responsiveness in the hippocampus prevents the settlement of the ltp.

lateralized behavior of molarless mice observed in the ort also suggests the possible involvement of an attenuated da system in the hippocampus. the prefrontal cortex  is another projection site of da neurons from the vta, and chronic stress causes a hypodopaminergic state in the pfc  <cit> , as well as in the hippocampus  <cit>  with an impaired spatial working memory  <cit> . interestingly, exposure to an uncontrollable stressor causes a lateralized alteration of da consumption in the pfc  <cit> , which closely relates to lateralized rotational preferences  <cit> . the age-dependent development of the lateralized preference of rotational behavior in molarless mice may indicate the selective and progressive reduction of neuronal transmission of the da system.

another possible hypothesis supporting the attenuated da system in the molarless mice is iron deprivation caused by extraction-induced reduction of gastric acid secretion  <cit> . the iron is a key element in da synthesis, and da deficit in the brain is generally recognized as a pivotal for hyperactivity and pathologic lateralization of cognitive functioning that are commonly observed in attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder   <cit> . in fact, an excessive spontaneous motor activity and a deficit in selective attention are key signatures of the rodent model of adhd  <cit> , which corresponds to the behavior of molarless mice at  <dig> weeks of age.

a limitation of this study is that it is difficult to separate the influence of malnutrition from psychological stress on the development of cognitive and behavioral deficit in the molarless mice. considering that either food deprivation with intact masticatory function or molar extraction with powder-diet feeding causes impairment of the hippocampus-dependent memory function, as well as attenuation of the da system  <cit> , these two factors might have an additive effect. further examination of the serum ferritin levels or administration of da agonist/antagonist in the current rodent model is needed to elucidate the effect of masticatory function on the systemic development in detail. uneven dimensions of subdivisions defined in the oft might dismiss the preference for peripheral and/or intermediate areas, although it would not affect the interpretation of the result of comparable number of entrances to the subdivisions between molarless and control groups.

CONCLUSIONS
sustained reduction of masticatory stimulation impaired hippocampal-dependent learning ability even in young animals, which was associated with increased locomotor activity in exploring a novel environment and imbalanced rotational preference during exploring behavior. these results suggest that reduced mastication at an early stage of life may be a chronic stress that accelerates the aging process of the hippocampus.

