BACKGROUND
the lymphatic vasculature functions as a tissue drainage system and an immunological control system by collecting extravasated fluid, macromolecules and leukocytes from tissues. the lymphatic system is involved in numerous pathologies such as cancer, lymphedema, inflammation and graft rejection  <cit> . it is also implicated in the dissemination of tumor cells to regional lymph nodes which results in poor prognoses of patients with cancers  <cit> . reflecting its specialized functions, the lymphatic vasculature displays a distinctive structure. in sharp contrast to blood vessels, the basement membrane of lymphatic vessels is discontinuous or absent. lymphatic endothelial cells  display tight junctions and interdigitations, and are connected to the surrounding collagen fibers by anchoring filaments  <cit> . the discovery of specific markers for lecs enabled technical progress in lymphatic vascular biology and greatly promoted lymphatic research  <cit> .

although mechanisms leading to new blood vessel formation during physiological and pathological processes are well documented, how migrating lec organized into new lymphatic vessels has long been a mystery. the prevailing view of their origin from the venous system during embryogenesis is supported by studies performed in mouse and zebrafish  <cit> . lec could also derive from mesenchymal progenitor cells or lymphangioblasts identified in amphibian and birds through a process referred as lymphvasculogenesis  <cit> . there is an emerging body of work concentrated on attempts to elucidate how to create tubes and generate a complex functional vascular tree  <cit> . tube morphogenesis is an important morphogenetic process observed during various developmental and pathological events. regarding epithelial cells, five putative mechanisms have been proposed for tube formation and include:  the wrapping of a cell sheet to form a tube;  the budding of cells from a pre-existing tube;  the cavitation during which the central cells of a solid spheroidal or cylindral mass of cells are eliminated to create a tube;  cord hollowing generating a lumen between aggregated cells or  cell hollowing creating intracellular luminal spaces inside a single cell, spanning the length of the cell  <cit> . progress in understanding the processes of lumen formation  has benefited from elegant studies in the zebrafish system  <cit>  and in vitro models of tubulogenesis  <cit>  and of sprouting angiogenesis in 3d extracellular matrix  environments  <cit> . for blood vessel formation, it is now widely accepted that blood endothelial cells  at the tip of the bud  invade the matrix and create a space that can be occupied by a cord of cells without apparent lumen. behind the tip cell, the so-called "stalk cells" composing the stalk of the sprouting capillary are proliferating and contribute to stalk elongation, as well as to basement membrane deposition  <cit> . bec organization along the matrix space generated by migrating cells initiates an extracellular luminal area resulting in the transformation of cord into a tube  <cit> . cell hollowing or intracellular vacuolization is an additional mechanism by which individual cells generate vesicles that can interconnect with adjacent cells leading to lumen size increase. in sharp contrast to those major advances made in the field of angiogenesis, little information is available on how lec migrate and organize into lymphatic vessels during lymphangiogenesis. although lymphatic vessels are enclosed in a matrix structure mainly composed of collagens, the extent of ecm remodeling in lymphangiogenesis is unclear. a major challenge is the difficulty of establishing appropriate in vivo models and culture systems to enable the dissection of this complex biological process. recently, several in vivo and in vitro models of lymphangiogenesis have been developed and are useful for exploring the cellular and molecular mechanisms of lymphangiogenesis  <cit> .

in the present study, ultrastructural features of neoformed lymphatic vessels have been investigated in two in vivo models and one in vitro 3d culture system:  the corneal lymphangiogenic assay induced by thermal cauterization of the mouse cornea  <cit> ;  the lymphangioma model consisting in lymphatic cell hyperplasia induced by intra-peritoneal injection of incomplete freund's adjuvant  <cit>  and  the lymphatic ring assay which bridges the gap between in vitro and in vivo systems  <cit> . we provide innovative morphological data, at the ultrastructural level, demonstrating the pronounced ecm remodeling and intracellular vacuolization during the migration, alignment and organization of channels of sprouting lymphatic cells in vivo. through transmission electron microscopy , we show that collagen degradation takes place as an important step for vessel neoformation during lymphangiogenesis.

RESULTS
induction of lymphangiogenesis in vivo
to investigate the mechanism leading to lymphatic vessel neoformation, we used three distinct models of lymphangiogenesis in a collagen rich environment. the mouse model of thermal cauterization-induced corneal lymphangiogenesis mimicks lymphangiogenesis occurring upon inflammatory conditions such as keratitis , chemical burns and graft rejection  <cit> . although the cornea is an avascular tissue, upon inflammatory "insult" such as thermal cauterization, lyve- <dig> positive lymphatic vessels arose perpendicularly from the limbal vascular arcade . upon confocal microscopy, lec at the end of branching vessels displayed numerous filopodia-like extensions reflecting their migrative feature . in the second in vivo model used, lec hyperplasia was induced by intra-peritoneal incomplete freund's adjuvant injection. white masses of lymphangioma appearing at the surface of the diaphragm were collected one month after the first injection . lymphatic vessels were visible upon hematoxylin-eosin staining  and were lyve- <dig> positive . various levels of cell fusion are observable leading to the progressive increase of vessel-like lumen size.

ultrastructural features of lymphangiogenesis in vivo
we first examined by tem the normal cornea that is composed of a multi-layered cellular epithelium and a connective tissue stroma which makes up the bulk of the cornea . basal epithelial cells were apposed on a regular basement membrane . the stroma was formed by several lamellas of parallel collagenous bundles which crossed at an angle to each others. the collagen fibrils within each lamella were parallel to each other and ran the full length of the cornea. stromal fibroblasts appeared as elongated flattened cells interspaced with collagen in the cornea. these cells were characterized by a very thin cytoplasm devoid of vacuoles . as expected, the normal cornea was devoid of any blood or lymphatic vessels. after thermal cauterization, inflammatory cells such as neutrophils were observed in a remodeled collagen matrix . sprouting blood and lymphatic endothelial cells were morphologically identified in accordance with previous reports  <cit> . neo-formed blood vessels often contained white or red blood cells and were characterized by the presence of a continuous basement membrane that frequently surrounded a pericyte . in contrast to blood vessels, lymphatic vessels displayed an irregular and narrow lumen . lec of neo-formed lymphatic capillaries were joined by interdigitations and were distinguishable by their intimate association with collagen fibrils through anchoring filaments and the absence of a continuous basement membrane .

during the process of lymphatic vessel formation, migrating lec extended long processes  and aligned to organize into cord-like structures . they progressively interconnected by interdigitations  and adhered to the collagen matrix through anchoring filaments . the presence of mitotic figures reflects the proliferating feature of these lec forming neo-vessels . gaps were often observed between neighboring cells. extracellular spaces formed also thin tubular structures incompletely lined with elongated cells . the continuity of the endothelial lining was provided by the cytoplasmic processes of lec that formed interdigitating, overlapping and end-to-end junctions, finally delimitating a lumen and forming a so-called prelymphatic vessel . during these events, noticeable signs of ecm remodeling and intracellular collagen degradation were detected, including the presence of a large amount of lysosomes . the tem analysis of lymphangioma largely confirmed the observations made on the cornea and provided evidence for the establishment of intercellular spaces leading to tubular structures . lec alignment into cords with a thin and irregular lumen was also noticed . reminiscent matrix fragments resulting from matrix degradation were again detected in interendothelial gaps and in the lumen of neo-formed vessels .

migrating cells displayed numerous intracellular vacuoles of variable size, including in their cytoplasmic extension . the intracellular vacuoles fused to form a large intracellular luminal cavity . in addition, the establishment of intercellular spaces between lec cords or lec processes and the connection to and fusion with each other led to lumen formation . similar observations were made in both in vivo models.

the lymphatic ring assay reproduces in vitro the lymphangiogenic process
to validate the in vivo observations, we then used the lymphatic ring assay which bridges the gap between in vivo and in vitro systems and recapitulates, in a collagen environment, the different steps of cell sprouting from a pre-existing lymphatic vessel  <cit> . in these 3d lymphatic ring cultures , lyve- <dig> positive endothelial sprouts  first appeared after  <dig> days of culture under a 5% o <dig> atmosphere and reached a maximal outgrowth after  <dig> days. the observations upon confocal microscopy revealed that neovessel tips were made of migrating cells which extended filopodia-like processes probing the surrounding matrix . recent findings in the field of angiogenesis led to the identification of specialized endothelial cells including the tip cells that are non proliferating cells probing the environment at the extremities of endothelial bud; and stalk cells that proliferate and elongate the stalk of the sprout. we thus explored the proliferation rate of migrating cells in sprouting capillaries through brdu incorporation. both migrating cells at the tip of sprouting capillaries and cells inside the extending sprout incorporated brdu . the percentage of proliferating cells was  <dig> ± 14% at the extremities and  <dig> ± 5% inside the forming buds. the proliferative feature of lec at the tips of extending sprouts was confirmed in vivo in the corneal assay .

as the outgrowth expanded, vessels developed a visible lumen as previously reported  <cit> . the electron microscopic findings supported the data generated in vivo. indeed, the sprouting lec showed again intracellular vesicles in their cytoplasm, as well as in the numerous processes that they extended . degradation products of collagen were also visible in intracellular vesicles, in intercellular spaces of tubular structures and in extracellular spaces delimitated by pseudopode-like extensions of migrating cells . the putative implication of proteases of the matrix metalloprotease  family was assessed in this model, by using synthetic mmp inhibitor . lymphatic vessel outgrowth was inhibited in a dose-dependent manner by the broad-spectrum inhibitor gm <dig> .

discussion
recent studies on lymphatic vessel formation have mainly focused their interest on organism development. on the contrary, much less is known about the process of lymphangiogenesis occurring in pathological conditions. this study sought to define the ultrastructural features of neo-formed lymphatic vessels and exploited the attributes of two established models of inflammation accompanied by a robust lymphangiogenesis  <cit> , and the advantage of the recently set up model of lymphatic ring assay which recapitulates all steps of sprouting lymphangiogenesis  <cit> . here, we propose a model of lymphatic vessel formation through tunneling . this concept is supported by similar tem observations generated in three distinct models demonstrating that the formation of lymphatic neo-vessels relies on the alignment of lec which drive a tunnel through extracellular matrix. during lymphangiogenesis, cords of cells create an extracellular space by the degradation of collagen fibrils occurring extracellularly and intracellularly. sprouting lec are characterized by  the extension of long thin vacuolized processes which probe the extracellular environment , connect with adjacent cells resulting in the formation of cord-like structures and pre-lymphatic vessels consisting in thin tubular structures lined with elongated lec ;  an intense intracellular vacuolization associated with vesicle coalescence leading to an intracellular luminal space ;  a matrix remodeling generating space between cells promoting cell migration and contributing to lumen formation . furthermore, the present study underlines the strength of the in vitro lymphatic ring assay which recapitulates the processes observed in vivo in pathological conditions.

emerging descriptions of cellular and molecular events of tubulogenesis occuring during blood vessel formation have converged on three mechanisms underlying angiogenesis: budding , cord hollowing and cell hollowing  <cit> . progress in understanding such angiogenic tube morphogenesis has benefited from 3d culture systems. the present study represents the first ultrastructural description of capillary formation during pathological lymphangiogenesis. in line with the previous descriptions of the angiogenic process, we observed intracellular and extracellular hollowing events. a common feature of the three lymphangiogenic processes studied here is the migration of cells creating spaces that can be occupied by a cord of very thin and elongated cells delimitating a luminal space. in the present study, the involvement of cell proliferation has also been evidenced during cord formation. cell hollowing or intracellular vacuolization is a mechanism by which individual cells generate vesicles that can enable the cells to interconnect with neighboring cells to form multicellular lumens and tubes  <cit> . cell vacuolization is a common feature of migrating cells in the three models presented here. vesicles of various sizes were seen to progressively enlarge and fuse to each other to, in turn, form a large intracellular luminal vesicle. by analogy with the angiogenic process, this space likely fuses with vesicle of adjacent cells to form the lumen of a pre-lymphatic vessel. this concept is supported by the process of cell fusion leading to increased lumen size clearly seen in the lymphangioma both at ultrastructural and histological levels . the intracellular vacuolization mechanism was initially associated with the morphogenesis of single endothelial cells which had no contact with adjacent cells occurring during the process of vasculogenesis  <cit> . the intracellular vacuolization has been extensively studied in tubulogenesis assay on 3d matrix leading to the identification of key molecular regulators such as matrix metalloproteinases and small gtpase  <cit> . in this context, the zebrafish system was suitable to demonstrate the importance of such process in an in vivo context during developmental conditions  <cit> . the present ultrastructural investigation provides the first evidence of intracellular vacuolization in vivo during lymphangiogenesis. further investigations are required to give new molecular insights on how this process contributes to lumen formation in lymphatic capillaries. despite further attempts, we have been unable to set up a real-time visualization of living cells with confocal or two photons microscopes in the lymphatic ring assay.

an exciting advance in the field of angiogenesis came from the finding that several types of specialized endothelial cells  are involved in the building of functional blood capillaries. it has been described that lymphatic tip cells expressed more vascular endothelial growth factor receptor- <dig>  and neuropilin- <dig>  <cit>  but the transposition of the new concept of tip/stalk cells from angiogenic sprouts to lymphangiogenic sprouts in terms of cell proliferation is still premature. in order to shed some light on this issue, we have analyzed the proliferation rate of migrating cells in sprouting capillaries, both in vivo in the corneal assay, and in vitro in the lymphatic ring assay. proliferation assessed by brdu incorporation was observed both in extending capillaries and at their extremities. in the aortic ring that mimicks the angiogenic process, a quantitative analysis of proliferating cells revealed that none of the tip cells had incorporated brdu, while  <dig> ± 5% of the stalk cells were brdu positive . these data suggest that the concept of tip cells defined as non proliferating cells probing the environment can not be extended to the process of lymphangiogenesis and emphasizes differences between the cellular mechanisms underlying lymphangiogenesis and angiogenesis.

of great interest is our finding that lec create in vivo, physical spaces within the surrounding collagen rich environment. this is associated with an extensive extracellular matrix remodeling both evidenced extracellular and intracellularly. long processes extended by lec were seen to roll up to enclose matrix fragments and create extracellular spaces. the contribution of mmps in this remodeling process is supported by the inhibition of lec sprouting achieved by using a synthetic mmp inhibitor. such observation is in line with our recent identification of the metalloproteinase- <dig>  which displays collagenolytic activity  <cit>  as a key regulator of lymphangiogenesis  <cit> . indeed, the embedding of lymphatic duct fragments issued from mmp2-deficient mice led to impaired lec sprouting and lymphangiogenic response  <cit> . the involvement of mmp-driven proteolysis in the lymphangiogenic process is further supported by our previous work using broad spectrum mmp inhibitors in the corneal assay  <cit> . it is worth noting that intracellular vacuolization and extracellular remodeling are not two exclusive mechanisms . they have been both evidenced in the three distinct in vitro and in vivo models used here and thus likely operate concomitantly during lymphangiogenesis. altogether, our data emphasize the interest of the lymphatic ring assay to unravel the cellular and molecular mechanisms of lymphangiogenesis. it appropriately recapitulates in vitro the different steps of lymphangiogenesis observed in animal models such as corneal lymphangiogenesis and lymphangioma. the novel emerging panel of in vitro and in vivo models of lymphangiogenesis  <cit>  are suitable to investigate the biology of lymphangiogenesis. this is mandatory for the understanding of several pathological processes such as lymphedema, graft rejection and metastatic dissemination through the lymphatic way.

CONCLUSIONS
the present study provides new insights into lymphangiogenic tube formation. it also highlights the suitability of the lymphatic ring assay to investigate lymphangiogenesis associated with different pathological processes.

