BACKGROUND
among the citrus species, several pummelos  and mandarin-like varieties are self-incompatible  <cit> . clementine mandarin , derived from an uncontrolled cross between a sweet orange and a mandarin, is probably the most widespread citrus species showing self-incompatibility . it is characterized by gametophytic si, with the pollen tubes stopping their growth in the upper or middle style  <cit> . moreover, in this species si is coupled with a variable degree of parthenocarpy. si and parthenocarpy in citrus are very important traits for fruit production because they result in seedless fruits, which have a higher value in the markets compared to the seeded ones. therefore, understanding the molecular basis of si would be important to plan marker-assisted breeding to obtain new seedless genotypes.

despite the importance of this trait, the genetic basis are still poorly understood and the key genes of si have not been identified yet. the study of populations segregating for si might be definitely a powerful strategy to give new insights into its genetic basis. however, the difficulties to obtain and characterize appropriate populations, with a variable degree of parthenocarpy and female/male sterility observed in the progeny might limit this approach. such kind of strategy for the identification of the s-locus was carried out analyzing several crosses among different citrus cultivar and accessions with got- <dig> isozyme, which is thought to be linked with the s-locus  <cit> , providing only a rough estimation of their possible s-genotype.

in recent times, different research groups attempted to better understand si and pollen-pistil interaction in several citrus genotypes, mainly trying to characterize putative homologs of key genes and proteins of already characterized si systems. gentile and colleagues  <cit>  reported the involvement of ca2+-dependent transglutaminase  in the self-incompatible response in pummelo, as already reported for rosaceae  <cit> . regarding the s-locus genes, a s-like rnase has been isolated from 'zigui shatian' pummelo  <cit> , however the authors suggested that this gene might play an important role during ovary senescence rather than in the incompatibility response. another s-like rnase has been isolated from a mandarin variety and was partially characterized  <cit> , but it's not still clear whether this gene is the key determinant for the self-incompatible response.

to overcome these limits, the transcriptome analysis of natural mutants displaying contrasting compatibility behaviour might be more effective to better understanding the molecular basis controlling the progamic phase in citrus. over the last decade, the genome and/or transcriptome analysis of natural or induced citrus mutants have been a powerful strategy to study the molecular basis of agronomically important traits, such as ripening period, fruit pigmentation, seedlessness and other traits related to quality  <cit> . concerning si, a few citrus natural mutants displaying different sexual behaviour with respect to their original varieties have been identified and characterized  <cit> . differences between the mutants and the original cultivars were related to differences in pollen  <cit> , style  <cit>  or ovary  <cit>  functionality. in some cases, different behaviours during the progamic phase were associated to abnormal embryo development  <cit> . therefore, it seems clear the mechanisms preventing fertilization are different in these genotypes, so it's reasonable to hypothesize that the mutations affected different genes or pathways implicated in reproduction.

recently we chose two clementine clones with contrasting behaviour relating to self-pollen recognition  as a model to identify candidate genes implicated in pollen-pistil interaction. histological assays and analysis of pollen tube kinetics were performed to study the pollen tube behaviour in the two genotypes, and to assess whether the breakdown of si in 'monreal' was caused by changes in pistil or pollen functionality. the analysis demonstrated that the 'monreal' mutation affected pistil functions, since pollen tubes of the two varieties grew equally in the pistils of self-compatible mutant, while 'comune' rejected the pollen of both varieties, recognizing the pollen of 'monreal' as self-pollen  <cit> . a first transcriptome comparison was conducted analyzing whole styles with stigmas, leading to the identification of a first set of genes differentially expressed in non-pollinated flowers and during pollen-tube elongation in self-pollination condition  <cit>  including stress related genes, and transcripts related to ca2+ and hormone signalling. surprisingly, a relatively high number of gene tags of different classes of retrotransposons were isolated, indicating their possible activation in response to pollination. however, the cdna-aflp analysis covered only part of the transcriptome and, due to the presence of pollen tubes growing along the pistil, the isolated gene tags were presumably not pistil-specific.

here we describe a complementary approach to identify another set of candidate genes in 'comune' and 'monreal', to provide a better view of the molecular aspects related to citrus reproduction. we used laser capture microdissection , which has been efficiently used to investigate several aspects of plant reproductive biology  <cit> . in our approach, lcm was coupled to microarray analysis to identify genes specifically expressed in the stylar canal cells . we demonstrate that our transcriptomic survey of scc is an efficient strategy to discover candidate genes involved in the si response in clementine.

RESULTS
laser microdissection of scc and microarray analysis
clementine pistil is composed of  <dig> or  <dig> fused carpels, which are assembled around an inner channel, and all sharing a common wet stigma that bears unicellular and multicellular papillae. stylar canals are layered radially and lead to the ovary locules. each canal is bordered by rectangular papillar cells, described in lemon  <cit>  and 'nova' mandarin  <cit> . scc are placed with their long axis orthogonal to the canal. although in some cases it is possible to see few pollen tubes growing within the inner channel  <cit>  the majority of pollen tubes grows inside the stylar canals. as a result, these cells play a pivotal role in pollen-pistil interaction. to isolate the scc,  <dig> μm transversal sections were cut from oct -embedded styles with stigmas in the upper third of the style before pollen tubes arrive. once we checked the integrity of the embedded tissues, we performed the lcm of the scc , discarding other tissues such as parenchyma and vascular bundles. also, sections from the stigma were discarded, since stigma is not the site where si reaction occurs  <cit> . around  <dig>  cells were microdissected from each biological replicate. the isolated rna was not sufficient for the microarray hybridizations, therefore a two-round rna amplification was performed. additional file  <dig> shows the agilent bioanalyzer profiles of the biotin-labeled amplified rna  after the second round of amplification. arnas ranged from  <dig> to  <dig> bp, with a peak around  <dig> bp, indicating the good quality of the arna after the in vitro transcription protocol.

biotin-labeled arna was hybridized on the affymetrix citrus genechip® which contains  <dig>  probe sets representing up to  <dig>  citrus transcripts from several citrus species and hybrids. the array is estimated to represent about  <dig>  genes  <cit> .

the three biological replicates of 'comune' and 'monreal' were compared using the rank products  method. rp is a non-parametric analysis method which has been proven to be particularly sensitive in case of small number of biological replicates and large between-study variation  <cit> . the last aspect is of outstanding importance in our experiment, because sample processing might increase variability among replicates  <cit> . rp analysis detects genes that are consistently found among the most strongly up-regulated or down-regulated genes in a number of replicate experiments  <cit> . in our experiment, the comparison of transcriptomes of highly specific cells at the same physiological conditions resulted in a low number of differentially expressed genes identified between the self-incompatible and the self-compatible genotypes . specifically,  <dig> genes were over-represented in the scc of the self-incompatible 'comune', while  <dig> were over-represented in 'monreal'. in general the differentially expressed genes showed a significant fold change-difference, especially in the case of the transcripts preferentially expressed in 'comune'. they did not reveal any functional enrichment and were not homologous to genes previously characterized as involved in pollen-pistil interaction. actually, many of the candidate genes were not previously annotated in other plant species.

pfp, percentage of false-positives

for real time quantitative rt-pcr  validations of the microarray results , total rna was isolated from separate bulks of scc, from which two-round unlabeled arna was synthesized. all the 'comune' up-regulated genes were validated by qrt-pcr. regarding the 'monreal' over-represented genes, only one was not validated , while cit. <dig> was discarded for the presence of unspecific pcr products.

an f-box is the most up-regulated gene in the scc of the self-incompatible genotype
cit. <dig> was the unigene which showed the highest fold-change value, with more than 37-fold over-representation in 'comune' . this unigene is represented in the genechip by a single clone of a c. sinensis callus library. attempts to get a deduced amino acid sequence of the cit. <dig> unigene led to no reliable predictions. actually, partial cdna amplification and sequencing of cit. <dig> revealed that the transcript expressed in the scc of 'comune' was  <dig> bp longer, sharing higher similarity to a single est from c. sinensis early-developing fruits . sequencing of the genomic region surrounding the open reading frame  revealed allelic variation, and translation evidenced a non-functional allele, having 100% homology with the cit. <dig> locus of the clementine haploid genome, and a functional allele, which encodes an intronless  <dig> amino acids f-box protein . a  <dig>  kb region spanning the putative f-box locus was sequenced but no polymorphisms were detected between 'comune' and 'monreal', indicating that the differential transcriptional regulation was not related to nucleotide polymorphisms. blastx search showed that the predicted functional orf shared homology to a poplar putative f-box protein . the putative arabidospis ortholog  was annotated as a non-specific f-box. interproscan identified a single f-box domain skp2-like  and no additional protein motif structures. the f-box domain was similar to the one of sleepy  f-box of arabidopsis , that interacts with della proteins and is involved in ga signalling  <cit> . however, no evident homology with sly <dig> was observed outside the f-box domain.

three aspartic acid-rich  protein encoding genes are preferentially expressed in self-incompatible condition
bioinformatic analyses added remarkable information regarding three unigenes found over-represented in 'comune'  and showing no functional annotation in available databases. the isolated genes represent three complete orfs encoding small proteins containing  <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> amino acids, respectively. the deduced protein sequences share high homology degree and are characterized by an extremely high percentage of aspartic acid residues ranging from 19%  to 27%  providing very low values of pi . the alignment of the deduced amino acid sequences with other homologous proteins isolated from different plant sources shows that no significantly conserved sequences are detected in the first half of the n-terminal region, whereas two highly conserved motifs are detected both in the second half of the n-terminus and in the c-terminus of the proteins. the first conserved motif is a poly-aspartate assembly usually spaced out by glycine residues followed by a second ydyapaa motif, both of them being still uncharacterized. the aforesaid motifs can be repeated in tandem along the protein sequence as observed in cit. <dig> that exhibits three poly-d/g + ydyapaa motifs along the sequence . interproscan search did identify neither known functional domains nor signal peptides. moreover, secondary structure prediction studies carried out upon the three deduced protein sequences revealed that, except small n-terminus regions likely folded as β-sheet, they are randomly coiled leaving the aspartate residues exposed in the surrounding environment .

another interesting characteristic was identified analyzing the location of the asp-rich protein genes in the recently released draft of the clementine  and orange  genomes . that is, the  <dig> asp-rich protein genes are located in tandem in a region of about  <dig> kb. specifically, the asp-rich protein genes are positioned in scaffold  <dig> of the clementine genome , and in scaffold  <dig> of the sweet orange genome. in both genomes this region is highly conserved, with minor differences located in the uncoding regions. the main one is represented by a deletion of  <dig> bp in clementine, confirmed by pcr amplification and sequencing, in the region between cit. <dig> and cit. <dig> . the asp-rich protein genes are supported by a relatively low number of ests, for the most part found in non-flower-specific tissues subjected to stresses .

est no. refers to ests found in dbest database which typically showed query coverage and percentage of identity above 90%. est total no. refers to the total number of ests deposited in the dbest database of ncbi until august  <dig>  db refers to the database from which the information regarding the asp-rich protein genes were retrieved. h, harvest database; p, phytozome; g, genbank; u, uniprot; cgd, cacao genome database

carrying out similarity searches among the sequenced plant genomes we identified asp-rich homologs in arabidopsis thaliana, arabidopsis lyrata, populus trichocarpa, medicago truncatula, glycine max, ricinus communis, theobroma cacao and manihot esculenta. as in citrus, the asp-rich protein genes are usually in tandem, with the number of linked genes depending on each species and varying from  <dig> to  <dig>  exceptions are represented by poplar and cassava, where single copies are present. moreover, soybean contains two putative asp-rich proteins which are placed in different chromosomes, while in medicago, in addition to  <dig> clustered asp-rich located in chromosome  <dig>  there are two unclustered identical asp-rich in chromosome  <dig>  which are elements of a duplicated region. m. truncatula and a. lyrata possess the highest number of asp-rich paralogs , while a. thaliana displays three clustered asp-rich proteins; two are predicted in the tair genome browser, release  <dig> , while the third one has no gene id but was predicted using fgenesh and is supported by  <dig> ests. in some cases, as in a. thaliana, gene predictions are supported by ests, while in others, such as ricinus and medicago, there are no est corresponding to the prediction. the low est support found in this species is probably due to the relatively low number of ests deposited in the databases, but also imply the highly specific role of this genes in specific metabolic processes.

another search was performed against uniprot and dbest databases to identify other asp-rich homologs and gene tags from additional species . in the asp-rich homologs, aspartate is still the prevalent residue, with an average percentage of 22% in the amino acids composition of the predicted proteins. also, as the citrus asp-rich proteins they are characterized by a short length , by a variable number of poly-d/g domains , and the majority presents the polyd/g + ydyapaa at the c-terminus . as in the case of citrus, most of the identified ests were generated from stressed tissues, and in some cases from flowers, pointing out to a possible conserved role in different species. interestingly, one est belongs to a cdna library from the jelly fish clytia hemisphaerica suggesting that the role of this genes might not be plant-specific.

the phylogenetic analysis was conducted aligning the whole predicted protein sequences using clustalx . the neighbor joining  tree separated the asp-rich proteins into seven major groups, which are tentatively called subfamilies from a to g . proteins with equal number of poly-d domains or similar domain organization usually grouped together. the a and b subfamily are divided into subclades comprising asp-rich proteins which possess two or three conserved domains scattered along their sequence and a high percentage of asp residues . the c family consists of asp-rich proteins from solanaceae, plus a subcluster including lactuca and ipomoea proteins. most of the proteins of the c group possess  <dig> asp-rich domains. d and e are small subfamilies which comprise, respectively, asp-rich proteins from gerbera x hybrida and cynara cardunculus , and from castor bean and cacao . arabidospis proteins, containing a single poly-d domain at the c-terminal region, are all grouped in the subfamily f, while the asp-rich proteins from legumes clustered in the subfamily g. the predicted sequences belonging to the groups f and g have a relatively low percentage of asp . the paralogs of m. truncatula and of the two arabidopsis species display a high level of similarity and are tightly grouped. on the contrary, higher variability in length and number of the asp-rich domains was observed in citrus, cacao and castor bean. it is noteworthy that the paralogs of these species belong to different sub-clades, suggesting a possible sub-functionalization.

the genomic region surrounding the asp-rich protein genes is conserved among genomes
further structural analysis of the genomic regions surrounding the asp-rich protein genes evidenced another remarkable feature. specifically, we identified a della protein gene about  <dig> kb downstream the asp-rich protein genes. della was found to be differentially expressed in a previous transcriptome profiling  <cit> . in particular, its mrna levels were higher in 'comune' pollinated styles with stigmas compared to 'monreal' ones.

the region between the asp-rich protein genes and della is highly conserved in c. clementina and c. sinensis genomes. moreover, this segment showed collinearity with the genomes of two unrelated plants such as cacao  and castor bean  . in the four genomes, the asp-rich protein genes are in the same orientation of della. between the asp-rich protein genes and della, other predicted orfs are present . the clusters of the four genomes share the main structure and gene orientation, with the presence of pentatricopeptide repeat  - containing proteins, an eama-like nucleotide sugar transporter and an f-box gene located between the asp-rich protein genes and della. not all the predicted genes are supported by expression data. the coding sequence of the f-box putative protein  upstream della is not represented in the citrus genechip, and it has no significant similarity with the cit. <dig> f-box.

histological and transcriptional changes during pollen-pistil interaction
to investigate possible changes in mrna levels during pollen germination and pollen tube elongation, a time course analysis was performed on whole styles with stigmas. we focused on the f-box-containing unigene cit. <dig>  which showed the highest fold change among the differentially expressed genes, and on the putative asp-rich protein genes . for this analysis, we collected non-pollinated flowers just prior to flowering  as well as self-pollinated styles with stigmas from one to eight days after pollination , indicated as t <dig> to t <dig>  moreover, we investigated the expression patterns in non-pollinated flowers collected at t <dig>  t <dig> and t <dig> to assess whether the genes were induced by pollination, or conversely, were developmentally regulated. a daily histological observation of self-pollinated styles with stigmas was performed on both varieties to monitor the rate of pollen tube elongation . this analysis was previously conducted on both genotypes  <cit> . however, since the pollen tube growth is highly influenced by environmental temperature, new microscopy observations were essential to detect possible coincidences between pollen tube behaviour of 'comune' and 'monreal' and transcriptional changes of the candidate genes. from t <dig> to t <dig>  pistils of both varieties displayed similar performances regarding pollen tube germination and pollen tube elongation. pollen germination was evident from t <dig> , and until the 4th dap germinated tubes were at the level of the stigma , some of them reaching the upper style. between t <dig> and t <dig>  a slight up-regulation of all the analyzed transcripts was observed in 'comune', although mrna levels of the  <dig> genes were generally low . the exception is represented by cit. <dig>  which was already some  <dig> fold up-regulated in 'comune' at t <dig>  after t <dig> we observed a marked difference both in pollen tube kinetics and gene expression. in 'comune', the self-incompatible genotype, pollen tubes were still in the stigmatic canals, and only a few were recorded in the upper or middle style . conversely, in 'monreal' a conspicuous number of pollen tubes grew along the middle style , reaching the base of the style after  <dig> days. the differences in pollen tube behaviour coincided with differences in gene expression. from t <dig> a clear up-regulation of the  <dig> genes was observed in 'comune', with a peak of expression at t <dig>  while in 'monreal' no changes were observed compared to the previous sampling dates . 'comune' unpollinated flowers at t <dig> showed mrna levels comparable to the ones of 'monreal', indicating the self-incompatible condition elicited the up-regulation of the f-box and of the asp-rich protein genes.

additional qrt-pcr were performed on pollen tubes grown in vitro, to assess whether the different mrna levels detected in the time course analysis might have been influenced by a differential expression at the level of pollen tubes. rna was isolated from tubes grown for about  <dig> h, which showed similar rate of elongation between the two clementines . extremely low mrna levels and no differential expression were observed in cit. <dig>  cit. <dig> and cit. <dig> , while no expression was detected for cit. <dig>  the time course analysis was also performed to analyze the expression patterns of della, which was preferentially expressed in 'comune' styles with stigmas at t <dig> and t <dig> .

discussion
in this study, lcm was used to spefically isolate scc of two clementine genotypes differing for the si response. 'comune' is a widespread self-incompatible variety, while 'monreal' is a self-compatible variety originated from a spontaneous bud mutation  <cit> . the microdissection of the scc allowed to perform a highly specific study of the transcriptome of the cells implicated in the interaction between pistil and pollen tubes, with the main aim of identifying candidate genes involved in self-pollen rejection. the results of microarray analysis suggested that the differential regulation of few specific transcripts might have lead to the breakdown of si in 'monreal'. based on functional information retrieved from the databases, these genes do not show any clear functional enrichment, and many of them have no annotation, making it difficult to compare our results with si systems characterized on model plants. on the other hand, our experiment provided a new set of transcripts that are very likely to play a key role during the progamic phase in citrus. searches in the databases revealed that most of these genes are not flower specific, suggesting that probably the mutation leading to the breakdown of si did not affected the s-locus determinants. however, it is known that non s-locus genes are implicated in si  <cit> . most of the preferentially expressed genes were low-represented in est databases and showed a weak expression in whole styles with stigmas before the si reaction occurred. this indicates the usefulness of the lcm in the identification of highly specific and/or low expressed genes.

flowers for lcm were sampled one day after pollination, when pollen was just germinating. self-pollinations were performed to assess whether the presence of pollen in the stigma might have elicited a differential response of the scc in self-compatible vs. self-incompatible conditions. so, while pollen tubes where still in the stigma, we targeted the rectangular scc located in the upper/middle style, which is the site where incompatibility occurs in 'comune', without contamination of pollen tubes. although we did not analyze mrnas of microdissected scc of non-pollinated flowers, qrt-pcr demonstrated that slight differences in gene expression were also present in whole styles with stigmas before pollination, indicating that, at least in the cases of cit. <dig>  cit. <dig>  cit. <dig> and cit. <dig>  the different mrna levels in the scc between 'comune' and 'monreal' were not induced by the pollen germination in the stigma.

among the identified genes, our analysis focused on four unigenes over-represented in 'comune' . a time course analysis coupled to histological observation of pollen tube elongation was performed to correlate pollen tube behaviour with the difference in gene expression between 'comune' and 'monreal'. until the 4th dap we could not observe any clear differences in the mrna level of the  <dig> analyzed genes, and no clear differences were evident in pollen tube behaviour between the two varieties. form the 5th dap we observed an impressive up-regulation in the self-incompatible combination. selected candidate genes showed a clear differential expression  during pollen - style interaction , in agreement with histological observation . the peak of up-regulation was evidenced in concomitance with the pollen tube arrest, suggesting that all the analyzed genes have a key role in the stop of pollen tube elongation. the up-regulation was clearly induced by pollen tubes in the styles, as confirmed with the comparison of the expression levels of non-pollinated and self-pollinated flowers at t <dig> . the candidate genes were weakly expressed in pollen tubes and no differences in the mrna levels were observed between 'comune' and 'monreal' . as a result, it is unlikely that the transcriptome of pollen tubes influenced the mrna levels detected in the time course analysis. in fact, our expression data demonstrate that the drastic changes in mrna levels occurred in the stylar tissues as a response to self-incompatible pollen tubes. also, the drastic up-regulation of the four genes should not represent a downstream response to si, since these genes are already differentially regulated in scc before si occurs.

bioinformatic analysis provided useful information to hypothesize the role of the four unigenes. cit. <dig> probe set matched to a putative f-box protein gene sharing homology to an arabidopsis f-box  annotated as non-specific  <cit> . this protein belongs to the c <dig> group of the f-box superfamily, of which sly <dig> belongs. however, the similarity with sly <dig> regards the f-box domain, while the c-terminus, responsible for targeting the substrate for ubiquitination, does not share any homology with sly <dig> 

f-box protein superfamily is one of the largest in plants  <cit> . these proteins are key regulators of proteolysis, conferring specificity to the scf  e <dig> ubiquitin ligase complex, which is responsible for recognizing the substrate for ubiquitin-mediated protein degradation. despite the fact that it is not possible to correlate the role of the novel clementine f-box gene with any characterized orthologs, database searches and transcriptional data revealed that the clementine f-box gene was not previously identified in clementine cdna libraries and evidenced highly specific expression patterns, since it was almost  <dig> fold up-regulated in scc  and about  <dig> to  <dig> fold up-regulated in whole styles with stigmas  in concomitance with the arrest of pollen tube elongation. this drastic up-regulation, and the absence of identical ests in databases support the high specificity of this gene and point out to its possible involvement in highly specific proteolytic events occurring in the style during the self-incompatible response. studies on the families where si system have been already characterized  showed that proteolysis has a key role during self-pollen rejection. usually proteolytic events follow the initial si signal perception leading to the eventual death of the male gametophyte  <cit> . functional analysis will be necessary to shed light on the role of the clementine f-box during pollen-pistil interaction.

another striking finding was the identification of the three putative asp-rich protein encoding genes, cit. <dig>  cit. <dig> and cit. <dig>  up regulated in 'comune'. in addition to the high similarity in their primary structure, they co-localize in the clementine genome . the clustered genes displayed similar expression patters  which might indicate that they are commonly regulated as already reported for other clusters  <cit> . although their function has not been investigated, it is known that the expression of the arabidopsis homologous at1g <dig> is sharply up regulated in plants exposed to 3--l-alanine , a phytotoxic allelochemical  <cit> . in other studies, this gene turns out to be strongly induced by iron deficiency  <cit>  and by treatment with the polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbon phenanthrene  <cit> . these results support the hypothesis that the genes encoding the asp-rich proteins might be triggered in response to different types of stresses. since other information is still lacking, we attempt to assign a putative function to the citrus asp-rich proteins and also propose a model which overall might explain the regulation of si in the 'comune' variety. because of their richness of aspartic acid residues, the asp-rich proteins are supposed to act as novel ca2+ "entrapping" proteins. although they do not show sequence similarity with other well known ca2+ interacting proteins, such as calsequestrin, calreticulin and calmodulin, the asp-rich proteins share with those proteins the aspartate residue abundance which has been related with the protein ability of ca2+-binding  <cit> . therefore, assuming that ca2+ levels play a decisive role during pollen-pistil interaction, as already reported for several plant species  <cit> , the up-regulation of the asp-rich encoding genes observed in 'comune' might enhance the amount of proteins functioning as ca2+-trap elements, and lead to an exceptional decrease in ca2+ availability, thus contributing to switch off the signal cascade usually induced by the increase in cytosolic ca2+ concentration or to the alteration of ca2+ gradient needed for pollen tube elongation. pollen tube growth could represent, among others, the downstream physiological process dramatically affected by this missing triggering event. to support this hypothesis, it is worthwhile to mention that the aforesaid at1g <dig> gene is up regulated in a t-dna insertional mutant of a p-type atpase cation pump, the male gametogenesis impaired anthers ; the mutant shows reduced male fertility and imbalanced cation homeostasis  <cit> . moreover, a ca2+ pump , which presumably pumps ca2+ out the cytosol  <cit> , is differentially regulated in the two genotypes during pollen-pistil interaction showing an up regulation in the 'comune' genotype  <cit> . further mandatory work will be undertaken to validate both the supposed role and the functioning model of pollen-pistil interaction in citrus genotypes and, if they are proved, this might represent a case in which specific regulatory mechanism involving different loci rather than the s-locus could be co-responsible of the si determination.

the integration of the transcriptomic data with the synteny analysis denoted a specific genome region containing a cluster of genes activated during self-pollen rejection . specifically, the asp-rich protein genes are linked to a della gene which was previously isolated in the self-pollinated 'comune' styles with stigmas  <cit>  and showed a preferential expression in the self-incompatible genotype. this raise intriguing questions about the possibility that the non-homologous genes located in this genome region might contribute to a common function related to self-pollen rejection. examples of co-expressed and functionally related gene clusters in eukaryotes have emerged over the last decade  <cit>  and are likely to increase with the huge amount of data coming from the genome projects. the most investigated operon-like organizations in plants are secondary metabolic pathways  <cit> , mostly implicated in plant defence response. clustering appears to have occurred de novo through some form of convergent evolutionary process  <cit> . in our case, it is unlikely that the genes are clustered by chance, since this cluster is conserved in at least two other plant species, cacao and castor bean . the collinearity of the citrus genome segment comprising the asp-rich protein genes and della with other segments of unrelated genomes support the hypothesis that selection might have favoured the linkage of these genes. the advantage of clustering is related with the fact that tightly linked genes might be co-regulated at the levels of nuclear organization and/or chromatin  <cit> . the co-localization of the three up-regulated asp-rich protein genes as well as della in the scaffold  <dig> of the clementine genome v <dig>  suggests that the mutation leading to self compatibility probably affected the functionality of tightly linked genes. further transcriptional analyses will be carried out on the other genes surrounding the asp-rich protein genes to study their possible role during different stages of the pollen-pistil interaction.

CONCLUSIONS
lcm coupled to microarray analysis was definitely a powerful tool to identify candidate genes involved in self pollen rejection which have not been previously associated to si. data at the transcriptome level strongly suggested that a restricted number of differentially regulated transcripts are associated with self-pollen recognition. although functional information is missing, we hypothesize that proteolysis and ca2+ homeostasis might be crucial for si response in clementine, reflecting to some extent molecular events occurring in other si systems. however, further work at the protein level will be necessary for understanding the role of the candidate genes during self-pollen recognition. also, the unigenes represented in the genechip do not cover the whole transcriptome, consequently other strategies such as rna-seq might help to improve the transcriptome coverage to identify additional genes implicated in self-pollen recognition.

