BACKGROUND
mycoplasmas are prokaryotes in the class mollicutes  and are characterised by the absence of a cell wall  <cit> . mycoplasmas cause disease in a number of animal species and are able to survive and persist in the face of host defences, even though they possess a relatively small genome and are bounded by a single protective plasma membrane. the recent chemical synthesis and cloning of whole mycoplasma genomes has also drawn attention to the possibility of creating synthetic cells and genetic manipulation of the smallest bacterial genomes  <cit> . the proteins within the single limiting membrane of mycoplasmas fulfill many of the critical functions related to morphology, nutrient transport, environmental adaptation and colonisation of the host  <cit> .

many of the surface proteins of mycoplasmas are amphiphilic and/or lipid modified and some have been shown to be components of solute transport systems or involved in antigenic variation and adherence, while the functions of many others remain unknown  <cit> . mycoplasmas possess an unusually large number of lipoproteins, which are anchored to the cell membrane by a lipid moiety, with the polypeptide moiety exposed on the cell’s outer surface  <cit> . lipoprotein signal peptides are cleaved by signal peptidase ii at a conserved motif preceding the amino terminal cysteine of the mature lipoprotein. the significance of mycoplasma lipoproteins in interactions with the host emphasises the need to better understand how they are processed, and the mechanisms controlling their expression  <cit> .

mycoplasma gallisepticum  is a major poultry pathogen, causing chronic respiratory disease in chickens, infectious sinusitis in turkeys and conjunctivitis in house finches  <cit> . it has a worldwide distribution and causes severe economic losses in the poultry industry. vaccination of the flock is a necessity to control mycoplasmosis in commercial poultry farms. the live vaccines in use at present are f strain, 6/ <dig> and ts- <dig>  <cit> . although effective and widely used at present, these vaccines could be modified to act as vaccine vectors to deliver other antigens and thus be the basis of multivalent vaccines.

although the genome of m. gallisepticum  strain rlow has been sequenced  <cit> , the lack of genetic systems for mycoplasmas in general impedes our ability to study their molecular biology. the use of uga as a tryptophan codon in mycoplasmas also makes it tedious to use heterologous hosts such as escherichia coli  for expression and characterisation of cloned mycoplasma sequences  <cit> . molecular tools such as reporter gene systems suitable for studying lipoprotein processing and expression in mycoplasmas are necessary.

the e. coli  ß-galactosidase gene  has been used to identify gene promoters and detect genetic regulatory elements in m. gallisepticum  and acholeplasma  species  <cit> , and as a reporter gene in combination with the vlha   <dig>  promoter in m. gallisepticum  s <dig>  <cit> . a major drawback of the use of ß-galactosidase  as a reporter is its limited ability to pass through the bacterial cytoplasmic membrane  <cit> . when the gene for an exported protein is fused to lacz , the hybrid protein is membrane bound and such proteins have very low ß-galactosidase activity  <cit> . green fluorescent protein  has been used to identify promoter sequences in dna libraries of mycoplasma pneumoniae  and mycoplasma genitalium  in e. coli  <cit> , but gfp could not be detected following transformation in m. gallisepticum  <cit> . the chloramphenicol acetyl transferase  gene has also been used as a selectable marker in m. pneumoniae  using a modified tn <dig>  transposon  <cit> .

the phoa  gene codes for the e. coli  periplasmic alkaline phosphatase , and is active when exported across the cytoplasmic membrane into the periplasmic space  <cit> . functional alkaline phosphatase is a dimer of two identical subunits and each subunit contains two intramolecular disulfide bridges. the amino-terminal signal sequence is cleaved upon translocation across the cytoplasmic membrane, and the mature phoa is folded into an active conformation after export to the periplasmic space. disulfide bond formation is followed by folding into monomers and then conversion to the active dimer conformation  <cit> . enzymatic activity of phoa fusion proteins depends on the presence of an export sequence and this principle has been used in developing reporter vectors to determine membrane protein topology and to facilitate identification of genes involved in bacterial virulence  <cit> .

the aim of this study was to evaluate whether the e. coli phoa  gene was suitable for use as a reporter gene to investigate gene expression and protein processing in mycoplasmas, using a construct incorporating signal sequences from the m. gallisepticum  vlha <dig>  lipoprotein and the ltuf  promoter to express phoa as a membrane-associated lipoprotein.

RESULTS
construction of plasmid ltuf acy phoa  
the elongation factor tu promoter region of 277 bp   and the leader sequence of the vlh a <dig>  gene  from m. gallisepticum  were originally amplified by pcr from the genomic dna of m. gallisepticum  strain s <dig> and ligated into the pism <dig> lac <cit>  vector to produce the ltuf sig lac  construct  <cit> . the ltuf  promoter region was amplified from m. gallisepticum  genomic dna by pcr using the lnf and tsr oligonucleotide primers , and the vlh a export signal sequence of 51 bp was amplified from m. gallisepticum  genomic dna using the tsf and lbr primers . these two products were then joined by overlap extension pcr using the primers lnf and lbr. the resultant pcr product was ligated into pgem-t  following the manufacturer’s instructions. the ltuf  promoter and vlh a export signal sequence  region was excised from pgem-t by digestion with not i and  bamhi and ligated into similarly digested pism <dig> lac to generate pism <dig> ltuf siglac. digestion of pism <dig> lac  with not i and bam hi resulted in the loss of one inverted repeat region  in the insertion sequence of the transposon.

lower case indicates changes made to introduce restriction endonuclease cleavage sites and bold lettering indicates the stop codons.

the ltuf  promoter and the vlh a <dig>  signal sequence from pism <dig> ltufsig lac were amplified by pcr and used to create the ltuf acyphoa  construct. the ltuf  promoter, vlh a <dig>  signal and acylation sequence were amplified from pism <dig> ltuf siglac  as a single 369 bp product using the primers ltnf and sbr . the not i cleavage site was included in the ltnf primer and the vlh a signal sequence for lipoprotein export and acylation was included in the sbr primer. the phoa  gene  was amplified from the plasmid pvm01::tn phoa <cit>  using the primers axpf and pbgr . tnphoa  encodes alkaline phosphatase without the export signal sequence and first five amino acids of the mature protein  <cit> . the 369 bp and 1335 bp pcr products were joined using overlap extension pcr to produce a 1693 bp product using the ltnf and pbgr primers . the 1693 bp fragment was purified from a 1% agarose gel after electrophoresis using the qiaex gel extraction kit  and ligated into pgem-t following the manufacturer’s instructions. an e. coli  transformant containing a plasmid of the expected size was selected and the insert dna sequence confirmed using bigdye terminator v <dig>  cycle sequencing  and the m <dig> universal primer sites of the vector. the dna insert was released from the pgem-t vector by digestion with not i and bgl ii, gel purified using the qiaex gel extraction kit  and ligated into not i and bam hi digested pism <dig> lac <cit> , resulting in pism <dig> ltufacypho a.

the first 26 bp of the is <dig> element, the ir region that was deleted during not i-bam hi digestion of the pism <dig>  vector, was restored by inserting a 40 bp double stranded linker oligonucleotide, produced by annealing irf and irr, into the not i cleavage site of the construct. the linker irf oligonucleotide contained a mutation at the sixth base  from the 5' end to inactivate the not i cleavage site, and included an nhe i cleavage site at the 3' end. irf and the complementary irr oligonucleotide were annealed by mixing them at equimolar ratios and heating to 50°c for 1 min, then slowly cooling at 1°c/min to 10°c. the double stranded linker had  <dig> base 5' overhangs at each end to facilitate ligation to not i digested pism <dig> ltufacypho a, resulting in nhe i and not i cleavage sites, and yielding the pism <dig> ltufacypho a vector  with the modified ir region.

construction of plasmid ltufphoa  
the pism <dig> ltufpho a vector , which did not contain either the vlh a <dig>  signal sequence or the acylation sequence of the ptap plasmid, was also generated. the ltnf and ltpr primers were used to amplify the 305 bp ltuf  promoter region, whilst the phoa  gene was amplified using primers ltpf and pbar. the pcr products were purified and joined by overlap extension pcr using primers ltnf and pbar, which included not i and bam hi sites, respectively . the resultant pcr product of 1640 bp was gel purified, ligated into pgem-t and the dna sequence confirmed as described above. the ltufphoa  was released from pgem-t and ligated to similarly digested pism <dig> lac , resulting in the plasmid ptp, and the ir oligo adaptor then inserted into the not i cleavage site as described above.

transformation of m. gallisepticum  with alkaline phosphatase expression constructs and detection of transformants
both ptp and ptap plasmids were used to transform m. gallisepticum  cells by electroporation. transformant colonies were observed on ma plates containing gentamicin within 4 days, and colonies picked and grown in mb with gentamicin added. the presence of the gentamicin gene was confirmed by the amplification of a 223 bp pcr product using the oligonucleotide primers gmf and gmr. the genomic location of the transposon in each of the mycoplasma transformants was predicted following genomic dna sequencing and blast searching the m. gallisepticum  rlow genome .

the m. gallisepticum- ptap transformant colonies on ma plates stained blue following addition of the substrate bcip/nbt. a strong blue colour development in 10 min was found to indicate transformant colonies, whilst a light blue colour was observed in untransformed colonies only after prolonged incubation. the level of differential staining readily identified ptap-transformed mycoplasma colonies and those colonies that were larger in size and stained a darker blue colour were selected for subculture and further studies.

quantitative rt-pcr
the levels of phoa  mrna in both ptp and ptap transformants were normalised to gapdh gene expression and the relative abundance determined in three transformants produced using each construct. the difference in gene expression relative to gapdh mrna in each transformant was determined. the average level of transcription of phoa  in each ptap and ptp transformant was compared. the levels of phoa  mrna  were determined in ptap <dig> , ptap <dig> , ptap <dig> , ptp <dig> , ptp <dig>  and ptp <dig> . the mean level of phoa  transcription in ptap transformants  was significantly greater  than in ptp transformants .

detection and quantitation of alkaline phosphatase activity in ptap and ptp transformants
five randomly selected ptap and ptp transformants were selected and their level of alkaline phosphatase expression determined. the level of ap activity in untransformed cells was used as a baseline. the mean level  of ap activity for  <dig> ptap transformants was 190 ±  <dig> u/mg total cell protein, whilst no ap activity was detected in ptp transformants and untransformed cells.

alkaline phosphatase expression localized to the plasma membrane
whole cell proteins from ptap and ptp transformants were subjected to western blotting and immunostained using a mab to alkaline phosphatase. only in those m. gallisepticum  transformed with ptap, and not in those transformed with ptp, was an immunoreactive 47 kda band observed, indicating phoa expression. the protein expression of different ptp or ptap transformants was similar, and the ap expression of representative transformants tap <dig> and tp <dig> are shown in the results.

whole cell proteins of untransformed, ptp-transformed or ptap-transformed m. gallisepticum  were subjected to triton x- <dig> fractionation and proteins in the hydrophobic and aqueous fractions were separated by sds-page, transferred to pvdf membranes and immunostained using a mab to alkaline phosphatase. a band of 47 kda, corresponding to the predicted molecular weight of expressed phoa, was observed in the ptap-transformed whole cell proteins  and the hydrophobic fraction , but not in the aqueous fraction . no reactivity was observed in any of the fractions from ptp-transformed  or untransformed m. gallisepticum  cells.

proteins from m. gallisepticum  transformed with ptap were separated into membrane and cytosolic fractions by differential ultracentrifugation and the fractions subjected to sds-page and western blotted. immunostaining with a mab to alkaline phosphatase detected reactivity in both whole cells  and the membrane fraction , but not in the cytosolic fraction . as a control, mab  <dig>  <cit> , against the vlha membrane lipoprotein, was also used to probe the blot and detected vlha in both whole cell proteins and in the membrane fraction, but not in the cytosolic fraction .

trypsin digestion of surface exposed alkaline phosphatase
the cell surface exposure of m. gallisepticum  proteins and ap were examined by trypsin proteolysis. on the coomassie blue stained sds-page gel, the concentration of the major cell surface lipoprotein vlha decreased with increasing concentrations of trypsin and tryptic products of this lipoprotein could be seen . immunostaining of trypsin-treated cell proteins with a mab to alkaline phosphatase demonstrated a gradual loss of reactivity with increasing concentrations of trypsin from 31 μg/ml to 250 μg/ml , indicating surface exposure of phoa. as a control, mab  <dig> to vlha was used to confirm tryptic proteolysis of the surface-exposed vlha lipoprotein . the majority of the proteins detectable by coomassie blue staining were not affected by trypsin treatment, indicating that cytoplasmic proteins were not exposed to proteolysis.

globomycin inhibited phoa processing
when ptap transformant cells were grown with increasing concentrations of globomycin, cell growth was inhibited. a concentration of 25 μg globomycin/ml was the highest to still allow growth of cells. growth in 25 μg globomycin/ml resulted in an increase in the molecular weight of phoa  compared to that seen in cells grown in the absence of globomycin .

radiolabelling of lipid modified proteins
lipoproteins of m. gallisepticum  transformed with ptap were radiolabelled with palmitate, separated by sds-page gel and either stained with coomassie brilliant blue  and autoradiographed  or western transferred and immunostained . following autoradiography, a band of 47 kda, similar to the expected size of alkaline phosphatase, was detected in the ptap transformed cells , suggesting that phoa in ptap transformed m. gallisepticum  was a lipoprotein. a western blot immunostained with a mab to ap demonstrated the presence of a recombinant ap protein of similar size to that of the radiolabelled band in ptap-transformed m. gallisepticum  .

two-dimensional gel electrophoresis and mass spectrometric analysis of phoa proteins
following separation of triton x- <dig> preparations of protein by 2-d gel electrophoresis, a spot corresponding to phoa was excised, digested with trypsin and analysed by mass spectrometry. peptide mass fingerprinting resulted in the positive identification of phoa, with a mascot score of  <dig> and sequence coverage of 53% . potential  amino-terminal tryptic peptides  were not identified. attempts to recover the acylated peptide in organic extracts of the gel spot were also unsuccessful.

discussion
in this study we used the transposon tn <dig> -based vector pism <dig> lac , modified to form pism <dig> ltuf acy phoa , to transform m. gallisepticum  and express functional alkaline phosphatase on the cell surface. two constructs containing the alkaline phosphatase gene, one with the vlha  <dig>  leader and acylation sequences and another without these sequences, were introduced into the tn  <dig> transposon arm. following transformation and immunoblotting, a 47 kda protein was detected in constructs containing the vlha  <dig>  leader and acylation sequence. the vlha  acylation sequence was chosen with the purpose of expressing the recombinant protein as a lipoprotein.

to confirm the processing of phoa as a lipoprotein, radiolabelling and globomycin treatment of mycoplasma cells were carried out. in m. gallisepticum , lipoproteins are predicted to be processed by signal peptidase ii, as no other protein processing pathways are known to be present. processing of lipoproteins by signal peptidase ii is specifically inhibited by globomycin and, consequently, processing into a mature lipopeptide is reduced. the increased size of phoa in cells grown in the presence of globomycin suggests that the vlha signal sequence was not processed, resulting in an unacylated preprotein. metabolic labelling of mycoplasmas can be problematic because of the requirement for serum in media, which results in low incorporation of lipids in radiolabelled cells  <cit> . the presence of other lipoproteins of similar molecular weight that can be labelled with palmitic acid  <cit>  can interfere with specific detection of radiolabelled proteins in sds-page gels. while it potentially offers greater specificity, detection in 2-d gels was problematic because of the low efficiency of label incorporation, the low abundance of phoa and the limited loading capacity of 2-d gels, which are likely to have contributed to our inability to detect radiolabelled phoa after 2-d gel electrophoresis.

alkaline phosphatase activity was not detected in tp transformants. ap of e. coli  has two identical subunits, which fold as monomers and then form dimers for enzymatic activity. in e. coli , the proteins thioredoxin reductase  and thio-disulfide isomerase  maintain the reduced state during export of the protein across the cytoplasmic membrane  <cit> . it is translocated across the membrane via a sec-dependent pathway to the periplasmic side of the cytoplasmic membrane, the leader peptide is cleaved and the mature alkaline phosphatase is released into the periplasm  <cit> . homologous proteins must have been present to enable the folding and export of functional phoa in ptap-transformed m. gallisepticum . the absence of detectable alkaline phosphatase expression and activity in ptp-transformed mycoplasma cells could be attributable to the lower level of transcription of phoa  together with the possible retention of the protein in the cytoplasm in a reduced form, and thus inactive, and subsequent proteolysis. since the promoter region and all other sequences preceding the start codon were identical to those in ptap, similar levels of transcription were expected for both constructs, but there was an eight-fold lower level of phoa  in ptp transformed cells compared to in those transformed with ptap. it is not clear whether the signal sequence in the ptap construct could have affected transcription and further studies are needed to elucidate the mechanisms for the lack of phoa activity in ptp transformants.

generally the differences in the protein export pathway of gram-positive bacteria result in low phoa  activity when it is introduced into these organisms  <cit> . this has led to the use of the enterococcus faecalis -derived phoz  as a reporter system in gram-positive bacteria  <cit> . although mycoplasmas have similarities to gram-positive bacteria, this study has shown that phoa  from e. coli  can be expressed as a membrane protein in m. gallisepticum .

as the construct could be successfully introduced into m. galliseptcium  using the transposon tn  <dig>  it could provide a suitable model for investigating membrane protein export in other mycoplasma species. other workers have investigated the use of tn phoa to detect membrane protein export signal sequences from genomic libraries of mycoplasmas, after introduction into e. coli <cit> . the ptap vector will be a valuable and versatile tool for studies analysing regulatory effects of promoter regions, gene expression using different translational start codons and leader sequences and also for optimising expression of foreign antigens. studies on gene regulation could also be facilitated by using the phoa vector.

mycoplasma lipoproteins are surface exposed and have atypical acylation, and are commonly immunodominant. thus expression of an antigen as a lipoprotein is likely to be an optimal approach to inducing a vaccinal response  <cit> . heterologous lipoprotein expression has been demonstrated in mycoplasmas and its use as live vaccine was emphasized in mycoplasma capricolum  subsp. capricolum , in which spiralin has been expressed on the cell surface using an oric  plasmid vector  <cit> . the phoa  vector we have described here could be used to facilitate optimisation of expression of heterologous bacterial or viral antigens, and immunomodulators on the mycoplasma cell surface. preliminary studies in our laboratory using the phoa  vector have been successful in expressing the immunomodulatory genes of chicken ifn-γ in the ts- <dig> vaccine strain  <cit> . the expression of such immunomodulatory genes has the potential to enhance the immunogenicity of live attenuated vaccines by intrinsic adjuvantation. the phoa  expression system allows rapid assessment of the level of expression from different promoter and signal sequences and thus optimisation of both expression and translocation of such heterologous proteins.

CONCLUSIONS
this is the first study to express alkaline phosphatase on the mycoplasma cell surface. the use of this system will enable us to further study protein translocation across mycoplasma membranes. the study also demonstrates the ease of using phoa  as a reporter gene in mycoplasmas. thus, we have successfully developed a vector system in mycoplasmas with the potential for use in optimising heterologous gene expression and ultimately in recombinant vaccine development, in addition to its potential as used as a tool in studies of the molecular pathogenesis of mycoplasmosis.

