BACKGROUND
the study of speciation lies at the nexus of micro- and macroevolution, i.e., phylogenetics and population genetics. phylogeography, which incorporates both approaches in a geographical context, examines the role of different historical processes in population demography, differentiation and speciation  <cit> . the advent of rapid and affordable dna sequencing over the past  <dig> years has catalyzed studies on the evolutionary dynamics of populations and the discovery of previously unrecognized morphologically cryptic species  <cit> .

the pea blue butterfly, lampides boeticus  , is one of the most widely distributed butterflies in the world, and is currently found across the palaearctic region from britain to japan, throughout suitable habitat in africa, madagascar, south east asia, and australia, extending eastwards to parts of oceania including hawaii. it occurs in temperate, subtropical, and tropical biomes in both lowland and montane localities, typically in open and/or disturbed areas.

taxonomically, l. boeticus is the only species in its genus and has no commonly recognized subspecies, despite its wide distribution. the larval stages feed on plants in at least six families, although leguminosae  is the predominant host plant taxon  <cit> . cultivated legumes, including broad beans  and garden peas  are among its preferred host plants, and the butterfly is a crop pest in many parts of its range  <cit> . lampides boeticus is among the approximately three-quarters of butterfly species in the family lycaenidae that associate with ants as larvae and pupae  <cit> . the species is facultatively tended by a variety of ants throughout its range, including camponotus spp., iridomyrmex spp., and 'tramp' ant species including tapinoma melanocephalum and the argentine ant, linepithema humile  <cit> .

we sampled  <dig> l. boeticus from  <dig> localities on four continents  to test the hypothesis that this widespread species, as currently circumscribed, consists of more than one genetically distinct taxon. we also used nucleotide sequence data to further examine the genetic structure of this species and analyze the demographic history of the sampled populations.

RESULTS
phylogenetic analyses and node dating
bayesian, maximum likelihood and parsimony phylogenetic analyses arrived at similar phylogenetic hypotheses for the evolutionary history of l. boeticus that agreed on all major groupings . cytochrome c oxidase subunit i  had  <dig> variable sites and cytochrome b  had  <dig>  of which  <dig> and  <dig> were parsimoniously informative, respectively. thus, cytb was more variable –  <dig> % of nucleotide sites were variable across all samples – than coi, in which  <dig> % of nucleotide sites varied. the percentage of parsimoniously informative nucleotide sites was also higher in cytb , as was the number of nucleotide sites with parsimoniously informative non-synonymous substitutions . the parsimony analysis resulted in  <dig>  most parsimonious trees with a tree score of  <dig>  the strict consensus of these trees differed with regard to two nodes when compared to the tree obtained in both bayesian and maximum likelihood analyses . lampides boeticus was monophyletic with regard to the three chosen outgroup species. in addition to the divergent genotypes in clades c and d , there were two other groups that were supported by bayesian, maximum likelihood and parsimony analyses. clade a contained all haplotypes from africa, madagascar, the eastern and western palaearctic, indo-burma, and the philippines not found in the divergent clades c and d. grade b is a paraphyletic assemblage containing all of the haplotypes from the sundaland, wallacean, and australian regions not found clades c and d. only samples  <dig> and  <dig> from clade d were infected with wolbachia as determined by pcr assay.

divergence of lampides from its putatively closest relative, cacyreus, occurred in the miocene approximately  <dig>  ±  <dig>  mya . divergence of clade d, containing haplotypes from north queensland and the moluccas , occurred in the pleistocene approximately  <dig>  ±  <dig>  mya, and clade a and grade b, containing the majority of haplotypes , diverged approximately  <dig>  ±  <dig>  mya . however, given the relative paucity of genetic variation and the small magnitude of the difference of the inferred ages of nodes , these age estimates should be regarded as approximations.

pairwise distances among l. boeticus coi+cytb haplotypes ranged from 0– <dig> % , while distances between l. boeticus and the outgroup taxa ranged from  <dig> – <dig> % . the relatively low levels of intraspecific sequence divergence among populations are consistent with the hypothesis that l. boeticus is a single species with pairwise genetic distances well below the upper ranges of intraspecific divergence estimates found in other lepidopteran species  <cit> .

specimens 1– <dig> are lampides boeticus, † = outgroup taxa,  <dig> = cacyreus marshalli,  <dig> = uranothauma falkensteini,  <dig> = phlyaria cyara. latitude, longitude, and elevation data were estimated from collection locality data using google earth http://earth.google.com for taxa marked with an asterisk ; coordinates and elevations for other taxa were recorded with hand-held gps. pairwise distance from  <dig> = pairwise distance from the most common haplotype, represented by specimen 1; pairwise distance from  <dig> = pairwise distance from the most divergent haplotype, specimen  <dig>  mcz = dna and tissues collection of the museum of comparative zoology, harvard university; rmbr = cryogenic collection of the raffles museum of biodiversity research, national university of singapore. coi and cytb = genbank accession numbers for each specimen

translated amino acid sequences were invariant within coi, but  <dig> changes at  <dig> sites were observed in cytb. mcdonald and kreitman tests found no evidence of natural selection acting on these mitochondrial genes .

perhaps the most striking pattern in the data was the paucity of genetic variation across vast geographic distances. our analyses showed that lampides boeticus is a widely distributed and apparently panmictic species with little population differentiation. the most common coi+cytb haplotype was shared by specimens from spain, turkey, kenya, namibia, madagascar, laos, and vietnam, spanning a distance of over  <dig>  km or  <dig> longitudinal degrees on three continents . coalescent theory predicts that internal nodes in a gene genealogy will be more common than tip nodes, as these represent older haplotypes. mutations at different sites within these ancestral haplotypes result in descendent haplotypes that are younger and less common, and appear as multiple 'tips' emanating from the more abundant haplotypes of the internal node  <cit> . this pattern was evident in our haplotype tree . however, several samples were highly divergent from the majority of genetically similar, yet widely distributed haplotypes. these samples could not be connected to the others with a 90% parsimony connection limit in the coi+cytb network . these haplotypes, corresponding to clades c and d in the phylogenetic analysis , were joined to very different sister haplotypes in the networks of coi and cytb, and with lower parsimony connection limits . in these networks for individual genes, the divergent samples were on relatively long braches, with a haplotype from central thailand closely related to a sample from madagascar in clade c. clade d contained a single sample from north queensland, australia, and differed at only two nucleotide sites from a haplotype shared by two samples from the wallacean islands of buton and tomea in the moluccas to the east of sulawesi. interestingly, other samples collected from the same sites in tomea and madagascar grouped with the bulk of genetically similar samples , indicating substantial genetic diversity within these populations . in the phylogenetic analyses, these lineages appear to have diverged earlier than the more common genotypes . it is unlikely that these haplotypes are nuclear copies of the mitochondrial genes , since all sequences could be translated into amino acids with no stop codons. in addition, both genes from the five specimens in clades c and d were amplified and sequenced twice to minimize the probability of human error.

demographic and population genetic analyses
indices of molecular diversity, results of tajima's d and fu's f tests, and output from the mismatch distribution analysis including estimated time since population bottlenecks are provided in table  <dig>  grant and bowen  <cit>  suggested that comparison of h and π values within clades can provide information about patterns of past demographic expansion and/or constriction. they categorized numerical values of h and π as either high or low, and described situations that may have lead to each of four possible scenarios. in our data set, h and π values of coi and cytb from clade a and grade b considered separately or together all fall into category  <dig>  with high h  and low π , indicating rapid expansion after a period of low effective population size. all values of fu's f statistic revealed significantly negative deviations from mutation-drift equilibrium   <cit> . in addition, tajima's d statistic was significantly negative for coi data from clade a and marginally non-significant for cytb data in the same clade, indicating deviation from neutral evolution and suggestive of demographic expansion.

number of samples , number of haplotypes , number of polymorphic nucleotide sites , average number of nucleotide differences  and variance, haplotype diversity  and standard deviation, and nucleotide diversity  and standard deviation calculated for each gene in the two largest and most widespread clades of lampides boeticus. tajima's d and fu's f test statistics with probability values for deviation from neutral evolution and test statistics for mismatch distributions of each gene , with estimates of time since expansion. reliable estimates for cytb divergence rates are not available for the calculation of time since expansion. significant p values are bold.

mismatch distributions are frequency distributions of the number of nucleotide differences in all pairwise comparisons. a population that has experienced sudden exponential growth from an initially small population is expected to have a unimodal mismatch distribution resulting from coalescence of haplotypes to the same bottleneck event  <cit> . in clade a and grade b, deviations of the observed distributions of nucleotide frequencies were not significantly different from those expected under a model of stepwise expansion , and visual inspection of the mismatch distributions  indicate that the unimodal distributions of both genes in clade a are highly suggestive of a bottleneck, while the bimodal distributions of both genes in grade b suggest that the initial population size was larger before the expansion. this difference between clade a and grade b is reflected in differences between the pre- and post-expansion values of θ or the coi data, though this difference is not evident in the θ values calculated from the shorter cytb sequence fragment . the estimated age of the bottleneck in clade a is more recent than that of grade b , reflecting the more recent divergence of clade a in the estimated phylogeny. the estimated age of the bottleneck for the pair of clades,  <dig>  my, predates the estimated divergence time of all extant l. boeticus  <dig>  mya , suggesting methodological discrepancy between the methods used to date divergence times and those used to estimate time since expansion. these differing estimates are no doubt affected by the inflated estimate of time since expansion due to the lack of a value for μ expressed in generations rather than years .

beerli  <cit>  provided evidence from analyses of simulated data that bayesian methods of population parameter estimation are more likely to provide accurate estimates than maximum likelihood methods. however, our estimations of the parameters θ and g using both methods are remarkably concordant. the analyses suggest that the populations constituting grade b are larger than those composing clade a, and that grade b has a higher exponential growth rate than clade a .

maximum likelihood estimates are given first; bayesian estimates are in parentheses.

with the exceptions of l. boeticus and the species cacyreus marshalli, which feeds on geraniums and recently underwent a range extension as an invasive species into southern europe from africa  <cit> , all species in each of the genera closely related to lampides are confined to the african region, with some species also present in madagascar. tracing the most parsimonious reconstruction of biogeographic regions on the given tree indicates that the most recent common ancestor of l. boeticus and its sister taxon lived in the african region. however, the optimization for the l. boeticus node is ambiguous, with an african origin being only one of several most parsimonious optimizations. the genus harpendyreus was placed in the same section as cacyreus by eliot  <cit> , implying a close relationship with lampides, but was not sampled in the phylogenetic reconstruction of the polyommatini. however, harpendyreus is wholly african, and its absence does not affect our inferences.

discussion
the phylogeographic structure of lampides boeticus was remarkable in two respects. while most sampled populations had little or no genetic variation across half the planet, a small number of specimens from widely spaced locales were highly divergent from the most common haplotypes, yet relatively similar to each other.

as currently circumscribed, l. boeticus appears to be monophyletic with respect to the outgroups included in this analyses, and is nested within a wholly african clade. while we acknowledge the possibility that some extant species may have relictual distributions, it seems plausible – given the number of exclusively african close relatives – that the most recent common ancestor from which lampides and its sister taxon evolved originated in africa and spread eastward across the old world. descendants from early expansion events  appear to have been largely replaced throughout much of the range by descendants from expansion events after one or more recent bottlenecks .

the low genetic divergence among most members of this species could be the result of either recent and rapid population expansion after a population bottleneck or selection acting on some portion of the mitochondrial genome. these explanations are not mutually exclusive, but the weight of evidence suggests that most extant populations of l. boeticus have descended from expansion after one or more bottlenecks. results from fu's f and tajima's d tests, analyses of mismatch distributions, and comparison of h and π values all suggest rapid expansion after a population bottleneck, with populations in clade a from africa, madagascar, the palaearctic, and the philippines resulting from a more severe population constriction than populations in grade b from sundaland, wallacea, and australia. moreover, since sampling was random with respect to genotype, the larger number of post-bottleneck haplotypes in clade a and grade b suggests that these individuals have a selective advantage over individuals from clades c and d, perhaps because they displaced most of the individuals from these basal lineages or because they are more effective dispersers or colonizers. our data, however, cannot rule out the possibility that genetic drift is responsible for the predominance of haplotypes in clade a and grade b. since l. boeticus is a polyphagous crop pest, human agriculture or commerce may have aided the rapid movement of the species around the globe by inadvertently transporting it with crop plants or produce. however, we suspect this factor has been minimal or geographically restricted, as no individuals from clade a were found in the areas inhabited by individuals from grade b, and vice versa.

inspection of haplotype networks from individual and concatenated genes  further suggest that australia has been colonized by l. boeticus at least three times: once by an ancestor of the genetically divergent individual in clade d , once from a lineage originating in wallacea , and at least once by a lineage from sundaland .

a selective sweep acting on some portion of the mitochondrial genome might also explain the paucity of genetic variation in clade a and grade b. zink  <cit>  has shown that natural selection on a transmembrane portion of the mitochondrial nd <dig> gene is responsible for the shallow and unstructured haplotype trees of parus montanus , and similar selective forces on one or more mitochondrial gene could account for the pattern observed in l. boeticus. however, macdonald and kreitman tests reveal no evidence for selection acting on the genes sequenced for this study.

infection by wolbachia spp., a group of rickettsial endocellular bacteria that manipulate host reproduction in a variety of ways, can spread rapidly throughout contiguous populations, purging genetic variation of the host species and causing a so-called 'wolbachia sweep'  <cit>  capable of reducing haplotype diversity within populations and whole species  <cit> . however, none of the samples in clade a, grade b, and clade c tested positive for wolbachia infection, though two of the three samples  in clade d were infected. the uninfected specimen in this clade was from a dried specimen of unknown age purchased from a dealer who could not provide the collection date, and may also have been infected, but the wolbachia dna was too degraded to be amplified in the pcr test employed here.

four lines of evidence suggest that all l. boeticus populations sampled in this study belong to a single, potentially interbreeding species: 1) even the highest l. boeticus intraspecific pairwise distance values are within the range of intraspecific variation recorded from other butterfly species; 2) monophyly of all sampled populations is well supported ; 3) the lack of external morphological differences among populations; and 4) estimated divergence time of all sampled l. boeticus genes  is more recent than the estimated divergence of lampides from its putative sister genus cacyreus  <dig>  mya. there are many caveats to using pairwise genetic distances and a molecular clock to infer the age of lineage splitting events  <cit> . these ages must thus remain speculative and, in the case of l. boeticus, cannot be confirmed by biogeographic or fossil evidence.

the haplotypes in clades c and d are most likely descended from basal lineages that diverged before the putative population bottleneck that gave rise to clade a and grade b. descendents of these bottlenecks seem to have largely displaced earlier lineages throughout the species' range. the relatively large number of synapomorphies that unite the haplotypes in clade c and clade d renders convergence unlikely, and the geographical distances between haplotypes in these clades – particularly between the thai and malagasy specimens in clade c – makes dispersal an unlikely explanation. the presence of these early-diverging clades, in conjunction with the inferred demographic history of clade a and grade b, suggest a demographic history profoundly affected by the species' propensity to undertake regional migrations  <cit> .

the low genetic diversity of lampides boeticus in clade a and grade b across its geographic range is similar to that of several other old world lepidopteran crop pests. like l. boeticus, the haplotype network of helicoverpa armigera  has a comparatively long branch, but the cluster of haplotypes at the end of this branch belong to a separate species, h. zea, which is morphologically distinguishable only by close examination of the genitalia  <cit> . the population parameters of θ estimated for clade a and grade b  overlap with θ values calculated for several other widespread pestiferous lepidoptera, including h. armigera   <cit>  and ostrinia nubilalis . values for the gypsy moth, lymantria dispar , are notably lower  than for la. boeticus, but the demographic scenario inferred for ly. dispar is remarkably similar to that of la. boeticus: divergent lineages in widespread locales  are thought to represent ancient splitting events from populations spreading throughout eurasia, with current european populations harboring the most derived haplotypes  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
our analyses suggest that all populations of the butterfly lampides boeticus  sampled in this study belong to a single, widespread species with a complex evolutionary history. phylogenetic estimates suggest that the most recent common ancestor of l. boeticus and its sister taxon diverged in africa in the miocene approximately  <dig>  mya, but all extant populations coalesce to a most recent common ancestor that lived approximately  <dig>  –  <dig>  mya, near the beginning of the pleistocene. the majority of individuals are descended from expansion events after one or more population bottlenecks, though some populations harbor ancestral polymorphism predating these population constrictions. one lineage found in northern australia and the moluccas may have experienced accelerated differentiation due to infection with the rickettsial endosymbiont wolbachia, which infected at least  <dig> of  <dig> sampled individuals in this clade. the proclivity of l. boeticus to undergo regional migrations of unknown distance appears to have prevented genetic differentiation due to isolation by distance, and the species' apparent wanderlust has clearly shaped its demographic history, which is marked by expansion and long distance dispersal following periods of small population size.

