BACKGROUND
due to animal welfare considerations the eu has banned the use of conventional cages  for laying hens from  <dig>  and alternative systems such as furnished cage systems , floor systems or aviaries  have been proposed to replace these  <cit> . traditionally, hens have been housed in minor cages with groups of 4- <dig> individuals, and the alternative systems are based on larger groups of more than  <dig> hens. in these cages layers are provided more space and facilities for natural behaviour, however a more aggressive nature among the laying hens has been observed  <cit> , and environmental problems with a higher bacterial contamination level have also been noted  <cit> . this has led to concerns about an increased risk of transmission of salmonella to humans due to a general higher level of microbial contamination of the shell of eggs derived from hens housed in alternative housing systems  <cit> . it is not known whether the combination of larger group sizes and social stress may increase the susceptibility to colonization by salmonella. stressing laying hens by feed withdrawal is a traditional method to induce molting, and in several studies this have resulted in an increase in the susceptibility towards colonization by salmonella  <cit> . the mechanism behind this is not well understood, but the starvation may affect the balance between different microbial populations in the intestinal microbiota  <cit> , as a reduction in diversity is observed which may lower the natural competitive barrier  <cit> .

in the investigations of the dynamics in the intestinal microbiota, molecular methods have superseded conventional culture methods due to an increased sensitivity, and have become powerful tools. terminal restriction fragment length polymorphism  and denaturant gradient gel electrophoresis  have been used to describe variations and diversity of the microbiota in the intestinal tract in broilers  <cit> . however, when it comes elucidate the phylogenetic diversity in the intestinal microbiota at species level, these methods are not sensitive and specific enough. by traditional culture methods only culturable genera are detected, and these are estimated to be about 1% of all genera present in the microbiota  <cit> , whereas dgge only detects species that represent more than 1% of the total microbiota  <cit> , and in t-rflp, sequence redundancy at the cleaving side may generate fragments of the same length from various species. a more comprehensive description of the distribution of species in the microbiota can be done by sanger sequencing of 16s rdna libraries. with this method individual species are arranged into operational taxonomic units  based on > 98% similarity of 16s rdna sequences  <cit> , but as these methods are very laborious, only the most dominating species are detected. a much deeper investigation of the microbiota has been achieved with the introduction of second generation sequencing technology, such as  <dig> pyrosequencing, where massive parallel sequencing of short hyper variable regions within the 16s rdna is performed  <cit> . using this technology, a 16s rdna library may be sequenced in one run; generating a large number of sequence reads that allows a much deeper insight in the distribution of species. although the generated sequences do not cover the whole gene, huse et al.  <cit>  were able to achieve a 99% correlation of identification, when compared with full length sequencing of a library from the human microbiota.

the microbiota of laying hens experiencing nutritional stress has been investigated by  <dig> pyrosequencing  <cit> . in this study, the authors described the changes in the microbiota induced by different molting methods, where hens were given different feed or being starved. by starving the layers, they observed a decrease in species diversity of the caecal microbiota which was not found in hens receiving a diet with high fiber content. with the change to more welfare friendly cage systems, laying hens are now going to be housed in larger groups of  <dig> birds, rather than 4- <dig> birds as seen in conventional battery cages. whether these changes in group size, increased contact between individuals or change in behavior may also have influence on the diversity of the species in the intestinal tract or in the oviduct, have not been investigated. using molecular methods as t-rflp and next generation sequencing, the aim of this study was to describe the effect of the housing system on the distribution of the dominating bacterial species in the intestinal microbiota in laying hens housed in different cage systems before and after inoculation with salmonella enteritidis.

RESULTS
t-rflp analysis of the impact of cage type on intestinal microbiota
the microbiota in ileal and caecal samples from the first experiment were characterised by creating individual t-rflp fingerprint profiles for each sample. profiles were generated on the basis of the number of terminal restriction fragments  in the range of  <dig> -  <dig> bp. the relationship between two profiles could then be calculated by pair wise comparisons as a dice similarity coefficient , however to compensate for the variation between individual comparisons, the mean of the sd values was calculated and used to compare cage groups. the dice coefficients from the first experimental study are shown in table  <dig>  in ileum, the highest dice score was found between samples within same cage, and especially cc and av diverged clearly from each other  with fc being in between, sharing profiles with both the other cages . when sampling was done  <dig> weeks later, higher sd values were calculated within cage, while values between cages were in the range  <dig> - <dig> . this shows that layers sharing the same environment also had comparable ileal microbiota, and this similarity increased over time. the height of the t-rf peaks reflected the prevalence of individual species in the microbiota. ileum was characterized by having the same 3- <dig> dominating t-rfs in all cage groups, but other individual t-rfs were also present. before inoculation  <dig>  ±  <dig>  different t-rfs were detected in cc, while fc had  <dig>  ±  <dig>  and av  <dig>  ±  <dig> . these were maintained throughout the study, although an increase was found in av . the four most dominating t-rfs in all samples were  <dig> bp,  <dig> bp,  <dig> bp, and  <dig> bp. these t-rflp fragments could be equated with by different lactobacillus species by in silico digest of 16s rdna. although the total number of detectable t-rfs remained constant in the ileum, an inverted relationship was found between one group of t-rfs:  <dig> bp,  <dig> bp and  <dig> bp which decreased in height, whereas as a new and unidentified t-rf  <dig> bp emerged. this shift was primarily found in layers from fc and a few layers from other cages, and this may explain some of the differences observed in sd between cages.

n: number of samples

sd: dice similarity coefficient

t-rf: terminal restriction fragments

the t-rflp profiles from the caecum contained a higher number of t-rfs reflecting a much more complex microbiota than in the ileum, and an increase in the amount of t-rfs was observed in all caecal microbiota over time . the majority of the dominating t-rfs were shared by all cage groups, however cages specific differences among the minor t-rfs were observed. samples from cc and fc were more uniform, whereas a large variation between the profiles was observed in av on the first sampling day , however the profiles were more uniform on the second sampling  <dig> weeks later . the sd values were higher within the same group than between cage groups, and an increase in sd over time was observed, in accordance with the findings from the ileum.

to test whether the differences in profiles between cages were caused by a specific cage factor or merely a reflection of isolation between cages, we included samples from the second experimental study  <cit> . apart from one t-rf , all dominating t-rfs in the ileum from the first trial were also present in a second study. the major groups of t-rfs in the caecal samples were similar between experiments; however some fragment were only found in one of the experiments. to test for common cage factors, profiles from the caecum were compared by principal component analysis  . a clear clustering of samples from the same experiment and cage system was observed. by the first principal component  all caecal t-rflp profiles were clearly separated in two groups according to sampling day and experiment, thus showing that the highest variance was caused by differences between the two experiments. the second component  separated each experiment into three clusters each containing profiles from same cage system. in both studies cc samples were most different from av, with fv samples clustering in between. samples collected before inoculation did not cluster as clearly as samples taken at the end of the study. an indication of a common cage factor was observed by the y component, where samples from the same cages in both experiments were influenced similarly by this component. the pca showed that especially t-rf  <dig> was more prevalent in samples from cc, while t-rf  <dig> was more frequently found in av. it is likely that the first fragment may represent a lactobacillus spp., while no specific genera could be identified for the other fragment, as several different genera  may be represented by this t-rf.

t-rflp analysis of the impact of salmonella on the intestinal microbiota
the impact of an inoculation with s. enteritidis on intestinal microbiota was also evaluated. after inoculation, no clinical signs of infection were detected in the layers. however, colonisation of the intestinal microbiota was established, and s. enteritidis could be detected in samples from internal organs as well as in cloacal swabs  <cit> . at the end of both studies, salmonella was found in a few layers by culture and pcr. in the ileal samples, salmonella was detected in 2/ <dig> from av by pcr, while other samples were negative. in the caecum, s. enteritidis could be cultured in 2/ <dig> samples from av, 3/ <dig> from both fc and cc. the concentration of s. enteritidis in the positive samples was generally low, as culture positive samples not always were positive by real-time pcr. t-rflp profiles of intestinal microbiota positive for s. enteritidis were compared with profiles where it had been eliminated. on the basis of the mean sd values calculated between salmonella negative and positive samples from the same cage, no differences could be detected between positive and negative samples within same cage . when profiles were analysed by pca, no discrimination was found between positive or negative samples within the same cages .

 <dig> sequencing of the caecal microbiota
the microbiota in the caecal samples from the first experiment were further characterized by  <dig> pyrosequencing of 16s rdna gene libraries. due to the high sample similarity observed in the t-rflp analysis, we pooled the dna from  <dig> cage mates and used this as template for  <dig> pyrosequencing. in total six samples were generated, one for each cage type before and after inoculation with salmonella. from each sample, between  <dig>  and  <dig>  sequence reads could be used for analysis . on the basis of 99% similarity these reads were sorted into otus. the amount of reads in each otu varied greatly ranging from more than  <dig>  to single reads, thus reflecting the prevalence in the microbiota. due to differences in the amount of sequence reads obtained from individual samples, the relative distribution of sequences was calculated on the basis of the total number of reads from the sample. otus that accounted for > 1% of the total number of sequences were considered as dominant species.

a the ratio was calculated by dividing all otu that could be affiliated to firmicutes  by the number of otu's from bacteroides.

in total,  <dig> different otus were identified, and  <dig> and  <dig>  respectively, out of these were found in non-inoculated samples from av and fc, however, for cc a progressive decrease in numbers of otus was observed in both samples before and after inoculation with salmonella. in these cages,  <dig> otus were identified before inoculation and  <dig> otus four weeks after inoculation, while in the other cages  <dig> otus were detected at the end of the experiment. due to a different number of reads obtained from each sample, normalized prevalence values of each otu were calculated. using a cut-off value of  <dig> %, the difference in diversity between cages was still observed where the dominating genera in cc constituted a larger proportion of the microbiota at the expense of fewer otu's, compared to the two other cages .

the consensus sequence from each otu was compared against the ribosomal database  to find the most related species or genus. though many of the bacterial species in the caecal microbiota still remain to be characterized, it was possible to classify 92% of all otus to phylum level, and out of these were 86% classified to class level and 55% to genus level. although variation was observed in the relative presence that colonized the caecum, it was the same group of genera that were dominating in all cages before and after inoculation, accounting for more than 74% of the total amount of reads . the caecal microbiota from all cages was dominated by two phyla: bacteroidetes and firmicutes, with proteobacteria, fusobacteria, actinobacteria and deferribacteres also being represented, but only in low numbers. the dominating classes were bacteroidia and clostridia , and within these classes were butyricimonas spp. and faecalibacterium spp. the most dominating genera. based on identified otu's, a ratio between bacteroidetes and firmicutes was calculated . all samples had a relatively high number of bacteroidetes, with the exception of cc where a drop was observed in samples collected  <dig> weeks post infection .

a) percentages are presented as the relative distribution compared to all otu's in the sample.

discussion
to investigate the impact of different housing conditions on the intestinal microbiota in ileum and caecum in laying hens, samples obtained from two experimental inoculation studies previously reported by de vylder et al.  <cit>  have been further characterised using t-rflp and  <dig> pyrosequencing. we found that individuals living in the same environment also tend to develop similar microbiota. despite of being raised in the same environment and likely having similar microbiota to begin with, we found, that when hens were transferred to different cages types  for  <dig> weeks, minor but uniform changes in the t-rflp profiles of the microbiota in ileum and caecum occurred. by comparing t-rflp fingerprints from individual hens, we found highly similar ileal and caecal profiles in hens from same cage, which could be discriminated from other cages in the same experiment. however, the differences were not cage type specific, as when samples from two independent experiments were compared by pca, the largest component were observed between experiments, meaning that cage type only had minor influence on the variance. this indicates that the intestinal microbiota may be influenced on the contact to the surrounding microbiological environment in the cage.

the differences in the evolution of the microbiota were further analysed by deep sequencing of 16s rdna libraries from pooled caecal samples. when  <dig> week old laying hens were moved from a floor system and into conventional cages, their caecal microbiota changed towards a less diverse microbiota compared to hens from the same flock that were allocated to aviary and furnished cages. sequencing of rdna libraries revealed that hens housed in conventional cages showed a progressive decrease in the number of different otus in their caecal microbiota, compared to hens housed in aviary or furnished cages. the decline was already observed after  <dig> weeks in the cage, and it was even more pronounced after  <dig> weeks. the same reduction was not observed in the other cage systems. the otus that were not recovered in conventional cages were all represented in the other cages, however in low numbers reflecting that they belong to the group of less abundant species. as each otu represents unique genera or even species, this reflects an overall decrease in diversity of their caecal microbiota towards fewer and more dominating species. alternative cage systems are characterized by having larger cages due to flock sizes and facilities for enhancing natural behaviour. these facilities may, however, hinder the removal of manure compared to conventional cages, and an overall higher bacterial level has been noted in these systems  <cit> . it is likely that the laying hens housed in a more contaminated environment, as in the alternative systems, may be more exposed to faeces from the other layers, and thereby continuously being reinoculated, thereby maintaining a higher species variety in the microbiota.

the vast amount of sequence reads generated from each sample by  <dig> pyrosequencing allowed quantification of the individual otu in relation to the total flora. only minor differences were observed in the relative distribution of phyla and classes of bacteria in the caecal microbiota between cages, but quantitative variations that were not cage specific were observed between different genera. however, when otus were grouped according to phyla and classes, comparable groups were found in all samples. this indicates that the cage system itself did not influence the balance between the large classes, but pinpoints the caecal microbiota as a dynamic, highly competitive organ where a decrease in one genus may be compensated by an increase in a closely related species, or other species belonging to the same functional guild that shares the same requirement for substrates.

when the consensus sequences from  <dig> otus were aligned with the rdp database, more than 91% were identifiable at least to phylum level, and more than 55% could be identified to genus level. the most prevalent phyla in the caecal microbiota were bacteroidetes, with firmicutes being the second most prevalent. the ratios between these two phyla  remained fairly equal between the cc and ac, but a decrease was observed for cc. a major reason for this difference was promoted by a shift from faecalibacterium to butyricimonas. whether this change was mediated by the cage system of a coincidence remains to be established, but we did not find that it changed the susceptibility for salmonella, probably because both species produces butyric acid. there are indications that the feed may have large influence the f/b ratio. in domestic and wild turkeys, scupham et al.  <cit>  found similar ratios between these phyla; however this is in contrast to the caecal microbiota found in broilers. in a number of studies  <cit> , the microbiota in broilers were heavily dominated by firmicutes, with bacteroidetes only present at much lower level. an explanation for this may be the different feeding strategies that are used. broilers are normally fed a high energy diet that sustains fast growth, which possibly leaves more digestible nutrients for the intestinal microbiota. in contrast, laying hens are fed a much more restricted diet containing less energy and higher amounts of digestive fibers, which instead may favour genera from bacteroidetes. the same phenomena has been described for the microbiota in obese humans, where ley et al.  <cit>  observed an increase in bacteroidetes during long term restricted diet.

the two most dominating genera found in this study were faecalibacterium and butyricimonas constituting more than one third of the total microbiota in all sequenced caecal samples. the first species is a well known colonizer of the caecal microbiota of poultry; however butyricimonas has just recently been described in rats  <cit> , and has to our knowledge not been described in poultry before. both bacteria are important contributors to the production of butyric acid in the lower intestine, and may represent an important functional guild in the microbiota. studies have shown that especially butyric acid may have a prominent role in the reduction of invasion  <cit> , and colonization of salmonella in the caecal microbiota  <cit> . butyricimonas was the most dominant genus in caecum samples from conventional cages, but this difference was not reflected in any variations found in the colonization level of s. enteritidis as reported by de vylder et al.  <cit> , who found no difference in excretion level and time between cage systems.

we did not find evidence that the introduction of s. enteritidis to the intestinal microbiota were able to change the species diversity in ileum or caecum. when individual t-rflp profiles from salmonella positive layers were compared with cage mates that had cleared the infection no differences were observed. when comparing the distribution of otu in each group before and after inoculation, the balance between different classes and genera were also maintained throughout the study. the low impact on the intestinal microbiota may be explained by the fact that inoculation only induced a subclinical infection, in contrast to experimental studies where a more profound disturbance of the microbiota has been observed in cases where diarrhoea has followed infection  <cit> .

in the early studies of nurmi and rantala  <cit> , it was shown that a highly diverse intestinal microbiota in broilers is one of the best barriers towards colonization with salmonella . however, we did not find that decreased diversity in the layers had a significant impact on the colonization and elimination of salmonella. it is likely that this colonisation resistance is highly important in broilers where a mature flora has not been established yet, but in layers this may not be as important. furthermore, in the second inoculation study where seeder birds were housed together with non-infected birds, de vylder et al.  <cit>  found that the transmission of s. enteritidis was higher among hens housed in aviary or floor system than in conventional and furnished cages. a likely explanation for our observation is that direct contact to faecal material from infected hens is very important for the transmission of s. enteritidis in a flock, and that the higher species diversity found in layers with more contact with faecal material does not prevent colonization, but keeps it at a relatively low level.

CONCLUSIONS
in the present study, we have compared the intestinal microbiota in layers from different housing systems under experimental conditions. when laying hens were housed in conventional cages, a change was observed in their caecal microbiota towards a less diverse flora, with the most prevalent genera being more dominating compared to aviary and furnished cage. this decrease in diversity did not have an impact on the elimination of salmonella, and moreover the higher diversity found in aviary systems did not protect laying hens from being infected. we did not find evidence, that the cage systems itself was able to change the intestinal microbiota in a way which made it more sensible towards colonization with salmonella, but it highlights that hygiene in alternative systems is a particularly critical factor for preventing the spread of salmonella within a flock.

