BACKGROUND
the use of cdna and oligonucleotide microarray technology has revolutionized the fields of molecular biology, biochemistry and genetics. the ability to simultaneously evaluate gene expression across tens of thousands of genes gives researchers opportunities not previously afforded to them.

rna extractions have proven to be of large concern for evaluating messenger rna transcript levels by microarrays and other procedures such as rt-pcr, rnase protection assays and northern blot analyses. extraction procedures are still evolving and adapt to meet different needs, such as for pure cell populations  <cit> . differences between two rna extractions from the same source material have been shown to make a significant contribution to technical variance in microarray data  <cit> .

microarray technology utilizes various protocols based in part on reverse transcription and pcr technologies  <cit> . direct labeling protocols use modified deoxyribonucleotide phosphates  incorporated during a reverse transcription reaction, in which mrna is copied into cdna. one possible modification to the dntps is the addition of an amino-propagyl cyanine  fluorescent molecule at the 5-carbon of the pyrimidine base  <cit> . for cdna and oligonucleotide microarrays, cy <dig> and cy <dig> are commonly used fluorescent dyes that are excited by different wavelengths of light. therefore they can be used in combination, one labeling a control or reference sample and the other labeling the treatment or test sample. after combining the two labeled cdna samples and hybridizing to a microarray chip, gene expression can be extrapolated from the ratio of the two different cyanine dye fluorescences detected. the entire microarray process, especially the reverse transcription labeling procedure, is dependent upon the quality and integrity of the starting rna.

the agilent  <dig> bioanalyzer, first described for the investigation of dna, employs microfluidic technology for the analysis of nucleic acids and proteins  <cit> . a total rna assay determines a numerical value for the ratio of 28s ribosomal rna  subunit to 18s rrna subunit, while an mrna assay determines the percentage of rrna contamination. to measure ribosomal subunit concentrations, rna is combined with a sample buffer containing a fluorescent dye that intercalates into the rna and is excited by an internal  <dig> nm diode laser. data output is in the form of an electropherogram, which graphically depicts spikes in fluorescence over time; the larger the peak, the more intact ribosomal subunits are in the sample. if a sample is degraded, subunits will show a smaller degree of fluorescence that is spread out over a longer amount of time, indicating a greater variety of sizes in the sample. auer and colleagues recently published the "degradation factor" utilizing data obtained using the rna assay of the bioanalyzer as a more quantitative approach  <cit> . this approach calculates a ratio between the 18s ribosomal peak area and the average of the peaks smaller than the 18s ribosomal peak that are indicative of degradation. the authors show that rna isolations which exhibit similar degradation factors are more likely to give gene expression results that are more biologically relevant than comparing two rna isolations with differing degrees of degradation.

the quality and integrity of rna samples can be evaluated by gel electrophoresis, uv spectrophotometry and the agilent bioanalyzer. from one or a combination of these methods, assessments of how well an rna sample may perform in a reverse transcription labeling reaction and subsequent microarray chip hybridization can be made. unfortunately, the cdna reverse-transcribed from an rna of reasonable quality may not yield reliable products after the labeling steps and lead to poor hybridization results. our lab has experienced this problem as a result of, among others, possible genomic dna contamination of the rna sample. this problem with the rna is difficult to detect with an rna assay on the bioanalyzer, and the contamination will likely impact the quality of any labeling reaction the sample is used in, regardless of the fluorophore.

agilent currently promotes the use of their instrument for measuring cy-labeled crna obtained from an amplification protocol. they do not, however, currently have a protocol to measure the quality of cy-labeled cdna from a direct labeling protocol. to address and avoid the loss of time and money associated with a failed microarray analysis, we present a novel use for the agilent  <dig> bioanalyzer in determining the relative quantity and quality of direct-labeled products obtained during the labeling reaction. by comparing with cdna obtained from known high quality rna, we can determine how well the cyanine dye was directly incorporated during reverse transcription, and thus if reliable microarray data can be obtained.

RESULTS
using an agilent bioanalyzer, typical indications of high quality, intact total rna samples are electropherograms with flat baselines and a relatively flat valley between the two strong fluorescent rrna peaks . an important note is that within the context of a high quality total rna sample, the mrna fluorescence is below detection. mrna normally accounts for only 1–5% of a total rna sample  <cit>  and the rrna peaks dominate the fluorescence of these samples. the undegraded total rna sample shows distinct 18s and 28s rrna subunit spikes, with a ratio of  <dig>  . this ratio, along with the contours of the electropherogram, led to the conclusion that this was an undegraded, high quality rna sample. treatment with  <dig> ng ml- <dig> rnase degrades essentially all rna present, as evidenced by its lack of 18s and 28s rrna peaks . concentrations of rnase less than  <dig> ng ml- <dig> only partially degrade the rna samples since 18s and 28s peaks are detectable but less than optimal .

fully degraded, partially degraded and intact rna, generated by titrating varying amounts of rnase, were used to prepare samples for measuring cy <dig> incorporation directly into the cdna by reverse transcription of rna by the agilent  <dig> bioanalyzer. it should be noted, however, that rnase treatment can be unpredictable, since even slight deviations in temperature and timing of incubation can result in varying degrees of degradation. over triplicate experiments, individual treatments could vary over 100% from day to day, however the overall trends do not change.

cy5-dutp was directly incorporated by reverse transcription into the intact  sample as well as the three rnase treated samples. since the rna is hydrolyzed after reverse transcription, only the cdna detectable. analysis of the cy <dig> signal obtained from an intact rna sample , as measured by the bioanalyzer, reveals a distribution of different transcript sizes. along with a wide distribution of sizes, the overall fluorescence is much higher for the undegraded sample as compared to the rnase-treated samples . the cy5-labeled cdna concentration, calculated by the bioanalyzer assay as the area under the curve in figure 1e, decreases approximately 65% after treatment with  <dig> ng ml- <dig> rnase and 30% with  <dig>  ng ml- <dig> rnase. treatment with  <dig>  ng ml- <dig> rnase also depleted cy5-labeled cdna concentration, though only by about 25%. these bioanalyzer results show considerable reductions in cy5-labeled cdna signal obtained, due to the degraded nature of the rna samples.

gel electrophoresis, such as small scale poly-acrylamide analysis  <cit> , has been used to determine characteristics of cy <dig> incorporation. as shown in figure  <dig>  the phosphorimager scan of an agarose gel and the "gel-like image" obtained from the bioanalyzer visually depict common trends. however, performing the gel electrophoresis was more sample- and time-consuming. furthermore, quantitation was more subjective since measurement areas must be user-defined. the coefficients of variation, though intrinsically high because of the rnase treatment itself, were higher for the gel electrophoresis analysis.

further validation of this assay came from analyzing rna samples that had previously been labeled and hybridized, but provided poor quality expression data. these rnas, based on bioanalyzer electropherograms similar to that of the intact rna in figure 1a, appeared to be of high quality with 18s:28s peak ratios in excess of  <dig> . to test the new assay, the labeling reactions were performed again and the labeled products produced were assessed on the bioanalyzer and hybridized to the niehs human toxchip.

as shown in figure 3a, each of these test samples show a marked decrease in the total fluorescence measured by the bioanalyzer as compared to the control samples, which were derived from rna that had previously performed well in microarray labeling and hybridization procedures. additionally, comparison of average array intensity for each of the test samples is dramatically reduced when compared with arrays hybridized with product from mcf <dig> intact rnas . we believe that there was possible genomic dna contamination, as evidenced by non-migratory nucleotides in the wells of a formaldehyde gel  it has been implicated that dna contamination causes a decrease in efficiency of the labeling procedure  <cit> , though other contaminants inherent to rna extraction, such as phenol, or inherent to the rna sample  may also interfere. though first thought to be of ideal quality for microarray, these human lung fibroblast test samples have been shown through the application of this novel assay to be less than optimal for use on a microarray chip. had this assay been used prior to hybridization in previous experiments, the money and time spent in putting these direct labeled products on a chip would have been saved.

CONCLUSIONS
from this novel bioanalyzer assay, we are able to determine if a sample of questionable integrity is "chip worthy" or not. selection criteria are subjective since the quality requirement will differ for different platforms. determining the integrity of a sample could save an investigator a significant amount of capital resources . the agilent  <dig> bioanalyzer provides a cost-efficient way to determine an rna, and the subsequent cdna, sample's ability to provide high quality data  for a microarray chip. though not meant as an absolute quantitative tool, trends in labeling efficiency can be assessed using this novel method. this assay can be used in place of conventional gel electrophoresis because it is more time and sample efficient, and it is considerably more cost effective than microarray hybridizations. in the future, we plan to use this assay to as a screening tool for direct labeled products prior to hybridization.

