BACKGROUND
in most sexually reproducing species, males compete for access to females. this competition amongst males can potentially result in male specific adaptations including the ability to manipulate their mates – either physically or physiologically. as a by-product of such manipulation, males often end up causing fitness depression in females  <cit> . such effect of males on female fitness is generally called mate-harm  <cit> . mate-harm in turn selects for increased resistance to male-induced harm in females. the mechanisms of mate-harm vary across species  <cit> . it can range from purely physiological  to mechanical . for example, in fruit flies  mate-harm is caused both by physical coercion during courtship  <cit>  and by physiological manipulation mediated through accessory gland proteins  <cit> . due to these, females suffer mating cost both in terms of fecundity as well as longevity  <cit> . in water striders  <cit>  and bean weevil  <cit>  on the other hand, mate-harm happens principally through mechanical rout, leading to enhanced mortality in females. this dynamic conflict between the two sexes, commonly known as interlocus sexual conflict, can potentially lead to open ended cycles of adaptation and counter adaptation – reminiscent of the “red queen” dynamics in prey–predator or host-parasite systems  <cit> .

interlocus sexual conflict has been hypothesized to be an important evolutionary force, potentially affecting the evolution of life-history traits  <cit>  and rates of aging  <cit> , as well as promoting speciation  <cit> .

there are two aspects of interlocus conflict –  evolution of male traits related to “mate-harm ability” and  evolution of traits related to resistance to male-induced harm in females. here, we focus on the male part of the conflict. in addition to the evolution of mate-harming ability in males, we also explore the evolution of life-history traits in males from populations routinely experiencing different operational sex-ratios.

a number of experimental evolution approaches have addressed the interesting dynamics related to the evolution of mate-harm and other components of male reproductive behaviour. in one approach, populations were either released from sexual antagonism  or were subjected to sexual antagonism . following several generations of selection, monogamous males were found to be more benign compared to polygamous males  <cit> . experimentally enforced monogamy has been shown to select for reduced investment in sperm production  relative to the polygamous condition  <cit> . these studies indicated the maintenance cost of the relevant male traits. in another approach, populations were subjected to male-limited evolution, wherein males were allowed to evolve with respect to a fixed target female phenotype  <cit> . both the studies reported increase in male fitness in absence of the gender load. while rice  <cit>  found harming ability of males to evolve in response to such selection, such response was not observed by jiang et al.  <cit> . yet another approach has been to experimentally evolve populations under different levels of sexual antagonism generated by varying the operational sex ratio of the populations  <cit> . in all these studies, females’ ability to resist mate-harm has been found to evolve in response to such selection. crudgington et al.  <cit>  found males evolved under male biased operational sex ratio to be more harming to their mates relative to males evolved under enforced monogamy. however, wigby and chapman  <cit>  found males’ harming ability to be unresponsive to the selection . thus from the multifarious results observed in a range of experimental evolution studies, it appears that the issue of evolution of mate-harm and male reproductive behaviour and/or physiology under intersexual conflict is far from being settled.

theories suggest that males under stronger sexual conflict should evolve increased investment in sexual reproduction and related traits at the cost of faster aging and shorter life-span  <cit> . however, only few studies have so far addressed the correlation between sexual conflict and evolution of life-span and aging. maklakov et al.  and maklakov and fricke  did not find any effect of artificially imposed monogamy or polyandry on the life-span and rate of aging of the males of their study populations  <cit> . thus it is important to test whether evolution under different levels of sexual conflict leads to the predicted  <cit>  changes in life-span and rate of aging.

here we ask the following questions:  does the ability of males to cause mate-harm evolve under different levels of sexual conflict?  if mate-harm evolves under such condition, how do males become more harming? do their behavioural traits, such as courtship frequency and spontaneous locomotor activity, respond to such selection?  is there a longevity cost to adaptation to varying levels of sexual conflict?

we present the results of an experimental evolution study addressing interlocus conflict. three replicate populations of drosophila melanogaster were each subjected to three different levels of sexual antagonism by manipulating the operational sex ratio – male biased , equal sex ratio  and female biased . intensity of interlocus conflict is expected to be high under male biased condition, moderate under equal sex ratio and low under female biased regime. evolution of sperm competitive ability in these selection regimes has already been reported  <cit> . we have shown that both components of sperm competitive ability  have declined under f-regime, while sperm defense has increased under m-regime  <cit> . here we report the evolution of  body size,  harming ability of the males ,  courtship frequency,  spontaneous locomotor activity and  mean longevity and age specific survival rate under two conditions – reproducing and non-reproducing.

RESULTS
the experiment was performed using a set of laboratory adapted populations of drosophila melanogaster – lh and lhst see methods section and  <cit> . the lhst population was split into three replicates  and held in the laboratory conditions for three generations. from each of the lhst populations, we derived three sex ratio regimes – male biased , equal sex ratio  and female biased . thus the experiment consisted of nine populations in all. due to the method of derivation of these populations , populations with same numerical subscript were treated as statistical blocks during analysis and block was always modeled as random factor. assays were performed after > <dig> generations of selection followed by one generation of complete relaxation of selection .

dry body weight
we measured dry body weight of the freshly eclosed males from the three selection regimes, i.e., m/c/f-regimes . analysis revealed a significant effect of selection regime . multiple comparisons using tukey’s hsd showed that f-males were significantly bigger compared to the males from other two regimes.

summary of the results of two-factor anova on  dry body weight,  locomotor activity and  courtship frequency, treating selection regime as the fixed factor crossed with random blocks. dry body weight was measured in groups of five flies and these values were used as the unit of analysis. for the other two traits, vial means were taken as the unit of analysis. p-values in bold case are statistically significant.

mate-harm assay – fitness of the ancestral females exposed to selected males
to measure the extent of mate-harm caused by the selection regime males, we measured selected males’ effect on ancestral  females’ progeny production during the 18 hour window on 14th day  of their life . this was done under two conditions – singly mated  and continuously exposed . a three factor analysis of variance on the fitness data using selection regime  and treatment  as fixed factors and block  as random factor suggested a significant effect of selection regime . multiple comparison using tukey’s hsd indicated that females mated to f-males produced significantly more progeny compared to females mated to the males of other two regimes clearly indicating that the f males had evolved to be more benign towards their mates over the two days of interaction. none of the interactions were statistically significant. compared to females mated once to m or c-males, females continuously held with m or c males produced  <dig> % and  <dig> % less progeny respectively. when females were held continuously with f males, the decline in progeny production was extremely low . however, these differences were not manifest as either a significant effect of mating status or selection regime × mating status interaction.

summary of results of three-factor anova using selection regime and mating status as fixed factors crossed with random blocks on the progeny production data. vial means were taken as the unit of analysis. p-values in bold case are statistically significant.

longevity assay
we performed a longevity assay on the selected males under two different conditions – non-reproducing and reproducing. in the non-reproducing treatment, selection regime males were collected as virgins and held in single sex-vials for their entire life-span. in the reproducing treatment, selection line males were collected as virgins and two days later were combined with ancestral  females. for both the treatments, male mortality data was collected every alternate day. mean longevity of the males were calculated using the raw mortality data and subsequently analysed. to measure female survivorship when housed with the selected males, female mortality data was collected in the same way from the reproducing set.

mean longevity
the mean longevity of all the three regimes and two treatments were in the range of  <dig> to 73 days. the maximum longevity ranged from  <dig> to 99 days. these values are substantially high considering that the flies are maintained on a 14 day discrete generation cycle. under non-reproducing condition, f-males were found to have higher mean longevity compared to that of m and c-males, while under reproducing condition, m-males had shorter mean longevity compared to both f and c-males . however, the effect of selection regime on the mean longevity under both mating treatments  was non-significant , very likely due to the heterogeneity of mean longevity of c-males across blocks leading to a nearly significant selection regime × block interaction . closer scrutiny of the data indicated that c <dig> behaved differently relative to c <dig> and c <dig> under both reproducing and non-reproducing conditions. hence, we reanalysed the data excluding the c-regime. we observed a significant effect of selection regime on mean longevity under both treatments , indicating a significant difference in mean longevity of m and f-males under both treatments. mean longevity of m-males was significantly lower than the longevity of f-males under both reproducing and non-reproducing conditions .

summary of the result of two-factor anova with selection regime as fixed factor crossed with random blocks on  mean longevity under “non-reproducing” and “reproducing” treatments with all three regimes included in the analysis,  mean longevity under “non-reproducing” and “reproducing” treatments with c-regime excluded from the analysis, and  lh-female mortality - female mortality and mortality rate. except female mortality rate, vial means were taken as the unit of analysis. mortality rate of each population was calculated and these population level estimates were used as the unit of analysis. p-values in bold case are statistically significant.

in addition, we performed pair-wise comparisons  using paired t-tests followed by dunn-sidak correction. mean longevity of each of the population was calculated and these population means were then taken as the unit of analysis. for consistency this was done for both mating status . the results are summarised in table  <dig>  under non-reproducing condition, there was a significant difference between m and f-regimes. under reproducing condition, the difference between m and f-regimes was marginally not significant . the differences between c and m or f-regimes were not significant in either mating status .

population means were taken as the unit of analysis. p-values in bold case are statistically significant.

we also analysed the survivorship data using cox’s proportional hazard model . under non-reproducing condition, males from the m-regime had significantly higher risk ratio compared to males from the f-regime. however we found no significant difference between either m and c or f and c regimes . under reproducing condition, males from the m-regime had significantly higher risk ratio compared to males of the c-regime . however, the difference in survivorship between m and f-regimes was marginally non-significant  and had significant block effect .

mortality of ancestral females
total number of female deaths recorded per vial was higher in case of m-males compared to c and f-males, though the difference was non-significant . mortality rate of the ancestral females, i.e., number of female deaths observed per week averaged across the male life-span, was found to have significant effect of selection regime of the males . multiple comparisons using paired t-test  revealed that lh-females died faster when exposed to m-males compared when they were exposed to c-males . female mortality rates with f and c-males , and with f and m-males  were not significantly different.

courtship frequency of selected males
we measured courtship frequency  of the selection regime males when they were exposed to ancestral  females. this was measured during 3rd and 4th day post eclosion . a total of eight observations were taken within this span of time during the light-phase of the light/dark cycle. analysis of the courtship frequency data suggested a significant effect of selection regime . tukey’s hsd indicated that m-males had significantly higher courtship frequency compared to that of c-males . however, courtship frequency of f-males was not different from that of c-males .

spontaneous locomotor activity
to get an estimate of the overall activity level of the selection regime males, we quantified their spontaneous locomotor activity . this trait has been previously shown to be positively correlated with male fitness  <cit> . the measurement was done under identical conditions in which courtship frequency was measured. males were held with ancestral females and observed during the 3rd and 4th day post eclosion . all eight observations were recorded during light phase of the light/dark cycle. we found significant effect of our selection on the spontaneous locomotor activity of the selection line males . through multiple comparisons using tukey’s hsd, m-males were found to have significantly higher activity score compared to both f and c-males . though f-males were less active compared to c-males, the difference was not significant .

discussion
in our study, under decreased intensity of sexual conflict , males evolved to be relatively benign towards females. f-males were found to be have significantly reduced detrimental effect on females’ progeny production, despite evolving larger body size. we did not find them to be less active or less eager in courtship . the increase in body size of f-males is a likely consequence of relaxed male specific selection in f-regime resulting in the evolution of body size towards the female optima. such mode of body size evolution has been reported previously in this system  <cit> . males evolved under increased level of sexual conflict , tended to be relatively more harming. these males were found to cause significantly higher female mortality over their entire life-span. however, their ability to depress female progeny production was not significantly different from that of the c-males. m-males were found to have increased courtship frequency and spontaneous locomotor activity. in addition, we found the m-males to have shorter mean longevity relative to the f-males under both mating treatments. we now discuss each of these findings in detail.

evolution of courtship frequency
we observed an increase in courtship frequency in m-males even when they were held under equal sex ratio. under male biased operational sex ratio , male-male competition is likely to be high and opportunities of mating are likely to be low. as courtship  is tightly correlated with competitive mating success of males  <cit> , selection should favour increased courtship under enhanced male competition for mates. our results support the observation that courtship frequency increased in d. pseudoobscura populations reared at male-biased operational sex ratios for over  <dig> generations  <cit> . holland and rice  <cit>  found courtship frequency to decrease under experimental removal of sexual selection through enforced monogamy. however, crudgington et al.  <cit>  did not observe any such decline in courtship frequency in populations of d. pseudoobscura evolved under monogamous mating system. as female biased regime is expected to cause a general relaxation of the degree of male-male competition, males from f-regime could in principle evolve decreased courtship frequency. but we did not find any such evidence. one possible reason might be the assay environment, which had equal sex ratio. for f-males, equal sex ratio is a three-fold more male biased condition relative to their normal selection condition. males in this system are known to show plasticity in the components of their reproductive behaviour in response to varying numbers of competitors  <cit> . hence, the difference in the selection versus assay condition can potentially explain the observed results.

evolution of locomotor activity of males
in a beautifully designed and executed study, long and rice  <cit>  showed that ‘adult locomotory activity’ is positively correlated with male fitness. the study also showed that locomotor activity has antagonistic fitness consequences in the two sexes, i.e., it is involved in intra-locus conflict  <cit> . under intense competitive condition in m-populations, one would expect a strong selection on male-fitness related traits, such as, locomotor activity. the results confirm this prediction and show a significant increase in spontaneous locomotor activity in m-males compared to c-males. however, we did not observe decline in locomotor activity in f-males relative to c-males, possibly indicating a basal level of selection pressure maintaining male-fitness related traits. additionally, as discussed in the previous section, d. melanogaster males are capable of showing plasticity in their reproductive behaviour based on the number of competitors  <cit> . since the assay was done under equal sex ratio, which is a relatively more male biased condition than the f-males’ usual maintenance regime, plasticity in male behaviour can contribute to the observed results.

evolution of harming ability in males
mate-harm is a byproduct of a suit of reproductive success enhancing traits in males  <cit> . populations, as simple as laboratory island populations  <cit> , have been found to harbor significant amount of genetic variation with respect to male’s ability to cause such mate-harm  <cit> . a number of previous studies have reported the selection response of mate-harm  <cit> . enforced monogamy resulted in the evolution of reduced mate harming ability in males  either causing less female mortality  <cit>  or being relatively benign to female fecundity  <cit> . the ingenious approach of “male-limited evolution” adopted by rice  <cit>  resulted in the evolution of more competitive males, which also caused more female mortality compared to control males.

however, other studies failed to find any evidence of evolution of mate-harm. manipulation of intensity of sexual conflict by altering the sex ratio did not cause any evolution in male’s ability to cause harming effects in females  <cit> . though rice  observed evolution of mate-harm using male-limited evolution, a more recent study using the same approach did not see such evolutionary response  <cit> .

our results clearly demonstrate the evolution of mate-harm under altered levels of sexual conflict with m males evolving to be more harming and f males evolving to be less harming to their mates. while males have been shown to harm females in terms of both mortality and life-time fitness  <cit> , the natural question our observation raises is – why did our m-males evolve to be harming only in terms of mortality and not in terms of progeny production? the mechanism by which males cause increased mate-harm could be chemical  or physical . at this point it is difficult to predict whether increase in mate-harming abilities of m-males is due to the evolution of behavioural components or due to the evolution of the ejaculate  <cit> . increase in courtship frequency  in m-males is an indication of changes in the physical component of mate-harm  <cit> . however, since the change is small, the effect of this was probably only experimentally resolvable under long term exposure rather than short term  exposure as was done in the mate-harm assay .

under f-condition, males evolved to be relatively benign to females. females continuously exposed to f-males produced significantly greater number of progeny compared to the females exposed to the males of the other two populations. even, females which were allowed a single mating with f-males produced more number of progeny compared to those mated to the males of the other two regimes, though this difference was not significant. this indicates that the f-males are benign to their mates, at least in terms of affecting progeny production. notably, this benign nature of the f-males was evident in spite of them being larger compared to the males of the other regimes . at least one previous study has shown that larger males cause more harm  to females  <cit> . the fact that the f-males in our study were found to be larger but less harming, clearly underlines the benign nature of these males. moreover, rice and holland  <cit>  have show that evolution of harming ability of males  was not associated with a change in body size. additionally, since the benign nature of f-males was expressed even after a single round of mating, it is possible that the ejaculate quality and/or quantity of these males have evolved. we did not find any measurable difference in the mortality rate of females held continuously with f-males or c-males. while mate-harm has been shown to affect both female fecundity and longevity  <cit> , our finding was not unexpected given that females mated to f-males also produced significantly more number of progeny. additionally, previous studies about evolution of mate-harm have produced mixed results. while some studies  <cit>  have shown evolution in males’ ability to cause mortality in their mates without affecting their fecundity, others have not seen any measurable change in mate harming ability of males  <cit> . thus it is possible that evolution of mate harm ability in males in terms of fecundity and survivorship are, at least, to some extent independent of each other.

our results are different from those of wigby and chapman  <cit>  even though the same approach was used to alter the level of sexual conflict. wigby and chapman  <cit>  did not find any effect of selection on the harming ability of the males, whereas our results suggest evolution in this trait under both male biased and female biased regimes. this difference in results can possibly be attributed to one major difference in the selection design – collection of virgin flies prior to the setup of adult competition vials and sex ratio treatments. as wigby and chapman  <cit>  did not collect virgin flies all the populations experienced similar sex ratio during the first  mating. as a result, in their selection design strength of selection on males is expected to depend on the frequency of mating after the sex ratio regimes are set up. additionally, some progeny can always be expected to be sired by the males that mated before the sex ratios were set up, diluting the effect of the selection.

our finding of evolution of mate-harming ability in males is, to some extent, in contrast to that of jiang et al.  <cit> . the males from the “male -limited” populations of jiang et al.  evolved higher fitness but did not show increased mate-harm   <cit> . it is particularly surprising because populations used in our study and that of jiang et al.  <cit>  share a common ancestry. jiang et al.  <cit>  cited the possible lack of sufficient additive genetic variation in the ancestral  population surrounding mate-harm related traits as one of the explanations for their result. however, as is evident from our finding, this is not the case. we argue that their finding only suggests that “ml”  males evolved to reduce the gender load by some mechanism which did not interfere with interlocus conflict. bedhomme et al.  <cit> , working on the same populations, observed increased efficiency but decreased frequency of courtship activity in males expressing the ml genome compared those expressing c  genome. in addition, male limited evolution was associated with decrease in body size   <cit> . this indicates a decrease in at least the physical component of mate harm. whereas male-limited evolution “masculinised” the genome without making it more harming, our selection regime directly selected for components of interlocus conflict and led to the evolution of mate-harm. therefore it is clear that substantial amount of genetic variation still exists in the ancestral population. however in our study, while there was a clear evidence of evolution of mate-harm under f-regime with respect to female fecundity , there was a strong trend observed under m-regime with respect to female mortality . therefore it is possible that the amount of genetic variation is more in one direction  than in the other direction .

interestingly, along with the evolution of mate-harm, sperm competitive ability has also evolved in our regimes  <cit> . the f-males, which are relatively benign to their mates have significantly lower sperm defense and offense abilities. on the other hand, m-males, which cause increased mortality in their mates, show significantly higher sperm defense ability. our findings are consistent with the previous reports which show a positive correlation between males’ sperm competitive ability and mate-harming ability  <cit> .

evolution of life-span and aging
sexual conflict has been suggested to have major consequences in the evolution of life-span and aging by affecting baseline investment in reproduction  <cit> . under high level of male-male competition , males are expected to increase their investment in reproduction, thereby causing the evolution of faster aging and shorter life-span. when sexual conflict is absent or low, populations are thus expected to evolve slower rate of aging and longer life-span. previous studies have largely ignored the effect of sexually antagonistic adaptations on life-span and aging  <cit> . wigby and chapman  <cit>  looked at the effect of alteration in level of sexual conflict on measures of female longevity but did not address aging in males. in another study, maklakov et al.  <cit>  observed selection response of seed beetle populations to experimentally enforced monogamy and polygamy and found no effect of selection on male life-span and aging rate.

in the present study, we found m-males to have shorter mean longevity relative to f-males under both reproducing and non-reproducing conditions. there are a number of possible explanations for these observed trends -  the trends might represent trade-off between somatic maintenance and reproduction, predicted by the life-history theories of sexual conflict . increased conflict might have selected for greater investment in reproductive behaviour and/or physiology under m-regime leading to reduced longevity, while the opposite is expected under f-regime.  a related possibility is that the males might have evolved different levels of male-male antagonistic interaction  under the m and f-regimes. this can evolve due to the different levels of male-male competition under the two selection regimes  <cit> . under much relaxed intensity of male-male competition, i.e., f-regime, males can potentially evolve to be less aggressive  relative to those evolved under more competitive – m-regime. such difference between m and f-males can potentially lead to differences in male mortality rates . however, at this point, in absence of a measure of aggressive behaviour of the selection regime males it is not possible to test this prediction.  alternatively, the increase in body size of the f-males  can potentially indicate increased availability of resources for the f-males, leading to the increase in longevity and age specific survival rates. however, as mentioned above, we have found the f-males to evolve reduced harming ability in spite of evolving larger body size, indicating their reduced investment in reproductive behaviour and/or physiology. therefore at least part of our observation pertaining to the longevity of f-males is very likely to be a reflection of the above mentioned trade-off between reproductive behaviour and/or physiology and longevity. the populations used in our study have been maintained on a 14 day discrete generation cycle for several hundred generations. in such a system, longevity beyond 14th day post egg collection  does not contribute to the fitness of the organism and is hence not directly under selection. hence evolution of longevity beyond 14 days can occur only as a correlated effect of selection. we found that the mean and median longevity in our experiment were in the range of  <dig> to 73 days, clearly far beyond the usual 14 day maintenance cycle. however, we observed patterns in longevity of the males from the m and f regimes consistent with the predictions of the life-history theories of sexual conflict. hence, even though the differences in longevity that we observed across the three selection regimes was small, the fact that we observed them at all  underscores the importance of sexual conflict in evolution of life span and aging.

CONCLUSIONS
the present study shows the evolution of male traits under altered levels of sexual conflict. we have shown that male courtship frequency and locomotor activity evolve in response to the prevailing level of intersexual conflict and male-male competition. we also provide direct evidence of the evolution of mate-harm in response to the mentioned selection pressure. the trends observed in the longevity and age-specific survival rates were also largely in congruence with the theories of life-history evolution. at least part of our observations can be explained in terms of the body size evolution. together with our previous report on sperm competitive ability of the selection regime males  <cit> , our study is one of the few experimental evolution studies showing evolution of male traits, under altered levels of sexual conflict through the manipulation of operational sex ratio.

