BACKGROUND
cellular adaptation to environmental changes ensures fitness and survival of cells and organisms. adaptation programs may strengthen cell walls in response to stress, switch the metabolic machinery upon starvation or trigger morphological differentiation during multicellular development and sexual reproduction. entering and exiting g <dig>  or quiescence, are yet further examples of cellular transitions, important for the health of all organisms. a greater understanding of the control mechanisms that establish, maintain and end quiescence is important for basal, medical and biotechnological research.

budding yeast saccharomyces cerevisiae responds to carbon and nutrient limitation either by entering stationary phase , or sporulation   <cit> . sporulation involves two distinct but tightly linked processes: meiosis and subsequent formation of four haploid spores, two each of mating type a and α, enclosed in an ascus sack . the spores contain high levels of protective trehalose and are surrounded by multi-layered spore walls. these features enable them to withstand harsh environments and to survive long periods of dormancy  <cit> . upon exposure to glucose and nutrients, spores exit dormancy through germination and resume growth. spore germination is a multi-step process that includes local degradation of the thick spore wall, breakdown of storage carbohydrates, swelling and elongation of the tightly packed spore  <cit> . during germination, the spore gradually loses its spore characteristics such as resistance to chemicals, heat and uv light, and starts acquiring those of a vegetative cell  <cit> . if the germinating spore is in close proximity to cells of opposite mating type it will initiate mating within hours after germination, before re-entry into the mitotic cell cycle  <cit> . the mating process, which involves cell cycle arrest prior to bud-formation and dna synthesis, at least partly explains the observation that dna replication starts first a few hours into germination, compared to transcription and translation that initiate within minutes after addition of a glucose-containing rich growth medium  <cit> . the knowledge of the properties and activities of quiescent spores is relatively sparse. deciphering the underlying control mechanisms of establishing, maintaining or exiting spore dormancy is important for better comprehension of all phases of the life cycle of yeast. also the process of germination is poorly characterized and research in this field will broaden our understanding of cellular developmental processes.

in this study, we analysed the transcriptional reprogramming of germinating spores and show that exit from dormancy results in rapid and global changes consisting of sequential gene expression subprograms. we identified a complex candidate network of transcription factors  regulating this response, thereby extending our understanding of the global regulatory program during germination  <cit> . by comparison of the responses between rich growth medium and pure glucose, we find that although the expression outputs are qualitatively similar, the response to rich medium is stronger than the glucose response. furthermore, spores treated with pure glucose sense and react on amino acid starvation within the first  <dig> min after germination onset, and this response can be linked to specific tfs. taken together, these results highlight that the process of germination consists of specific and temporally distinct gene expression subprograms.

RESULTS
spore germination involves a global gene expression reprogramming that encompasses distinct subprograms
we performed a time course microarray analysis to investigate the global response during germination . the analysis showed that germination initiation is accompanied by a rapid and massive upregulation of gene expression: hundreds of transcripts increase within minutes and  <dig> genes are sequentially upregulated  during the first two hours of the germination process. to facilitate further analysis, we filtered for genes exhibiting at least a two-fold change in expression in two consecutive time points, which were considered as significantly regulated. this criterion yielded a set of  <dig>  genes;  <dig> upregulated and  <dig> downregulated genes, as compared to dormant spores. k-means clustering analysis of these genes revealed eight clusters with different profiles and timings of up- or downregulation . interestingly, the clusters corresponded to distinct groups of genes with significantly enriched gene ontology  terms . each cluster likely corresponds to one or several regulatory subprograms, which in turn is defined by distinct tf. k-means clustering of the complete set of genes is consistent with figure  <dig>  but the inclusion of ~ <dig>  genes that are not clearly responsive leads to dampened curves and three non-responsive clusters  . together, these results demonstrate that the exit from spore dormancy results in rapid and global expression changes with sequential onset of different subprograms.

the regulatory subprograms are linked to distinct transcription factor sets
we further aimed at identifying regulators of the global transcriptional germination program and its subprograms. the on-line-tool t-profiler  <cit>  was used to predict the tfs responsible for the global germination program . we combined the results based on chip-chip data  and consensus motifs  to identify twenty-five potential global germination regulators. the collection of tfs reflects the shift to glucose metabolism and the consequential glucose repression , the resumption of growth  and the release from stress  during germination. interestingly, an early and transient activity of tfs was prominent, involving ume <dig> and cbf <dig> that share some highly upregulated target genes, as well as hsf <dig> that regulates genes for chaperones involved in protein folding and refolding. ume <dig> plays an essential role in sporulation by regulating early meiotic genes and was recently shown to be required also for germination  <cit> . we linked these tfs to the distinct subprograms identified in figure  <dig> by analysing these clusters independently with t-profiler, relaxing the significance threshold, and taking the intersection between these results and the global germination tf set. twelve of the twenty-five tfs were associated with distinct subprograms, with very limited overlap . these tfs are largely consistent with the tfs identified for the clusters corresponding to the whole dataset in additional file  <dig>  further reinforcing the impression that the subprograms are regulated by distinct tf sets .
.

ypd and glucose results in qualitatively similar gene expression responses although ypd confer a stronger output than glucose
the main trigger for spores to exit dormancy is a fermentable carbon source, which suffices to induce early germination events such as spore wall degradation and swelling  <cit> . to identify the impact of other components in rich growth medium, dormant spores were pulsed with pure glucose and samples were taken at the same intervals as the ypd treated spores for microarray analysis , and the resulting expression profile was filtered as the ypd dataset. the genes significantly up- or down-regulated during germination in ypd and/or glucose define the core dataset used in the subsequent comparisons and consist of  <dig>  genes. the response of spores to glucose was not as pronounced as to ypd, judged by both the number of significantly regulated genes and the average expression change of genes in the core dataset . the average fold change was higher in ypd than in glucose even when the calculation was based on only those genes significantly regulated in both ypd and glucose, which excludes that this effect is solely due to regulation of additional subprograms in ypd that would bias the comparison .

to further characterize common and unique aspects of the global gene expression profiles between spores germinating in ypd and glucose, two dimensional hierarchical clustering was performed . the core set of regulated genes was divided into two groups for each dataset based on expression change; genes altered at least two-fold and genes altered less than two-fold under that specific germination condition. these groups were clustered independently and plotted against each other in a two-dimensional matrix to determine the degree of correlation between the different spore responses. the matrix contains three groups of genes: those displaying a two-fold change in expression under both conditions, and those displaying a two-fold change in expression under either condition but not for the other . a simplified numerical analysis of the two dimensional cluster is depicted in figure 3d. this presentation demonstrates the high degree of similarity in the gene expression response, and the numerical correlation between the responses was highly significant . we conclude that the vast majority of genes changed expression in the same direction, even though expression change for some genes passed the two-fold criterion in ypd but not glucose treatment. there is one noteworthy exception;  <dig> genes showed a two-fold or more up-regulation in glucose but not in ypd . almost half of these,  <dig> genes, encode proteins involved in amino acid biosynthetic processes, and their average expression profile was clearly different from that in ypd . this strongly suggests that spores can sense and react on amino acid starvation within the first  <dig> min after germination onset.

the differences between the transcriptional responses in ypd and glucose induced germination can be linked to specific tfs
the similarity in gene expression pattern between germination in ypd and glucose is reflected in similar tf activity profiles. t-profiler analysis of the global germination program in glucose predicted eight additional tfs and the combined tf set of germination in ypd and glucose encompass thirty three tfs . the majority of these tfs show similar activity patterns under the two conditions . to more clearly discern the condition specific differences, we plotted the difference in activity score over time with colour strength indicating absolute difference . part of these differences can be explained by the faster, stronger and perhaps more synchronous changes during germination in ypd, as exemplified by the hsf <dig> peak and consistent with the gene expression data. however, the two conditions activate distinct subprograms, such as the amino acid biosynthetic genes induced during germination in glucose; involving gcn <dig>  bas <dig>  leu <dig>  dal <dig>  met <dig>  met <dig>  met <dig> and cbf <dig> that showed positive t-value profiles in glucose. interestingly, cbf <dig> seemed to have a dual role in germination, with high positive t-values at germination onset in both ypd and glucose, as well as a later function during germination specifically in glucose. different subsets of cbf1-target genes were upregulated in the two time windows and the later genes are targets of the met4/cbf1/met28/met31/met <dig> activation complex that induce amino acid biosynthesis genes  <cit> . hence, the tf activity profiles are highly similar during germination in ypd and glucose despite slight differences in timing and strength, and the activation of condition specific subprograms.

the temporal ordering of the germination subprograms is consistent with the wiring of the tf network
to relate the temporal organisation to the candidate tf network structure, we extracted the tf sub-network corresponding to the thirty three tfs identified above from a global tf network  <cit> . figure 4c and d display the cross regulation within the network as directed edges, and the peak activity score and timing of the peak for each individual tfs are indicated with node size and colour, respectively. this abstraction summarises the data with two exceptions;  cbf <dig> has a double peak during germination in glucose, the second  coincides with the amino acid biosynthetic activators, and  msn <dig> has an initial but very transient peak before falling down to a negative value, similar to msn <dig>  under both conditions. note that the sequential order of activity is largely consistent with the network structure, including the synchronous peak of interconnected tfs such as sok <dig> and phd <dig>  which appears to orchestrate a common, early gene expression subprogram, and that of the amino acid biosynthesis tfs gcn <dig>  leu <dig> and met <dig>  we note that these two clusters overlap with the two out-of-phase sub-graphs proposed to define the cellular redox oscillations  <cit> . this reinforces the impression that a substantial part of the expression changes during germination reflect the metabolic evolution of the quickening spores rather than germination specific processes. it is tempting to speculate that the underlying regulation is related to the previously observed metabolic oscillations. in this scenario, the sharp transition from starvation to abundant energy leads to a rapid and highly synchronised initiation of metabolism followed by a synchronised metabolic evolution in the spores, which would allow the metabolic phases to be observed on the population level. however, the germination process also includes specific subprograms, such as the activation of hsf <dig> and the initiation of mating. taken together, the predicted tf activities display a temporal organisation which is consistent with the cross regulation within the tf network and which may largely reflect the metabolic evolution of the quickening spores.

the spore germination gene expression program overlaps between yeast strains but not with the genes reported to be required for germination
we proceeded to compare our results to a previous transcriptome analysis of germination of sk <dig> spores  <cit> . two dimensional hierarchical clustering of genes exhibiting at least a two-fold change in expression in two consecutive time points shows that these previous results are largely consistent with our findings, despite the use of an auxotrophic strain and differences in sporulation procedures, number of replicates and choice of reference rna . in fact, the simplified numerical analysis shows that their set encompasses 71% of the genes identified here during germination in ypd . however, we only confirm 34% of the genes reported in this previous dataset. this is likely due to more stringent inclusion criteria , as the gene clusters we report here are more coherent; we report fewer and relatively larger gene clusters , as determined by separation at correlations coefficients < <dig>  . furthermore, the data presented here have a higher time resolution during the onset of germination, and a unique feature in this study is the rapid but transient upregulated genes . in contrast to the large consistency between these two datasets, there is no significant overlap with the  <dig> germination deficient mutants identified by deutschbauer et al.  <cit> , although there is a tendency towards underrepresentation among the genes upregulated during germination . it has been observed and discussed before that the overlap between mutant and gene expression data when studying yeast responses show little or no overlap  <cit> . to summarize, the data presented here help narrowing down the germination program substantially and identify previously uncharacterised subprograms in the very onset of the germination process, which display no significant overlap with germination defective mutants.

the gene expression programs of germination and stationary phase exit exhibit common and unique features
several lines of evidence suggest that a large portion of the germination program reflects the metabolic evolution of the quickening spores rather than germination specific functions. to pursue this connection in more detail, we compared the germination program to the transcriptional changes during stationary phase exit  <cit> . we started with a detailed analysis of the early time points  in our ypd dataset which revealed a novel transient peak of up-regulated genes including transcripts for protein folding, transporters and transcriptional regulators. a numerical comparison showed that more than half of the genes  that we found to be at least two-fold upregulated at  <dig> and  <dig> minutes during germination in ypd, were also upregulated  <dig> min after exit from stationary phase .

further, a t-profiler analysis of stationary phase exit and comparison with ypd-induced germination revealed that the rapid and transient upregulation of many genes seen during germination was also prominent during stationary phase exit . whereas cbf <dig> activity appears in both exit programs, hsf <dig> seems germination specific. several discrepancies may be due to differences in the initial states of spores and stationary phase cells, such as the faster upregulation of ribosomal biosynthesis and increased downregulation of respiration in the latter . others may reflect strain differences, such as the induction of amino acid biosynthetic genes in the auxotrophic strain during stationary phase exit . hence, the two conditions differ in subprogram composition, timing and amplitude, but also share a number of changes towards growth and differentiation, such as the massive induction of ribosomal biosynthesis and the induction of mating .

discussion
the ability to exit and re-enter the cell division cycle in response to altered nutrient conditions is of paramount importance for cellular viability and cooperation. when starved, diploid yeast cells enter the sexual cycle by sporulation, while haploid cells arrest in a stationary phase. cells in these two quiescent stages share many properties; they do not proliferate, their metabolic, transcriptional and translational rates are low, and they are surrounded by a thickened cell wall that provides resistance to harsh environments  <cit> . consistently, their modes of re-entry into active division share many features, including initiation by a fermentable carbon source, acquisition of increased sensitivity to cell wall degrading enzymes and heat, and they rely on similar gene expression programs as described here and previously  <cit> . it has been reported for stationary phase cells that rna polymerase ii is positioned upstream of genes rapidly expressed upon addition of nutrients and glucose  <cit> , and we find that many of the same genes are highly responsive during onset of spore germination. this indicates that a similar positioning may exist in spores, although further experimental evidence remains to be provided.

further, we identified a common early and transient peak of transcription, including genes encoding transporters and transcriptional regulators that presumably are required for setting up proliferation after spore dormancy  <cit> . we also see that glucose repression is quickly turned on and that mrnas for gluconeogenesis, the tca cycle and the carboxylate cycle are rapidly and strongly down-regulated both during germination and stationary phase exit   <cit> . the identification of these subprograms also during germination advances our understanding of the germination program and further bridges the differences between re-entry from the different quiescent stages.

there are also discrepancies between dormancy exit of spores and stationary cells. in our hands, germination is associated with down-regulation of gcr1/gcr2-regulated glycolytic mrnas, which does not occur during quickening from stationary phase. this is counterintuitive as resumption of growth in glucose containing medium requires glycolysis. we can only speculate about the possible purpose of this. to germinate quickly is crucial in the competition with other micro-organisms for nutrients and colonization of the micro environment; perhaps the spores contain high levels of these glycolytic mrnas for translation immediately upon germination signals as mrnas already present in the dormant spores most likely is the first choice for translation upon germination initiation  <cit> . it is also possible that the mrnas of glycolytic genes, if bound to ribosomes or accumulated in p-bodies, are protected from degradation in the dormant spore and therefore enriched. whether these expression changes have any impact on the glycolytic protein levels during germinating still needs to be determined. we also see that hsf <dig> activation of genes associated with protein folding and refolding is more prominent during germination than stationary phase exit. the dormant spore contains high levels of trehalose that serves a protective role for proteins  <cit> . this trehalose is rapidly mobilised during germination and the hsf <dig> mediated response may be required to protect or refold proteins during this transition  <cit> . consistently, trehalose accumulates at high temperatures  <cit> , while protein levels of chaperone hsp <dig> increase only upon heat stress relief . stationary phase cells also accumulate trehalose  <cit> , and we note that genes implicated in protein folding are up-regulated also during exit from stationary phase. the absence here of a significant peak of hsf <dig> activation could reflect that these cells accumulate relatively little trehalose, are less dehydrated or that the first time point examined, six minutes into the quickening process, is too late to capture the hsf <dig> peak. hence, most apparent discrepancies between the two quiescent states may be quantitative rather than qualitative.

we further characterise the spore quickening by examining the effect of re-entry of media on the gene expression program. rich growth medium with glucose has proved to be a more powerful germinant than glucose alone when it comes to acquisition of zymolyase sensitivity and trehalose breakdown  <cit> . this holds true also at the level of gene expression; although the transcriptional outputs are qualitatively very similar, ypd induces a stronger, faster and/or more synchronised response than pure glucose. these results support the idea that spores sense not only glucose but also the presence of nutrients and growth factors in the environment. in particular, the presence of amino acids appears essential for the rapid and massive induction of ribosomal genes that we observe exclusively in ypd  <cit> . this implicates the tor pathway in the quickening process but it remains unclear if glucose is the initial trigger that enables other nutrients to be sensed, or if energy and other nutrients are sensed simultaneously. we note that in glucose-treated spores, tf activity and genes for amino acid biosynthesis are induced within half an hour, clearly showing that the limitation of amino acids is sensed early during the germination process. the ribosomal protein genes are induced within a similar time window, suggesting that the delay in ribosomal up-regulation reflects the delayed amino acid supply in glucose the tfs for amino acid biogenesis displayed rapid and sustained induction also during ypd-induced stationary phase exit , possibly reflecting differences between the auxotrophic by <dig> used for stationary phase exit and the prototrophic y <dig> strain used in this study. however, this is not reflected in a delayed induction of the ribosomal protein genes showing that they are regulated by distinct mechanisms and/or cues.

finally, we resolve the gene expression profile in temporally distinct subprograms that are orchestrated by interconnected tfs. the data set we present here has a higher initial time resolution than previous studies, more stringent evaluation criteria, less noise and hence more coherent clusters, and benefit from the increased resolution gained by two-dimensional clustering. this allows us to analyse the temporal and compositional organisation of the germination gene expression program. as shown in figure  <dig>  the candidate tf network driving the quickening is highly interconnected and the temporal organisation of the response reflects the interconnections in this network and the activities of interconnected tfs are highly synchronous. in particular, we see an early peak of the sok2-yap6-phd <dig> cluster, which has been implicated in the metabolic and respiratory oscillations  <cit> . this is paralleled by a strong activity in hsf <dig> as discussed above. the sok2-yap6-phd <dig> peak is followed by rapid and sustained induction of ribosomal genes in ypd  and biosynthetic genes  in glucose where ribosomal protein genes do not peak until after full induction of the biosynthetic program . interestingly, the hsf <dig> peak is sustained until the ribosomal induction, which may suggest that its down-regulation is dependent on amino acid and/or protein synthesis. this delayed response in glucose is also reflected in a slower mating response, again potentially reflecting a need for protein synthesis in the acquisition of sexual  identity. finally, germination in glucose leads to a second biosynthetic peak  that is absent in ypd. also this cluster has been implicated in metabolic oscillations and constitutes a key regulator of the biosynthetic program peaking in the oxidative phase  <cit> . the absence of this peak in ypd could be due to the abundant amino acids in rich media or the entry into a different subprogram: mating. taken together, the transition from quiescence to growth primarily includes metabolic changes and key regulators of oscillatory metabolism appear to strongly influence also germination, which may reflect a highly synchronised return to active metabolism. we find the lack of germination specific targets noteworthy and conclude that this highly complex program is primarily a metabolic adaptation that adapts its subprogram composition to the exact environmental conditions of the quickening spores.

CONCLUSIONS
in conclusion, we have determined the gene expression response of dormant spores to ypd and pure glucose, identified distinct expression subprograms, and linked them to distinct tfs. we found strong similarities between quickening of spores on ypd and glucose, and to quickening from stationary phase. resumption of active metabolism coincides with a transcriptional response with clearly distinct subprograms that reflect each nutritional condition. interestingly, the program does not encompass any clear germination specific genes, and the process can be explained by a combination of metabolic programs including trehalose mobilisation, glucose repression, amino acid and protein biosynthesis, and mating. future challenges in the field of yeast germination include deciphering the translational and metabolic responses of germinating spores, and to identify proteins and pathways essential for the process of exiting dormancy.

