BACKGROUND
the camp-dependent protein kinase  is a key regulator protein in eukaryotic signal transduction and is involved in several cellular processes during growth and development. via phosphorylation of its substrate proteins pka controls metabolic processes, camp mediated gene expression, cell differentiation and/or apoptosis  <cit> . the enzymatic activity of the pka catalytic  subunit is controlled by a set of four different regulatory  subunit isoforms, i.e. type i and type ii, both with two isoforms  each. thus, in its inactive state pka forms a heterotetrameric holoenzyme complex , containing an r-subunit dimer and two c-subunit monomers. the pka holoenzyme is activated upon cooperative binding of four molecules of the second messenger camp to the r-subunits, thus releasing the now active c-subunits  <cit> . the expression pattern of single pka isoforms as well as the isoform specific composition of the holoenzyme and tissue specific distribution of pka isoforms allows a tight regulation of the catalytic activity of pka. in turn, pka provides an important model system for kinases, allowing investigation of the molecular mechanisms of kinase function as well as the development of tools for diagnostic purposes which in turn enables their use as biomarkers  <cit> .

historically, purification of pka holoenzyme from biological material was performed via anion exchange chromatography ; later, a second step based on affinity purification utilising camp resins was added  <cit> . however, most strategies so far resulted in either partly degraded or insoluble protein with limited yield. therefore we set out to design novel camp affinity matrices for simple and rapid purification of camp binding proteins. these resins should provide a chemical tool that targets proteins containing the conserved camp binding domains, specifically pka r-subunits while fulfilling the following criteria required for efficient affinity binders:

 <dig>  purify high quantities of selected protein of interest;

 <dig>  yield functionally active protein;

 <dig>  provide a purification procedure with mild but efficient elution conditions while retaining high yields of protein;

 <dig>  obtain nucleotide-free proteins which can easily be used for further interaction studies and biochemical assays;

 <dig>  provide an easy-to-use procedure applicable in chemical proteomics.

in addition to camp's role as a general activator of all holoenzyme isoforms, with pka representing the main intracellular effector of camp, there are still other targets of camp like nucleotide-gated ion channels  <cit> , camp degrading phosphodiesterases  <cit>  or epac, the camp-regulated guanine nucleotide-exchange factor for rap  <dig> and  <dig>  <cit> , all containing one or more highly conserved cyclic nucleotide binding  domains  <cit> .

pka r-subunits and specific components of the camp signalling network can be precisely targeted from complex protein mixtures using highly specific camp analogs covalently coupled to agarose beads. generally, two groups of chemical tools are used for the affinity purification of functional complexes: agonist and antagonist binders . agonist binders are synthetic cyclic nucleotides which bind the r-subunits that are complexed with interaction partners , however, these agonists cause the pka holoenzyme to dissociate. antagonist binders, interacting preferentially with the intact, non dissociated pka holoenzyme, can be utilised to identify interaction partners that bind to the entire complex , including proteins interacting with the c-subunits.

in the present study several cyclic nucleotide analogs were synthesised and optimised for their binding properties to the respective components of the pka system using an iterative approach based on direct spr binding studies. subsequently, these camp analogs were coupled to a solid support and tested for binding and elution in a one step purification procedure probing all four recombinantly expressed r-subunit isoforms. furthermore, we tested optimised cyclic nucleotides analogs for their application in a chemical proteomics approach addressing either the r-subunits or the intact pka holoenzyme complex along with physiological interaction partners derived from animal tissue.

RESULTS
in previous studies, hundreds of cyclic nucleotides were developed and characterised regarding their binding ability to proteins containing cyclic nucleotide binding  domains  <cit> .

improved camp analogs as novel tools for pka r-subunit purification
for our developments we used optimised binders based on sp-camps , a camp analog where the axial exocyclic oxygen atom of the cyclic phosphate is replaced by a sulphur atom, resulting in an approximately 10-fold reduced affinity towards the r-subunit when compared to camp alone  <cit> . in order to couple sp-camps to a solid phase, analogs with different spacers in positions  <dig> or  <dig> of the adenine base  were designed and synthesised. two complementary strategies were combined for the characterisation of improved binders for pka r-subunit purification. in initial kinetic studies, surface plasmon resonance  was employed and selected camp analogs were immobilised on a sensor chip and the association and dissociation patterns of all four r-subunit isoforms were analysed in detail. in an additional approach, these camp analogs were coupled to agarose beads and their ability for affinity purification of r-subunits was studied via pull down experiments. in both sets of experiments, 8-aha-camp and 8-aea-camp were used as controls, since they represent conventional camp analogs which have been commonly applied for purification of pka r-subunits or for interaction studies in previous reports  <cit> .

spr binding studies
8-aea-camp, 8-aha-camp, sp-8-aea-camps, sp-8-aha-camps and sp-2-aha-camps were covalently coupled to a sensor surface using nhs/edc chemistry and the association and dissociation patterns of the four different r-subunit isoforms  were analysed using a biacore  <dig> instrument . all four r-subunit isoforms showed fast association behaviour when binding to the immobilised camp analogs. no notable dissociation could be detected when switching the instrument to buffer, thus indicating a stable interaction between the r-subunit and the immobilised camp analogs . when adding cgmp  during the dissociation phase the dissociation behaviour from an immobilised cyclic nucleotide analog was affected by  the exchange of the exocyclic oxygen to a sulphur in the immobilised camp analog,  the chosen linker of the camp analog and  the r-subunit isoform. in general, dissociation in the presence of cgmp was slower for conventional camp analogs compared to the newly designed sp-camps analogs. when comparing dissociation from all sp-camps analogs, a slower dissociation was observed from the 2-substituted analog  than from the 8-substituted analog . among the r-subunit isoforms, riiα displayed the slowest dissociation from all five analog surfaces tested.

generally, fast binding to the affinity matrix as well as rapid and complete dissociation under elution conditions are preferred for purification, without the dissociation of protein from the affinity matrix under washing conditions. from the observed elution patterns, sp-8-aea-camps was considered the best candidate for efficient elution of hriα , especially when compared to 8-aha-camp and 8-aea-camp which conventionally have been employed   <cit> . panels a and b  clearly demonstrate that the riβ and riiα dissociate rather slow from the non sp-camps analogs, even in the presence of cgmp. in general, for the r-subunit isoforms riβ, riiα and riiβ, the dissociation with cgmp is fast and almost identical for the 8-substituted camps analogs.

as a consequence of the high surface ligand density the association and dissociation patterns of the r-subunits to the immobilised camp analogs were severely affected by mass transfer limitations. these limitations are due to depletion of the analyte  being in close proximity to the sensor surface during association, thus prohibiting the quantitative analyses of association and dissociation kinetics. furthermore, rebinding effects in the dissociation phase are intensified by the presence of four camp binding sites per r-subunit dimer  <cit> . still, the high surface density of camp analogs on the sensor surface very well represents the situation that is occurring on the agarose beads during binding and elution.

purification of the r-subunit isoforms using sp-camps agaroses
the analogs tested in spr  were coupled to agarose beads using nhs chemistry . bacterial cell lysate containing overexpressed riα was incubated with each analog coupled to agarose . after several washing steps were performed, no notable dissociation of the riα subunit from the agarose was detected. elution of the protein with  <dig> mm cgmp resulted in a protein fraction containing highly pure and active r-subunit as determined by sds-page and spectrophotometric activity assay  <cit> , yielding  <dig> mg protein per approximately  <dig> μl of agarose slurry. only little additional protein could be eluted subsequently with camp, still leaving some protein on the agarose beads .

cgmp elution from the other two agaroses  resulted in half the amount of purified pka r-subunit  when compared to the yield from the sp-8-aea-camps agarose. furthermore, hriα could only be partially eluted from the sp-8-aha-camps agarose with  <dig> mm camp, while leaving a significant amount of protein on the beads, thus indicating that riα binds too tight to this analog and therefore can not be used for this affinity purification procedure. additionally, both the sp-2-aha-camps and sp-8-aha-camps agarose showed a  <dig> kda protein coeluted with cgmp, it was identified by mass spectrometry  as e. coli chloramphenicol acetyltransferase which is abundant in the bl <dig>  codon plus ril strain .

thus, from the three affinity resins tested, only sp-8-aea-camps fulfils and exceeds all necessary requirements for improved affinity purification when compared to conventional 8-aea- or 8-aha-camp agarose chromatography  <cit>  and thus appears to be the best option for isolating large quantities of pure and active riα.

comparison of conventional agaroses 8-aha-camp and 8-aea-camp with sp-8-aea-camps
the sp-8-aea-camps resin as well as the conventional agaroses 8-aha-camp and 8-aea-camp were all tested via small scale purification with all four r-subunit isoforms, namely riα, riβ, riiα and riiβ. the protein yields eluted first with cgmp and then subsequently in a second elution step with camp are displayed in fig.  <dig>  as a control the camp elution was performed according to diller et al.  <cit> . all r-subunit isoforms were obtained in a pure and active form as determined by a spectrophotometric assay  <cit> . since the highest overall yield of the respective r-subunit was obtained using sp-8-aea-camps agarose, this amount was set as the 100% reference point . interestingly, mild elution of riα subunit with cgmp from the sp-8-aea-camps agarose is nine times more efficient than the cgmp elution from the 8-aea-camp agarose. furthermore, a fourfold higher yield was obtained from the cgmp elution only using the sp-camps agarose than from combining both elution steps  employing 8-aea-camp together. purification of riα with 8-aha-camp agarose was even less efficient than using 8-aea-camp . still, the amount of riβ, riiα and riiβ isoforms eluted from our newly designed sp-8-aea-camps agarose was a minimum of 40% greater than from the conventional agaroses.

in a further experiment all four r-subunit isoforms were purified with the sp-8-aea-camps agarose . the purification of riα and riiα isoforms resulted in  <dig> mg protein per liter expression media. for riβ and riiβ isoforms  <dig> mg and  <dig> mg protein were purified respectively. all affinity purified proteins were verified by ms . the entire purification procedure of each r-subunit isoform was completed within  <dig> h.

binding of the pka holoenzyme complex to agonist and antagonist
based on the purification strategy described above, novel camp derivatives with antagonist properties were designed to analyse the pka holoenzyme  complex and target physiological interaction partners via a chemical proteomics approach. only camp analogs derived from the lead structure rp-camps  have been shown to act as pka-antagonists  <cit> , whereas the sp-camps analogs and camp itself act as agonists . the general assumption that rp-camps binds to the r-subunit in the intact pka holoenzyme thus preventing complex dissociation  <cit>  was addressed by a combination of spr binding analysis and mass spectrometry .

therefore the antagonist rp-8-ahdaa-camps  and the agonist 8-aha-camp were covalently coupled to two sensor surfaces on a single cm <dig> sensor chip.  <dig> nm of each, pka holoenzyme , free r-subunit and c-subunit were injected to both sensor surfaces. fig. 6a shows the resulting binding curves for type i holoenzyme. maximum binding signals of  <dig>  and  <dig>  ru on the antagonist and on the agonist surfaces were observed, respectively. these difference in the binding signals indicates that the entire holoenzyme complex is captured to the antagonist surface whereas on the agonist surface only the free r-subunit is bound, since the immobilised agonist causes holoenzyme dissociation and release of the c-subunit. hence, these differences in binding signals reflect the mass difference between the holoenzyme complex  and the free r-subunit . a control experiment was performed, injecting free r-subunit over both surfaces and similar binding signals of approximately  <dig>  ru each were obtained for the agonist as well for the antagonist surface . furthermore, binding signals to the agonist surface using free r-subunit and the pka holoenzyme complex were in the same range, again indicating that the holoenzyme dissociates when interacting with the agonist surface. as an additional control c-subunit alone was injected over both analog surfaces. no binding was observed, demonstrating that the c-subunit does not contribute to the binding signal.

to prove that the intact holoenzyme complex was bound to the antagonist sensor surface a bia ms experiment was performed .  <dig> nm of each, pka holoenzyme , free r-subunit and c-subunit were injected and after a  <dig> min wash, the sensor surface was incubated with  <dig> % sds. proteins bound to the nucleotide surface were eluted using the microrecovery function  and the content of  <dig> subsequent elutions was subjected to sds-page , displaying two distinct bands. these bands correspond to r- and c-subunits, as identified by lc-esi ms/ms and western blot analysis . both, r- and c-subunit, were detected in equal amounts according to coomassie staining , strongly supporting the hypothesis that functionally intact holoenzyme complex  was bound to the antagonist surface and subsequently eluted. for a control the same amount of holoenzyme was also injected to the agonist surface and analysed as described above. only r-subunit, but no c-subunit, could be detected by sds-page , ms and western blot analysis .

based on the bia-ms results , the antagonist was coupled to agarose beads via nhs chemistry . these beads were then incubated with purified holoenzyme complex. samples of each step of the pull down experiment were analysed via a sds-page  as well as analysed by western blot with an anti-c-subunit antibody , proving that rp-camps derivatised agarose provides an extremely valuable tool for holoenzyme purification. an additional control was performed with free r- and c-subunit. both were incubated with the antagonist beads and then analysed with sds-page. only the r-subunit but not c-subunit was detected verifying the bia-ms results.

targeting the pka interactome from pig brain using agonist and antagonist agaroses
in a proof of principle experiment agonist  and antagonist agarose  were incubated with pig brain lysate in order to investigate, if endogenously expressed r-subunit and pka holoenzyme can be pulled out of biological material. after incubation of the soluble protein fraction with the affinity resins, the beads were washed six times and the bound proteins were subsequently eluted with  <dig> mm camp and analysed by sds-page .

using the agonist as affinity reagent, all four r-subunit isoforms were pulled from pig brain lysate. when using the antagonist, additionally all major c-subunit isoforms  were identified based on ms . in addition to the pka subunits other distinct sets of proteins were pulled out from pig brain tissue using either agonist or antagonist agaroses . this indicates, that functional complexes of camp interactome can be pulled out of tissue lysates with these new chemical tools, proving the opportunity for the discovery of additional components of the camp signalling pathway.

discussion
during the last  <dig> years several approaches have been used to selectively purify fully functional r-subunit isoforms of pka, either endogenous from animal tissues  <cit>  or recombinantly expressed in bacteria  <cit> . most purification strategies have been based on ion exchange chromatography. there were also early attempts to use camp analogs linked via the n <dig> or c <dig> position of the adenine ring to an agarose matrix for affinity purification of r-subunits from several tissues  <cit> . in most cases, however, the affinity of the r-subunit to the various camp analogs used was too high to subsequently and successfully elute the protein efficiently. only under harsh conditions could the r-subunit be removed from the matrix either by one of the two procedures:  <dig> m urea  <cit>  or camp elution at elevated temperatures  <cit> ; while still yielding not only less protein than using ion exchange chromatography but also protein that was insoluble and/or proteolytically degraded  <cit> . in order to increase the yield of nucleotide-free and highly active r-subunit attempts to use fusion tags for purification  <cit> . however, fusion tags to the n-terminus as well as to the c-terminus of the r-subunit turned out to be problematic. modifications of the n-terminus can interfere with r-subunit dimerisation and binding of a kinase anchoring proteins  <cit> . since fusion tags on the c-terminus are located in close proximity to the camp binding domains, the cyclic nucleotide binding properties can be affected. cleavage of the tag is an additional purification step which may lead to a loss of protein as well as cause additional proteolytic products.

we synthesised  <dig> different sp-camps analogs  and characterised the binding to all four r-subunit isoforms in direct interactions studies using spr. subsequently these agonists were coupled to solid supports and used for affinity purification of recombinantly expressed r-subunits. all three analogs displayed superior purification strategies when compared to conventional camp analogs .

using sp-8-aea-camps agarose it is now possible to obtain large yields of active and nucleotide-free r-subunit without the use of denaturants. this is especially important since remaining nucleotide in the cnb domain would interfere with subsequent studies. furthermore decreased stability of urea unfolded and refolded protein occurs  <cit> .

in general, affinity reagents, addressing a specific subset of proteins or protein complexes, are of growing importance for many applications in proteomics. this includes enrichment of proteins or subcellular components as well as removal of unwanted cell debris subcellular components, proteins and metabolites. therefore, our described camp analogs not only provide a highly selective tool as an affinity material for purification of pka r-subunits, but can also serve as a tool that particularly targets the camp sub-proteome . here we can demonstrate that components of camp signalling pathways were selectively complexed with their physiological interaction partners thus demonstrating that phosphorothioate camp analog agaroses are extremely valuable for comparable chemical proteomics studies. furthermore, phosphorothioate camp analogs provide an additional advantage as they were shown to be highly stable against phosphodiesterase activity  <cit>  and are therefore well suited for use with cellular lysates.

in a recent approach, scholten et al.  <cit>  used conventional cyclic nucleotide agaroses to pull out components of the cgmp/camp interactome from rat heart tissue in order to identify cyclic nucleotide binding proteins and their interaction partners. since elution with camp from the 8-aea-camp agarose was not sufficient for subsequent ms analysis, those studies had to be performed with material that was obtained by boiling the incubated agarose beads in sds loading buffer. with the newly designed sp- and rp-camps agaroses described here, specific binding and elution of camp binding proteins and a reduction of false positives can be achieved since elution with camp can be considered as an additional purification step. the use of these novel tools now enables us to also pull out interaction partners of intact holoenzyme, which is especially important for identification of novel interaction partners of the c-subunits of pka such as the recently described a-kinase interacting proteins  in the holoenzyme form.

CONCLUSIONS
novel camp analogs based on phosphorothioate were optimised in an iterative approach combining design, synthesis and direct spr binding studies. after coupling to a solid support, two sets of chemical binders were tested for highly efficient purification procedure of all isoforms of pka r-subunit. sp-8-aea-camps was identified as the most valuable tool for purification purposes, yielding milligram amounts of both highly pure and active r-subunit within  <dig> h. furthermore, sp- and rp-camps derived analogs have the potential to be employed in a chemical proteomics approach targeting distinct camp sub-proteomes.

