BACKGROUND
human malaria has been long recognized as a major global health problem. malaria is caused by parasitic protozoa belonging to the genus plasmodium, a diverse group with a broad range of vertebrate hosts, including reptiles, birds, and mammals. the known plasmodium species found in mammals are mostly restricted to primates primarily from africa and southeast asia, as well as a handful of plasmodium species parasitic to african rodents. there are four species commonly found in humans; however, they are not a monophyletic group but rather part of two distinct clades of primate malarias indicating independent origins as human parasites. one clade includes p. falciparum together with several lineages found in african apes  <cit>  and the second includes the other three human malarial parasites  intertwined with the remaining plasmodium species found in non-human primates  <cit> . the general consensus, supported by molecular phylogenetic inferences, is that host switches are relatively common for primate malarial parasites and they have been crucial in the origin of those found in humans  <cit> .

given the diversity of plasmodium parasites found in humans and their importance as cause of disease worldwide, it is of considerable interest to estimate a timeline for the evolutionary path through which malarial parasites colonized the human host. having such a timeline will provide a necessary framework for investigating the dynamic of speciation/host-switch events leading to the actual human pathogens. it will also allow for hypothesis testing while investigating adaptations at a molecular level, such as those related with mechanisms of invasion. however, the lack of a fossil record combined with these complex dynamics involving host switches have made molecular dating studies particularly difficult in this important group of parasites. as a result, in-depth analyses timing the origin of human malarias have been limited.

most evolutionary genetic studies that include timing have used complete or partial mitochondrial genome sequences. those investigations have focused on the origins of p. vivax from non-human primates in southeast asia  <cit>  and p. falciparum from african apes  <cit> . these molecular dating analyses have in common the use of relatively simple timing methodologies that employ strong assumptions, which can introduce biases in the estimated times. for example, recent studies have assumed constant rate  molecular clock models using tightly bound  calibrations based on fossils records or biogeographic events from the extant hosts  <cit> . such studies yielded estimates for the origin of plasmodium spp. in primates, and mammals in general, that were very young  when compared with the origin of their hosts . although ad hoc host switches offer plausible explanations for such discrepancies  <cit> , it is possible that these young time estimates for malarial parasites were the result, at least in part, of using fixed calibration points tightly defined around the host's fossils underestimating their time of divergence  <cit> . moreover, whatever scenario past studies assumed, they all lacked an external group that allowed them to validate the estimated divergence times. an event that will provide a most needed external validation is the radiation of plasmodium species found in lemuriformes.

given the hosts' geographic isolation, malarial parasites from lemuriformes provide a benchmark for validating the plausibility of timeframes that can explain their introduction into madagascar. lemuridae malarias, originally considered in the same sub-genus with rodent malarias, are a group that appears to be as diverse as those found in cercopithecidae from southeast asia  <cit> . nevertheless, no evidence has been provided indicating that the lemur malarias are part of a monophyletic group  <cit> . a recent phylogenetic analysis that included partial mitochondrial gene sequences  from a parasite found in a white sifaka, propithecus verreauxi  <cit> , suggested that this lemur parasite lineage may share a common ancestor with the group of catarrhini parasites that includes the agents of human malarias p. malariae, p. ovale, and p. vivax. however, its relationship with rodent malarias was still unclear given the low support at that node. nevertheless, it was proposed that lemuridae plasmodium might have radiated with their hosts, 75- <dig> mya  <cit> ; a time frame that clearly contradicts estimates generated by previous studies  <cit> .

here we investigate the time of origin of human malarias as part of the radiation of plasmodium found in primates. specifically, we study the impact that different molecular dating methods, assumptions and calibrating points have in timing the radiation of primate malarias and how this process relates to the lineages leading to human parasites. in our analyses, we include nearly complete mitochondrial genomes for five species of lemuridae malarias. the origin of those species are not used to calibrate the clock per se since we have no grounds for assuming co-speciation with their hosts, yet they provide "a temporal landmark" that allows us to determine the plausibility of timing scenarios. thus, we compare estimated timelines and verify if they take into account the introduction of primate malarias into madagascar, an event that could not have happened after the last terrestrial mammal colonization event   <cit> . then, the complete mitochondrial genome analyses is followed by a study of an extended dataset of partial mitochondrial genome sequences recently reported for african apes  <cit>  in order to explore the origin of p. falciparum.

in contrast to previous studies, we found that the plasmodium mitochondrial genome  does not evolve at a constant rate necessitating the use of relaxed clock methods in timing analyses. our investigation indicates that previous timelines for the radiation of primate malarias and the origin of those parasitic to humans were likely underestimates since they fail to properly explain the introduction of lemur malaria into madagascar. overall, our analyses indicate that there were several ancient host-switches among major mammalian plasmodium during the eocene, a time compatible with the radiation of african anthropoids   <cit> . the separation of the p. falciparum lineage from other mammalian clades can be dated back to that time. our analyses also indicate that the divergence of three of the four lineages with human parasites took place in the oligocene, at a time consistent with the divergence of cercopithecoidea and hominoidea.

RESULTS
a total of  <dig> blood samples from five species of lemurs were processed . blood smears were collected; however, none of the samples were positive by microscopy. using cytb diagnostic primers, eight individuals were positive for plasmodium spp.: one black and white ruffed lemur, one indri, and the six lesser bamboo lemurs . however, we could only obtain complete mtdna sequences from six samples. in these samples we found four haplotypes : two of the haplotypes  were obtained from two different individuals of lesser bamboo lemur, while haplotype b was found in a black and white ruffed lemur and d in an indri. to the best of our knowledge, this is the first report of malarial parasites in these lemuridae species that are found at different locations than those previously studied  <cit> ; our species are in the eastern coast whereas previous reports are from the western and northwest parts of madagascar. in previous studies, four species of plasmodium isolated from eulemur macaco macaco were described, but no molecular data was available for comparison  <cit> . we obtained the complete mitochondrial genome from one of those parasite species   <cit> . the original e. m. macaco infection included three different species  <cit> ; however, after experimental infections, the isolates used in this investigation were enriched with p. percygarnhami  <cit> . we included isolates from these experimental infections finding one distinct haplotype and it is reported as plasmodium sp.  .

the genetic divergences among the five haplotypes  suggest an equal number of plasmodium species . indeed, the average divergence among the lemur malaria haplotypes is twice the average divergence observed among well characterized rodent parasite species and at least one order of magnitude greater than the polymorphism observed within plasmodium species . thus, the most parsimonious explanation for such divergence among the five lemur haplotypes is that they represent an equal number of species. in the case of p. ovale wallikeri and p. o. curtisi, the divergence is more than double that found in subspecies of rodent malaria , supporting previous studies indicating that these two lineages of p. ovale should be considered sub-species  <cit> .

when we evaluated the phylogenetic signal in all three genes  and the non-coding region, the results from the statistical saturation tests show that overall all genes of the mitochondrial genome have phylogenetic information; however, cox <dig> seems to be the gene with the most saturation. specifically, if we assume an asymmetric tree, we found that the 3rd positions in cox <dig> are not useful in phylogenetic reconstructions. despite this saturation, the gene cox <dig> retains enough phylogenetic information when all positions are used .

therefore, we used the complete mitochondrial genome to infer phylogenetic relationships of plasmodium spp. from lemurs and other hosts using maximum likelihood and bayesian methods ; these two analyses yield similar results. the phylogenetic analyses were performed using the coding and non-coding regions .

as expected, the rodent malaria parasites are part of a monophyletic group that includes p. atheruri, the african porcupine parasite ; however, the phylogeny and time estimates indicate that host-switches have taken place among malarial parasites found in the rodent families muridae and hystricidae. the five lineages of lemur malarias are part of a monophyletic group that shares a common ancestor with one of the groups of catarrhini parasites, the one including all primate malarias except those species found in the p. falciparum clade. we found no evidence that the lemur parasites shared a more recent common ancestor with rodent malarias  <cit> . this result holds when we include the partial sequence  of lemur malaria reported elsewhere  <cit>  . it is worth noting that the branching of the lemur malaria clade resembles the relationship among the host taxa  <cit> , although there is no definitive evidence of co-speciation.

the relative position of the human parasite p. ovale, however, was not fully solved. in the analysis using shorter sequences but an extended data set that included several lineages found in african apes, p. ovale conforms a monophyletic group with all catarrhini parasites that is a sister clade of the lemur lineage ; however, it seems to share a recent common ancestor with the lemur parasites when the complete mtdna  is used . these uncertainties, however, do not change the fact that parasites found in catarrhini and lorisiforms primates share a common ancestor in both analyses .

the phylogeny obtained in figure  <dig> was then used for timing purposes. the assumption of a strict clock  was rejected when we applied maximum likelihood methods on the complete mitochondrial genome. assuming different rates for each gene and the non-coding regions, we have found a significant difference  between the fitting under the assumption of a strict molecular clock  and no molecular clock , rejecting the strict molecular clock model. consistent results were found in each gene separately . thus, we found that there was not a good fit to a "constant clock-like" rate in the plasmodium mitochondrial genome and that it exhibits rate heterogeneity among genes. the divergence among genes in our phylogenetic analyses and time estimates using relaxed clocks has a r <dig> =  <dig>  for cytochrome b, followed by cox <dig>  and cox <dig> , indicating that cytochrome b and cox <dig> are the genes with less rate heterogeneity. we therefore estimated divergence times using two different relaxed clock methods and evaluated the effects of their assumptions and of different calibration boundaries on these estimates  <cit> .

in order to study the effect of calibration points, we calibrated the relaxed clocks with increasingly informative boundaries, starting with a minimum-only boundary of  <dig> mya for the divergence of african/asian malarias based on the fossil record of the papio/macaca split. the second and third scenarios introduced a maximum boundary on this same node based on either the fossil record  or previous molecular clock estimates  . this approach produces multiple time estimates for each node that can then be compared to evaluate their robustness to model perturbations .

point time estimates and their associated 95% credibility intervals  are shown in millions of years . combined cris are also shown . node numbers are listed in additional file  <dig>  the absolute maximum for the ingroup root node  was set at  <dig> mya .

in all the scenarios explored, we find that beast produces time estimates that are significantly younger than multidivtime  . the most extreme case is the one with a minimum-only boundary  which produces time estimates that differ, on average, by 60% . for example, the origin of south asian primate parasites was dated at  <dig>  mya  using mdt and  <dig>  mya  by beast, whereas the origin of plasmodium in mammals was dated at  <dig>  mya  and  <dig>  mya  for mdt and beast respectively. the uninformative nature of using only a minimum time with a uniform probability distribution is likely the major cause of this large discrepancy between the two methods that implement different underlying assumptions  <cit> . we therefore expected the two methods to yield more similar estimates with increasingly informative calibrations.

this is indeed what we find with the most conservative calibration scenario, a uniform probability distribution between 6- <dig> mya, which produces time estimates for the two methods that are within 8% of each other  . under this scenario catarrhini parasites  are very young when compared with the homo-macaca divergence  <cit>  supporting the notion that even the lineages leading to the human parasites p. ovale and p. malariae originated via host switches from an undetermined host. the origin of african ape malarias, including the human parasite p. falciparum, is estimated at a time frame consistent with multiple host switches among chimpanzee and gorillas, with a composite credibility interval  of  <dig> - <dig>  mya. the falciparum-reichenowi split, on the other hand, is estimated between  <dig> - <dig>  mya, a time interval relatively young for the homo-pan divergence. however, despite the similarities on the time estimates yielded by the two timing methods, this scenario produces divergence times that are inconsistent with the biogeographic distribution of the lemuroidea malarial pathogens. the divergence of the lemuroidea and catarrhini parasites is estimated at  <dig>  and  <dig>  mya by mdt and beast respectively, with a composite credibility interval  of  <dig> - <dig>  mya . the credibility interval from beast does not include the  <dig> mya benchmark . therefore, only the most inclusive ccri  <cit>  barely includes the youngest boundary of the colonization events of madagascar by terrestrial mammals and is included only by one of the two methods. such young time estimates leave the introduction of malarial parasites in lemurs with an unexplained mechanism.

the third scenario that we considered uses an informative calibration point  and accounts for the underestimation bias of the fossils  <cit>  by using a molecular time estimate as upper bound . similar to the most conservative scenario, several primate malarias are younger than their hosts, consistent with our current understanding of frequent host-switches in malarial parasites. we found that mdt estimates are still older, on average, than those obtained using beast . however, under this scenario, both methods estimate times for the origin of lemuroidea malarias that are compatible with their known biogeographic distribution with a ccri of  <dig> - <dig>  mya . it is worth noting that the two methods now include the  <dig> mya benchmark in their credibility intervals but beast still gives younger estimates than mdt. if true, these time estimates support an introduction of malarial parasites by terrestrial mammals other than lemurs, and a subsequent adaptation of these lineages to their lemur hosts. furthermore, the divergence of the human malarial parasites p. malariae, from the lineage leading to the macaque malarias is consistent with the minimum time,  <dig>  mya, proposed for the human-macaque split  <cit> . interestingly, the falciparum-reichenowi split is consistent with pan-homo divergence whereas the radiation of african ape malarias could be as young as ccris  <dig> - <dig> . we repeated these analyses using only coding sequences, without cox <dig>  and with only first+second codon positions to evaluate the effect of potentially saturated signals on the estimations. the results were similar or slightly older .

given that the time of divergence of p. malariae  from the other parasites found in cercopithecoidea is consistent with the proposed fossil evidence for the split of homo and macaca  <cit> , we explored the effect of this additional calibration point in our time estimates as a minimum only boundary . whereas the estimated times for the origin of primate malarias are slightly older on average than those reported in the original analyses , these estimates have the advantage that their credibility intervals are dramatically reduced in both timing methods. indeed, several of the credibility intervals of this scenario with two calibration points are within the credibility interval of the time estimates obtained by using 6- <dig>  mya only . it is also worth noting that if we explore the effect of considering p. ovale as monophyletic with other catharrini parasites , those time estimates  are not different when the calibration point of  <dig>  mya is used for all catarrhini parasites excluding p. ovale . it is worth noting that relaxed clock methods can accommodate uncertainties in the phylogeny such as the one observed in p. ovale  <cit> ; however, researchers should always check their effects on the credibility intervals.

discussion
timing the origin and radiation of human malarial parasites has been the subject of active discussions for almost  <dig> years. yet in most phylogenetic studies, time has been an implicit variable and not formally incorporated into the analyses. the use of molecular clocks is problematic even when good calibration points are available since time estimates are affected by the underlying assumptions of the dating methods  <cit> . in phylogenetic studies of parasitic organisms additional challenges occur because of the absence of direct calibrations from the fossil record. our study indicates that in order to estimate a timeline for the evolution of parasites where there are host switches such is the case of malarial parasites, we need to use more complex assumptions and methodologies which compensate for variable evolutionary rates  and biased host fossils information .

following this approach, we explored the consequences on the estimated times by using different methods and calibration boundaries and evaluated not only their robustness to parameter perturbations, but also their compatibility with known divergences and biogeographical distributions. because of the presence in our phylogeny of a monophyletic group conformed by the five lemur malarial lineages, we were able to use the colonization patterns of terrestrial vertebrates in madagascar as a proxy for biologically plausible time estimates, since the introduction of malaria into lemurs could not have happened after the last terrestrial mammal colonization event   <cit> .

we found that time estimates vary across methods and calibration boundaries used, suggesting that the time estimates on the plasmodium mitochondrial dna are not robust to model and parameter perturbations. it may be possible that such uncertainty could be reduced by including nuclear and/or apicoplast genes. in any case, such observed heterogeneity in evolutionary rates and estimated divergence times should be considered given the extensive use of mitochondrial genomes, and even gene fragments, in malarial parasites studies  <cit> . in the context of timing the origin of human malarias, some estimates can be reasonably discarded based on biogeographic evidence. for example, the most commonly used calibration point  produces estimates that are too young when used tightly bound around the fossil date . this result casts doubts on the recently proposed young divergence times that were obtained with a strict clock and a young calibration point  <cit> .

instead, we propose using a more inclusive time interval for the split of southeast asian and african malarial parasites  that considers also the molecular estimates for the divergence time of their hosts. given the indirect nature of the calibration points that are used for parasitic organisms, we consider the inclusion of all possible scenarios for the hosts a more reasonable approximation even when using such broad calibrations increases the credibility intervals. several considerations can be made based on this scenario.

first, all mammalian plasmodium could be as old as  <dig>  mya, as the ccri indicates for the 6- <dig>  mya scenario . this estimate is significantly older than those previously reported. such an early time provides new insights about the origin of malarial parasites in mammals since it is consistent with the radiation of african anthropoids  <cit>  and with the divergence of the contemporary rodent lineages that harbor malarial parasites  <cit> .

second, it is clear that the sampled lemuroidea parasites did not originate with their hosts early in the evolution of primates but rather arrived in madagascar at a later time. our data, however, does not allow us to speculate about the organisms that introduced malarial parasites into lemurs in madagascar  during the colonization by terrestrial vertebrates between ~ <dig> mya and ~ <dig> mya  <cit> . we explored an alternative scenario that has been proposed where lemur malarial pathogens diverged with their hosts 75- <dig> mya  <cit> . however, if we assume such an early calibration point , the time estimates are too old for the radiation of malarias in south asia, an event that is well grounded in both the host and parasite distributions and phylogenies  <cit>  .

finally, our time analyses provide a time frame for the origin of the human pathogen p. falciparum. the lineage leading to the laverania clade  may have diverged from the other parasites in primates during the radiation of african anthropoids . our estimates on the time for the radiation of the laverania species are, overall, consistent with the proposed divergence for homo and gorilla for the group of ape malarias including p. falciparum . our study differs from others by the fact that we do not use the divergence of homo and pan as a proxy to the p. falciparum - p. reichenowi divergence. this assumption has been recently questioned given the possibility that p. falciparum originated via a host-switch from a more complex dynamic among african apes  <cit> .

these scenarios were further explored in the extended dataset that included several partial mitochondrial genome sequences from plasmodium found in african apes . like in the case of complete mitochondria, the 6- <dig> mya scenario does not explain the origin of lemur malarias . we then limit our comparison to the more inclusive 6- <dig>  mya calibration at the papio-macaca split  and the scenario that considers the same 6- <dig>  mya with  <dig>  mya as a minimum . unfortunately, the credibility intervals varied greatly in these analyses carried out on partial sequences . these results allow us to reiterate that the use of short or single gene mitochondrial genes as molecular clock for malarial parasites should be done with extreme caution  <cit> . nevertheless, it seems that the radiation of the extant african ape malarial lineages may have taken place as early as the radiation of the hominoids, which includes both african and asian apes. considering the phylogeny , it is clear that there were several host switches among gorilla and pan. however, the number of host switches needed is the same in both scenarios, gorilla or pan proposed origins for p. falciparum. thus, it is plausible that the actual phylogeny of p. falciparum and related lineages simply reflect that gorillas are particularly susceptible to p. falciparum-like parasites and they acquired it from a pan lineage. it is clear that host switches have occurred in african apes; however, whether p. falciparum originated "recently" as result of a host switch from gorilla or pan needs further investigation.

time estimates and their credibility intervals  were estimated with multidivtime  and beast using two calibration points . combined cris  are also shown. node numbers refer to additional file  <dig> 

CONCLUSIONS
the expanded sampling of malarial parasites from lemurs, chimpanzees, and gorillas, enriches our understanding about the evolutionary history of malarial parasites. lemur malarias are a diverse group of species, their geographic isolation and diversity make them an excellent system to investigate factors leading to the radiation of parasite species. in the context of this investigation, lemur malarias provided a much needed external validation point. whereas the mitochondrial genome seems suitable for phylogenetic investigations, it does not evolve as a strict molecular clock. the fact that the malaria mitochondrial genome exhibits rate heterogeneity should be taken into account in systematic, phylogeographic, and molecular dating studies, especially those investigations that solely use partial sequences. based on our results, we recommend applying relaxed clock methods and exploring at least two scenarios on an extended set of loci that should also include nuclear genes whenever possible. the first scenario should consider as a calibration point the inclusive interval for southeast asian and african non-human primate malarial parasites . the second scenario should include, in addition to the previous calibration point, one that considers the split of p. malariae from other lineages at the time of the cercopithecoidea and hominoidea split, a minimum time of  <dig>  mya . although this second calibration seems reasonable given that it is consistent with all available data, it is an additional assumption so its effect should be considered separately. the observed rate heterogeneity in the mitochondrial genome makes us suggest that its use in molecular clock studies should focus on general trends observed on the credibility intervals rather than punctual time estimates. the timetrees obtained in this study, which account for rate variations and fossil uncertainties; confirm the common occurrence of host-switches in plasmodium lineages. contrary to previous studies, our findings favor older times for the divergence of the major groups of primate parasites in the oligocene with the origin of all mammalian plasmodium and the separation of the lineage leading to p. falciparum taking place as deep as the eocene, together with the radiation of african anthropoids.

