BACKGROUND
the introduction of novel high through-put sequencing technologies provides insight into the genetic architecture of an increasing number of non-model organisms including insects. next-generation  pyrosequencing has become an important tool in transcriptomic studies and allows targeted identification of genes which are  expressed in distinct tissues or cells, during development, or upon activation of immune responses. this technology has been used, for example, to characterize both the midgut-specific and the immunity-related transcriptome of manduca sexta, which has emerged as a model in lepidopteran biochemistry and physiology  <cit> . in this study, we subjected the immunity-related transcriptome of the greater wax moth galleria mellonella to a combination of sanger and nextgen sequence analysis. our study was motivated by two reasons. firstly, galleria is suited to identify ancient features of innate immunity in lepidopterans because it belongs to the family pyralidae which has been placed in a basal phylogenetic position within the lepidoptera. secondly, galleria represents a powerful, reliable and proven model system for innate immunity studies. it is currently used as a host system to reconstruct rapid reciprocal adaptations during host-parasite coevolution  <cit>  and as a an alternative model host for testing human pathogens, which is ethically better acceptable than mammalian hosts such as mice, rats and rabbits  <cit> . galleria caterpillars prosper world-wide in use as alternative mini-hosts because they combine advantages shared with other invertebrate host models with benefits that are unique to this lepidopteran. the advantages of the nematode caenorhabditis elegans and the fruit fly drosophila melanogaster are complete, well-annotated genomes and that microarrays, rna interference libraries and mutant strains are available which allow analysis of host-pathogen interactions at the molecular level  <cit> . however, the larger size of galleria caterpillars enables precise injection of antibiotics or a number of pathogens, easy manipulation and collection of tissue and hemolymph samples to study pathophysiology with, for example, proteomic approaches.

further advantages of galleria are  the low overall costs of breeding large numbers, providing an inexpensive whole-animal high throughput infection assay system  <cit> ,  their worldwide commercial availability, e.g., they are sold as bait for fishermen or as food for pets ,  the positive correlation between the pathogenicity of bacteria and fungi when evaluated in galleria and mice  <cit> ,  and that this heterologous insect host can be adapted in the laboratory to human physiological temperature . this is essential in order to mimic the physiological conditions in mammals because human pathogens are adapted to the physiological temperature of their host which is often required for the synthesis and the release of their pathogenic or virulence factors  <cit> . these advantages have convinced an increasing number of researchers to favor galleria as a mini-host model for prominent pathogenic bacteria and fungi that are responsible for severe human diseases such as bacillus cereus  <cit> , enterococcus faecalis  <cit> , listeria monocytogenes  <cit> , pseudomonas aeruginosa  <cit> , staphylococcus aureus  <cit> , candida albicans  <cit>  and cryptococcus neoformans  <cit> . in addition, a number of antimicrobial peptides and inhibitors of microbial virulence factors have been discovered during the past decade in galleria whose therapeutic potential in medicine and plant protection is presently being explored  <cit> .

the major disadvantage of galleria as a heterologous host system is that neither genome nor transcriptome sequence data are available and, therefore, important information about the immunity and stress related genes and their expression are lacking. consequently, this study was designed to fill this gap and to provide a data set which enables more detailed studies, for example microarray or proteomic analysis, in the future. in order to induce expression of immunity-related genes in this lepidopteran species we injected a bacterial lipopolysaccharide  preparation into last instar larvae which has been proven as a potent elicitor of immune responses in galleria  <cit>  and other insect species  <cit> . normalized larval dscdna was sequenced using roche  <dig> flx and sanger  methods. the combining of both technologies provided deep sequencing coverage of the expressed genes relevant to this research project.

because of the large hemolymph sample volumes that can be obtained from galleria caterpillars, their host response to pathogens can easily be studied at the peptide and protein level  <cit> . to test the correlation between transcriptomic and proteomic data we collected hemolymph samples from untreated and lps-injected larvae. in order to identify peptides and proteins that are secreted within the hemolymph upon activation of innate immune responses, we used 2d-gelelectrophoresis combined with mass spectrometric analysis of spots that appear or are enhanced upon injection of lps. complementary proteomic analysis of hemolymph samples confirmed induced expression and release into the hemolymph of proteins known to mediate recognition of microbes, immunity-related signaling or killing of microbes.

RESULTS
transcriptome assembly and functional analyses using gene ontologies
galleria has emerged as a powerful, surrogate and ethically acceptable model host for human pathogens, but the lack of genomic data is a major impediment for its use in preclinical research. in order to provide more detailed information about its transcriptome we subjected normalized larval cdna to nextgen pyrosequence  and sanger analysis. normalization of the larval cdna resulted in reduction of any over-abundant transcripts and production of an even distribution of transcripts ranging from  <dig>  to >  <dig>  kb in size. the average size of the cdnas of the galleria mixed larval cdna library that were cloned and sequenced was  <dig>  bp. with the  <dig> platform we generated over  <dig> million bases sequence information. the total number of reads was  <dig>  with an average length of read  of  <dig>  the data assembly consisted of  <dig>  contigs and  <dig>  million bases among which  <dig>  contigs were larger than  <dig> bases. the average contig size of contigs larger than  <dig> bases was  <dig>  bases. the largest contig had  <dig>  bases, the n <dig> contig size was  <dig>  bases. the sanger sequencing yielded a total of  <dig>  high-quality ests, which after assembly resulted in a total of  <dig>  contiguous sequences  and  <dig>  singletons represented by a single est and a total of  <dig>  putative gene objects . combined, the sanger and the pyrosequencing data of the galleria larval cdna library resulted in a total of  <dig>  contigs . for the subsequent blast searches and annotation, we excluded all of the singleton reads from the  <dig> pyrosequencing data as the singlets may be more error-prone and unreliable as compared to contigs with good sequence coverage. the complete set of sequences were subjected to a protein translated blastx search and a gene ontology  analysis using blast2go  <cit> .  <dig>  sequences  matched described sequences in genbank . more than half of the sequences  had no blast result, indicating a high number of lepidopteran or species-specific transcripts or transcript parts   <cit> .

we then analyzed which part of the assembled contigs had counterparts in certain species. for this purpose we used blast databases for the complete proteomes of drosophila melanogaster, bombyx mori, and homo sapiens. using this approach we cannot discern gene family members but get a rough overview on general protein distributions between clades. the venn diagram  shows the distribution of hits with a score threshold of  <dig>  we chose the score value as excluding criteria to make blast hits comparable, since p values are influenced by the data base size. we observed a total of  <dig> hits of which more than  <dig> are common to all species and therefore belong to the core of all metazoan genes. given that not all genes are active under the conditions chosen and that there are a number of species specific genes, the  <dig> identifiable genes shared between bombyx and galleria indicate a good coverage of the galleria transcriptome by our contig data set. not surprisingly another large fraction  is shared between the lepidoptera only and  <dig> contigs are common between diptera and lepidoptera. the slightly higher number of genes shared between lepidoptera and humans than between d. melanogaster and humans  indicate a d. melanogaster specific gene loss. overall, the species distribution of the top blast hit against the nr database for the galleria transcriptome shows a strong preference for matches against bombyx mori and tribolium castaneum genes. both insect species are represented by complete genome sequences in the public databases, as for drosophila, but the number of top blast hits against this insect model organism is much smaller .

for functional comparisons, all sequences were subjected to gene ontology  analysis in blast2go, where we classified all gene objects in biological function  and molecular process class  <dig> . to minimize the number of classes with only few gene objects, we set the minimum number of gene objects  in a class to 2% of the total number of sequences that could be classified. of the  <dig>  contigs in the galleria cdna library with high-score matches in the genbank non-redundant  protein database,  <dig>   could be classified into a go category, with each class containing at least  <dig> sequences . among the  <dig>  genes for which we obtained go terms, we observed a wide diversity of functional categories represented on all levels of the gene ontology database. figure  <dig> shows a total of  <dig>  and  <dig>  go level- <dig> classes into which the gene objects were classified. the most prominent go biological process categories were cellular metabolic process, macromolecule metabolic process and primary metabolic process , followed by the classes biosynthetic process, cellular component organization and biogenesis, and transport . the most prominent go molecular function categories were protein binding, nucleic acid binding and hydrolase activity . a comparison of the go categorized galleria transcripts with a functional go category and the complete predicted unigene set from the silk moth  genome subjected to the same blast2go process revealed a substantial overlap between the two datasets. out of  <dig>  total bombyx unigenes,  <dig>  had a significant blast hit , a much larger fraction  as compared to the galleria sequence data set . of the  <dig>  genes with a blast hit  <dig>  bombyx genes had a functional go category association . in a direct comparison of the presence and/or abundance of go terms, three go classes were absent in the galleria transcriptome, but present in the bombyx unigene dataset: generation of precursor metabolites and energy, cell recognition and regulation of biological process. based on the relative numbers of gene objects with functional go category associations the galleria sequences fall into go categories with a roughly similar distribution to that of the bombyx genome showing comparable numbers of most go categories both for biological process and molecular function . this suggests that the galleria sequence data contain a large diversity of genes involved in a variety of biological processes, and do not contain notable biases towards particular categories of genes.

the patterns of go category associations nonetheless differed between these two insect species in a few categories, with relatively high abundance of multicellular organismal development, anatomical structure morphogenesis and cellular developmental process in bombyx and biosynthetic process and macromolecule metabolic process and response to stress being more abundant in galleria. in addition to this, several categories were only present in galleria . differences in go category associations between bombyx and galleria might be attributed to the fact that ests of the latter originate predominantly from larvae.

recognition of pathogen or damage associated molecular pattern genes
peptidoglycan recognition proteins  and apolipophorin iii which are known to mediate recognition of pathogen-associated molecular patterns  and damage-associated molecular patterns  have been identified both among the determined transcripts and the new or enhanced spots of the 2d-gels, implicating their release within the hemolymph during humoral immune responses . insect pgrps specifically bind to and hydrolyze bacterial peptidoglycan, activate the toll or imd signal transduction pathways or proteolytic cascades that generate antimicrobial effectors, and stimulate phagocytosis. they have been found to code for up to  <dig> pgrps, classified into short  and long  forms. we identified six putative pgrp sequences in galleria, among which one pair solely originates from recent gene duplication  event . the two major classes of insect pgrps are well separated in the gene phylogeny as depicted by the good bootstrap support of the neighbour-joining analysis. in the class which includes the gut-expressed drosophila pgrp-lb gene, we can find two galleria pgrps . apolipophorin iii mediates pattern recognition of beta- <dig>  glucans and cellular encapsulation in galleria  <cit> . recently, it was shown that apoliphorin iii present in the hemolymph of galleria binds to nucleic acids released by damaged cells and wounded tissues, and these aggregates enhance both humoral and cellular defense reactions that can protect from infection  <cit> .

gram negative bacteria binding proteins  and β- <dig> -glucan recognition proteins  have been extensively studied as pattern recognition proteins in lepidoptera  <cit> . most of these proteins are produced in the fat body and secreted into the caterpillar's hemolymph. some are constitutively present whereas others are induced upon microbial infection. we have identified five different ßgrps in the galleria est data collection, including one most similar to the midgut-specific short ßgrp with glucanase activity as previously described  <cit> . to further examine the relationships among βgrp proteins across insects and the ßgrps identified in galleria, a total of  <dig> sequences from  <dig> species, including many proteins that had previously been found in insect hemolymph, were collected and used to construct a bayesian phylogeny . the phylogenetic analysis revealed that these sequences clustered in two distinct clades. one of these clades is clearly separated from the other clades by a high posterior probability and contains the helicoverpa armigera glucanase- <dig> protein , and sequences from cdna libraries made from midgut tissue of different lepidoptera species, including one galleria sequence. this phylogeny suggests that galleria does have all of the ßgrps found in more derived lepidopteran species, including the gene coding for a protein with glucanase activity. this supports the idea of an ancient ßgrp duplication event in lepidoptera, leading to paralogues that have different functions.

immunity related signaling
in insects, cell signaling against fungal and bacterial pathogens occurs through the toll, imd, and jak-stat pathways  <cit> . these pathways are quite similar to the vertebrate  signaling pathways, and induce the expression of antimicrobial peptides and other molecules through interaction with nfkb factors. the major signaling pathways toll and imd are represented by central receptors such as toll, toll-like,  <dig> wheeler and related lrr repeat-containing g-protein coupled receptors. we have identified at least three different toll or toll-like receptor transcripts in the galleria dataset. the exact number of different toll receptors is not easy to evaluate, as some of the transcripts are incomplete and the predicted amino acid sequences do not always overlap. in addition to toll, we identified two different  <dig> wheeler partial transcripts with homology to spodoptera frugiperda  <dig> wheeler . however, a critical evaluation of the role of  <dig> wheeler in drosophila has put its postulated function as a pattern recognition receptor for gram negative bacteria into question  <cit> . interestingly, we identified transcripts encoding for the transcription factors nfkb and relish which function as obligate dimmers. relish regulates downstream of the imd pathway expression of antimicrobial peptides in drosophila  <cit> . while the signaling pathways that stimulate immune gene expression have been well characterized by genetic analysis in drosophila, they are far from being well understood in most other insect species. however, several proteins involved in these pathways have recently been characterized in lepidoptera. one such pathway involves proteolytic activation of a cytokine called spaetzle, which functions in dorsal-ventral patterning during early embryonic development and in the antimicrobial immune response in larvae and adults. most interestingly, it could be shown that injection of spaetzle into m. sexta larvae stimulated expression of several immune-related peptides and proteins, including cecropin, attacin, moricin and lysozyme  <cit> . we have identified a spaetzle homolog in galleria. the gme-spaetzle cdna encodes a polypeptide with 29%, 42% and 44% identity to n. vitripennis, b. mori and m. sexta, respectively .

in addition to major immune signaling proteins, we identified a calreticulin sequence in the immune-induced galleria transcriptome data. calreticulin is involved in signal transduction events associated with innate immunity, cell adhesion, angiogenesis and apoptosis in mammals. the level of calreticulin on the surface of human dentritic cells and polymorphonuclear phagocytes correlates with their phagocytotic ability  <cit> . induction of calreticulin upon lps challenge has recently been determined in other invertebrates such as the planarian schmidtea mediterranea which is suggestive for its evolutionarily conserved roles in innate immunity  <cit> . lps-challenge also induced expression of tetraspanins whose role in modulating immune signal complexes in vertebrates is well established  <cit> . its induced expression upon lps-injection has also been documented in ancient insects such as the firebrat  <cit> . similarly, an ankyrin repeat domain containing protein was found both in this basal insect and in galleria.

antimicrobial peptides and proteins
our transcriptomic analysis resulted in identification of a large number of antimicrobial peptides and proteins  among which the moricin-like gene family, the gloverins and the cecropins were prominent. we determined the presence of six genes coding for moricin-like proteins of the eight moricin peptide fragments  reported from galleria. moricins have been shown to exert in vitro activity against both gram negative and gram positive bacteria, as well as against yeast and filamentous fungi  <cit> . although protein sequence alignments show highly conserved blocks of amino acids, a phylogenetic analysis of moricin sequences from galleria and other lepidoptera indicate species-specific gene duplication events for some gene family members , while others cluster according to the species phylogeny . moricins belong to the amphipathic α-helical antimicrobial peptides and have been first discovered in the lepidopteran b. mori  <cit> , while gloverins have first been found in the silk moth hyalophora gloveri  <cit> . the presence of moricins and gloverins seem to be restricted to lepidoptera. both proteomic and transcriptomic analysis confirmed the induced expression of gloverins and their secretion into the hemolymoh of in galleria . we identified five members among the induced transcripts. gloverins are basic and heat-stable proteins enriched in glycine residues but lacking cysteine residues . they interact with lps and thereby increase the permeability and inhibit the formation of the outer membrane in bacteria. at least  <dig> gloverins have been reported from the genome of the silkworm b. mori  <cit> .

cecropins represent another group of linear and amphipathic peptides with a-helical structure. the first member of this peptide family exhibiting antibacterial and antifungal activity was discovered in and isolated from the hemolymph of the silk moth hyalophora cecropia and has therefore been named cecropin  <cit> . the cecropin-like peptide from galleria is synthesized as a propeptide, with a putative 22-residue signal peptide, a 4-residue propeptide and a 39-residue mature peptide with a mass of  <dig>  kda. like cecropins from other insects it exhibits potent activity against both gram-positive and gram-negative bacteria  <cit> . we have identified four different cecropins in the galleria transcriptome dataset, including a more diverged d-type cecropin. this surprisingly large number of different cecropins  covers a larger fraction of the amino acid diversity encountered when comparing cecropins from across the lepidoptera.

we determined both cysteine-rich peptides reported from galleria which exclusively inhibit growth of filamentous fungi, the defensin-like antifungal peptides galiomicin  <cit>  and gallerimycin  <cit> . at least the latter contributes to innate immune responses mediating resistance of g. mellonella larvae against normally lethal infection by the human pathogenic yeast c. albicans  <cit> . transgenic expression of gallerimycin has been shown to confer resistance to fungal diseases on crops  <cit> . a homologue of spodoptericin, the third defensin-like peptide discovered in lepidoptera  <cit> , is also present in our galleria transcriptome.

in a previous study, we used the suppression subtractive hybridization method to screen for genes that are induced in galleria upon challenge with lps  <cit> . this approach resulted in the discovery of novel peptides and protein families which were also found in this extended transcriptomic study. for example, we discovered a cobatoxin-like molecule and a protein which was named gall-6-tox due to its six conserved tandem repeats of cysteine-stabilized alpha beta motifs , the structural scaffold characteristic of invertebrate defensins and scorpion toxins. homologues of gal-6-tox differing in the number of tandem repeats of the cs-αβ motif were later found in other lepidopterans such as bombyx mori and spodoptera exigua. it turned out that they belong to a novel family of atypical defensin-derived immune-related proteins, which is specific to lepidoptera and which is now called x-tox  <cit> . moreover, our study confirmed the induced expression of tenascin-like proteins in galleria upon lps-challenge  <cit> , which represent immune effector molecules known from vertebrates. however, using race-pcr we obtained the full-length cdna which is considerably shorter than vertebrate tenascins and lacks characteristic tenascin domains such as fibronectin type-3-like repeats. these findings make the relation of the identified sequences to tenascins unlikely.

with transcriptomic and proteomic analysis we also found different lysozymes, one of which was first identified in galleria more than  <dig> years ago, representing the first antimicrobial protein reported from insects  <cit> . it shares structural similarity with c  type lysozyme  <cit> , and its activity against gram-positive bacteria has been attributed to its ability to degrade cell wall peptidoglycan by hydrolysis of the b-1- <dig> linkages between n-acetylglucosamine and n-acetylmuramic acid residues. besides moderate activity against gram-negative bacteria  <cit> , galleria lysozyme was also shown to exhibit antifungal activity in vitro  <cit> , similar to that of human lysozyme against the pathogenic yeasts candida albicans and coccidioides immitis  <cit> . we identified four c-type lysozyme homologues and an additional i-type lysozyme whose function remains to be elucidated. to further examine the relationships among lysozyme proteins identified in galleria and those found in other insects, c-type lysozyme sequences from  <dig> insect species and from human were aligned and used to construct a gene phylogeny . the phylogenetic analysis revealed that these sequences clustered in two distinct clades. one of these clades clearly separated with a high bootstrap support contains most of the lepidopteran lysozymes, including a group with two of the four galleria lysozymes identified here and a previously identified partial lysozyme sequence . these findings suggest that galleria exceeds the number of c-type lysozymes found in other lepidoptera , supporting the idea of species-specific lysozyme gene duplication events in galleria leading to paralogues with potentially different functions.

the invertebrate i-type lysozymes, although somewhat diverged in their activities, encompass a group of proteins having highly related primary structures. they differ from other lysozymes in having  <dig> or  <dig> cysteine residues in the primary sequence. the latter are predicted to form five or six disulfide bonds which have been attributed to cause stability against heat denaturation, high osmolarity and proteolytic degradation. although several i-type lysozymes have been shown to be active at low temperatures, the enzyme is stabile even after prolonged heating or long-term storage at room temperature  <cit> . the i-type lysozymes are coded for by single copy genes in lepidoptera .

in addition, we identified a full-length cdna sequence which is identical to the deduced protein sequence of a galleria proline-rich peptide  <cit>  and almost identical to two protein fragments identified in a previous study analyzing hemolymph peptide fragments in galleria  <cit> . finally, our transcriptomic analysis confirmed the presence of genes encoding cobatoxin-like peptides  <cit>  .

inhibitors of microbial proteases
the immunity-related transcriptome of galleria comprises a number of serine proteinase inhibitors among which we identified three genes encoding inhibitors  that have previously been purified from hemolymph and whose amino acid sequence was partially determined by edman sequencing. all three ispis with molecular masses between  <dig>   and  <dig>   were determined to be capable of inhibiting the major virulence factors, designated as pr <dig> and pr <dig>  of the entomopathogenic fungus metarhizium anisopliae which is used in biological control of pest insects worldwide  <cit> . ispi- <dig> and ispi- <dig> do not share sequence similarity with other known proteins whereas ispi- <dig> turned out to represent a kunitz-type inhibitor . in addition, we found transcripts encoding for the insect metalloproteinase inhibitor  which represents the first and to date only peptide known from animals which is capable to specifically inhibit thermolysin-like microbial metalloproteinases belonging to the m <dig> family  <cit> . the latter encompass a number of prominent members such as aureolysin, bacillolysin, pseudolysin and vibriolysin which are produced by human pathogenic bacteria. thermolysin-like metalloproteases are recognized to be responsible for a number of symptoms associated with severe infections such as increase of vascular permeability, hemorrhagic edema, sepsis and necrotic tissue destruction in infected humans, and have therefore been implicated as targets for the development of second generation antibiotics  <cit> . the impi has been discovered in and was purified from galleria larvae which were preinjected with lps  <cit> . the amino acid sequence of the impi shares no similarity with other known proteins and its prominent stability against heat and acid treatment has been attributed to its five intra-molecular disulfide bonds. it has recently been found to encode two distinct inhibitors. the impi-peptide encoded by the n-terminal part contributes to innate immune responses by inhibiting microbial metalloproteases, whereas the impi-peptide encoded by the c-terminal part of the gene has been implicated to mediate regulation of endogenous matrix metalloproteinases with pleiotropic functions in immunity and development  <cit> .

transferrin
several induced transcripts encode for transferrin which represents a multifunctional and evolutionarily conserved player in innate immunity. its role in binding and removing available free iron ions, thus creating unfavorable environments for bacteria has first been reported in vertebrates  <cit> . a recent study using b. mori confirmed both the induced expression of transferrin upon lps-challenge and its contribution to antibacterial iron-withholding strategy in lepidoptera b. mori  <cit> .

stress response genes
in line with our previous studies in which we used lps-challenge to screen for inducible immunity-related genes in insects and other invertebrates  <cit>  we determined induced expression of genes involved in detoxification and stress adaptation such as apolipoprotein d, cytochrome p450s, gluthathione s-transferases, and a number of heat shock proteins which further supports our hypothesis that interdependencies between immune and stress responses are evolutionarily conserved in insects  <cit> . glutathione s-transferases  are a large and diverse family of detoxification enzymes found in most organisms. gsts help to protect cells from oxidative stress, but they also play a central role in the detoxification of both endogenous and xenobiotic compounds  and are involved in intracellular transport and biosynthesis of hormones. eukaryotes contain multiple gsts belonging to different gst classes and with differing enzyme activities to accommodate the wide range of functions of this enzyme family. the insect gst supergene family encodes a group of proteins that have been assigned to at least six classes: delta, epsilon, omega, sigma, theta and zeta  <cit> . the delta and epsilon classes, both specific to insects, are the largest classes and are often involved in xenobiotic metabolism whereas the omega, sigma, theta and zeta classes have a much wider taxonomic distribution and likely play essential housekeeping roles  <cit> . herbivorous insects have to cope with toxic plant metabolites taken up with their diet and gsts can play an important role in their detoxification  <cit> .

we identified a total of  <dig> different gsts in galleria larval ests out of which  <dig> were microsomal gsts. five out of the six classes identified in other insect species are represented and most of the galleria gsts belong to the insect-specific delta and epsilon classes with  <dig> and  <dig> members each, respectively. however, in contrast to a comparable larval est dataset of the generalist plant herbivore lepidopteran h. armigera  <cit>  both the total number of gsts identified and the strong overrepresentation of the insect-specific gsts is much lower in galleria . the insect-specific delta and epsilon gst classes are often involved in detoxification of xenobiotics and the limited number of gsts from those classes may point at the unique ecological niche and highly specialized diet of galleria which is devoid of any  plant secondary metabolites.

CONCLUSIONS
we have generated a comprehensive larval transcriptome map of the phylogenetically ancient lepidopteran galleria mellonella. this data set complements and massively expands the known spectrum of immunity and stress related genes of this model host which have been found in previous studies using peptidomic  <cit>  or ssh-based transcriptomic approaches  <cit> . besides genes encoding proteins that mediate recognition of microbial signatures such as gnbps, βgrps, pgrps and toll or immunity-related signalling, we determined a broad spectrum of defence related effectors such as antimicrobial peptides and proteins among which moricins and gloverins are restricted to lepidoptera. in line with other studies, the spectrum of genes which is up-regulated in response to injected lps includes proteins involved in detoxification  and stress response . the secretion of induced immunity-and stress-related peptides and proteins into the hemolymph has been confirmed by comparative proteomic analysis of hemolymph samples from untreated and immunized larvae. importantly, the spectrum of immunity-related genes identified in this study shares high similarity with that found in another lepidopteran species, the tobacco hornworm m. sexta, whose killed bacteria-induced transcriptome has previously been analyzed by pyrosequencing  <cit> . furthermore, except for attacins, we identified in galleria members of all families of antimicrobial peptides which are predicted from the complete genome sequence of b. mori,  <cit> . taken together we postulate that all effector molecule families contributing to lepidopteran innate immunity are present in the phylogenetically basal family pyralidae to which galleria belongs. the entity of generated data provide a valuable platform for more detailed analyses of immune responses in galleria and, therefore, improve the suitability of this lepidopteran both as a model host for human pathogens and for studies addressing coevolution with entomopathogens.

