BACKGROUND
β-lactam antibiotics like penicillins and cephalosporins belong to one of the largest-selling classes of drugs worldwide with a production of forty-five thousand tons in the year  <dig>  <cit> . penicillins and cephalosporins are produced by the filamentous fungi penicillium chrysogenum and acremonium chrysogenum, respectively, as well as some filamentous bacteria. these antibiotics possess as common structural motif the β-lactam ring  <cit> . not surprisingly, the penicillin and cephalosporin biosynthetic pathways have the first two enzymatic steps in common. first, the non-ribosomal peptide synthetase δ-l-cysteinyl-d-valine synthetase  forms the tripeptide acv. the formation of acv acts as the committed step in both penicillin and cephalosporin biosynthesis. acv is subsequently converted into isopenicillin n , which has the characteristic β-lactam backbone, by the enzyme isopenicillin n synthase . both acvs and ipns have been shown to be located in the cytosol in p. chrysogenum  <cit> . subsequent replacement of the α-amino adipoyl side chain of ipn by the more hydrophobic phenylacetyl or phenoxyacetyl moieties occurs in p. chrysogenum in the specific environment of the microbody and results in the formation of penicillin  <cit> . on the other hand, epimerization of the α-amino adipoyl moiety followed by ring expansion leads to cephalosporin biosynthesis in a. chrysogenum  <cit> . so far, a requirement for specific organelles for cephalosporin production in this filamentous fungus is unknown.

isopenicillin n synthase  belongs to a class of non-heme ferrous iron dependent oxidoreductases. during its enzymatic reaction one molecule of oxygen is completely transformed into two water molecules by removal of four hydrogen atoms from the acv tripeptide  <cit> . detailed mechanistic studies of the ipns enzyme were carried out using aspergillus nidulans ipns produced in escherichia coli  <cit> . these studies showed that the formation of the β-lactam ring is carried out by an iron -oxy intermediate with the his <dig>  asp <dig>  and his <dig> residues of a. nidulans ipns forming the active center. furthermore, a conserved arg-xxx-ser oxidase motif is involved in binding of the acv substrate  <cit> .

our objective is to introduce the penicillin biosynthesis pathway from p. chrysogenum into the methylotrophic yeast hansenula polymorpha. yeast species have the advantage of being versatile, easy to handle and cultivate, and possess superior fermentation properties relative to filamentous fungi. additionally, introducing the penicillin biosynthesis pathway into this yeast species allows a better understanding of the function of microbodies in penicillin production. in the past, the microbody-localized proteins involved in penicillin biosynthesis in p. chrysogenum – isopenicillin n:acyl coa acyltransferase  and phenylacetyl-coa ligase  – were successfully produced in h. polymorpha in an active form  <cit> . here we present our data on the expression of the p. chrysogenum pcbc gene encoding ipns in h. polymorpha.

RESULTS
ipns produced in h. polymorpha at 37°c is not stable
the p. chrysogenum pcbc gene encoding ipns was cloned downstream of the strong, inducible h. polymorpha alcohol oxidase promoter  in phipx <dig> and was integrated at the paox locus in the h. polymorpha genome . a strain, designated ipns  <dig> , containing the pcbc expression cassette was selected and cultivated at 37°c on methanol medium to induce the paox. wild type h. polymorpha was used as control. to analyze the induction profile of ipns protein, aliquots were taken at different stages of growth on methanol . western blots were prepared using crude extracts of tca precipitated cells and decorated with a polyclonal α-ipns antiserum. this demonstrated  that strain ipns  <dig>  produces an α-ipns specific protein of the expected size , that was absent in wt controls . however, after the onset of the stationary growth phase ipns levels declined rapidly . to check the stability of ipns protein produced in h. polymorpha, cells of strain ipns  <dig>  were grown on methanol medium to mid-exponential growth phase, and then  <dig> % glucose was added to the cultures, a treatment that results in complete repression of the paox. subsequently, aliquots of equal volume were taken at regular time intervals and tca precipitated. western blot analysis showed that within  <dig> minutes after glucose addition the ipns protein levels in the cells had decreased more than 50% , indicating that in h. polymorpha ipns is not stable when produced at cultivation conditions physiological to the host.

effect of the cultivation temperature on ipns production in h. polymorpha
instability of heterologous produced protein in yeast can be attributed to improper folding in the unnatural host, or to absence of activation, both of which can result in turn-over of the protein  <cit> . our assumption was that p. chrysogenum ipns was not properly folding in h. polymorpha, which might be overcome by cultivating the recombinant strain at a reduced temperature. since p. chrysogenum hyphae are usually grown at 25°c, we cultivated h. polymorpha strain ipns  <dig>  on methanol media at 30°c and 25°c again taking aliquots at different stages of growth . under these conditions, the growth rate of the h. polymorpha cells is reduced. western blots demonstrated that ipns protein was present in h. polymorpha extracts at all stages of growth . we also analyzed the effect of the reduction in the growth temperature of strain ipns  <dig>  on the stability of ipns. cells grown at 30°c and 25°c on methanol media to the mid-exponential growth phase were shifted to  <dig> % glucose in order to repress the paox and aliquots of equal volume were taken at regular time intervals after the shift. western blot analysis demonstrated that ipns protein was fully stable when produced at the lower growth temperatures .

in order to directly compare the amount of ipns protein produced in h. polymorpha ipns  <dig>  at the different cultivation temperatures, equal amounts of extracts from cells exponentially grown on methanol were analyzed by western blotting. extracts of identically grown h. polymorpha wild type cells and p. chrysogenum cells grown on penicillin production medium supplemented with phenylacetic acid were used as controls. this revealed that the steady state levels of ipns protein produced in h. polymorpha at 25°c are significantly enhanced relative to production at 37°c and 30°c . additionally, the amount of ipns produced at 25°c in the heterologous host is comparable to that produced in a high penicillin producing strain of p. chrysogenum.

h. polymorpha ipns  <dig>  cells grown at reduced temperatures produce functionally active ipns
we have determined the enzyme activity of ipns produced in methanol grown cells of strain h. polymorpha ipns  <dig>  at different growth temperatures via a bioassay that utilizes the β-lactam sensitive bacterium micrococcus luteus  as indicator strain  <cit> . cells of the h. polymorpha host strain and p. chrysogenum served as controls. crude extracts were prepared using glass beads as indicated in methods and equal amounts of protein were incubated with substrate acv. subsequently, the resulting reaction product was used in the bioassay. when extracts prepared from the h. polymorpha strain ipns  <dig>  grown at 25°c and 30°c were used in this assay, this resulted in the formation of a zone of growth inhibition on the indicator plates . in contrast, extracts prepared from h. polymorpha wt and ipns  <dig>  grown at 37°c produced no inhibition zone. also the use of higher amounts of extract from ipns  <dig>  cells grown at 37°c did not result in halo formation . in order to check whether the halo formed by the reaction product of crude extracts of h. polymorpha ipns  <dig>  grown at 25°c and 30°c was caused by the synthesis of ipn, we added  <dig>  iu of penicillinase to the reaction mixes and continued incubation at 25°c for an additional  <dig> minutes. the results  indicate that the product formed by the ipns  <dig>  extract is sensitive to penicillinase, confirming formation of the β-lactam structure. from this, we conclude that ipns produced in h. polymorpha at 25°c and 30°c is functionally active.

localization of ipns produced in h. polymorpha
in p. chrysogenum ipns is a cytosolic protein  <cit> . since two of the enzymes involved in penicillin biosynthesis  are located to microbodies in p. chrysogenum  <cit>  , it is important to know the subcellular location of ipns in h. polymorpha. cells of strain ipns  <dig>  were cultivated on methanol to induce ipns production and prepared for immunocytochemistry using polyclonal α-ipns antiserum. immunogold labelling was only observed in the cytosol or on nuclear profiles  as is characteristic for soluble proteins  <cit> . microbodies and mitochondria invariably lacked specific labelling, which led us to conclude that ipns produced in h. polymorpha is located in the cytosol.

CONCLUSIONS
in this study, we demonstrate that p. chrysogenum ipns, produced in the methylotrophic yeast h. polymorpha, is stable and functionally active when cells of the heterologous host are cultured at 25°c. in contrast, ipns protein produced at 37°c, the ambient growth temperature of h. polymorpha is unstable and inactive. our data support that the instability of ipns at the higher temperature is caused by poor/slow folding of the protein. cultivation of cells at the lower temperature is thought to slow down protein synthesis, which allows more time for proper folding. indeed, the growth rate of h. polymorpha at 25°c is reduced as compared to 37°c . structural analysis of a. nidulans ipns  <cit>  indicated that the protein contains β-sheets which form an active hydrophobic core that is shielded from the hydrophilic environment by α-helical structures. previously, it was shown in e. coli that the solubility of ipns improved significantly by lowering the cultivation temperature  <cit> . thus, poor folding at high temperatures may be an intrinsic feature of ipns.

previously, we succeeded in producing iat and pcl in h. polymorpha and to target these proteins to the correct subcellular location, the microbody  <cit> . both proteins showed enzymatic activity in h. polymorpha cells cultured at 37°c, implying proper folding at the physiological growth temperature of the heterologous host. nevertheless, since both proteins originate from p. chrysogenum, optimal enzyme activities are expected at 25°c. the observation that active ipns is only produced in h. polymorpha cells cultured at 25°c implies that penicillin production in this heterologous host may only be successful at reduced growth temperatures.

our next step on the way to insert the entire penicillin biosynthesis pathway into h. polymorpha will be the production of functionally active acvs in the heterologous host. this undoubtedly is the most challenging step, since yeast genomes do not encode non-ribosomal peptide synthetases like acvs, while in bacteria and filamentous fungi these proteins are widespread.

