BACKGROUND
the human stomach pathogen helicobacter pylori infects approximately 50% of the world population, usually from childhood until old age  <cit> . h. pylori exhibits exceptionally high genetic diversity, such that almost every infected human carries one or multiple unique h. pylori strains  <cit> . this diversity is the result of the combination of a high mutation rate with very efficient recombination during mixed infections with multiple strains  <cit> , for reviews see  <cit> . the specific mechanisms that are responsible for the high mutation rate of h. pylori and the unusual characteristics of its dna uptake and recombination machinery are yet incompletely understood.

we have previously described an in vitro system that allows us to measure mutation and transformation frequencies in h. pylori wild type strains and isogenic gene knock-out mutants, as well as the length of the donor dna fragments imported into the recipient chromosome after transformation  <cit> . in this system, natural transformation of different h. pylori wild type strains with dna from heterologous h. pylori donors led to the incorporation of  <dig> - <dig>  kb fragments into the recipient chromosome, depending on the combination of donor and recipient strains. imports resulting from recombination contained short interspersed sequences of the recipient  in ~10% of the cases  <cit> , leading to complex mosaic patterns. the glycosylase muty, a member of the base excision repair  machinery, is involved in at least one isr-generating pathway in h. pylori, repairing mismatches after the heteroduplex formation between recipient and donor dna  <cit> . however, the inactivation of muty in h. pylori did not completely abrogate the formation of isr, suggesting that additional mechanisms might contribute to isr generation.

in addition to ber, h. pylori also contains a second gap-filling dna repair system, the nucleotide excision repair pathway , whose role in h. pylori mutation and recombination is yet poorly understood. in escherichia coli, the ner system is responsible for the replacement of bulky dna lesions such as covalently modified bases, noncovalent drug nucleotide complexes and abasic sites generated by oxidative metabolism or ionizing radiation  <cit> . initiation of ner starts with the recognition of dna distortions by the uvrab complex  <cit> . after recognition, uvra dissociates and uvrc is recruited and acts as a single-stranded dna endonuclease, cleaving at both sides of the lesion  <cit> . finally, the unwinding activity of the uvrd helicase, which preferentially catalyzes a 3’ to 5’ unwinding, removes the excised segment. dna polymerase i fills in the gap while the remaining nick is closed by ligase  <cit> . in h. pylori, orthologs of the four ner genes, uvra-d, have been identified  <cit> ; but until now, only few studies have addressed the functions of these genes. h. pylori uvrb was shown to be involved in the repair of acid-induced dna damage  <cit> , and uvrd limited homologous recombination and dna damage-induced genomic rearrangements between dna repeats  <cit> .

here we have used a genetic approach to analyze the roles of the h. pylori ner system components in regulating the mutation rate, and the frequency and import patterns of homologous recombination after natural transformation.

RESULTS
characterization of h. pylori ner mutants and their susceptibility to uv light-induced cell damage
to investigate how the ner system contributes to genetic diversification in h. pylori, we individually inactivated the ner genes in h. pylori strain  <dig> by either allelic disruption with a kanamycin resistance cassette , a chloramphenicol resistance conferring cassette , or by quasi-complete replacement with a kanamycin resistance . since the components of the ner system participate in repairing damage caused by uv radiation in many different organisms  <cit> , we first investigated the sensitivity of the diverse ner mutant strains against uv light. mutants in uvra, uvrb, uvrc and uvrd as well as a reca mutant  <cit>  were exposed to uv irradiation and the amount of surviving cells was compared to the survival rate of the wt strain  <dig>  inactivation of any of the ner components markedly increased the susceptibility to uv irradiation , indicating that all ner mutants are impaired in dna repair.

to assess the effect of ner gene inactivation on growth properties in vitro, which might affect the results of other experiments reported in this study, growth curves were performed for all mutants and compared to wild type strain  <dig>  none of the ner mutants were affected in their growth properties in comparison with the wild type strain  <dig> .

spontaneous mutation frequencies in ner deficient mutants
since the control of spontaneous mutagenesis has been associated with the ner system in e. coli <cit> , we determined the effect of inactivating the ner genes on spontaneous mutation frequencies. for this experiment, the frequencies of mutations conferring rifampicin  resistance, occurring through different single base-pair mutations in the rpob gene  <cit> , were measured . the inactivation of uvra and uvrb significantly reduced the mutation frequency, while the inactivation of uvrc and uvrd had no significant effect on the frequency of rif resistant mutants. in order to rule out that the observed effects of the inactivation of uvra and uvrb were due to polar effects, we constructed complemented strains where an intact copy of the target gene was introduced into the chromosome of the mutant . the introduction of intact gene copies restored the mutation rates of the mutant strains to wild type levels .

recombination frequencies in ner-deficient h. pylori mutants after natural transformation
we next examined the role of the h. pylori ner system in recombination. each mutant strain was individually transformed with genomic dna extracted from h. pylori strain j99-r <dig>  this strain contains a point mutation  that confers rif resistance which can be used as a selection marker to recover recombinant clones . recombinant clones were distinguished from spontaneous mutants by partial rpob sequence analysis. the uvra mutant exhibited a highly significant decrease of the recombination frequency in comparison to the wild type . a decreased mean recombination frequency was also determined for the uvrb deficient mutant, however, the difference between the uvrb mutant and wild type did not reach statistical significance . there was no significant difference between the recombination frequency of the uvrc mutant and the wild type . the introduction of an intact copy of the uvra gene into the uvra mutant restored the recombination frequency to wild type levels. in contrast, the uvrd deletion mutant  showed a hyper-recombinational phenotype  that is in agreement with previous studies in e. coli <cit>  and in h. pylori <cit> .

characterization of the donor dna imports after recombination in ner-deficient mutants
one of the characteristics of h. pylori is the import of relatively short fragments of donor dna into the recipient chromosome after natural transformation. in order to understand whether components of the ner system play a role in the control of the length of dna fragments replaced after natural transformation, and in the formation of interspersed sequences of the recipient , single recombination events were further characterized. for this, rif resistant clones obtained using the in vitro transformation assay were randomly selected and a 1663 bp fragment in the rpob locus was sequenced. recombinant nucleotide sequences were aligned with both donor and recipient sequences to identify the different import parameters used for graphic comparisons of the polymorphisms . maximum likelihood estimations  of the import size were calculated and the total number of isr found among the isolates was counted. statistical significance of the results was evaluated using a bayesian approach . since the uvra mutant showed a strongly reduced recombination frequency, an allele-specific pcr was used in a pre-screening step to distinguish between spontaneous mutants and recombinant clones.

there was no significant change of the import length in the uvra, uvrb, and Δuvrd mutants. strikingly, the inactivation of uvrc had a strong and highly significant effect on the length of imports of donor dna into the recipient h. pylori genome . indeed, the mle of the imports increased more than 2-fold in the uvrc mutant compared to the wild type strain  <dig> . a functional complementation of this mutant restored this phenotype to wild type values, confirming that the generation of long imports was due to the absence of uvrc. none of the four mutants showed a significant change in the frequency of isr .

very strongly significant results  >30) are marked in bold.

discussion
the nucleotide excision repair  is a mechanism by which dna lesions causing distortions of the helical structure  can be repaired. in e. coli, ner also acts on non-bulky lesions such as oxidized or methylated bases, suggesting overlapping activities of the ber and ner systems for some substrates  <cit> . the h. pylori genome contains orthologs of all four ner genes, uvra-d , however the function of most of these genes, and their involvement in the unusual genetic variability of this pathogen were poorly characterized. our data show that inactivation of each of the four h. pylori ner genes strongly increased uv sensitivity, confirming that they are indeed functional homologs of the e. coli ner genes  <cit> .

mutation rates
inactivation of h. pylori uvra and uvrb resulted in a significant reduction of the mutation frequency in comparison to the wild type strain. these results seem surprising, considering that one key function of the ner system is to limit mutations by repairing dna lesions. our results are, however, consistent with previous findings in e. coli, where decreased mutation frequencies were reported in uvra and uvrb mutants after treatment with oxidized deoxyribonucleotides, while mutation rates were unaffected in a uvrc mutant  <cit> . under non-damage-inducing conditions, e. coli mutants in uvrauvrb and uvrc exhibited a lower mutation rate  <cit> . the excision and replacement of undamaged bases were first characterized by branum and colleagues who showed that in e. coli and in human cells, ner is able to excise damage-free fragments in lengths of 12– <dig> and 24–32 bp, respectively  <cit> . this process has been referred to as “gratuitous mutations” and it has been suggested that it may be a major source of oncogene mutations in humans  <cit> . such a double functionality of the ner proteins has been also reported for pseudomonas putida and e. coli where the ner system is also involved in the generation of mutations  <cit> . based on our results, we hypothesize that the basal level of ner-mediated replacement activity on undamaged dna is contributing to the overall high mutation frequency that is characteristic of h. pylori and contributes to its rapid genetic diversification  <cit> . as outlined above, the effects of uvrc inactivation on mutation rates in other bacterial species are complex and depend on the experimental conditions. we note that uvrc does not appear to contribute to the generation of gratuitous mutations in h. pylori.

the ner system has a dual role in the control of the homologous recombination in h. pylori
our data show that the inactivation of uvra significantly decreased the recombination frequency after natural transformation of h. pylori. a decrease was also observed with a uvrb mutant, which was suggestive , but did not reach statistical significance. the recombination frequency could be restored by functional complementation, indicating that uvra facilitates homologous recombination in h. pylori. uvra was not essential for this process, since recombinants were still detected in the mutant. recombination frequencies differed significantly between uvra and uvrb mutants, the reason of this statistically highly significant difference between both mutants remains to be elucidated.

inactivation of uvrc likewise had no significant effect on recombination frequencies in h. pylori. by contrast, uvrd was found to act as an inhibitor of homologous recombination, as previously shown by other investigators  <cit> .

we note that inactivation of uvrc promoted the incorporation of significantly longer dna fragments into the h. pylori genome  in comparison to the wild type strain, while a complemented mutant strain exhibited imports indistinguishable from wild type. we also observed that a different uvrd mutant strain, constructed by insertion of an antibiotic resistance cassette into the middle of the uvrd gene , exhibited a strongly increased import length . the mechanisms underlying these observations are as yet unclear.

based on the data from our genetic analysis, we propose a model for homologous recombination in h. pylori , where dna molecules enter the cytoplasm as ssdnas, which are highly recombinogenic substrates  <cit> , and are loaded with reca as nucleoprotein filaments  <cit> . thereafter, reca catalyzes the duplex invasion whenever homology regions are encountered within the genomic h. pylori recipient strain  <cit> . this results in dna distortions that are recognized by the uvrab complex. it remains unclear how strand breaks are introduced after this recognition, since the data indicate that uvrc is either not involved in this process, or can be functionally replaced by a different enzyme with partly redundant function. the helicase uvrd catalyzes the removal of the incised fragment and the unwinding of the dna. finally, the incised region will then be repaired by dna polymerase i and ligase. uvrd also works as an anti-recombinase, by dismantling the reca-ssdna complex and thus leading to the restoration of the template, as found previously in e. coli and suggested for h. pylori <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
our study provides evidence for a dual role of the ner system in h. pylori: besides its function in safeguarding genome integrity from dna-damaging agents, it also contributes to its genetic diversity. this is accomplished first by the generation of spontaneous mutations, and second, by controlling import frequency and import length of donor dna via homologous recombination. even though the importance of recombination in the genetic variability of h. pylori has been well characterized, less is known about the molecular mechanisms and the regulation of the dna incorporation. therefore, the investigation of the ner system in homologous recombination and the specific role of uvrc in the regulation of import length are of interest for future studies. since the gastric habitat of h. pylori is likely to be rich in dna damaging agents, it will be of interest to study the roles of ner components in h. pylori genetic diversification under in vivo conditions, e.g. in suitable animal models. finally, the results show the functional versatility of apparently conserved housekeeping proteins such as the ner components, emphasizing the importance of comparative functional analyses in diverse organisms, such as other naturally competent and recombining bacteria.

