BACKGROUND
tardigrades are small metazoans resembling microscopic bears  and live in marine, freshwater and terrestrial environments, especially in lichens and mosses  <cit> . they are a phylum of multi-cellular animals capable of reversible suspension of their metabolism and entering a state of cryptobiosis  <cit> . a dehydrated tardigrade, known as anhydrobiotic tun-stage  <cit> , can survive for years without water. moreover, the tun is resistant to extreme pressures and temperatures , as well as radiation and vaccuum  <cit> .

well known species include hypsibius dujardini which is an obligatory parthenogenetic species  <cit> . the tardigrade h. dujardini can be cultured continuously for decades and can be cryopreserved. it has a compact genome, a little smaller than that of caenorhabditis elegans or drosophila melanogaster, and the rate of protein evolution in h. dujardini is similar to that of other metazoan taxa  <cit> . h. dujardini has a short generation time, 13- <dig> days at room temperature. embryos of h. dujardini have a stereotyped cleavage pattern with asymmetric cell divisions, nuclear migrations, and cell migrations occurring in reproducible patterns  <cit> . molecular data are sparse but include the purinergic receptor occuring in h. dujardini  <cit> .

milnesium tardigradum is an abundant and ubiquitous terrestrial tardigrade species in europe and possibly worldwide  <cit> . it has unique anatomy and motion characteristics compared to other water bears. most water bears prefer vegetarian food, m. tardigradum is more carnivorous, feeding on rotifers and nematodes. the animals are really tough and long-living, one of the reasons why m. tardigradum is one of the best-studied species so far.

questions of general interest are: how related are tardigrade proteins to each other? which protein families provide tardigrade-specific adaptations? which regulatory elements influence the mrna stability? starting from all published tardigrade sequences as well as  <dig> unpublished new sequences from milnesium tardigradum, we analyse tardigrade specific clusters of related proteins, functional protein clusters and conserved regulatory elements in mrna mainly involved in mrna stability. the different clusters and identified motifs are analysed and discussed, all data are also available as a first anchor to study specific adaptations of tardigrades in more detail . furthermore, the tardigrade analyzer, a sequence server to analyse individual tardigrade specific sequences, is made available. it will be regularly updated to include new tardigrade sequences. it has a number of new features for tardigrade analysis not available from standard servers such as the nih entrez system  <cit> : several new species-specific searches , additional new sequence information  and pattern-searches for nucleotide sequences . an easy search for clusters of orthologous groups  different from the cognitor tool  <cit>  allowing tardigrade specific cog and eukaryotic cog  searches is also available.

furthermore, a batch mode allows a rapid analysis of up to  <dig> sequences simultaneously when uploaded in a file in fasta format .

two fifths of the tardigrade sequences cluster in longer protein families, and we hypothesise for a number of these that they are implicated in the unique stress adaptation potential of tardigrades. we find also ten tardigrade specific clusters. the unique tardigrade adaptions are furthermore indicated by a number of functional cogs and kogs identified here, showing a particular emphasis on the protection of proteins and dna. rna read out is specifically regulated by several motifs for mrna stability clearly overrepresented in tardigrades.

RESULTS
we analysed all publicly available tardigrade sequences  as well as  <dig> unpublished m. tardigradum sequences from our ongoing transcriptome analysis.

major tardigrade protein clusters of related sequence-similar proteins
all available tardigrade sequences were clustered by the clans algorithm  <cit> . interestingly,  <dig>  % of the predicted proteins  cluster in just  <dig> major families, each with at least  <dig> sequences . these include  <dig>  est sequences from a total of  <dig> .

using these clusters, a number of tardigrade-specific adaptations become apparent : the clusters include elongation factors , ribosomal rnas and proteins  which are part of the transcriptional or translational machinery. cluster  <dig>  could provide membrane and structural reorganization or immune protection  according to homologous protein sequences characterized in other organisms. other clusters show protein families related to the tardigrade stress adaptation potential, e.g. ubiquitin-related proteins  and cytochrome oxidase-related proteins .

 <dig> shown are the number of proteins found for the specified cluster, their percentages and the corresponding cluster number in figure  <dig>  the full table with all clusters and their color code matching to figure  <dig> is given in . clusters  <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> contain rrna and are given in .

 <dig> tardigrade specific protein cluster

moreover, proteins responsible for protein degradation  were found as well as proteins regulating peptidases . cluster  <dig> consists of  <dig> heat shock proteins which are involved in many stress response reactions  <cit> . few diapause specific proteins  are known from other animals. diapause is a reversible state of developmental suspension. it is observed in diverse taxa, from plants to animals, including marsupials and some other mammals  <cit>  as well as insects  and should here support the tun formation or regulate other  metabolic inactive states. furthermore, proteins involved in storage or transportation of fatty acids also seem to be important . late embryogenesis abundant  protein expression seems to be linked to desiccation stress and the acquisition of desiccation tolerance in organisms  <cit>  e.g. nematodes  <cit>  and rotifers  <cit> . thirty-one lea type  <dig> family proteins were found in cluster  <dig> 

lea proteins are wide-spread among plants and synthesized in response to certain stresses  <cit> . the lea type  <dig> family is well known in higher plants  to be synthesized during late embryogenesis and in aba stress response. it includes desiccation-related protein pcc3- <dig> of cratersostigma plantagineum. lea type  <dig> family occurs in bacteria , but is atypical for animals. however, this is an animal example where lea family type  <dig> is well represented and forms a full cluster.

moreover, ten clusters  consist of proteins which seem to be specific for tardigrades. these show no significant homology to known proteins.

functional clusters of stress-specific adaptations present in tardigrades
to gain a systematic overview of involved tardigrade functions, all available tardigrade sequences were classified species-specific according to cog functional category  <cit>  as well as according to cog number and molecular function encoded. note that in this section "protein" implies one type of protein. a cog or kog comprises often several sequences from different tardigrades. prokaryotic  and eukaryotic  gene clusters were compared . again, several tardigrade-specific adaptations stand out, e.g. highly represented cogs regulate translation elongation factor and sulfate adenylate transferase and a strong ubiquitin system. there are many cysteine proteases . for redox protection there are  <dig> thioredoxin-domain containing proteins and  <dig> heme/copper-type cytochrome/quinol-like proteins as well as ubiquinone oxidoreductase subunits . there are ten proteins involved in seleno-cysteine specific translation  <cit> . in eukaryotes, selenoproteins show a mosaic occurrence, with some organisms, such as vertebrates and algae, but notably also tardigrades, having dozens of these proteins, while other organisms, such as higher plants and fungi, having lost all selenoproteins during evolution  <cit> . membrane gtpases  are often of lep a  type in tardigrades. in general, members of the gtpase superfamily regulate membrane signaling pathways in all cells. however, lepa, as well as nodo, are prokaryotic-type gtpases very similar to protein synthesis elongation factors but apparently have membrane-related functions  <cit> . it is interesting to observe this prokaryotic-type gtpase in tardigrades. we suggest that it will have similar function as known in other organisms and thus ensure protein translation  coupled to membrane integrity and possibly cytoskeletal rearrangement which would again boost the tardigrade resistance to stress.

 <dig> detailed data and all cog/kog numbers are given on the web page http://waterbear.bioapps.biozentrum.uni-wuerzburg.de/cgi-bin/cog_stat.pl. summarized here are the functions of those clusters of orthologous groups  occurring particularly often or suggesting tardigrade specific adaptations.

the kogs show similar highly represented families and adaptations. abberant proteins are rapidly recognized by ubiquitination-like proteins  and ubiquitin-ligase related enzymes  as well as proteasome regulatory subunits . for protein protection and refolding disulfide isomerases  and cyclophilin type peptidyl-prolyl cis-trans isomerases  are available. connected to redox protection are also thirty aaa+type atpases and three peroxisome assembly factor  <dig> containing proteins . this broad effort in protein protection is further supported by molecular chaperones  and chaperonin complex components . there are six superoxide dismutases and six copper chaperons for thioredoxins , glutaredoxin-like proteins  and ten thiodisulfide isomerases as well as  <dig> glutathione-s-transferases. we found  <dig> hits to helicases. tardigrade dna protection is represented by  <dig> proteins of the molecular chaperone dna j family: proteins of the dna j family are classified into  <dig> types according to their structural domain decomposition. type i j proteins compose of the j domain, a gly-rich region connecting the j domain and a zinc finger domain, and possibly a c-terminal domain. type ii lacks the zn-finger domain and type iii only contains the j domain  <cit> . the latter two are referred to as dnaj-like proteins. analysis of the domains present in tardigrade proteins by smart  <cit>  and pfam  <cit>  searches reveals only the j domain and in some cases a transmembrane region, identifying them as type iii dnaj-like proteins. for further information on these cogs/kogs see table  <dig> 

1shown are the number of proteins found for the specified cog/kog number, the kog distribution of the kog in different eukaryotic species  and the cog/kog annotation.

abbreviations: a arabidopsis thaliana, c caenorhabditis elegans, d drosophila melanogaster, h homo sapiens, y saccharomyces cerevisiae, p schizosaccharomyces pombe, e encephalitozoon cuniculi. *these include specific unpublished data from ongoing work on m. tardigradum

moreover, undesired proteins can be rapidly degraded by cathepsin f-like proteins  or l-like proteins . there are several calcium-dependent protein kinases  and actin-bundling proteins. according to this observation calcium signaling should be implicated in adaptive rearrangement of the cytoskeleton during tardigrade rehydration. the cytoskeleton is a key element in the organisation of eukaryotic cells. it has been described in the literature that the properties of actin are modulated by small heat-shock proteins including a direct actin-small heat-shock protein interaction to inhibit actin polymerization to protect the cytoskeleton  <cit>   found in the above analysis).

translation in tardigrades includes polypeptide release factors  and proteins for translation elongation . there are about  <dig> gtp-binding adp-ribosylation factors. the secretion system and rab/ras gtpases are fully represented . seventeen tubulin anchor proteins show that the cytoskeleton is well maintained. finally, we find  <dig> tnf-associated factors and  <dig> apolipoprotein d/lipocalin proteins.

typical motifs in tardigrade mrnas
the regulatory motif search showed a number of known regulatory rna elements involved in tardigrade mrna regulation . certainly it can not be formally ruled out that some of these elements work in a tardigrade modified way. similarly, there are probably further patterns which are tardigrade specific, but not detected with the utrscan software  <cit>  applied for analysis.

                              hypsibius dujardini
                              milnesium tardigradum
 <dig> we considered  <dig>  ests in h. dujardini.  <dig> we considered  <dig> ests in m. tardigradum.  <dig> the number of hits is followed by the number of mrnas with this hit in brackets to indicate multiple hits.

the rna elements found include the lox-p dice element  <cit>  in h. dujardini as top hit with as many as  <dig>  ests . the cytidine-rich 15-lipoxygenase differentiation control element  binds kh domain proteins of the type hnrnp e and k , mediating mrna stabilization and translational control  <cit> .

furthermore, a high number of mrnas contains k-boxes  and brd boxes . all these elements are involved in mrna storage and mrna stability. these two elements are potential targets for mirnas as shown in drosophila melanogaster  <cit> .

however, in the two tardigrade species compared, only  <dig> of  <dig> well known rna elements are found, suggesting a clear bias in tardigrade mrna regulation. for example, the widely used au rich elements in higher organisms  <cit>  such as vertebrates are absent in tardigrades .

regulatory elements in tardigrade mrna are probably important for their adaptation, in particular to support transformation to tun stage and back to active stage again. the list of rna elements found can be compared for instance to our data on regulatory elements in human anucleate platelets  <cit>  where mrnas have to be stockpiled for the whole life of the platelet. due to this comparatively long life, a long mrna untranslated region is important in these cells. the same should apply to tardigrade mrnas, since their average utr is predicted to be long. a different stock-piling scenario occurs in unfertilized eggs, but due to developmental constraints, here localization signals are often in addition important for developmental gradients. we tested for these in tardigrades but did not find a high representation of localization motifs.

web-tool tardigrade analyzer
we created a convenient platform to allow rapid sequence comparisons of new protein sequences, in particular from new sequencing efforts in tardigrades, to our database by applying rapid heuristic local alignment using blast  <cit>  and allowing to search in selected species.

a batch mode allows the analysis of up to  <dig> sequences simultaneously when uploaded in a file in fasta format. output data are displayed according to an enhanced blast output format with graphical illustrations. low expected e-values result for searches using the option of our tardigrade specific databases: a more specific smaller database reduces the probability of false positives. as an alternative for general sequence analysis, a search against the non-redundant database of genbank can be performed. this takes more computational power and yields higher e-values, however, it identifies functions for most sequences. an additional useful feature is to scan all available data for peptide motifs or prosite signatures using a "pattern" module  or assign potential functions by cogs  <cit> . the first is helpful to recognize tardigrade proteins in cases where the tardigrade sequence has diverged far, and only critical residues for function are still conserved as motif signatures. it can also be applied to search for regulatory rna motifs such as polyadenylation sites  or recognize promotor modules such as the glucocorticoid receptor element . for this purpose, both, the tardigrade sequences and the non redundant database can be searched .

interestingly, this nucleotide  specific option is not available on some common servers, e.g. the phi-blast  <cit>  server at nih. further options include a user-defined database  and interactively animated stress clusters .

the tool http://waterbear.bioapps.biozentrum.uni-wuerzburg.de/ allows rapid searches for tardigrade specific sequences, e.g. molecular adaptations against stress . for instance, a search for trehalase sequences shows no trehalase mrna in the h. dujardini sequences. in contrast, there are several heat shock proteins in tardigrades, an example is hsp <dig> proteins . specific cogs are also rapidly assigned for any desired sequence. this includes the option to map the query sequence of interest to any of the known tardigrade specific cogs. furthermore, nucleotide patterns such as mrna polyadenylation sites are rapidly identified e.g. in h. dujardini mrnas . similarly, other mrna 3'utr elements can be identified, e.g. au rich sequences mediating mrna instability or regulatory k-boxes  in tardigrades.

1these are hits using the pattern hit option and the heat shock protein prosite entry ps <dig> for pattern generation and recognition. the pattern has the signature of y-x- - - - -f- -r- .  <dig> predicted similarity to q7pt <dig>  from swissprot

implications
tardigrades show a surprising large amount of related sequences. certainly, one has to correct for a few genes sequenced from many lineages for phylogenetic studies in tardigrades  however, despite this, a number of tardigrade-specific clusters still remain. furthermore, table  <dig> shows that most of the annotated clusters are stress-related.

looking at specific protein functions, both cog and kog proteins show that tardigrades spend an extraordinary effort in protein protection, turnover and recycling as well as redox protection. some other specific adaptations become apparent also from table  <dig>  but the complete extent of these adaptations is unclear given the limited sampling of available tardigrade sequences. furthermore, protection of dna is critical as it has been shown that tardigrade tuns accumulate dna damage which first has to be repaired before resurrection occurs  <cit> . taking this into consideration, dna j proteins were investigated in more detail since proteins of this family are well represented in tardigrades, including several cogs and kogs. several data underline the extremely high resistance of tardigrades to temperature, pressure and radiation as well as a high repair potential regarding dna  <cit> . thus, we suggest that the high repair potential is also mediated by this well represented protein family. phylogenetic analysis  shows that these proteins are represented by several kogs as well as the classic cogs in tardigrades. in particular, the first three kog families are also used in m. tardigradum, where extreme stress tolerance requires strong repair mechanisms  <cit> . furthermore, all these tardigrade proteins in table  <dig> are small, having neither zinc-finger domains nor low complexity regions, but instead consisting of single dna j domains which would always place them in type i  of dna-j like proteins. this suggests that the direct interaction with dna-j like proteins is the key molecular function.

finally, we could show that there are  <dig> regulatory elements used in tardigrade mrna, while a number of other elements known from higher eukaryotic organisms and vertebrates is not used. it is interesting to note that the elements often used in tardigrades are all involved in regulation of mrna stability. thus, they may be implicated in stage switching, as presumably in the initial phases of the tun awakening or tun formation, new supply of mrna is turned off and instead regulation of synthesized mrna becomes important.

in addition, and for further research we supply the web tool tardigrade analyzer. there are a number of alternative tools available, e.g. from ncbi http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/. however, we offer some species-specific searches not available from these sources as well as rna and promotor pattern search . furthermore, there are functional cog prediction as well as new, unpublished tardigrade sequences from m. tardigradum, all above reported data including the reported sequences and detailed functional clusterings as well as regular server updates. a better understanding of the survival mechanisms in these organisms will lead to the development of new methods in several areas of biotechnology. for example, preservation of biological materials in situ, macromolecules and cells from non-adapted organisms  <cit> . this is, of course, only a first and very general overview on potential tardigrade specific adaptations, more species-specific data will be considered as more information becomes available.

CONCLUSIONS
tardigrade genomes invest in stress-specific adaptations, this includes major sequence related protein clusters, functional clusters for stress as well as specific regulatory elements in mrna. for further tardigrade genome analysis we offer the tardigrade workbench as a flexible tool for rapid and efficient analysis of sequence similarity, protein function and clusters, cog membership and regulatory elements.

