BACKGROUND
biological systems in cancer involve multifunctional modules that coordinately regulate complex behavior  <cit> . many researches focus on identifying biomarkers on high-throughput data such as dna microarray data and rna sequencing data. however, the high complexity of biological systems makes the single molecular approach hard to fully reveal the underlying mechanism. integrative approaches with different data sources are needed to extract deeper insights in different levels and aspects  <cit> . several methods  <cit>  have been developed to integrate protein-protein interaction  data with microarray gene expression data to identify significant protein interaction networks. chuang et al.  <cit>  proposed a protein-network based approach to identify the biomarkers of metastasis within gene expression profiles. the biomarkers identified in interconnected subnetworks have shown high reproducibility and accuracy in the classification of metastatic versus non-metastatic tumors. ideker et al.  <cit>  introduced an approach to identify active subnetworks, which shows consistent condition-specific gene expression change on ppi network. the change of gene expression is measured by significance value  and further converted to z-score, then the network score can be aggregated by the z-score of the genes in the subnetwork. a simulated annealing based searching algorithm is implemented to find the maximal-scoring connected network. chen et al.  <cit>  point out that these two methods mentioned above define the network score as an aggregation of significance score of genes, which usually leave the less differentially expressed biomarkers unidentified. in order to address the concern of gene interaction, chen et al. proposed a bagging markov random field  based method to improve the protein interaction subnetwork identification. bmrf employs maximum a posterior  principle to estimate the differential score of genes or proteins and form a novel network score that considers the pairwise gene interaction in the subnetworks. although bmrf has achieved success in identifying biologically meaningful subnetworks, there are still some concerns about the method. bmrf treats the ppi connection equally by putting the same weight on the edges of the network, which is not true in the real case. as a cell needs to act differently in response to different stimuli, the regulatory mechanism should have condition specific preference. accepting all the connections in the ppi database may lead to errors in map estimation. furthermore, it has been proven that there are a lot of false positives in the protein interaction database  <cit> . therefore, we need to quantify the dependency between genes to reduce the negative effect of false connections and improve the performance.

in this paper, we proposed an approach, namely bmrf-mi, for identifying protein interaction network by incorporating mutual information  into a markov random field  framework to model the dependency of genes. mi is developed in information theory to measure the uncertainty between random variables. as the complexity of the biological system is very high, using mi to estimate the correlation between genes can help us reveal both linear and non-linear relationships. by incorporating the quantification of the dependency between the genes, we are able to minimize the effects of false edges in protein network and identify more accurate subnetworks. we generate synthetic data to show that our method has an improved performance in protein subnetwork identification. besides, we also apply bmrf-mi to breast cancer patient data to demonstrate the feasibility of the proposed method for real biological studies. experimental results show that the proposed method is able to identify biologically meaningful subnetworks. furthermore, we use survival analysis to show that the identified subnetworks can be used to predict the recurrence status of the cancer patients.

RESULTS
bagging markov random field and mutual information  based network identification
the flowchart of the proposed method is shown in figure  <dig>  given the gene expression data and ppi network, we use mutual information to estimate the dependency between genes to prioritize the connections in a network. unlike the traditional pearson correlation test, mi measures the uncertainty between the genes, which can capture more complex relationships. we model the gene dependency in a network by integrating mrf with mi, then the network score is formed by map estimation. considering the computational complexity, we applied simulated annealing searching algorithm to find the optimal network. the search starts from several selected genes and grows to construct a network with a maximum network score. we then apply a non-parametric bootstrapping to improve the robustness and reproducibility of the method. a number of sample sets can be generated by randomly sampling samples with a replacement. the confidence level of identified genes can be measured as the frequency of appearance on the sampled data sets. the final network is composed of the genes with high confidence level.

simulation experiments
the simulation ppi network is an estrogen receptor  related ppi network with  <dig> nodes and  <dig>  edges extracted from the hprd database  <cit> . the ground truth subnetwork is constructed by the genes in pathways closely related to breast cancer, which has  <dig> genes and  <dig> interactions. the dependency between genes can be constructed as a symmetric matrix, and the magnitude of the element indicates the strength of dependency. the genes in the ground truth subnetwork are set to have a higher dependency value, which means that they have stronger mutual dependency than the other genes. we use the markov random field model developed by wei et al.  <cit>  to simulate the differential state of genes. based on the differential state and gene dependency, the gene expression data is simulated from multivariate gaussian distribution with  <dig> samples in each phenotype , which takes the dependency matrix as the covariance matrix. for differential genes, a random difference will be generated to differentiate the mean level of two phenotypes. for non-differential genes, the gene expression data comes from the same distribution. the differential z-score is calculated by inverse cumulative standard normal distribution of p-value estimated from student's t-test. the false positive rate  of the simulation data can be controlled by a weight parameter w in the mrf model introduced by chen et al.  <cit> . we simulate the data by varying the fpr ranging from 30% to 85% to evaluate the performance of identifying differential expressed protein interaction networks under different levels.

we first use the area under the receiver operating characteristic  curve  as a criterion to evaluate the performance of bmrf-mi and bmrf in terms of network identification accuracy. by applying a bootstrapping strategy, bmrf-mi and bmrf will assess the confidence level of the genes in the identified network. then different threshold of confidence level can be set to calculate the sensitivity and specificity so as to obtain the roc curve. for each method,  <dig> different simulation data are tested to address the concern of variance of the performance. figure  <dig> shows the auc value of the three methods and the detail values are shown in table  <dig>  it can be seen that bmrf-mi performs better than bmrf, especially when the fpr is high. under high fpr condition, bmrf-mi is able to use the dependency between the genes to correct the differential state of the genes. although bmrf also considers the pairwise gene dependency relationship in network, the connection between genes are not differentiated, which will make the differential state of some genes affected by unrelated genes. as a result, bmrf-mi can achieve an increase of  <dig>  to  <dig>  in auc under different conditions.

besides bmrf, one popular method, jactivemodules proposed in  <cit> , is selected to compare the performance. as jactivemodules does not prioritize genes in the subnetwork, we cannot use auc to evaluate the performance. here we use f-score  / ) as a metric to comprehensively assess the subnetwork identification accuracy. figure  <dig> and table  <dig> show the f-score of the three methods. it can be seen that bmrf-mi outperforms competing methods with an average improvement of  <dig>  in f-score under different conditions. as described in  <cit> , jactivemodule only identifies the subnetwork with optimal aggregated z-score of genes, thus it will identify a lot of false positive genes in the network, which leads to low f-score.

breast cancer microarray data
we further tested our method on one estrogen receptor  related breast cancer patient dataset introduced in loi et al.  <cit>  to identify subnetworks related to recurrence of breast cancer. the patients samples are divided into 'early recurrence' group  and 'late recurrence' group  based on survival time. we finally got  <dig> samples in 'early recurrence' group and  <dig> samples in 'late recurrence' group. the ppi network data is obtained from hprd database  <cit> , which contains about  <dig> genes and  <dig> interactions. we further extracted an er focused ppi network with  <dig> genes and  <dig> connections by finding the subnetwork within two jumps from er. the  <dig> seed genes are selected from the er focused network with node degree larger than  <dig>  for the differential score of the genes, we perform student's t-test on the  <dig> genes between two groups of samples to calculate the p-value and convert the p-value to z-score by inverse cumulative standard normal distribution. the gene dependency is estimated by r package 'parmigene' <cit> , which implements the knn-mi estimator mentioned in kraskov et al.  <cit> . for the bootstrapping process, the confidence level threshold is set to  <dig>  to find significant genes in network.

among the  <dig> identified subnetwork, we select  <dig> significant subnetworks with size larger than  <dig> and score larger than  <dig>  . then we applied affinity propagation clustering   <cit>  on the significant subnetworks  to merge related networks. we use the default setting of apc and get  <dig> subnetworks , which are shown in figure  <dig>  the color of the node shows the log <dig> fold change of the gene; the red genes express higher in 'early recurrence' group and the green genes express higher in 'late recurrence' group. to study the function of these networks, we applied david functional annotation tool  <cit>  to analyze the genes. the identified networks are significantly enriched in breast cancer related pathways including cell cycle , tgf-beta signaling pathway , erbb signaling pathway , insulin signaling pathway  and mapk signaling pathway . the details of the functional annotation results are shown in table  <dig>  beside the lists of genes, we also show the dependency between genes by the thickness of edges in the network. for example, in net <dig>  we see that the cyclin-dependent kinases  genes are strongly connected with the minichromosome maintenance  genes. johnson et al.  <cit>  show that the cdk inhibitors will lead to increased mcm complex association with dna and mcm is closely with dna damage  <cit> , which is related to breast cancer recurrence. in addition, net <dig> shows strong connection between bad and ywhaq, which is associated with cell death and validated by  <cit> . moreover, the genes in common pathway tend to have strong mutual dependency. for example, it can be seen from net <dig> that the cell cycle genes including ywhag, ywhaq, ywhah, cdkn1b and abl <dig> are closely connected.

in order to show the significance of the subnetworks identified from loi et al. data, we train the netsvm  <cit>  classifier to classify breast cancer patients from our in-house data into 'early recurrence'  group and 'late recurrence'  group. our in-house data set consists of  <dig> samples which can be divided into  <dig> 'early recurrence' samples and  <dig> 'late recurrence' samples. netsvm is a network based classifier specially designed for cancer prediction by integrating gene expression data and protein interaction data. for each subnetwork, we use 5-fold cross-validation to train netsvm classifier on loi et al. data and independently test on our in-house data. the prediction results are further analyzed by kaplan-meier survival analysis. due to the heterogeneity of cancer samples, it is very hard to validate all identified subnetworks on other datasets. among all the five subnetworks, net <dig> and net <dig> are significant in differentiating the survival curve of two groups with log-rank test p-value of  <dig>  and  <dig> , which is shown in figure  <dig> 

CONCLUSIONS
in this paper, we have proposed a new method by incorporating mutual information into a markov random field based framework to tackle the problem of protein interaction subnetwork identification. the proposed method is tested by simulation data with different experimental conditions. we have observed significant improvements in terms of the accuracy of subnetwork identification. to validate the efficacy of the method in real biomedical applications, a breast cancer patient dataset is used for the identification of protein interaction networks related to recurrence of breast cancer. the identified subnetworks are significantly enriched in pathways related to the progression and recurrence of breast cancer. we further validate the significance of the subnetworks on other dataset by predicting the recurrence status of patients.

