BACKGROUND
teleosts are ectotherms and water temperature greatly influences their physiology and behaviour. within the species-specific thermal tolerance ranges, fishes are able to cope with natural temperature changes, such as daily and seasonal variations. however, close to or beyond the limits of thermal tolerance, physiological adaptation is no longer capable to cope with environmental conditions and fish health and survival are threatened
 <cit> . thermal stress trigger cellular and organismal responses activating a cascade of events that may lead to pathological conditions and ultimately to death. there are, however, profound differences in thermal tolerance even among fish species with similar geographic distribution
. investigating the molecular mechanisms underlying the susceptibility to cold temperatures could provide a better understanding of how organisms either adapt or fail to respond to environmental challenges. the gilthead sea bream, sparus aurata linneus  <dig>  although a relatively robust species, is particularly sensitive to cold: when water temperature drops below 12°c, fish become minimally active, reducing food intake and metabolism. for this species the lethal temperature is higher  compared to other teleosts with similar ecological traits and geographic distribution 
 <cit> .

in the gilthead sea bream, the persistence of low temperatures for a long time may predispose to the "winter disease", a syndrome that involves several factors such as generalized stress, metabolic depression, immune suppression and opportunistic pathogen infections. along the northern mediterranean coasts and lagoons, the outbreak of winter disease may lead to fish mass mortality up to 80% during the winter season, with significant economic losses for semi-intensive and extensive aquaculture production
.

several aspects of the physiological response to low temperatures in the gilthead sea bream have been investigated both in natural populations and under laboratory conditions
, providing evidence that metabolic depression and oxidative stress occur in different tissues after cold exposure. one of the main pathological consequences of the limited response to cold exposure in the sea bream is the onset of a severe hepatic steatosis, suggesting that liver dysfunction might be at the basis of several winter disease symptoms
 <cit> . however, the cascade of molecular events underlying the response to cold in this temperature-sensitive species is not fully elucidated. winter disease represents an extreme example of the complex interactions between organismal physiology and environmental stressors, which remain a central issue in aquatic animal ecology
 <cit> . until recently, biochemical and molecular studies on organismal adaptation to environmental variations were limited to single or few proteins or genes. high-throughput transcriptome analysis, however, now provides an unprecedented view of global transcriptome response to environmental stressors. in particular, dna microarray and next-generation sequencing, provided detailed molecular information on genomic responses of teleosts to hypoxia
 <cit> , heat shock
, cold shock/cold stress
. in the present study an oligo-dna microarray representing  <dig>  s. aurata unique transcripts
 <cit>  was used to investigate the response to cold on liver, as this organ exerts important metabolic functions in cold adaptation processes
 <cit> . fish were exposed for 21 days to  <dig> °c in order to simulate environmental conditions that frequently occur during winter in the northern mediterranean coastal areas. this critical temperature is near to the lethal threshold reported for this species. the experiment was carried out during winter season, to prevent seasonal impact that might influence the physiological status of the fish. dna microarray analyses were carried out at four different time points  in order to compare liver transcriptome profiles in cold-exposed and control individuals .

RESULTS
growth and liver condition
the effects of low temperature exposure on growth and liver condition of sea bream are summarized in table 
 <dig>  the body weight  was only slightly reduced in cold-exposed groups at the end of the experiment , with no differences observed at starting time  with controls.table  <dig> 
mean value  of growth parameters and liver condition in control  and cold exposed groups  at the start  and at the end  of experiment



bw 

tl 

lw 

hsi

steatosis 
different letters represent significant differences between groups and sampling time at p< <dig> .



conversely, liver weight and hepatosomatic index  significantly increased in cold-exposed groups  at 21d and in comparison with the control groups . in most of fish exposed to cold, the liver appeared yellowish and friable and affected by steatosis. no mortality occurred during the trial.

microarray analysis
a principal component analysis  of microarray data  showed that  <dig> % of the observed transcriptional changes were explained by the first two components and  <dig> % by the third component. since along the first component samples are ordered according to time of exposure, it seems evident already from such an exploratory analysis that long-term exposure to cold  caused the largest transcriptional variation between cold-exposed and control groups.figure  <dig> 
pca of
s. aurata
liver gene expression profiles in controls  and cold groups  at the different sampling points.




to evaluate the effects of low temperature, pair-wise comparisons between cold-exposed and controls at each time point using a two-class sam test  were carried out, showing large sets of over- and under-expressed genes in cold-exposed animals, with increasingly relevant effects being observed at later time points . a total of  <dig> ,  <dig>  ,  <dig>   and  <dig>   differentially expressed genes  were obtained at 0 h, 6 h, 24 h and 21d, respectively . a substantial overlap was observed between degs at different time points , although just  <dig> transcripts were significantly differentially expressed along the entire experiment. the response to cold was strong not only in terms of total number of degs, but also in the degree of transcriptional changes. thirty degs at 0 h ,  <dig> at 6 h ,  <dig> at 24 h ,  <dig> at 21d  showed large fcs  . the time component in transcriptome regulation appears to be largely due to the effect of cold exposure, as sam tests performed comparing only control samples across different time points showed no differentially expressed genes . such evidence confirms that the liver transcriptome in control animals is relatively unaffected by the duration of the experiment per se, despite the fact that controls were also fasted to increase comparability with cold-exposed animals. a complete list of degs is available in additional file
 <dig> table  <dig> 
absolute number of differentially expressed genes  at each time-points after temperature drop



0 h

6 h

24 h

21d
in the right part of the table it is reported the absolute count of genes for each category of log <dig> fold change  classification.
venn diagram showing the number of common differentially expressed genes at the four sampling time-points, obtained by sam.




a useful tool for reducing the complexity of large sets of degs is functional annotation and enrichment analysis, which highlights the most significant biological processes across degs . the most significant process at 0 h was go:0043433 ~ negative regulation of transcription factor activity, with three degs: heme oxygenase   <dig> , caat/enhancer binding protein gamma , and dna-damage-inducible transcript , more commonly reported as chop. all three genes have been reported to be involved in antioxidant response, although ddit3/chop is best known as one of the main effectors of the unfolded protein response 
 <cit> . highly relevant to response to oxidative stress, is also kelch-like ech-associated protein  <dig> , a cytosolic inhibitor of nuclear factor erythroid 2-like  <dig> . changes in the cellular redox state induce nfe2l2/nrf <dig> dissociation from keap <dig>  its nuclear import and the transcriptional activation of several antioxidant genes, including hmox <dig>  and of its own inhibitor, keap <dig>  up-regulation of keap <dig> and hmox <dig>  as observed at 0 h as well as 6 h, 24 h and 21d, suggests an immediate and sustained activation of nfe2l2/nrf <dig>  the main transcription factor involved in the cellular response to oxidative stress.

at 6 h, the most significant enriched biological process was go:0044255 ~ cellular lipid metabolic process represented by  <dig> degs . among them, it is listed glycerol-3-phosphate acyltransferase mitochondrial precursor , that represents the first step of the metabolic pathway for the synthesis of glycerolipids
 <cit> . its transcript was significantly over-expressed at 6 h, but also at 24 h and 21d. similar evidence  was observed for acyl-coa synthetase long-chain family member  <dig> , a gene that was reported to be over-expressed in nonalcoholic fatty liver 
 <cit> . the opposite pattern  was observed for other genes in the list, acyl-coa dehydrogenase c- <dig> to c- <dig> short chain , acyl-coa dehydrogenase long chain , and enoyl-coenzyme a hydratase, all playing important roles in lipid beta-oxidation. on the same line of evidence is the observed under-expression at 6 h-21d of hydroxysteroid  dehydrogenase  <dig> , which is involved in the peroxisomal pathway of lipid catabolism. another gene belonging to the cellular lipid metabolic process is, noteworthy, peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor delta , which is significantly under-expressed at 6 h and also at 21d. activation of ppard was recently reported to attenuate hepatic fat deposition
 <cit> .

finally, a sea bream transcript encoding fatty acid binding protein  <dig>  was significantly under-expressed at 6 h, as well as at all other time points . at least three other transcripts encoding fabps  were found to be under- or over-expressed, especially at 21d . the most relevant for fatty acid transport within hepatic cells is fabp <dig>  which is the main fabp expressed in the liver
 <cit> , as confirmed by absolute fluorescence values in this study . multiple lines of evidence support the hypothesis that fabp <dig> acts as a long-chain fatty acid transporter, specifically targeting its ligands to beta-oxidation pathways
 <cit> . in the liver of cold-exposed sea breams fabp <dig> drops dramatically after 21 days .figure  <dig> 
average of gene expression values of fabp <dig>  fabp <dig>  fabp <dig> and fabp <dig> at each sampling time  in control and cold-exposed groups.




in consideration of the extremely large number of differentially expressed genes at 24 h and 21d, enrichment analysis was performed separately for over- and under-expressed degs , although the results were similar when considering all degs together . at 24 h, the most significantly enriched biological process  for over-expressed genes was go:0006396 ~ rna processing with  <dig> degs, the majority of which represented proteins involved in rna splicing . in fact, the second most significant bp was go:0008380 ~ rna splicing with  <dig> transcripts. other noteworthy bps were go:0046907 ~ intracellular transport and go:0008219 ~ cell death. in the latter bp it is included growth arrest and dna damage-inducible beta  gene, which plays a key role in the response to cellular stress and it has been recently reported to be transcriptionally activated by oxidative stress in hepatic cells
 <cit> . while gadd45b has an essential pro-survival role, other over-expressed genes have opposite actions. for instance, bcl2-like  <dig>  belongs to the pro-apoptotic branch of the bcl <dig> family, cell death-inducing dffa-like effector c , phosphatase and tensin homolog , tumor protein p <dig> binding protein  <dig> , all favor apoptosis at different levels, while caspase  <dig>  is one of executioner enzymes for programmed cell death. in the same list is also the transcript encoding chop, which was found to be over-expressed as early as 0 h and is among the genes that are differentially expressed at all time points . in fact, persistent over-expression of chop is considered a marker of chronic and/or excessive activation of upr, and chop has been shown to promote cell death
 <cit> . particularly, the upr branch leading to chop transcription has been shown to be involved in diverse liver diseases 
 <cit> ). the most significant bps for under-expressed genes at 24 h concerned lipid metabolism . several under-expressed transcripts encoded the same proteins already described for 6 h , and additional ones involved in lipid beta- or alpha-oxidation, , or in the synthesis of phospholipids .

gene expression profiles were even more divergent between controls and cold-exposed fish after 21 days at constant low temperature. while several of bps enriched at earlier time points remain significant , the most significantly over-represented pathways/processes involve protein metabolism, in particular protein catabolism and folding. such evidence lends further support to the hypothesis of upr activation in sea bream hepatic cells under cold stress. in fact, gene set enrichment analysis  using the reactome "unfolded protein response " gene set was marginally significant at 24 h  and highly significant at 21d  . in addition to the mentioned chop, gsea identified as significantly over-expressed in cold-exposed fish two other key upr effectors, x-box binding protein  <dig>  and activating transcription factor  <dig> . it has been recently shown that prolonged activation of atf <dig> and chop leads to cell death through a specific mechanism
 <cit> . while upr normally decreases protein synthesis, joint over-expression of atf <dig> and chop activates protein synthesis-related genes, in addition to the upr transcriptional program. increased protein synthesis, with consequent atp depletion, coupled with enhanced oxidative stress, leads to cell death
 <cit> . remarkably, in cold-exposed animals at 21d nine aminoacyl-trna synthetase  genes  are over-expressed, largely overlapping with those reported to be chop/atf <dig> common targets by han et al.
 <cit> . likewise, expression of six genes encoding eukaryotic translation initiation factors  was significantly increased , including eif2s <dig>  eif4g <dig>  and eif <dig>  which were found to be activated upon chop/atf <dig> over-expression in human cells.

gsea also confirmed the main lines of evidence from the analysis of sam-derived degs. when sets comprising genes included in reactomes "triglyceride biosynthesis" and "mitochondrial fatty acid beta oxidation" were employed, gsea revealed highly significant enrichment at 21d . similar evidence was obtained when analysing the set of putative target genes of the transcription factor chop , while the analogous analysis on genes putatively regulated by the nrf <dig> , the key regulator of oxidative stress response, gsea was highly significant already at 6 h. with regard to proteins involved in protection against reactive oxygen species , a gene-by-gene analysis revealed that classical anti-oxidant enzymes such as superoxide dismutase  are not modified at the transcriptional level, while catalase mrna is significantly under-expressed . on the other hand, other enzymes with similar function, such as peroxiredoxin  <dig>  and glutathione peroxidase  <dig>  are over-expressed at 21d. both prdx <dig> and gpx <dig> have a major role in protecting mitochondria from ros damage.

metabolic depression and reduced oxygen consumption have been reported in gilthead sea breams exposed to temperatures lower than 12°c
 <cit>  and apparently no temperature compensation of metabolic rate occurs in this species. in eurythermal fish such compensation is normally obtained through enhanced aerobic respiration and mitochondrial biogenesis. to explore whether transcripts involved in these processes are differentially expressed in cold-exposed sea breams, gsea was carried out using two reactome gene sets, "tca cycle and respiratory electron transport" and "mitochondrion organization and biogenesis". genes included in the latter process were marginally enriched at all time points and significantly at 24 h, while transcripts related to aerobic respiration and tricarboxylic acid  cycle, were differentially expressed at 6 h-21d . similarly related to mitochondrial biogenesis are prohibitins , which have been shown to play a key role in mitochondrial biology
 <cit> . phb <dig> was found to be significantly over-expressed under pairwise sam test in cold-exposed animals at 24 h and 21d.

another well-known response to cold temperature in fish is the over-expression of α- and β-tubulins  and Δ- <dig> desaturase , which is involved in homeoviscous adaptation 
 <cit> . in fact, tuba <dig> and tuba <dig> are over-expressed at all time points , tubb <dig> and tubb2b at 0 h-21d, while scd is over-expressed at 24 h and 21d, with a fc >  <dig> at the latter time point. likewise, mrna encoding for high mobility group box  <dig>  was found to be significantly over-expressed at 24 h and 21d .

validation of microarray results using real-time rt-pcr
target genes for qrt-pcr analysis were selected considering transcripts with a fc between  <dig>  and  <dig> and represented by two independent probes in the normalized data set. according to these criteria,  <dig> genes were selected  and tested on  <dig> time points.

for all target genes tested, the direction of change in expression was concordant between qrt-pcr data and microarray results. overall, a statistically significant correlation was obtained comparing the expression levels of each gene across all biological replicates. five genes showed highly significant correlation coefficients  for both probes  with qpcr data . one gene  exhibited a high correlation  for one probe and a significant correlation  for the other one. one gene  had a significant correlation for one probe  and a positive correlation for the other one . the remaining three genes  showed a not significant, albeit positive correlation for both probes.

discussion
gene expression analyses of gilthead sea bream exposed to low temperature suggested the conservation of the main mechanisms/processes contributing to setting the thermal limits in ectotherms
 <cit> . these include a broad activation of genes involved in rna processing, especially at 24 h and 21d. rna chaperones and, in general, modified rna processing are thought to be required to compensate for increased stability of rna secondary structures at low temperatures. likewise, over-expression of scd leads to increasing polyunsaturated fatty acids in lipid by-layers, which decrease membrane fluidity contributing to hva. up-regulation of hmgb <dig> was suggested to be involved in compensating the effects of cold on dna
 <cit> , as hmgb <dig> seems to increase "openness" of dna to transcription on a genome-wide level. an active transcriptional program for mitochondrial biogenesis was identified as well. significant alterations in the expression of mrnas encoding proteins involved in aerobic respiration were found, although, as already observed in other teleosts, the net effect of such changes was not clear.

the investigation of acute stress and mortality at thermal extremes might not reflect the molecular and organismal mechanisms underlying the capacity to respond to less extreme temperatures, which might represent the relevant thermal boundary for a certain species in nature
 <cit> . the experiment presented here builds upon existing knowledge at different levels  on a well-studied syndrome, the winter disease, which represents a case study for the limited ability to respond to low temperatures. earlier work already identified tissue- and organ-specific alterations as well as organismal-level effects of low temperatures, suggesting that metabolic unbalances in the liver are one of the central events for cold-induced disease and lethality in the gilthead sea bream
 <cit> .

here, whole-transcriptome evidence is provided on acute and sub-acute reaction in such a key organ, showing a massive response especially after three weeks at low temperature. it should be noted that such a response does not represent the broad alterations of expression profile generally observed in pre-mortal conditions, as no mortality occurred and all fish gradually recovered when water temperature was backed to 16°c
 <cit> .

gene expression analyses highlighted the activation of the anti-oxidant response already at 0 h, and was sustained until 21d .

recent studies in ectotherms demonstrated increased oxidative stress as temperature moves away from thermal optimum
 <cit> . noteworthy, the measurement of oxidative stress and the proteomic analyses of sea bream liver exposed to low temperature, revealed a significant increase of lipid peroxidation and nitric oxide in cold-exposed animals. expression of anti-oxidant proteins was less clear as glutathione s-transferase and catalase were significantly under-expressed, in agreement with transcriptomic results presented here, while other enzymes potentially involved in oxidative stress response were over-expressed
 <cit> . a vast literature in human medicine suggests a relevant role for oxidative stress in liver disease, especially in hepatic steatosis. such a knowledge is much pertinent as one of the major histological findings in winter disease is increased lipid content in sea bream liver
 <cit> . more specifically, it has been reported that human hepatocytes exposed to h2o <dig> show decreased expression of ppara and of its target genes
 <cit> . ppara positively regulates fatty acid oxidation, therefore down-regulation of ppara and beta-oxidation-related transcripts as observed in human hepatocytes as well as in cold-exposed sea bream liver, might reduce lipid beta-oxidation with consequent lipid accumulation, leading to hepatic steatosis
 <cit> . this hypothesis is consistent with the liver condition of fish observed in this study.

all the mentioned reactions , however, have been already reported in cold-adapted teleosts or in eurythermal fish with good tolerance for low water temperatures. what is different in the gilthead sea bream that makes it unfit for cold? the most interesting finding in the present study is the evidence for a key role of upr in the acute and sub-acute response to cold. to our knowledge, this is the first time that upr is observed after exposure to low temperatures. the upr or endoplasmic reticulum  stress response is a complex mechanism that is conserved across multicellular organisms and is aimed at preventing er overload with misfolded or damaged proteins
 <cit> . it is particularly important for cells that have high levels of secreted protein synthesis. this is the case of hepatocytes, which actively secrete several serum proteins , and in particular, lipoproteins to re-circulate lipids. upr signaling consists of three main branches with diverse modes of activation , which converge on a broad transcriptional program to counteract er stress. influx of newly synthesized proteins into the er is decreased, er-specific chaperones and proteins favoring disulfide bond formation  are over-expressed, irreversibly damaged peptides are degraded by up-regulated erad components. upr in hepatocytes has been extensively studied because of its potential relationship with liver disease. er stress response represents a protective, pro-survival response, which is aimed at restoring cell homeostasis. upr, however, is a double edge sword. when it is unable to relieve er overload, chronic upr activation leads to cell death
 <cit> . which are the potential triggers for upr in the case of cold-exposed gilthead sea bream? low temperature is known to affect protein folding. protein denaturation at 6°c might not be severe enough to compromise protein function directly, for instance altering enzymatic activity, but it likely represents a stress signal for upr. oxidative stress might also contribute to upr activation as free radicals oxidize cell proteins, and oxidized proteins are unlikely to pass er quality control. oxidative protein damage might be paradoxically amplified by some upr effectors. for instance, ero1-like proteins  generate ros in the er as part of the disulfide bond formation. remarkably, ero1l-beta was significantly over-expressed at 21d in cold-exposed fish. furthermore, protein synthesis and folding require energy. in cold-exposed sea breams atp might be depleted because of lack of metabolic rate compensation
 <cit> . finally, prolonged fasting causes depletion of glycogen
 <cit>  and in the long term, reduced energy production from glucose could not be compensated by fatty acid oxidation, because such metabolic pathway is down-regulated . as already mentioned, anti-oxidant response represses beta-oxidation, and upr appears to act synergistically in this direction through chop
 <cit> . repression of lipid beta-oxidation likely contributes also to accumulation of triglycerides in sea bream hepatocytes. during cold-induced fasting perivisceral lipid stores are mobilized and fatty acids are taken up in the liver
 <cit> , this study]. as their catabolic pathway is repressed, fatty acids follow the anabolic route, which is up-regulated at the transcriptional level. the observed up-regulation of pparg and genes involved in triglyceride biosynthesis  might be a response to increased levels of circulating lipids, although er stress might contribute as well. the relationships between hepatic lipid biosynthesis and upr is still controversial, although unresolved er stress in upr-effectors null mice is associated with over-expression of genes encoding key enzymes for triglyceride biosynthesis, coupled with significant up-regulation of chop and atf4
 <cit> . as mentioned earlier, prolonged over-expression of these two transcription factors ultimately leads to cell death through up-regulation of genes involved in protein synthesis, a pattern observed here after three weeks of cold-exposure.

CONCLUSIONS
low water temperature apparently generates a perfect storm in the gilthead sea bream, where oxidative stress, altered lipid metabolism, atp depletion, and protein denaturation converge to induce er stress, upr mechanisms further promote conditions for cell damage, and the inability to resolve er stress leads to liver dysfunction and eventually to death.

under such a scenario, which might be the factors that makes the gilthead sea bream unable to cope with cold, compared to related fish species? lack of temperature compensation for aerobic metabolism with consequent atp depletion has been already proposed
 <cit> . limited capacity to prevent ros-induced damage in this species might also be hypothesized. catalase and sods are key scavenger enzymes, as clearly demonstrated in several studies, yet sods were unchanged and catalase was down-regulated at the mrna  and protein level
 <cit> . finally, upr might be less effective in the gilthead sea bream, as possibly suggested by similarity in gene expression patterns with upr-null mice. er stress response is highly conserved across the animal kingdom, but it also shows significant variation between natural populations in a single species
 <cit> . it is therefore likely that even larger variation occurs between different species.

