BACKGROUND
during classical cellular differentiation cells lose phenotypic plasticity until they become fully differentiated. some differentiated cells have the remarkable ability to be converted into different cell types via a process termed as developmental redirection or cellular reprogramming. both differentiation and reprogramming are processes that are carefully orchestrated by the activation and repression of specific sets of genes. the knowledge about these activation and repression mechanisms can be integrated as network of regulations. modeling these regulatory networks allow us to describe biological processes, in general, as transitions between network states and cellular reprogramming, in particular, as transitions between stable steady states also called as attractors of the network model. on the other hand, the relationship between cellular phenotypes and the attractors has been proposed by several authors  <cit> , and recent literature authenticates this claim with experimental validation of a number of examples showing that only few key genes can induce transitions between cellular phenotypes  <cit> .

prediction of these key genes finds wide range of applications for cellular reprogramming. however, there is only handful of approaches in literature that can predict effective cocktails of transcription factors for cellular reprogramming  <cit> . most of these methods either requires a list of candidate genes to narrow down the combinatorial problem or based on computational brute force to simulate network response under perturbation. both the said strategies become prohibitive for the larger number of genes in the network. to this end, here we propose a computational methodology, which systematically identifies these key driver genes that are able to induce transitions between various cell types including differentiation, de/trans-differentiation.

stable cellular phenotypes  are part of a large space of all available cellular states. at the transcriptional level, attractors represent stable expression patterns or transcriptional programs. the existence of multiple attractors in a grn requires the presence of positive feedback loops or also called as positive circuits   <cit> . however, not all positive circuits in the network are involved in network multistability; those whose participating genes cannot be in a coherent stable state according to the connectivity of the circuit  are not contributing to stabilize the network because they are not stable by themselves. moreover, there are positive circuits that are contributing to stabilize specific attractors but not another.

in a previously published work  <cit>  we proposed the so called differentially expressed positive circuits  as targets to induce cellular transitions and showed how a topology based strategy pointed out genes involved in the so called bi-toggle switches  as driver genes for these transitions. here we used a bioinformatics approach to interrogate synthetic networks preserving properties of the well characterized gene regulatory network  of e. coli and we observed that there always exists at least one depc, which constitutes a necessary condition for the general applicability of the methodology presented here. a positive circuit is considered depc if its constitutive genes change their expression values between two given attractors of the grn. hence, we assume that depcs forms the barrier between the given two attractors. therefore, appropriate perturbation of genes belonging to these differentially expressed stability elements is expected to destabilize the initial cellular phenotype and stabilize the final one.

thus, by combining transcriptomics profiling, and stability analysis, proposed methodology identifies key genes, called here as reprogramming determinants , without considering any prior list of candidate genes. here, rds are defined as minimal set of genes, a single gene or group of genes, that are participating in the differential stability elements of the network model, when perturbed with an appropriate stimulus  can effect transitions between stable cellular programs. in this formalism, there are no constraints on the nature of products encoded by rds ; both proteins as well as non-coding rnas are equally eligible. finally, rds encompass as many number of gene combinations, as long as the set is minimal and can effect transitions between attractors of the network model.

the objective of this methodology is to identify all possible rds which can bring about the cellular transitions. here we propose a novel strategy to select combinations of genes to be perturbed based on dynamical simulations instead of the purely topology based strategy proposed before  <cit> . by focusing on genes involved on the stability of the gene regulatory network , the algorithm dramatically reduces the huge search space constituted by all possible combinations of genes. the efficiency and general usability of our methodology is demonstrated by analyzing a large number of in silico grns generated with biological properties as that of e. coli regulatory network, and selective six different biological examples of cellular reprogramming. analysis of in silico gene regulatory networks showed that these minimal sets of driver genes were always able to trigger transitions between all pairs of attractors. application to six biologically relevant examples finds experimental validation in literature for the identified sets of rds as effective inducers of transitions between cellular phenotypes. given the increasing interest of cellular reprogramming in regenerative medicine and basic research, our method represents a useful computational methodology to assist researchers in designing experimental strategies.

RESULTS
description of the differential expression stability analysis
cellular phenotypes are characterized by stable expression patterns at the transcriptional level. the underlying grn can be conceptualized and described as waddington landscape  <cit> , where stable cellular phenotypes, corresponding to the attractors of network model, are represented as wells separated by barriers . these barriers are established by those network elements that are stabilizing grns in their attractors. in the motive of identifying these barriers, the method presented here takes reconstructed grns and the associated expression patterns of the cellular phenotypes as input, and gives rds as output. since stable cellular phenotypes can be considered as attractors of grns, cell fate and cellular reprogramming involve transitions between these attractors. to this end, our method looks for combinations of genes in the reconstructed grn that are able to destabilize a specific initial attractor and stabilize the final one in response to the appropriate perturbation. therefore, this strategy allows us to narrow down a huge combinatorial searching problem to a set of minimal combinations that constitutes alternative reprogramming protocols. it is to note that this method operates on previously reconstructed grns .

the method takes as input grns and experimental expression data and delivers combinations of rds  and can be described in three steps : 1) computing grn attractors 2) detecting depcs 3) obtaining minimal combinations of rds genes targeting the depcs, in detail as follows.

computing attractors of the network
attractors are calculated with a boolean model of the grn . in this boolean model, up and down regulated genes assume values of “1” and “0” respectively. this is necessary to find suitable attractors of the network model representing the cellular phenotypes.

detecting depcs
at first, all positive circuits are detected using modified johnson’s algorithm . later, from this set of positive circuits a subset, whose constitutive gene expression profiles are differentially expressed between the attractor states involved in cellular transition , are identified. for a positive circuit to be differentially expressed it has to fulfill two requirements:  all of their constitutive genes change between the two attractors , and  the states of the circuit in both initial and final phenotypes should match attractors of the circuit when considered in isolation; .

obtaining minimal combinations of rds genes targeting all depcs
we look for the minimal combination of genes that are able to directly or indirectly target all depcs. for this purpose, we formulated this as a two-step integer optimization problem, where in the first step by perturbing all the genes in a given circuit, minimal numbers of circuits that can bring about the cellular transitions are identified. in the second step, minimal combinations of genes are identified from the minimal number of circuits using an algorithm that look for combinations of genes in minimal depcs with the requirement that there should be at least one gene for each depcs . consequently this strategy reduced further the required number of genes to be perturbed. afterwards, as a final step, the algorithm determines which depcs are not necessary to be directly perturbed  by simulating the network response  under perturbation of the minimal combination of genes but the gene belonging to specific depcs one at a time. by this mean we are able to reduce the final number of rds removing genes targeting depcs that are regulated by others.

validation with in silico gene regulatory networks
in order to validate this strategy, we applied our method to  <dig> grns of different size, but with the same topological properties of a well-characterized grn of e. coli. as a result of our analysis we obtained the following conclusions: a) between any two given attractors we always obtained at least one depc; and b) perturbation of minimal combinations of genes that include depcs between pairs of attractors always succeeded triggering transitions between these states . further, we calculated the percentage of rds that can trigger transitions between all calculated attractors. as it is shown in figure  <dig>  interestingly on an average only 6% of the genes from the whole network is sufficient enough to bring about the transitions between any given attractor to any other. also, on an average maximum  <dig> genes and a minimum of  <dig> gene is sufficient to bring these transitions.

application to cellular reprogramming
we demonstrated the efficacy of the current protocol using six different biological examples of cellular reprogramming. these examples provided an experimental confirmation of the identified rds as effective inducers of transitions between stable cellular phenotypes. the t-helper and emt examples are based on grns, which have been previously published  <cit> . in the latter case we expanded the original network with the addition of a novel double-negative feed-back with mirna34a, which has been recently published  <cit> . for the remaining examples  we used knowledge bases, like ariadne’s medscan technology  <cit> , to construct gene regulatory networks. we also tried to enrich, when possible, the grns by addition of mirna interactions experimentally validated and available in public databases, like transmir  <cit>  and mirtarbase  <cit>  . consequently, these networks were pruned in order to maximize matching between gene expression profiles and gene states found by our network dynamics simulation. this procedure allowed us to contextualize the networks to the biological conditions under which the experiments were performed  <cit>  . detected rds and transitions between known phenotypes are shown in table  <dig> for each example.

genes in bold correspond with those whose perturbation are represented in figure  <dig> 

alternative combinations of reprogramming determinant genes are separated by comma. combinations of reprogramming determinants genes perturbed in figure  <dig> are in bold.

t-helper
t lymphocytes are classified as either t helper cells or t cytotoxic cells. t helper cells take part in cell- and antibody-mediated immune responses and they are sub-divided in th <dig>  and effector th <dig>  th <dig>  th <dig> and treg cells. t-helper differentiation network determining the fate of the lineage has been proposed previously  <cit> . here we are focused on the transition between th <dig> and th <dig> phenotypes. we detected t-bet and gata <dig> as independent rds for th2-th <dig>  and th1-th <dig> respectively. these predictions are in full agreement with previously published experiments  <cit> .

emt
a transient phenomenon referred to as epithelial to mesenchymal transition  occurs during regular embryonic development and as a part of the metastatic cascade initiated by the breakdown of epithelial cell homeostasis in carcinomas. during the epithelial to mesenchymal transition , cells change their genetic and transcriptomic program leading to phenotypic and functional alterations, including the loss of epithelial features like cell-cell adhesions and cell polarity and gain of cell motility and mesenchymal and stem-like properties. emt can be initiated by multiple pathways converging in the activation of emt inducers. the emt example shows that snai <dig> is a triggering gene for the transition from epithelial to mesenchymal , which has been validated by experimental perturbation of this gene  <cit> .

hl60
the multipotent promyelocytic leukemia cell line hl <dig> was originally isolated by dr. steven collins from an acute promyelocytic leukemia  patient  <cit> . the multipotent promyelocytic leukemia cell line hl <dig> can be stimulated to differentiate into neutrophils using different chemical agents like including granulocyte macrophage colony-stimulating factor   <cit> , dmso  <cit> , all-trans-retinoic acid   <cit> ,  <dig> -dihydroxyvitamin d <dig>  <cit> , and 12-o-tetradecanoylphorbol 13-acetate   <cit> . nevertheless, how these chemical agents act at the gene regulatory level to induce the transition is still a relevant question to understand the underlying mechanisms of differentiation or reprograming. application of our method to the hl <dig> example allowed us to detect irf <dig> as triggering gene for inducing the differentiation from hl <dig> to neutrophil , which is a consistent result with previous experimental findings  <cit> .

ihep
normally, hepatocytes differentiate from hepatic progenitor cells to form the liver during the regular development. however, hepatic programs can also be activated in different cells under particular stimuli or fusion with hepatocytes. the transition from human fibroblasts to hepatocyte-like cells  induced by the perturbation of specific combinations of transcription factors has been previously reported by sekiya and suzuki  <cit> . in the ihep example we found several minimal combinations able to trigger the transition from fibroblast to hepatocyte. among these minimal combinations, the combined perturbation  of hnf4a and foxa <dig> has been experimentally validated  <cit>  .

icm
in the postnatal heart during the regular development, a large pool of existing fibroblasts is directly reprogrammed to an alternative fate as cardiomyocytes. no single master regulator of direct cardiac reprogramming has been identified till date, but the combined perturbation of three developmental transcription factors  has been proposed and validated experimentally as a rapid and efficient way to induce this transition  <cit> . our method found that when gata <dig> and mef2c are perturbed separately or in combination  are able to trigger the transition from fibroblast to induced cardiomyocyte , indicating the important role that these genes play in this cellular transition. this finding is partially consistent with the experiment performed by ieda and co-workers  <cit> , where gata <dig> and metf2c in combination with tbx <dig> were simultaneously perturbed to achieve this cellular transition. thus, our results propose the hypothesis that either gata <dig> or metf2c are individually capable to trigger this transition. to our knowledge, this prediction has not been experimentally validated in fibroblast-cardiomyocyte transition, but gata <dig> has been reported capable to reprogram mesenchymal stromal and p <dig> cells  <cit>  into cardiomyocytes  <cit> .

ipscs
the combined perturbation of pou5f <dig>  sox <dig>  klf <dig> and myc is known to be effective to induce the reprogramming of human fibroblasts to the ipscs. we analyzed a previously published microarray dataset  <cit>  of human fibroblast to ipscs. here an initial population of fibroblast is stimulated using above said four yamanaka transcription factors to induce transitions to ipscs. the application of our method to this dataset resulted on the identification of pou5f <dig>  sox <dig>  and myc as rds among other alternative combinations. however, klf <dig> was not pointed out as rd according to the reconstructed model and by our methodology due to it is not involved in depcs. that might be due to missing interactions within the network, one of the limitations of using only interactions from knowledgebase. atf <dig>  mir- <dig>  myb and tp <dig> were detected as suitable alternative targets to accompany pou5f <dig> and sox <dig>  being tp <dig> the only one with a previously reported key role in cellular reprogramming  <cit> . the blind-folded application of our methodology to the available trancriptomics datasets pointed out well known key genes involved in pluripotency recovery mechanisms and also proposed a handful of alternative candidates.

discussion and 
CONCLUSIONS
an increasing amount of experimental results showed that only few key driver genes are required for cellular reprogramming. since stable cellular phenotypes can be considered as attractors of gene regulatory networks, cell fate and cellular reprogramming involve transitions between these attractors. hence, this implies that by destabilizing the initial attractor and stabilizing the final one, one can induce the required transitions. here, we present a topology based method to identify minimal set of key genes belonging to specific stability elements , capable to induce transitions between cellular phenotypes when. we call their identification as differential expression stability analysis.

depcs detection relies on attractor computation assuming a boolean model, which is relatively simple and does not require kinetic parameter identification for a given topology. also, given that we are not interested in a detailed description of the regulatory mechanism we consider a boolean model suitable for our purposes, but not for the elucidation of transient states. grn models in this work do not take into account detailed cellular information, such as the strength of regulatory interactions and continuous gene expression values. however, it preserves the regulatory logic that rules the flow of information in gene regulatory networks, and consequently allows to roughly describing stable cellular phenotypes. it is worth mentioning that, given that this methodology neglects important dynamical aspects like kinetic parameters or affinity values, all interactions within the network are equally strong. this simplification may result in incomplete results because we are assuming that perturbing one gene is enough to effectively destabilize the circuit it belongs to, whereas weak interactions in the circuit may interrupt the regulation signal transfer. such situation would require perturbation of the circuit at different points  and this is something not considered by our approach.

analysis of a large number of in silico gene regulatory networks using a boolean model showed that for any couple of given attractors there always exists at least one depc, and that rds detected by the application of the methodology presented here were able to trigger transitions between all pairs of attractors. it is worth noting that this detection differs from a previously published work on the dynamical simulations of gene perturbations instead of the former simulations purely topology based approach  <cit> . further, we analyzed six different gene regulatory networks that describe representative biological examples . namely, we illustrate the process of cellular differentiation ), in which cells lose phenotypic plasticity until they become fully differentiated as well as the remarkable ability of some differentiated cells to be converted into different cell types via cell reprogramming . these examples provide an experimental validation of the identified rds as effective inducers of transitions between cellular phenotypes. thus, our method can be used to identify rds that are able to induce transitions between cellular phenotypes, and finding potential applications in the areas of disease modeling, to create novel disease models and in regenerative medicine for formulating new cellular therapies.

the method provides a strategy to induce transitions between cellular phenotypes exploring the stability landscape, eventually with alternative combinations of perturbed genes with the subsequent differences in trajectories. the fact that our methods provides these alternative combinations could help to address three major problems in cell reprogramming: a) safety in reprogramming process, avoiding undesired turnings often leading into cancer; among the alternative solutions, some combinations of rds genes inducing risky transitions too close to a tumorigenic profile can be avoided and safe transitions can be selected  <cit> ; b) efficiency; the reduced set of alternative experimentally testable solutions facilitates finding more efficient strategies to induce cellular transitions; c) fidelity; the potentially incomplete reprogramming or the appearance of aberrant phenotypes . such alternative phenotypes could be detected as additional attractors in the stability landscape and can be taken into account to obtain the desired transitions.

it is to note here that the predicted rds are purely based on the initially assumed grn from the literature and the finally contextualized grn topologies . grns in this work are reconstructed fully from literature knowledgebase. complementarily, a data oriented approach, like co-expression  <cit>  or mutual information  <cit>  based inference techniques, can also be followed for this particular task. both literature-based and data-based approached have their own advantages and disadvantages. for example, literature-based approach usually integrates interactions described in varying biological contexts, like different cell types, tissues or even organism, hence resulting in noisy grns that are not suitable to describe the system. on the other hand, data based approaches require large amount of data to classify statistically the true positive from false positive interactions of grn, which may arise due to indirect interactions. considering the data availability  in cellular reprogramming, we opt to employ a former approach to contextualize literature-based grns with respect to the available data, hence removing noise.

to this end, raw networks reconstructed from literature are contextualized by pruning those interactions that are not consistent with experimentally observed expression data. this contextualization process requires adopting a boolean dynamical model that is based on a set of assumed regulatory logic functions if specific regulatory mechanisms are not known . despite the effect of some wrongly assumed regulatory logic functions is partially overcome by the contextualization itself , sometimes both the wrongly assumed regulatory logic rules and/or network incompleteness may lead us to wrong or incomplete set of rd. however, there is a score obtained during the optimization process that represents the percentage of genes that are well explained by the dynamical model for the initial and final cellular phenotype expression profile. this score constitute an indicator of how reliable the predictions  performed on the contextualized network for a given set of regulatory rules are. leaving apart the first two examples with previously published networks  all the other four examples were reconstructed from the available knowledge in the literature. genes included in the reconstructed grns of the examples are those with experimental evidences of up- or down-regulation, and only the resulting contextualized topology makes them rd, rather than previous reports about their participation in reprogramming events.

also, the knowledgebase  used in this work, exploits word association to detect clear sentences, which describe the interactions with regulatory effects. only these known regulations are included in the database . for example, the sentences “…we now report that caspase-1-mediated il-1beta expression in response to…” and “…activation of caspase- <dig> is required for the efficient production of biologically active il- <dig> beta and il-18…”  allow to include the positive interaction between caspase- <dig> and il- <dig>  we checked that the interactions included in the reconstructed grns were not based on wrong or ambiguous sentences, but we cannot guarantee that they are not the result of the author’s misinterpretation.

as a limitation of this algorithm, the transitions involving cyclic stable states are not yet considered but are subject of possible extension of the method. modeling transitions between cyclic attractors could be applied to identify driver genes in biological systems with oscillatory behavior. also, according to the definition of rds, the output of the present method has exactly one gene for each depc, however in general it is possible to perturb multiple genes per circuit that are redundant or even choose those genes that are experimentally feasible to perturb from the identified depcs.

regenerative medicine, where the goal is to replace or regenerate damaged or lost human cells, is a rapidly growing research area  <cit> . however, current therapies that focus on tissue regeneration are significantly impeded by our limited understanding of how to reprogram cells towards specific cellular populations. hence cellular reprogramming, including the conversion of one differentiated cell type to another  or to a more immature cell , has a high relevance for regenerative medicine and disease remodeling  <cit> . on the other, with ever increasing amount of experimental observations, it is clearly evident that only few key genes, called here as reprogramming determinants , are more than enough for the orchestration of the complex regulatory events during reprogramming. although substantial progress has been made in developing experimental reprogramming techniques, to date there is no protocol able to systematically predict rds that can trigger transitions. in this article, we provide an in-time framework to design protocols to induce transitions between cellular phenotypes providing effective cellular reprogramming . this work thus represents a major potential advance in the way we uncover rds and pathways involved in cellular reprogramming, with enormous scope for regenerative medicine across diverse tissue- and cell-types.

