BACKGROUND
neonatal diarrhoea is a well-known disease complex in modern swine production influenced by individual, maternal and environmental factors. the aetiology in specific herd-cases may differ and is often incompletely diagnosed. until recently, this complexity was not of major practical concern, since most problems could be controlled by vaccination or antibiotics. around  <dig>  however, a new syndrome that did not respond to antibiotics or commercial vaccines seemed to emerge . the number of affected herds is unknown, but 80% of danish swine practitioners report to experience these problems
 <cit> .

currently, new neonatal porcine diarrhoea syndrome  refers to a clinical picture with piglets developing diarrhoea that is un-responsive to antibiotics within the first days of life. the suggested piglet-level case-definition is; non-haemorrhagic diarrhoea during the first week of life without detection of known infectious pathogens, which is characterized by milk-filled stomachs and flaccid intestines at necropsy
 <cit> . this definition is based upon diagnostic examination of  <dig> case and control piglets from the four herds of the current study. infectious agents which were evaluated and considered not to be involved in the syndrome included; enterotoxigenic e. coli, clostridium perfringens type a and c, clostridium difficile, rotavirus a, coronavirus, cystoisospora suis, strongyloides ransomi, giardia spp and cryptosporidium spp.

specific factors predisposing piglets to develop nnpds remain to be discovered. health problems in sows have previously been associated with diarrhoea in suckling pigs
 <cit> , but veterinary practitioners do not seem to associate the mastitis-metritis-agalactiae syndrome  or other sow health conditions with nnpds
 <cit> . practitioners report on an association with first parity sows,
 <cit> , but this experience needs scientific evaluation.

insufficient prenatal nutrition or inadequate colostrum supplies are well-known risk factors for neonatal diarrhoea, thus clinical signs suggesting such problems need evaluation in outbreaks of nnpds. a previous study showed that liquid faeces on the day of birth did not have any negative effects on piglets in these herds in terms of weight gain. therefore, it was hypothesized that liquid faeces at birth might be a normal phenomenon, unrelated to the syndrome
 <cit> . one of the aims of the present study was to elaborate on this hypothesis, by evaluating if liquid faecal consistency on the day of birth was associated with diarrhoea on the subsequent days.

the primary aim of the study was to investigate sow- and piglet-level risk factors associated with nnpds. furthermore, the epidemiological pattern of diarrhoea in terms of prevalence, timing, duration and tendency to cluster within litters was described within the separate herds of the study. since day one was hypothesized not to be part of the syndrome and piglets were only evaluated until the fifth day of life, nnpds was defined as diarrhoea at any point during the second to fifth day of life.

RESULTS
description of herds
the four study-herds were conventional indoor production herds and the piglets under study were all landrace-yorkshire-duroc cross-breeds. all herds had experienced problems with neonatal diarrhoea for at least one year. none of the herd-owners were able to point out changes in management connected with the outbreaks. all herds had weekly farrowings and practiced all- in/all-out in farrowing units with appropriate cleaning between farrowing batches. farrowing crates had partially slatted floors with supplemental heat and cover provided for the piglets. herd details are given in table 
 <dig> 

1specific pathogen free – in denmark most herds participate in a surveillance programme, and are registered for freedom/presence of certain infectious diseases, including prrs, m. hyopneumoniae, a. pleuropneumoniae, p. multocida tox + and b. hyodysenteriae. spf + ap <dig> means that the herd is declared free from all spf diseases except a. pleuropneumoniae type  <dig>  2average calculated from herd-registrations made in a 3 month period prior to investigation. 3feed type used in farrowing period. 4standard antibiotic treatments used in the herds during the first week of life. these treatments were not used during the study. 5any standard medication used on the day of parturition. these treatments were also used during the study.

data structure and important herd differences
altogether,  <dig> piglets within  <dig> litters were included at birth. a total of  <dig> piglets were removed from the data because they were euthanized for necropsy with no history of nnpds , died  prior to day five with no history of nnpds or were hermaphroditic . thus, a total of  <dig> piglets  were included in the analyses. within herds 1– <dig>   <dig>   <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> first parity sows and  <dig>   <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> mature sows  were included.

in herds 1– <dig>  10% of sows were treated with antibiotics and nsaids on day one, whereas this counted for 41%  in herd  <dig>  all sows in herd  <dig> and herd  <dig> were treated with oxytocin postpartum. in herd  <dig> and herd  <dig> a milk formula was given to piglets by drench for supportive care . despite the general rule of no antibiotic treatment prior to day  <dig>  in herd  <dig>  a total of  <dig> piglets were treated with streptocillin on the second day of life due to arthritis. these piglets were kept in the study, since the treatment was considered of minor importance in the context.

clinical findings in piglets on the first day of life
hollow flanks, rough hair coats, perineal staining and liquid consistency of faeces were relatively prevalent findings in all herds. liquid consistency of faeces was seen in a total of 26% of piglets . protruding ribs, fore-knee abrasions and dehydration were low prevalent findings in all herds. a correlation  between faecal consistency and perineal staining was seen. therefore only faecal consistency was evaluated in the risk-factor analyses. table 
 <dig> presents day one clinical findings in piglets. first parity piglets in herd  <dig> were lighter than first parity piglets in the other herds. furthermore, piglets in this herd had the highest prevalence of hollow flanks, rough hair coats, perineal staining and liquid consistency of faeces.

1different letters within rows indicate significant  in welch t-test.

2since these variables were correlated, only faecal consistency was evaluated in the risk-factor analysis.

3one or more of the following clinical signs; hollow flanks, rough hair coat, perineal staining, liquid faeces, protruding ribs, fore-knee abrasions and dehydration.

clinical findings in sows on the day of parturition
results of sow examinations are summarized in table 
 <dig>  mature sows in herds  <dig> and  <dig> had smaller litter sizes than mature sows in herd  <dig> and  <dig> . litter sizes of first parity sows where alike across herds . the majority of the sows  did not have any obvious health problems. certain differences were seen between herds; herd  <dig> having more sows suffering from fever and leg problems, herd  <dig> having more sows with vulva discharge and herd  <dig> having the highest prevalence of clinical mastitis. no obvious link between clinical registrations  and treatment  was seen. first parity sows in herd  <dig> were very often treated compared to the remaining sows in the study. the staff-persons indication to treat was mastitis.

1different letters within rows indicate significant  in welch t-test.

2medication included antibiotics and nsaids .

3within herds 1– <dig>  both first parity sows and mature sows were treated. in herd  <dig>  seven first parity sows  and two mature sows  were treated.

occurrence of nnpds 
in total,  <dig>  first parity piglets and  <dig>  of piglets born by mature sows were diarrhoeic at some point between day  <dig> and five, thus were classified as suffering from nnpds. the within-herd prevalence of nnpds and associations between liquid faeces on day one and nnpds are presented in table 
 <dig>  out of  <dig> piglets having liquid faeces on the day of birth, a total of  <dig>  developed nnpds.in the majority of cases , symptoms started on the second or third day of life . the duration of nnpds  in piglets within the four herds is presented in figure 
 <dig>  being affected for one or two days seemed to be the norm, but a few first parity piglets and piglets within herd  <dig> experienced symptoms for a longer period. the within-litter prevalence of nnpds is presented in figure 
 <dig>  both first parity litters and litters of mature sows were affected, but first parity litters were constantly affected and generally had a larger number of diarrhoeic on piglets. in affected first parity litters in average 60%  of piglets suffered from nnpds. this counted for an average of 38%  of piglets in mature parity litters.

1nnpds was defined as diarrhoea at any point during the second to fifth day of life.

2proportion of piglets having liquid faecal consistency day one that developed nnpds.

apart from the tendency to affect first parity litters most, no obvious pattern was seen across herds. in herd  <dig>  piglets with nnpds seemed to be clustered in litters, whereas in herd  <dig> and  <dig>  piglets with nnpds seemed to be more evenly distributed among litters. in herd  <dig>  a strong tendency for nnpds to cluster in first parity litters was observed. herd  <dig> stood out as the least affected herd – half of the litters in this herd were either unaffected or had a single piglet with nnpds only.

risk factors for nnpds at sow level
in the separate parity models , none of the sow-effects came out significant. thus, neither litter size, stillborn piglets nor clinical disease in sows were significant risk factors for nnpds.

the final overall model  is presented in table 
 <dig>  herd of origin was the most important factor associated with the development of nnpds, with an orpa of  <dig>  in piglets from herd  <dig> compared to piglets from herd  <dig>  parity was also an important risk factor with an orpa of  <dig>  in first parity piglets compared to mature parity piglets.

1the population average or accounts for an average piglet in any litter. 2herds with different letters as superscript are significantly different  when compared pairwise. 3note: this model did not include interaction effects – therefore these effects are finally evaluated in the herd specific models. 4intra class correlation coefficient .

risk factors evaluated included: herd, parity of sow, number of stillborn, clinical disease in sow, gender, birth weight, faecal consistency, appearance of flanks and appearance of hair coat.

risk factors for nnpds at piglet level
herd-specific models including the variables that were significant in the overall model were constructed . results are presented in table 
 <dig>  parity was the only significant risk factor for nnpds within all herds . random litter effects differed a lot between herds  and 39% ). birth weight and faecal consistency day one had similar effects in all herds; however, the effects were only statistically significant within herd  <dig> and herd  <dig>  respectively. the odds of developing nnpds were increased by  <dig>  per 100 g decrease in birth weight . liquid consistency of faeces on the day of birth increased the odds of developing nnpds  <dig>  times . since treatment of sows was highly prevalent in herd  <dig>  a treatment variable  was also tested within this herd. treatment of sows was not associated with the development of nnpds .

p
p
p
p
1the population average or accounts for an average piglet in any litter.

2intraclass correlation coefficient .

variables inserted in the full models included parity, birth weight and fecal consistency day one. or’s are only displayed for variables with significant effect. estimates for non-significant variables were extracted from the un-reduced models. significant associations are presented in bold.

discussion
the inclusion of herds for this study was based upon a high prevalence of unexplained neonatal diarrhoea prior to investigation, and intensive diagnostic investigations had suggested that they were all suffering from the emerging syndrome, nnpds
 <cit> . however, the low prevalence of diarrhoea during the study-period in herd  <dig>  suggested that this herd was in fact in remission at the point of the study . since many sows in this herd were medicated on the day of farrowing, the low prevalence of diarrhoea could be hypothetically linked with this. however, data did not support this theory and according to the herd-manager the rate of medication was not higher than in preceding periods with a high prevalence of diarrhoea.

according to interviews with herd-managers, the prevalence of diarrhoea during the study-periods in herds  <dig> and  <dig> was slightly lower than normal, but otherwise reflected their normal situations quite well. a lower prevalence in the study-period can be explained by elements in the study-design made in order to evaluate risk-factors and avoid excess mortality. thus, restricting litter sizes to a minimum, prohibiting cross-fostering as well as excluding underweight piglets could explain a lower prevalence of diarrhoea than normal. the severe symptoms in herd  <dig> matched recordings carried out before and after the study-period. investigated sow and piglet level risk factors did not give any obvious explanation for this herd to stand out. as previously published, pathological and microbiological findings in piglets from this herd did not differ markedly from findings in the remaining herds
 <cit> . furthermore, seasonal variations were unlikely to play a role, since herd  <dig> was investigated during winter, which is the low season for neonatal diarrhoeas
 <cit> .

the study intended to describe the epidemiological pattern of nnpds in terms of prevalence, timing, duration and tendency to cluster within litters. however, important limitations of the study that are relevant in the interpretation of its results need to be mentioned. an obvious limitation of the study was the fact that piglets were only examined for five days. thus, the definition on nnpds used in the study was made on practical grounds and should not be interpreted as if nnpds does not occur beyond the fifth day of life. in fact, 25-50% of piglets within herds started having symptoms on the fourth or fifth day of life, and some of them were probably diarrhoeic beyond the period of examination.

in herds  <dig> and  <dig>  the risk of developing diarrhoea was 6– <dig> fold increased when born by a first parity sow. in the other herds, the association with parity was weaker, but still significant. an association with young sows is in line with previous studies on suckling piglet and neonatal diarrhoea
 <cit> . different factors, such as lower levels of colostral antibodies
 <cit> , differences in milk composition
 <cit>  and stressful behaviour in first parity sows
 <cit>  may explain this association. although no specific microorganism has been identified in the pathogenesis of nnpds the overrepresentation of first parity litters may be due to lack of specific colostral immunity of a yet unknown infectious agent. it seems intriguing to interpret a tendency to cluster within litters  as an indication of the syndrome being of infectious nature. however, inborn  and environmental factors are also likely to cluster within litters, thus could also be a part of the explanation.

obvious health problems in sows were rare and were not statistically associated with development of nnpds. the lack of association between sow disease and nnpds is interesting, since it might differentiate this syndrome from previously known neonatal diarrhoeas
 <cit> . however, sows were only examined on the day of parturition and may have developed clinical symptoms later that were not taken into account. this study-design was chosen in order to be certain on cause-effect relationships . in this study, the actual disease effects were probably integrated in the– highly variable – random effects of litters. thus, the random litter effects probably represented a combination of undiagnosed disease, genetics and local environmental conditions as well as perhaps an infectious agent spreading within litters.

the fact that clinical signs of failure to thrive in piglets at day one were very infrequent  suggested that prenatal nutrition was generally adequate. furthermore, since hollow flanks on the first day of life were not associated with the development of diarrhoea in these herds, symptoms seemed not to be caused by insufficient nutrition.

potential associations between consistency of faeces on day one and the development of nnpds were of major interest in this study, since a previous study suggested liquid faeces at birth to be a normal finding in these herds
 <cit> . the present study showed that many piglets  having liquid faeces at birth did not develop nnpds, and that consistency of faeces at birth was only a minor risk factor for developing nnpds. the decision to of the study to draw a sharp line between day one liquid faeces and day two nnpds may be problematic, since so many piglets  were found to experience the first symptoms of nnpds on day  <dig>  some of these piglets  probably experienced the first symptoms of nnpds on day one. the decision to draw this sharp line was made on practical grounds, in order to be able to evaluate the hypothesis of liquid faeces on the day of birth being unrelated to the syndrome. since the study did  associate liquid faeces day one with the development of nnpds, future studies should not rule out that nnpds sometimes starts on the day of birth.

naturally, the overall limitation of the study is the lacking definition on nnpds. thus, it is important to underline that the conclusions from this study may not apply to all cases of nnpds, since they were drawn from findings in four herds only. however, the four herds were all thoroughly investigated in terms of possible infectious aetiologies, and none of them were diagnosed with any well-known agent to explain the symptoms. therefore, it presently seems fair to consider the diarrhoeal outbreaks in these herds to represent nnpds.

CONCLUSIONS
the prevalence and the duration of diarrhoea as well as the tendency of diarrhoea to cluster within litters differed much between herds diagnosed with nnpds. in most cases, symptoms started on the second day of life, but in 25-50% of cases within herds symptoms started on the fourth or fifth day of life. the duration of diarrhoea was most often one to two days.

herd of origin and sow-parity were the most important factors associated with the development of nnpds, whereas birth weight and faecal consistency on the day of birth were less important risk factors. the study did not point out other sow-level risk factors than parity. the reason for the more severe outbreak of nnpds in herd  <dig> was not explained by factors addressed in this study.

the general hypothesis of liquid faeces day one to be unrelated to the syndrome did not hold true. however, taking all results together, it seems that a liquid consistency faeces at birth is sometimes a harmless phenomenon, unrelated to nnpds.

the study did not evaluate factors associated with the high prolificacy of danish genetics  or herd-factors associated with nnpds. further studies are needed to look into these aspects.

