BACKGROUND
tardigrades are multicellular organisms, resistant to extreme environmental changes including desiccation, freezing and radiation. they outlast these conditions in an inactive form, called tun state or cryptobiosis  <cit> . all metabolic activity decreases during tun formation up to a complete cessation of measurable metabolism until environmental conditions improve and the tardigrade returns to its active state . other invertebrate taxa that undergo cryptobiosis to escape damage to cellular structures and cell death are nematodes and rotifers  <cit> . all of these organisms are apparently able to prevent or repair damage under cryptobiosis. the tardigrade is a striking case as the whole animal phylum  can undergo at least four types of cryptobiosis: anhydrobiosis , anoxybiosis , cryobiosis  and osmobiosis . in this analysis we investigate the metabolic mechanisms of anhydrobiosis. the tardigrade species milnesium tardigradum was analysed during tun formation, which was induced by dehydration. in tardigrades few metabolites have been analysed including carbohydrates that stabilize the membrane in the dry state  <cit>  or give protection and stress resistance  <cit> . the emphasis of this paper lies on the integrated analysis of metabolism during dehydration and the subsequent rehydration. to examine this, metabolites were measured in a time series by gas chromatography coupled with mass spectrometry . additionally we integrated expressed sequence tags  from m. tardigradum including state specific data from active and tun state  <cit> . here we propose an integrative network approach to trace changes in tardigrade metabolism and identify pathways responsible for their extreme resistance against physical stress.

multiple high-throughput data sets ranging from genomic over transcriptomic to proteomic data nowadays allow to analyse organisms and diseases in an integrated fashion. interaction networks are increasingly used in current research to integrate various data sources. for gene expression profiles integrated methods are used to search for gene signatures, functional modules, subnetworks of interest or activated pathways mostly using protein-protein interaction  networks to connect the interacting partners  <cit>  or by inference of regulatory networks from the molecular data  <cit> . similarly to other integrated analyses, metabolic data analysis can likewise benefit from the utilisation of network information  <cit> . technically extending the latter metabolic analysis, we characterize tardigrade metabolism using metabolite changes and est data in the context of metabolic pathways. similar approaches exist which integrate gene expression data, protein expression data or c <dig> flux data with metabolic pathways  <cit> , e.g by constraining metabolic fluxes  <cit> . usaite et al. integrate gene expression changes to identify connected subnetworks of enzymes with a maximum-transcriptional response in a metabolic network, this approach also accounts for highly connected metabolites in the network  <cit> . others use methods based on bayesian integration of the joint metabolomic and transcriptomic data for evaluating transcript-metabolite correlations  <cit>  or to integrate quantitative metabolome data with genome-scale models by using a bipartite graph theoretical representation of the metabolism  <cit> . the latter two use significant changes in metabolite levels to identify reporter reactions around which the most significant coordinated metabolite changes occur.

our analysis is based on a novel statistical approach to identify significantly changing metabolites with a trend in mass spectrometry profiles. this information is used to score the nodes of a metabolic network, constructed for this organism. moreover, we additionally use transcriptome information to score the edges of the network. here we implement new methods extending an exact network analysis framework heinz <cit> , which has been established for the integrated analysis of gene expression data in the context of a ppi network to calculate maximum-scoring subnetworks.

in this study we analyse the changes in metabolism, e.g. energy turnover, biosynthesis of cellular components, necessary for the change from an active state to an inactive state during dehydration and vice versa back into an active state during rehydration. therefore, we construct a metabolic reaction network derived from the kegg reference pathways  <cit> , as a source for pathway information. metabolic profiles are analysed using an umbrella trend test, which is introduced and applied subsequently. scores are deduced from the metabolic profiles for the nodes  of the metabolic network. scores for the edges of the network are derived from expression changes between the active and inactive state. these scores serve as a basis for the integrated analysis, which consists of two steps. first the metabolic network is reduced to an enriched subnetwork with enzymes and metabolites present in tardigrades. second a maximum-scoring subnetwork is calculated from the previously enriched subnetwork using scores for differential expression and trends in metabolic profiles. the final subnetwork constitutes a functional module containing significantly altered metabolites and enzymes with expression changes between the active and inactive stage. the specific subnetwork is analysed and visualized with respect to metabolic changes which the tardigrades undergo during the transition from an active to an inactive state  and vice versa .

RESULTS
integrated metabolic network analysis
the combined information from several data sources was used in the context of a metabolite network to analyse changes in metabolism of the tardigrades. the strength of our approach is the integration of distinct data by a network approach to identify significant regions of interest in the network. the data used for integration consists of metabolite profiles from mass spectrometry, est data from previous studies with mappings to ec numbers, as well as est libraries for the active and inactive state of the tardigrades .

the overall integration process is depicted in figure  <dig>  it is divided into three major parts,  the network generation,  the processing of the metabolite and est data for node and edge scoring and  the calculation of a maximum-scoring subnetworks .

construction of a metabolic reaction network
a metabolic reaction network was created on the basis of kegg reference pathways  <cit>  and converted into a graph with metabolites as nodes and reactions as edges . the graphs resulting from each metabolic pathway were combined into one supergraph. subsequently, this graph was transformed into an undirected graph and pool metabolites were removed which form non-specific shortcuts in the network . the resulting network consists of  <dig>  nodes which represent the metabolites and  <dig>  edges representing the reactions. the nodes and edges of this network were scored in the following with the integrated data to identify a subnetwork specific for the metabolic changes in the tardigrade m. tardigradum.

analysis of metabolite profiles
the metabolic profiles contain time course data for  <dig> metabolites after removal of unidentified metabolites, which were measured by gc-ms, but could not be assigned explicitly to a specific metabolite in the network. two distinct phases of tardigrade adaptation were measured, the dehydration phase  and rehydration phase . fellenberg  <cit>  introduced correspondence analysis  to identify principal factors in microarray data. in a similar manner, we applied the ca to metabolite profiles with the highest variance  to obtain the principal factors which contain most information . the first axis clearly separates the de- and rehydration process , while both first axes capture well the pattern of the metabolic time course. the ca not only allows to visualize the time points, but also the metabolites that are most specific for the axis . the first two axis explain 66% of the total variance suggesting that the strongest signal in the metabolite data reflects their sequential change over time.

we first examined the metabolite data by testing for differences in the means of the measurements for dehydration and rehydration using a wilcoxon test. despite significant differences for few metabolites, a closer look at the metabolite data showed increasing and decreasing trends in the time courses. this can be explained by the slow transition from the active into the inactive stage with a cessation of metabolism at time point  <dig> , where 100% of the tardigrades are in the tun stage. therefore, the experimental design required a trend test to analyse the metabolite time course data for metabolites that change most. two methods were used subsequently, the jonckheere-terpstra test  and the umbrella test  <cit> . both tests consider relative values between time points and an increase or decrease in their ranks.

the differences between the tests  are shown for simulated time series in figure  <dig> with the corresponding p-values. the jt test identifies an either increasing or decreasing monotonic trend in the data. therefore, the resulting p-values for the jt test are only significant for a monotonic upward trend . all other cases do not yield significant results. in contrast to this, the umbrella test is used to test for trends with an upward or downward apex . from a biological point of view it is more reasonable to consider trends with a peak, rather then monotonic trends. since it is expected, that the metabolism changes during the dehydration  and rehydration  phase and should be minimal in the inactive state . an umbrella form would be expected e.g. for storage metabolites or metabolites necessary for the protection of cellular structures, while for metabolites involved in energy production and cell growth an inverse umbrella shape is likely. we therefore applied the umbrella test to the metabolite profiles and calculated the significance of peaked trends for all metabolites. the turning point of the trend was set to time point  <dig>  where all tardigrades have completed the dehydration process.

node scoring from metabolite data
the p-values from the umbrella test were subsequently used to score the nodes of the metabolite network. to convert the p-values to scores for the network and calculate functional modules the approach by dittrich et al.  <cit>  was used . a beta-uniform mixture model  was fitted to the p-value distribution, where the beta distribution models the signal, while the noise is by definition uniformly distributed. finally the node scores were calculated based on a log ratio of signal to noise. the fitted beta-uniform mixture model is depicted in figure  <dig> with the corresponding quantile-quantile plot, validating graphically the fit of the bum model, despite some clustering effects in the data. the Π-upper value of  <dig>  measures the amount of noise in the data, vice versa denoting that  <dig> % of the metabolites change significantly in their profiles. the computed node scores range from - <dig>  to  <dig> , whereby significant p-values lead to a positive score, while non-significant p-values lead to a negative node score. unmeasured metabolites were assigned the average of the negative scores  which corresponds to a score derived from the noise in the data. similarly, other methods handle unmeasured metabolites by calculating random p-values and computing scores from these  <cit> .

edge scoring from est data
the ests were subdivided into two data sets, est data with ec number mappings from previous studies and differential ests  for the active and inactive stage . the ec number allowed the identification of corresponding tardigrade-specific enzymes and therefore reactions. the dests were mapped, as described in the following, to kegg ko identifiers using kaas  <cit>  and thereby to reactions. the distributions of the mapped reactions to ests are depicted in figure  <dig>  the two sources of normal and differential ests covered by mapping of ko identifier and ec number a total of  <dig>  reactions,  <dig> in common and  <dig> solely by dests and  <dig> by ests. the presence of ests mapped to an ec number were used to give a minimal weight of  <dig>  to the corresponding edges . a weight of - <dig>  was given to edges without identified enzyme mapping. this favoured the use of edges for which it is known that an enzyme exists, over reactions that might not exist in tardigrades, during the module search.

the dests were clustered into  <dig>  clusters using cd-hit-est . out of each cluster a representative was used to map kegg ko identifiers with the kegg automatic annotation server   <cit> .  <dig> clusters could be annotated. the log <dig> ratio of active na to inactive nicounts of dests was used for edge scoring: 

  se=|log2|−t, 

with threshold t≥ <dig> to adjust the sensitivity/specificity of sesimilarly to the fdr used for the node scoring .

calculation of the metabolic module
a functional module was calculated with an exact algorithm termed heinz <cit>  using the node and edge scores to find a maximum-scoring subnetwork . the module was calculated in a twostep approach.

first an enrichment step reduced the metabolic network to a tardigrade-specific subnetwork of  <dig> nodes and  <dig> edges. since the complete network was created from the kegg reference pathways, it contains all possible metabolic reactions and metabolites of which some might not occur in tardigrades. therefore a subnetwork was extracted based solely on the presence of enzymes and metabolites measured in tardigrades. identified enzymes from est data were used to score the edges and a positive node score  was used for measured metabolites. using these scores the heinz algorithm identified the maximum-scoring subnetwork, which aggregates metabolites and reactions that are likely to be present, over the positive scores.

the second step used the enriched subnetwork to score the changes in metabolites and differentially abundant ests. a functional metabolic module was calculated based on the node scoring from the metabolic profiles with an fdr of  <dig>   and the log ratio score for the edges from the dests with t= <dig> . the resulting edge score lay between - <dig> and  <dig>  giving these edges a 100-fold higher weight than with just enzyme information . by integrating the different sources of information, a module was obtained representing the significant trend changes in metabolites between the dehydration and rehydration process as well as changes in est abundance, connected by reactions for which enzymes were identified in the tardigrades.

physical stress-induced metabolic module for m. tardigradum
during dehydration the metabolism of tardigrades slowly reduces, up to a complete cessation of measurable metabolism in the tun stage. the recovery time during rehydration is probably a function of metabolic activities linked to repair of damage caused by dehydration and to restoration of metabolic pathways. the resulting module  reveals these processes by accumulating metabolic pathways involved in glycolysis/gluconeogenesis and carbohydrate metabolism, pentose phosphate pathway, the metabolism/catabolism of certain amino acids starting from pyruvate, including e.g methionine, lysine, phenylalanine, valine, arginine, tyrosine, threonine. furthermore, trend changes in the accumulation of glycerol, which is known to protect against harmful effects of dehydration by stabilizing the membrane, is observed as well as pathways for cellular responses to osmotic stress. significant changes in these pathways mainly show an umbrella-shaped trend in the metabolic profiles, resembling a catabolic reaction or degradation of the metabolites followed by a restoration and production of amino acids and cellular components from one-carbon sugars as carbon and energy source. these processes are also consistently identified by the go enrichment analysis, performed on the genes represented as enzymes in the functional module .

the inverse metabolic trend with a peaked shape is less common and would be expected for storage metabolites or bioprotectants. the module includes  <dig> metabolites with significant changes in this direction: sn-glycerol 3-phosphate, putrescine, spermidine, aspartate, citrate and d-glycerate. sn-glycerol 3-phosphate could potentially increase during dehydration to produce triglyceride as a highly efficient energy storage or even more likely glycerol as membrane stabilizer. putrescine is a diamine created by the decarboxylation of ornithine. the addition of two propylamine residues yields spermidine, an essential growth factor. other probable biological functions of spermidine are the stabilization of dna by association of the amino-groups with the phosphate residues of the dna, increase of rna synthesis and enhancement of stability of trnas and ribosomes  <cit> .

especially the information on differentially abundant enzymes is valuable, by which changes in reactions between metabolites are identified, e.g. the link between the pentose phosphate pathway to glycolysis by the transaldolase reaction: sedoheptulose 7-phosphate + glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate ⇌erythrose 4-phosphate + fructose 6-phosphate. using solely the metabolite data  during the module identification these reactions would not be taken into account . however, they seem to be highly important for tardigrade metabolism since they show strong differences in est counts between the active and inactive state. at present only few data on the abundance of the enzymes from dests is available. the integrated analysis will certainly gain from the creation of additional stage-specific data to identify further important reactions and pathways.

CONCLUSIONS
here we present an integrated approach to analyse sparse, heterogeneous data from a largely unknown organism. for tardigrades  neither the genome is known nor the complete transcriptome or proteome, and up to now only quite incomplete analyses exist on a molecular level. this study represents a first attempt to use the existing data in an integrative approach to complement each other. by integrating metabolic profiles and transcript data into a metabolic network created from kegg pathways, a module of concerted changes in metabolism during the process of de- and rehydration is identified.

from a statistical point of view we present a novel approach to analyse metabolite profiles. we implement the umbrella test to identify significant non-monotonic trends in the metabolites. furthermore, semi-quantitative differences in enzyme abundance are calculated between the active and inactive form of the tardigrade. the test results and information on enzymes are subsequently used to score the metabolic network. an advantage of our approach is the simultaneous integration of metabolite and enzyme related data into a combined analysis using node scores derived from the metabolite measurements and edge scores for differential abundance of enzymes. in contrast to previous approaches  our frame not only relies on the information of metabolic profiles, but allows the integration of molecular data for the edges of the metabolic network to model regulatory process in more detail and completeness. the resulting module thus represents metabolic pathways for which enzymes have been identified in the tardigrades, with significant trend changes in metabolite concentrations over time as well as alterations in est abundance during the transitions between the active and inactive stage. the identified stress responsive network module mainly comprises pathways involved in glycolysis and sugar metabolism, pentose phosphate pathway and the metabolism of certain amino acids and additional reactions to store energy in triglyceride and protect the dna.

it has to be noted, that changes in transcript abundance and metabolite levels correlate only to a certain extent. a clear relationship is evident where the metabolites are end-products . the relationship is less transparent in those cases where the metabolites are intermediates. this has different reasons, importantly, the use of metabolic data on changes  of intermediary metabolites to infer changes in metabolic rate is an intractable  problem beyond the scope of our methodology. in fact, our approach applies only statistical reasoning on more or less strongly correlated changes for different network nodes. hence, the interpretation of the changes for the intermediary metabolites has to be done with special care. the significance levels given for our estimates are only a guiding indicator here.

furthermore, it by now only uses a small set of measured metabolites  to score the nodes in the network, which is due to the limitation of current technologies. nonetheless, is the algorithm capable of handling ’omics scale metabolic data sets, which will unquestionably be available in future studies.

a clear benefit of the presented integrative method is the identification of key processes and pathways changing during the transition phases, despite the sparsity of available data for tardigrades so far. as more data become available, including the entire genome sequence of m. tardigradum and more comprehensive metabolic profiles, this kind of integrated network analysis will certainly provide a powerful tool for deeper and more detailed insights into tardigrade metabolic processes and adaptations.

