BACKGROUND
escherichia coli retains its dominant position as the first choice of host for the high-throughput production of proteins of therapeutic or commercial interest because of rapid biomass accumulation, well-established genetic manipulation methods and simple process scale-up  <cit> . however, a major disadvantage derived from the intrinsic properties of e. coli is the frequent formation of an inclusion body, a dense aggregate of misfolded polypeptides  <cit> . refolding the inclusion bodies into the native conformation might be straightforward if an efficient refolding scheme is established. there are a variety of conventional methodologies for refolding recombinant proteins from inclusion bodies, which contains simple dilution, dialysis and chromatographic refolding methods. dilution is the simplest and most widely used technique and involves refolding initiation by reducing the denaturant concentration. however, the target product in dilution refolding can be obtained only very low yield because of protein aggregation at high protein concentration. column-based refolding is the most likely to renaturate the protein aggregates at high concentration and to reduce the cost for reagents and buffers in large-scale protein refolding  <cit> . although these conventional methods are commonly used for protein refolding and quite progress has been made, disulfide bond formation and peptidyl-prolyl cis-trans isomerization have often frustrated the successful refolding of insoluble recombinant proteins containing cysteine and proline in multiple numbers  <cit> . generation of correct disulfide bonds and peptidyl-prolyl cis-trans configuration are required processes for formation and stabilization of the native protein conformation. furthermore, the kinetics and thermodynamics of disulfide bond formation and peptidyl-prolyl cis-trans isomerization can dominate the rate and pathway of protein folding and in turn determine the refolding efficiency  <cit> .

at least two classes of cellular factors are currently known to assist in vivo or in vitro protein folding. the first class includes a number of proteins collectively known as "molecular chaperones" such as groel-groes and dnak/dnaj/grpe in e. coli. molecular chaperones are believed to prevent undesirable folding pathways such as premature folding, aggregation and misfolding and thereby facilitate formation of biologically active protein structures  <cit> . the second class contains foldases that catalyze protein folding by stimulating rate-limiting reactions such as the formation and interchange of disulfide bonds and isomerization of peptidyl-prolyl bonds  <cit> . the respective enzymes are protein disulfide bond isomerase and peptidyl-prolyl cis-trans isomerase . recently, the application of these proteins in helping in vitro protein refolding has been studied actively  <cit> . groel monomer is composed of three domains: an apical domain that is responsible for binding substrate  <cit> , an equatorial domain that contains the atp-binding site, and an intermediate hinge domain that connects the apical and equatorial domains. the monomeric apical domain of groel  was proved to trigger the in vitro refolding of rhodanase and cyclophilin a without groes and atp and had the activity of intact groel in vivo  <cit> . the immobilized mini-chaperone and foldases were successfully employed in column chromatography and batchwise mode to refold indole 3-glycerol phosphate synthase, cyclodextrin glycosyltransferase, antibody fragments and the scorpion toxin cn <dig> in high yield with biological activity  <cit> .

here, we report a simple method that enables one-step purification and immobilization of folding machineries  simultaneously in fully functional forms using the positively-charged consecutive 10-arginine tag at their c-terminal. further, the folding-catalytic matrices immobilized with mini-chaperone and/or two foldases were recruited to refold two denatured and reduced model proteins containing multiple cysteine or proline residues for proving their refolding-assisting efficiency. this report provides an affordable refolding method using immobilized folding machineries to lead the rapid provision of the protein of interest from inclusion bodies produced in e. coli.

RESULTS
preparation of folding machineries
in order to obtain the recombinant folding machineries in e. coli, the pcr product coding for mini-chaperone, dsba or human ppiase  was cloned into template vector harnessing the arg <dig> tag. mini-chaperone and dsba expressed in e. coli bl <dig> were completely soluble and active form while approximately 50% of the total hppiase protein was soluble and the rest of the protein was in the insoluble fraction . the recombinant e. coli bl <dig> cells transformed with the corresponding expression plasmid of folding machineries produced mini-chaperone, dsba or hppiase as soluble protein in final yield of about  <dig> ,  <dig>  and  <dig>  g/l of culture, respectively. after simple one-step salt-gradient ion-exchange chromatography using soluble e. coli cell extracts, arg10-tailed folding catalysts were purified to more than 95% estimated from the sodium dodecyl sulfate polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis  analysis  and their predicted molecular weight were verified by matrix assisted laser desorption-ionization and time of flight  mass spectrometry . the simply and efficiently purified folding machineries with arg10-tails at their c-terminal were used for subsequent immobilization and refolding experiments.

construction of refolding matrices
initially, the sp-sepharose fast flow resin was used to immobilize purified folding machineries for preparative purposes. due to the stretch of  <dig> consecutive positively charged arg residues of folding machineries, the purified fusion protein was immobilized noncovalently by polyionic interaction to the matrix containing polyanion as a functional group, which yielded mini-chaperone-sepharose, dsba-sepharose and hppiase-sepharose. to measure coupling density, various amounts of purified folding machineries were mixed with the cation exchanger. the amount of immobilized folding machineries was increased as the loading amount of folding machineries into the cation exchanger was increased . the maximum amount of the folding machineries coupled to the resin as follows: mini-chaperone,  <dig>  mg/ml gel; dsba,  <dig>  mg/ml gel; hppiase,  <dig>  mg/ml gel. binary  and ternary  refolding matrices were prepared by thoroughly mixing in equal molar ratios of the single refolding gel .

functional analyses of immobilized folding machineries
immobilized mini-chaperone was fully functional in refolding a typical substrate, denatured carbonic anhydrase . immobilized foldases  were assayed on the basis of their enzymatic activities. immobilized dsba was tested for its ability to catalyze protein disulfide bond formation. an rnase a with scrambled disulfide bridges was incubated with dsba-sepharose in the presence of excess gsh over gssg. the recovery of rnase a activity was significantly higher in the presence of dsba-sepharose than the case with sp sepharose without dsba and the immobilized dsba effect was concentration-dependent . immobilized hppiase assay was carried out based on the observation that chymotrypsin cleaved the c-terminal amide bond only in the trans x-pro conformer of the chromogenic substrate, x-pro-phe-p-nitroanilide   <cit> . immobilized hppiase can catalyze the cis-trans interconversion of the ala-pro bond in the substrate n-suc-aapf-p-nitroanilide compared to the level of spontaneous isomerization in the absence of immobilized hppiase . the burst phase due to the cleavage of the excess trans isomer is completed during the mixing time and the remaining absorbance change is due to the cis-trans isomerization catalyzed by the immobilized hppiase .

batchwise refolding of denatured and reduced proteins
the immobilized folding machineries were found to facilitate the refolding of denatured and reduced rnase a with high efficiency . the refolding efficiency is the ratio of the soluble fraction to the total amount of denatured and reduced protein used for refolding and the functional recovery is estimated from the specific activity of the recovered soluble protein relative to that of native enzyme. the hppiase-sepharose used for the refolding of rnase a generated a 67% refolding yield, while  <dig> % was observed using sp sepharose fast flow alone. the mini-chaperone-sepharose and dsba-sepharose gave refolding yields of about 55% and 58%, respectively . the binary refolding matrices showed similar refolding yields to single refolding matrices. the binary refolding matrix of mini-chaperone/dsba-sepharose gave a high yield of protein folding, which was corresponding to 68% efficiency. the ternary matrix  gave the highest yield of 73% among all kinds of the refolding matrices. the rnase a prior to the denaturation and reduction initially had 76% of the activity of the purest protein under our assay condition. further, the maximum activity recovery was 31% more than that initially present. thus, the refolding matrices had reconditioned the rnase a by converting inactive protein into active. reconditioning activity has been proposed as a general property of refolding systems using immobilized foldases  <cit> . we have applied the same procedure to another protein, cyclohexanone monooxygenase  expressed as inclusion bodies from recombinant e. coli bl <dig>  more than 99% activity yield was obtained on batchwise refolding of chmo with refolding matrices. the refolding efficiency of chmo inclusion body using the folding machineries displayed on the cation exchanger was also shown in table  <dig>  the sp sepharose fast flow by itself produced less than  <dig> % of refolding yield, which was all aggregated. among single refolding gels, mini-chaperone-sepharose showed the highest refolding yield of 31%. binary refolding matrices exhibited better results than single refolding matrices. the mini-chaperone/hppiase-sepharose generated the best refolding yield of 46% in the group of binary refolding matrix. the ternary matrix  gave the highest yield of 53% among all types of the refolding matrices. similar to rnase a, the native chmo used for comparison of activity recovered from refolding matrices initially had 80% of the activity of the purest protein under our assay condition. moreover, the highest recovery of chmo activity was 25% more than that initially present, suggesting the reconditioning of chmo activity by refolding matrices immobilized folding machineries. no leakage of folding machineries from the cation exchanger was observed during the refolding process, which was confirmed by sds-page .

data were collected from three independent refolding experiments with identical protein concentration.

* refolding yield: the ratio of the soluble protein to the total amount of denatured and reduced protein used for refolding.

†activity yield: the specific activity of the recovered soluble protein relative to that of native rnase a or chmo showing 76% or 80% of the specific activity of the purest protein obtained from sigma company

cd analysis of refolded proteins
the cd spectrum of refolded rnase a showing a minimum at  <dig> nm in the far ultraviolet  region indicated that the refolded rnase a has a native-like secondary structure after comparison with the native rnase a . the denatured rnase a in  <dig> m gdnhcl, which has an unfolded conformation, exhibited a distinctly different cd spectrum. in the far uv-cd region, the spectrum of refolded chmo showed two minima at  <dig> nm and  <dig> nm and it was observed to overlay very closely with that of native chmo , suggesting that the refolded chmo has a very comparable secondary structure to the soluble and native chmo. this cd spectrum of the refolded chmo is similar to that of native chmo of another group  <cit> .

discussion
protein aggregation during production and refolding from the inclusion body of many industrial and pharmaceutical proteins in e. coli has been a major technical and economical bottleneck that has spurred basic research as well as process development  <cit> . among various approaches to overcome protein aggregation in refolding processes, refolding chromatography systems mimicking in vivo folding systems are introduced as an efficient and simple way to renature proteins in high yields  <cit> . however, refolding reaction stoichiometry requires a considerable amount of folding machineries  <cit> . therefore, a cost-efficient purification and immobilization of folding machineries is a critical step in order to apply this refolding methodology to a large bioprocess scale. previously, protein disulfide isomerase  has been immobilized only in low yield and is not active  <cit> . it is mainly due to very reactive thiol groups in pdi. altamirano et al.  <cit>  reported the first successful immobilization of dsba as a fully functional form. they could immobilize the dsba on agarose by transiently blocking the active site by cyanylation. however, this technique is still challenging to repeat and cost-inefficient. in this study, we report a simple method that enables simultaneous purification and immobilization of folding machineries in fully functional forms. among a variety of immobilization methods, adsorption is simpler and less expensive, with minimal chemical requirements and less likelihood of enzyme denaturation. however, the weak nature of the binding forces can cause leakage of the enzyme with changes in ph, ionic strength and/or temperature. in order to prevent leakage of proteins from the solid support and to exploit the simple adsorption method, the folding catalysts were charged by attaching 10-arginine amino acids. specifically, the charged consecutive arg10-stretch was genetically fused to the c-terminal of the mini-chaperone, dsba and hppiase to generate the charge-added folding catalysts. the generated folding catalysts were analyzed for their purification and immobilization characteristics. a single ion-exchange chromatography was performed for the one-step purification of the soluble folding machineries. most intracellular proteins of e. coli have their isoelectric points  at weak acidic ph in analysis of the wild type e. coli proteome  <cit> . ninety-seven percent of intracellular proteins have pi values below ph  <dig> , the same ph value of loading buffer, with only 3% at basic ph. it indicates that more than 97% e. coli proteins are negatively charged at ph  <dig>  and cannot be bound on a cation exchanger. the calculated pi values of mini-chaperone, dsba and hppiase with arg <dig> stretch was  <dig> ,  <dig>  and  <dig> , respectively, implying that the folding machineries have positive charges in  <dig> mm sodium phosphate buffer, ph  <dig> . therefore, they were easily purified with high purity form the negatively charged intracellular e. coli proteins using a single step of cation exchange chromatography. further, arg10-tail provided a simple and firm strategy for the immobilization of folding machineries. efficient immobilization of folding machineries on a cation exchanger was achieved using an adsorption based on electrostatic interaction. the maximum amounts of the immobilized folding machinery reached  <dig>  –  <dig>  mg/ml and were higher than those of other groups reported previously  <cit> . the immobilized mini-chaperone and foldases were fully functional when assayed in a batch mode. the targeted benefit of immobilization of folding catalysts is easy separation of the refolded protein from the other components and the immobilization procedure increases the efficiency of the folding machineries, since higher concentrations of the active folding machineries can be achieved in the gel than in solution.

recombinant proteins of industrial and pharmaceutical interest may have disulfide bonds and many are difficult to refold. after successful purification and immobilization of folding catalysts, we applied immobilized mini-chaperone and foldases to refold the cysteine- and proline-rich proteins. the first model protein is bovine pancreatic rnase a consisting of  <dig> amino acid residues and contains  <dig> cysteine residues involving in formation of  <dig> intramolecular disulfide bonds and  <dig> proline residues. the remarkable renaturation was achieved when the unfolded rnase a was treated with the individual immobilized folding machinery, suggesting that the immobilization of folding machineries on a cation exchanger through 10-arginine fusion did not inhibit their chaperone activity. this result contrasts with the spontaneous renaturation by the sp sepharose fast flow in refolding buffer . in addition, combination of the appropriate amounts of each gel makes it easier to find the optimal refolding conditions of the other target proteins because each gel has a similar refolding efficiency. the complete refolding matrices  proved to be highly efficient  in restoring the native structure and biological properties of the rnase a. the synergistic effect of dsba with ppiase and of groel with pdi has been observed in vivo and in vitro, indicating that they play cooperative roles in protein refolding  <cit> . the refolded rnase a recovers a native-like secondary structure based on its similar cd spectrum to that of native rnase a. the second model protein, chmo derived from acinetobacter sp. is one of the oxidative enzymes of special interest as a biocatalyst in the nadph-dependent oxidation of cyclohexanone to ε-caprolactone via a baeyer-villiger mechanism. it comprises  <dig> amino acids and contains  <dig> cysteines and  <dig> prolines. when the disulfide bonds prediction was performed using dianna, which is recent state-of-the-art web-based software determining the cysteine oxidation state and disulfide connectivity of a protein  <cit> , the result showed that  <dig> of  <dig> cysteine residues might be involved in the formation of two intramolecular disulfide bonds . the chmo deposited as inclusion bodies in recombinant e. coli could be refolded with 53% yield using the ternary refolding matrices  while the negligible refolding yield was achieved using the sp sepharose resin alone. the other refolding matrices also assisted the batchwise mode of chmo refolding .

CONCLUSIONS
this work demonstrates that a commonly used and relatively inexpensive ion-exchange matrix can be used for immobilization of folding catalysts. refolding was not inhibited by protein-matrix interactions thus preventing the need for tagged protein in an affinity based method. refolded protein was directly obtained from the refolding matrix in a highly concentrated form and free from incorrectly or incompletely refolded protein. this indicates that the proposed method can contribute significantly to bioprocess intensification as it integrates the reducing-agent removal, refolding, concentration and purification unit operations used in dilution refolding into an easily automated process. therefore, the method is an interesting alternative for large-scale or preparative oxidative refolding of complex and highly disulfide-bonded proteins. results reported here showed an effective refolding technique for proline- or cysteine-rich proteins obtained from e. coli inclusion bodies, which might be potential in the biotechnology industry.

