BACKGROUND
in the study of pathogens, it is fundamentally important to identify the molecular elements that enable transmission and replication in humans, and understand their evolutionary patterns as well as their functional role. this knowledge is particularly relevant to disease prevention, since it helps define the epidemiological characteristics of new pathogen strains, and in some cases the extent of their virulence  <cit> . current widespread concern over the potential threat of a human pandemic caused by mutated h5n <dig> avian influenza viruses highlights the medical, social, and economic value of tools that enable correct assessment of the potential for transmissibility of avian flu viruses amongst human hosts  <cit> .

the influenza a virus is in equilibrium with its natural hosts, aquatic wildfowl, amongst which widespread transmission occurs, often without causing serious disease  <cit> . this virus has limited zoonotic potential: only four influenza subtypes have been known to circulate amongst humans, while at least  <dig> subtypes have been observed in birds. domestic poultry and some mammals, particularly swine, are also hosts to a limited number of influenza a subtypes. however, occasional transmissions of influenza a to humans can have a tremendous impact. the spanish flu pandemic of 1918/ <dig> claimed over  <dig> million lives, and was almost certainly caused by adaptation of an avian h1n <dig> strain to humans  <cit> . although the circulating h5n <dig> subtype has negligible potential for human-to-human transmission, there is a concern that it might acquire the necessary mutations for this capability.

studies of the determinants of influenza host range and virulence have indicated that no single molecular factor can be pinpointed  <cit> . a multiplicity of mutations, distributed across several viral proteins, appears to be involved, making the experimental determination of the critical factors a complex task. a computational method is described in this paper, that compares arbitrarily large multiple sequence alignments of viral proteins and measures mutual information between the alignments at each amino acid site, leading to the identification of specific mutation patterns which characterize sets of sequences. characteristic variant patterns of adaptation to human hosts can thus be identified by comparing human-to-human transmissible influenza strains to avian strains. sequence signatures, which summarize the isolate-specific adaptation characteristics, can be extracted from these patterns. when ordered along a timeline, sequence signatures show the likely evolution of human-to-human characteristic mutations.

this paper describes the mutual information analysis method, and demonstrates its utility through an analysis of the influenza rna polymerase protein pb <dig>  this protein is a component of the ribonucleoprotein  complex, which is transported between nucleus and cytosol during viral infection and is therefore likely to require host adaptation. indeed, specific mutations of the pb <dig> protein are known to participate in human-to-human transmission adaptation  <cit> , and several studies have reported amino acid sites thought to be involved in this adaptation  <cit> . we used the results of these studies to show that mutual information analysis is highly effective for identifying systematic differences between sets of sequences. this method can be extended to the study of other pathogens, and of properties other than the host range.

several methods for identifying the molecular determinants of pathogenic traits have been proposed  <cit> . in vivo and in vitro experiments are costly and time-consuming, and their scope is usually limited to the study of single mutations, rather than systematic screening. for example, subbarao et al.  <cit>  sequenced several influenza mutants of varying replication capabilities, which were derived from a single-gene reassortant virus and implicated a key role of a single mutation of the pb <dig> protein  in replication of influenza in humans.

ad hoc computational methods involve production of multiple sequence alignments followed by visual inspection. buckler-white et al.  <cit>  identified  <dig> sites with distinctive human variants in influenza m <dig> and m <dig> genes by inspecting a handful of sequences. in a similar study, naffakh et al.  <cit>  identified seven sites in the pb <dig> gene from human variants from  <dig> aligned sequences. these studies lack statistical significance, which is a fundamental limitation of visual inspections: as the number of sequences increases, characteristic patterns become harder to discern. to alleviate this problem, researchers can split larger alignments into subgroups, using phylogenetic guide trees which cluster related sequences, making patterns more clearly visible . this approach was applied by obenauer et al.  <cit>  to define avian influenza proteotypes from alignments of up to  <dig> sequences, using a visual inspection method which is effective for sequence clustering, but cannot easily identify the residue mutation patterns that characterize each cluster. visual inspection methods have additional drawbacks: they lack objective measures for assessing mutations, and they do not scale well-large-scale alignments make detailed inspections impractical. both problems become particularly acute in sets characterized by multiple distinct mutations at the same site. the study of multiple distinct mutations can be addressed by formal methods, such as statistical diversity analysis based on information theory. korber et al.  <cit>  demonstrated the benefits of numerical variability measures by comparing the information entropy of separate alignments of hiv protein sequences, sampled from blood and brain tissues. they identified sites which were highly conserved  in the brain but not in blood, suggesting that the virus had forgone mutations to adapt to brain tissues. this method relies on entropy differentials between the two groups, and only sites characterised by high diversity in blood isolates were selected. however, this method is not capable of identifying sites which are conserved in blood isolates, but acquire mutations as a result of tissue adaptation.

a list of distinctive human variants of influenza a virus was compiled by chen et al.  <cit> , who identified sites with low entropy in both avian and human alignments, but with different consensus amino acids. by analyzing  <dig> full viral genomes, their study showed that entropy computations are highly scalable. however, information entropy alone is of limited use for comparative analysis, since it measures variability in a single alignment, without considering which variants occur in the other set. of  <dig> characteristic sites reported by this study, eight were in the pb <dig> protein; however, several sites were discarded, because they exhibited either multiple variants or high variability in the avian set.

data analysis approach
characteristic sites and variants
residues located at functionally important positions in a protein exhibit high conservation, since their mutations affect basic protein function and are usually detrimental to the organism's fitness. conservation analysis is often used as a tool for the identification of functional residues  <cit> . this principle can be applied to functional components that confer specific properties to a pathogen population. for example, a mutation required for viral replication in a specific host must be conserved in host-adapted strains, but not in other strains. such functionally important components can be therefore be found by comparing a characterized set of sequences , against a reference set . this comparison can identify one or more characteristic sites: sites that exhibit residue variants which are common in the characterized set, but rare in the reference set, and are therefore likely to participate in conferring the defining property of the characterized set. in the present study, human-transmissible sequences  have been compared to avian sequences which are not transmissible to humans . the sites identified in this analysis are therefore candidate functional sites responsible for human-to-human transmission. our working hypothesis is that the poor transmissibility of most avian strains to humans could be accounted by the infrequent occurrence of human characteristic residues in avian sequences, at these sites.

entropy and mutual information
information theory  <cit> , defines variability measures such as information entropy, which are finding many applications in bioinformatics  <cit> . the entropy h of a discrete random event x, whose possible outcomes form the set e = {e <dig>  e <dig> ... en}, is a measure of the outcome uncertainty, given by:

 h=−∑e∈epelog⁡2) 

where pe is the probability that e ∈ e is the outcome of x. in protein alignments, we measure residue entropy by identifying x with a site, and e with the set of amino acids that occur at that site. entropy values vary both with the number of amino acids observed at the site, and with their relative frequency. h =  <dig> at sites with 100% conserved residues, while variable sites have higher entropy, up to a maximum of hmax =  <dig>  . such extreme variability is unlikely in closely related sequence sets and, in practice, sites whose residue entropy exceeds  <dig>  can be regarded as highly variable.

entropy can be used to measure variability in multiple alignments and identify conserved residues or peptide variants  <cit> . because of its statistical nature, it is suitable for analyzing arbitrarily large dataset, and can thus be applied to large-scale diversity studies, such as the identification of stable antigenic targets over extended periods of time  <cit> , a key step in reverse vaccinology  <cit> .

entropy computations can be combined to determine relationships between pairs of variables  <cit> . when considering two discrete events a and b, one can measure the mutual information  of the two events as follows:

 mi = h + h - h 

where h is the joint entropy of the two variables, which is computed using equation , replacing e with the set of all unique pair of values .

mi is interpreted as the reduction in the uncertainty of the outcome of b when the outcome of a is known, and thus a measure of the dependence between the two variables. it was shown  <cit>  that mi is  <dig> for two fully independent variables, while the mi of two variables that are fully co-dependent is determined by their entropy:

  <dig> ≤ mi ≤ min{h, h} 

mi has been used in mapping of genes and clustering of genetic markers  <cit> . it has also been employed to identify pairs of co-evolving sites in proteins, which produce high mi values when individual and joint residue entropies are combined using equation   <cit> .

mutual information of characteristic sites
we have utilized mi to identify characteristic sites in sets of aligned viral sequences. we compare pairs of homologous alignments to measure the relationship between the amino acids residues observed at a site, and the alignment in which they are observed. in a pair of homologous alignments, every residue site n in one alignment aligns with the same site n in the other alignment. in practice, pairs of homologous alignments may be formed by extracting sets of aligned sequences from a master alignment, without further realignment. thus, variables a and b in equation  are replaced with the observed residue a, and the label s of the set  within which the residue is observed. the mi at a site x is therefore computed by:

 mi = ha + hs - hs,a 

ha is simply the entropy at site x for the merged alignment, computed using . hs is derived from the number of sequences in each of the two sets :

 hs=−n1nlog⁡2−n2nlog⁡ <dig> 

where n = n <dig> + n <dig>  finally, hs,a is given by:

 hs,a=−∑s∑a∈aplog⁡2p 

where p is the probability of any given combination of residue and set label .

characteristic sites present different residues in the two sets, highly conserved within each set. therefore, there is a strong relationship between residues and set labels at these sites, resulting in high mi values. conversely, sites with low mi  exhibit similar distributions of amino acid variants in the two sets and are not characteristics. since there are exactly two sets, the upper bound of hs is  <dig>  the maximum entropy for a variable with two outcomes. from equation  we therefore infer that  <dig> ≤ mi ≤  <dig>  however, since hs =  <dig> only when both alignments are equal in size, the range of i is reduced when one set is larger than the other.

identification of characteristic sites and variants
a high mi value is the primary requisite of a characteristic site. however, the selection process must take into account a variety of factors that can reduce the mi. in influenza adaptation, human characteristic variants are sometimes present in a minority of avian strains, which is expected if the mutations necessary for human adaptation originate in the avian pool. furthermore, sporadic random mutations and episodes of infections from other hosts can be observed in both sets. finally, avian characteristic variants are expected to be present in historical sequences, sampled before these variants stabilized. to select characteristic sites and variants, we identified four criteria that help distinguish characteristic sites from the background noise. the choice of threshold values for these criteria is largely dependent on the analysis task selection. the four criteria are:

• a characteristic site sc must have an mi value above mimin, the mi threshold below which no characteristic sites are deemed to be present.

• if a characteristic variant vc is present at site sc with probability pc within the set it represents and po in the other set, the ratio r = pc/po must exceed a minimum frequency ratio rmin if po is non-zero. a high rmin ensures that the variant is significantly more common in the set it represents.

• the probability pc must exceed a minimum probability pcmin. raising this threshold prevents statistically insignificant mutations from being considered characteristic, even when they are more frequent in one set than in the other.

• at a characteristic site sc, the probability pc' of a set s containing variants characteristic of the other set must be lower that the maximum contamination probability pc'max. this threshold prevents a site from being classified as characteristic if there is significant cross-contamination of variants between the two sets. depending on the analysis task, it is desirable to specify a different threshold for each set: for example, the tolerance for human variants present in avian sequences may be greater than the tolerance for avian variants in human sequences, to account for a more diverse pool of mutations in the avian virus population.

the selection process produces a characteristic variant pattern: a catalogue of characteristic sites, each possessing a list of the characteristic variants identified for each of the two sets. a characteristic variant pattern therefore presents in a concise form the systematic differences between a pair of aligned sequence sets, and can be used to derive a sequence signature for any homologous sequence. sequence signatures comprise only the residues at characteristic sites, and thus provide a concise representation of any given isolate, useful for determining which characteristic mutations it possesses.

experimental considerations
when choosing a mimin threshold, it is desirable to apply the same threshold values to multiple different comparisons . however, there are several statistical factors that influence mi values between alignments. these factors include: the presence of alignment gaps; the number of sequences in the comparison sets; and the size ratio of these sets.

alignment gaps, introduced by alignment algorithms, need to be accounted for in mi computations. the gap symbol is an artifact of the alignment and therefore cannot be considered an additional amino acid. however, its presence affects entropy calculations: although gaps are indicative of high variability, they artificially lower the entropy of sites where they are numerous  <cit> . although it is possible to estimate entropy at highly gapped sites, one has to question whether it is meaningful to seek characteristic variants at highly variables sites, where a large proportion of the sequences have no residue at all. a maximum gap threshold should therefore be chosen , above which a position should be ignored for mi computation purposes.

the number of sequences in a given set affects the computed entropy values and hence mi values. entropy is a statistical measure, and thus most accurate as sequence count approaches infinity. previous studies  <cit>  indicate that smaller set sizes introduce an error which is inversely proportional to the sequence count. our own experiments show that, when averaging over several random subsets, this relationship holds for sets as small as  <dig> sequences. however, for very small sequence counts the dramatic increase in sampling error makes entropy-based comparisons unreliable . in the present study, we only used sets of  <dig> sequences or more.

as previously discussed, any size disparity between the two sequence sets being compared reduces the range of mi values. figure 2-a shows that, as one set becomes several times larger than the other, mi values decrease at all sites. this relative size bias is problematic if characteristic site selection relies on absolute thresholds. when size disparity exists, we therefore correct for this bias using a sampling method, which compares the smaller of the two sets to multiple subsets of the larger set and evaluates the mean mi. each subset is randomly selected and equal in size to the smaller set of aligned sequences. figure 2-b shows the effect of this correction: mi values remain stable even as set size ratio exceeds 1: <dig>  especially at sites with high mi. small sequence counts, however, affect the estimate reliability at very low ratios. these measurements indicate that the sampling correction gives reliable mi results with size ratios up to 1: <dig> 

the role of metadata
multiple alignments used in comparative studies are constructed from sequences selected according to common characteristics, for example human-to-human or avian-to-avian transmission of infection. for small numbers of sets with well-defined selection criteria, alignments can be produced from separate queries to public databases such as genbank. however, matching the positions of separately-produced alignments is often problematic due to the presence of gaps, which are introduced by the alignment algorithm and whose position may vary in different alignments. in practice, comparative studies often need to test multiple hypotheses that require diverse selection criteria , demanding considerable additional effort in alignment construction. to address this problem, we constructed an annotated dataset in which sequences are accompanied by descriptive metadata, including strain name, subtype, host, year and country of isolation, protein name. we produced master alignments for each protein, so that subset alignments can be subsequently extracted through metadata queries, without further realignment. this method allows rapid comparisons of sequence subsets using arbitrary selection criteria.

quality-controlled metadata is difficult to obtain from public sequence databases, since the annotations of a large proportion of sequence records are inconsistent, incomplete, or even erroneous  <cit> . several approaches have been proposed to address these problems  <cit> , many of which require significant computing infrastructure or programming knowledge. this study made use of the aggregator of biological knowledge   <cit> , a desktop tool that employs user-defined structural rules to extract values from multiple annotation fields and from multiple sequence records, and subsequently reconcile conflicts in the extracted metadata. by automating the metadata extraction process, this tool enables the rapid construction of very large sequence datasets. more than  <dig>  influenza records were processed and annotated with relevant high-quality metadata for the current study. the use of structural rules enabled us to complete this task with only modest requirements for manual curation effort.

metadata-enabled analysis: the avana tool
the antigenic variability analyzer  tool, which supports a variety of entropy-based analyses of multiple sequence alignments, is the software engine used to support this study. this tool calculates and plots entropy profiles for multiple sequence alignments, allowing users to inspect variants and their frequencies at each position. avana can analyze the variability of peptides of any lengths, which makes it suitable for studying antigenic characteristics of pathogens  <cit> . for maximum flexibility, the tool is able to include arbitrary metadata fields , and select subsets of the master alignment using metadata values. since metadata is loaded separately from the master alignment, the latter can be produced using the multiple sequence alignment tool of choice. mi computation, size bias adjustments and characteristic site identification are built into the avana toolset, which automates the identification of characteristic variant patterns and produces sequence signatures. figure  <dig> shows a screenshot of the avana tools, which can be deployed on any java-enabled operating systems, and is freely available upon request to the authors.

RESULTS
catalogue of characteristic sites
a total of  <dig> characteristic sites were identified in this study . these  <dig> characteristic sites are present in both subtypes currently circulating amongst humans . all h2h characteristic variants exhibit extremely high conservation in humans , which is indicative of a possible role in the adaptation mechanisms of influenza a virus to human hosts. high conservation at characteristic sites is also typical in avian sequences , but not as uniformly, as some h2h characteristic variants appear with low frequency in the avian population . most discovered sites showed very little presence of human variants in avian sequences, with one notable exception: at site  <dig> the human variant  was present in 10% of avian sequences. this variant appears to be common in h9n <dig> avian viruses, which are known to infect humans  <cit> . however, the same variant was not present in the h9n <dig> strain a/quail/hongkong/g1/ <dig>  thought to have originated the pb <dig> gene of the h5n <dig> strains that claimed human lives in hong kong in  <dig>  <cit> .

previous studies have reported several of these sites as possible determinants of host-range specificity. the e627k mutation affecting influenza replication in humans  <cit> , was also associated with the high virulence of human h5n <dig> infections  <cit> . seven characteristic sites in pb <dig> were identified by naffakh et al.  <cit> , while chen et al.  <cit>  reported eight sites. combined, all these studies identified  <dig> sites , all of which were also found in the present study. all except one of the  <dig> characteristic sites reported herein are found in experimentally determined functional domains of the pb <dig> protein: signals controlling translocation to cell nuclei  <cit> , binding sites for proteins in the polymerase complex  <cit>  or rna cap binding sites  <cit> . this suggests that these mutations could play a role in the adaptation of critical viral functions to human hosts.

the high number of characteristic mutations, and their location in areas of contact with other proteins, suggest that h2h adaptation relies on complex interactions, and that the contribution of individual mutations may difficult to quantify and demonstrate experimentally. in the absence of experimental evidence, one cannot discount the possibility that some of the mutations identified have "hitch-hiked" alongside functionally important mutations. it must be noted, however, that all characteristic sites identified have remarkably stable in humans over a period of nearly  <dig> years, which suggests that they are important components of the adaptation, or that they play a supports role to functionally important mutations.

in addition to the  <dig> characteristic sites common to both h2h groups, we identified two characteristic sites unique to the h1n1h set, and nine unique to the hxn2h set . conservation is somewhat lower at these sites, possibly because they emerged at a later date.

evolutionary timelines
to reconstruct the emergence of characteristic mutations, we used the characteristic sites catalogue to produce signatures for all human pb <dig> sequences isolated between  <dig> and  <dig>  a the period spanning over the three major 20th century pandemics . the signatures were arranged chronologically to form a timeline, as shown in figure  <dig>  coloured backgrounds, distinguishing avian and human characteristic variants, permit an intuitive visualization of the emergence of adaptation to humans. although the signature of the virus strain responsible for the  <dig> spanish flu was clearly avian, it contained five h2h variants . by comparison, the signatures of all  <dig> avian  sequences revealed only one sequence  containing as many as three h2h variants, with 77% of sequences containing no h2h variants.

fifteen years later, the signature of the h1n <dig> circulating in the human population had acquired a predominantly human signature, and viruses isolated in  <dig> had signatures identical to circulating strains today. in summary, the characteristic variant pattern of human-to-human transmission evolved fully with remarkable speed , and has shown great stability over the following  <dig> years. the timeline shows that the two pandemics of  <dig> and  <dig>  had no effect on the continuity of the h2h signature for pb <dig>  although both pandemics were probably zoonotic in origin. this supports the widely accepted notion that these pandemics involved reassortment of avian strains with human-adapted strains, in which the pb <dig> protein which originally evolved from the  <dig> h1n <dig> strain was retained  <cit> . at first sight, a common origin of pb <dig> in all three subtypes seems to contradict the different variant patterns of h1n1h and hxn2h. however, h1n <dig> reappeared unchanged, twenty years after its elimination by the  <dig> pandemic, possibly due to accidental release from a laboratory  <cit> . the pb <dig> protein of this strain, effectively the ancestor of the h3n <dig> pb <dig>  was thus re-introduced to form a separate lineage.

the timelines obtained can be useful for detecting episodes of zoonotic infections, since the signature of avian and swine sequences are noticeably different from human signatures. the signatures of recent human isolates reveal that a/hong kong/1774/ <dig> and a/ontario/rv1273/ <dig> strains possessed pb <dig> proteins with avian characteristics, a sign of avian-to-human transmission, perhaps via a swine intermediary  <cit> . in addition, our results show that both human and avian characteristic variants circulate amongst pigs , making this group of sequences singularly difficult to characterize.

characterization of h5n1
this finding is in agreement with the extreme rarity of human-to-human transmission of avian influenza viruses. it is also consistent with the observation that the  <dig> and  <dig> pandemic viruses needed to acquire most of their internal genes from reassortments with human-adapted strains. even if h5n <dig> became capable of a similar reassortment with human strains, its potential for pathogenicity could be affected in unpredictable ways. since studies have failed to identify a single molecular component responsible for h5n <dig> pathogenicity, it appears that the pathogenicity is systemically determined, and that internal proteins may be involved.

metadata availability issues
the method described in this study is generic, and applicable to any analysis of systematic differences between sets of homologous sequences, selected on the basis of a particular metadata field. for example, the emergence of new characteristics can be studied by comparing sequence sets representing different periods of time. the integration of metadata capabilities in the analysis tools enables the rapid analysis of multiple sequence subsets, with dramatically reduced data preparation effort. sequence metadata is underutilized in current bioinformatic data mining approaches. we have shown that analysis tools can be greatly enhanced by this additional knowledge. however, the quality of results depends on the quality of the underlying metadata. collecting annotations is currently a significant obstacle for large-scale analysis, largely due to the uneven quality of annotations in large public databases. large-scale efforts, such as the niaid project  <cit> , and specialized databases, such as ncbi influenza virus resource , are improving the consistency of influenza a annotations. text mining techniques can support metadata gathering by analyzing publications associated with sequence records. the availability of intuitive and reusable text mining tools is increasingly useful for extracting annotations for specific purposes  <cit> . in the long term, however, problems of data duplication and inconsistencies in large-scale public databases are likely to persist. there is a need to complement public molecular databases with well-curated high-quality annotations. knowledge management approaches, such as semantic web technologies  <cit> , are likely to prove helpful in this area.

CONCLUSIONS
this paper presents a novel approach to the identification of characteristic variant patterns, based on the comparison of pairs of sequence alignments. we have shown that the method has important practical applications, including the identification of host range determinant mutations in influenza a viruses.

the higher number of pb <dig> characteristic sites identified in the present study with respect to previous studies show that mutual information analysis is more powerful than earlier methods applied for this purpose. this is largely due to the enhanced comparative power and high scalability of the statistical measures employed. the positions of the identified characteristic sites indicate their potential functional significance:  <dig> of  <dig> characteristic sites are located in the well-defined functional domains of pb <dig> protein. characteristic variant patterns are a useful tool for interpreting historical data. sequence signatures derived from characteristic variant patterns provide for a concise and understandable representation of individual sequences and evolving strains, while the timelines assembled from signatures of historical sequences are a helpful tool for understanding the emergence of specific characteristics. this method is generic and can be applied to any studies where it is desirable to perform molecular characterization of sequence groups from large-scale analysis, particularly for organisms with a high level genetic variability.

future work
a further possible application of the mi approach is in genotyping, which typically relies on the interpretation of phylogenetic trees, usually involving a strong subjective component. mutation patterns often characterize genotypes  <cit> , and mutual information analysis can provide an objective measure of clustering goodness, while characteristic variant patterns and sequence signatures can be used to classify sequences.

