BACKGROUND
during the course of evolution, the maintenance of biological systems requires the conservation of vital functions. at the same time, living beings are facing constant changes in their genome and environment. these variations, which are continuously challenging the fitness of the organism, are key modulators of adaptation. it is therefore essential to maintain a good balance between plasticity and robustness
 <cit> . how does this equilibrium evolve at the genetic level? in order to tackle this important issue, it is necessary to use a model system with a vital function that has been conserved during a given period of time, despite the divergence of the genetic modules that determine this function. the ecdysone receptor fulfils these requirements. this hormone receptor is a heterodimer composed of two nuclear receptors: ecr  and its obligatory partner usp , the ortholog of mammalian rxr . the activation of ecr by ecdysteroid hormones triggers a gene cascade that controls development  and reproduction in insects
 <cit> . both partners of this hormone receptor have undergone a dramatic divergence during the emergence of the mecopterida, a superorder of holometabolous insects, which includes diptera , lepidoptera , mecoptera , siphonaptera , and trichoptera 
 <cit> . this acceleration of evolutionary rate is correlated with structural and functional changes of the lbp of usp and of the heterodimer interface between ecr and usp
 <cit> . these results suggested to us that the maintenance of the ecdysone pathway was achieved, at least in part, through molecular adaptation of the usp lbd. we thus tested the hypothesis that selection has shaped this domain during the emergence of mecopterida.

changes in evolutionary rates are commonly used to detect innovations in the function of proteins. it is generally assumed that a slowdown of substitution rate is caused by the action of negative purifying selection that maintains an important function. by contrast, an acceleration of evolutionary rate can be interpreted in two opposite ways. it could be due to a phase of positive selection on a new function, or to neutral evolution of a functionless sequence. this simplistic approach raises several problems. indeed, the rate of evolution at a given position can change according to its interactions with other sites. many interactions are compatible with different conformations of a protein with the same function. therefore, within-site rate variation in time  is not necessarily associated with a change in function, but may simply reflect the epistatic nature of genetic units
 <cit> . in other words, the same site of a protein can follow different evolutionary paths in a phylogenetic tree, and whether these variations are adaptive or neutral cannot be inferred solely from the estimate of evolutionary rates. it is essential to take into account the interdependence of residues, within and between proteins. consequently, new methods try to incorporate protein structural constraints into evolutionary models
 <cit> . another important problem is to distinguish between positive selection and relaxation of negative selection
 <cit> . furthermore, the evolution of protein function involves alternating periods of conservative evolution and of rapid change
 <cit> . as a consequence, evidence for positive selection at the protein level are rare at a short time scale but much more frequent when considering deeper evolutionary time
 <cit> . finally, non-adaptive processes such as variations of the mutation rate or gc-biased gene conversion, can lead to an increase of evolutionary speed that is independent of natural selection
 <cit> . we are trying to tackle some of these issues that are central for a correct understanding of the genetic mechanisms of protein evolution using the ecdysone receptor. thanks to the availability of crystal structures and functional data, the ecr-usp case provides clear biological hypotheses regarding the codons upon which positive selection is expected. using appropriate models, we could test our hypotheses at different time scales by analysing evolutionary constrains either within extant insect families, or during three successive branches of mecopterida radiation. our results reveal the dynamics of evolutionary forces acting on the lbd of usp.

RESULTS
sequence variation of usp and cox <dig> in three insect species-goups
in order to study the evolutionary dynamics of usp at different time scales, we isolated sequences from several species of drosophilidae, tenebrionidae and blattaria . we have chosen the first two families as representative of the holometabolous insects, with drosophilidae showing the mecopterida “overacceleration” of usp
 <cit> . tenebrionidae belong to coleoptera, which is the sister group of mecopterida, while blattaria are hemimetabolous insects. both tenebrionidae and blattaria have a non-divergent usp
 <cit> . the  <dig> drosophilidae species used in this study span an evolutionary time of  <dig>  to  <dig> million years
 <cit> . the most ancient divergence time for the five true tribolium species used in our analysis was estimated between  <dig> and  <dig> million years ago
 <cit> . blattaria species may have diverged between  <dig> and  <dig> million years ago
 <cit> .
 <cit> , diptera
 <cit> , lepidoptera
 <cit> , tenebrionidae
 <cit> , blattaria
 <cit>  and insects
 <cit> . dots indicate the species used for detection of selection in usp along different branches. black dots: drosophilidae; blue dots: diptera ; green dots: divergence between antliophora and amphiesmenoptera ; red dots: emergence of mecopterida ; white dots: lepidoptera; grey dots: tenebrionidae; yellow dots: blattaria.

in order to compare the variable rates of usp evolution between these different insect groups, we used the gene cox <dig>  which encodes the mitochondrial cytochrome oxidase subunit  <dig>  this gene is known to evolve under a relatively uniform rate in most taxa of insects
 <cit> . overall, our data set consists of protein sequences for both usp and cox <dig> in  <dig> species of drosophilidae, tenebrionidae and blattaria . among these  <dig> sequences,  <dig> are new and were isolated for this study. the alignment of these proteins provides  <dig> positions  for usp lbd and  <dig> positions  for cox <dig>  as expected, the cox <dig> protein sequences are very well conserved between these three insect groups , whereas the usp lbd of drosophilidae is highly divergent from the other species .

the phylogenies that we obtained using alignments of concatenated sequences  of usp and cox <dig> proteins are similar to those already published . for example, we observed that tribolium brevicornis is not closely related to the other tribolium species, as shown by angelini et al. <cit> , who suggest that it should be included into the genus aphanotus. we also observed the paraphyly of periplaneta spp., with blatta orientalis located within this clade, as shown by other authors
 <cit> .

the negative selection on the usp gene is weaker in mecopterida families
we estimated non-synonymous/synonymous rate ratios  by whole tree analyses using maximum-likelihood methods and codon-based substitution models
 <cit>  . we analysed three groups of species that are characterized by a derived usp  and two groups with a less modified usp  .

if we consider each group separately, the best model indicates that the main force acting on usp sequences is negative selection: dn/ds is less than  <dig>  for at least 75% of the sites . we could detect rare neutral codons in blattaria , but not in the other groups . likelihood ratio tests contrasting positive selection models with nearly neutral models  never conclude that positive selection  is acting on usp within these groups . this notably explains the difficulty to adjust parameters of models m2a and m <dig>  as shown by standard errors associated to the estimation of p <dig>  ω <dig> and ωs . the highly constrained pattern also gives rise to an imprecise estimation  of the two shape parameters of the β distribution for the two non-mecopterida groups . this is coherent with the very weak improvement of the likelihood between m1a and m7/m <dig> models for these two groups. kolmogorov-smirnov tests indicate significant differences in the distribution of site-specific dn/ds between insect groups . as an illustration, the percentage of codons with a dn/ds above  <dig>  is 20% in mecopterida and only 5% in non-mecopterida groups . since saturation was detected among diptera usp, we performed a re-analysis of alignments simulated according to the estimated characteristics of the diptera dataset . the results showed a good accuracy in the estimate of the β distribution function , indicating that the detection of this pattern is robust to the saturation in diptera sequences. the confidence interval for the proportion of codons with dn/ds> <dig>  was less than ± 1%. in the same way, we confirmed that the weak precision in the estimation of the β distribution parameters for the tenebrionidae and blattaria does not alter their contrasted pattern with mecopterida groups . the mecopterida specific regions are among the less constrained of usp because, when they are removed from the analysis, the mecopterida curves shift slightly towards tenebrionidae and blattaria curves . to compare the evolutionary dynamics of usp between groups, we used cox <dig> as a reference  . in drosophilidae, the mean rate of non-synonymous substitutions of usp is  <dig>  times higher than for cox <dig>  by contrast, usp accumulates less non-synonymous substitutions than cox <dig> in the non-mecopterida families . overall, by employing cox <dig> as a relative molecular clock, the drosophilidae usp gene evolved  <dig>  times faster than the tenebrionidae usp and  <dig>  times faster than the blattaria homolog.

lnl: log likelihood. np: number of parameters. ω <dig>  ω <dig>  ω2: non-synonymous/synonymous rate ratio that characterize a negative, a neutral, and a positive selection regime, respectively . p and q: shape parameters of a β function describing the distribution of non-synonymous/synonymous rate ratios. ωs: ratio affecting a ps proportion of sites under positive selection in model m <dig>  lrt: likelihood ratio test.

these results suggest that negative selection on usp is relaxed in mecopterida families, when compared to non-mecopterida families.

relaxation of negative selection on the external surface of usp protein
in order to identify precisely the sites that present contrasted patterns in selective constraints between these groups, we projected the site-specific dn/ds onto the available 3d structures of usp protein . three functional domains of usp are highly constrained in every group of insects: the dbd , the lbp and the dimerisation interface. by contrast, other parts of the protein have experienced more relaxed evolutionary pressure, especially among the mecopterida families.

the lbd of non-mecopterida usps are homogeneously constrained. only  <dig> sites , located on the external surface of the lbd, have an estimated dn/ds ≥  <dig>  in tenebrionidae and blattaria. the uncertainty in parameter estimates  for these two groups may hinder the computation of site-specific rates, but these sites are not homologous in these two insect groups, except one position in helix h <dig>  .

the lbd of mecopterida usps shows very different patterns, with  <dig> sites  having a dn/ds ≥  <dig> . overall, the relaxation of evolution is more pronounced in lepidoptera than in diptera. only one-third of these sites are similar between these two insect orders. most of the relaxed residues are scattered on the surface of the lbd , a few of them being located in regions with a known or putative function. for instance, the hinge d domain and the following helix h <dig> of the lbd exhibit a high proportion of relaxed positions in diptera and lepidoptera , when compared to tenebrionidae and blattaria  . this region is known to have an allosteric effect on the corepressor-binding surface of rxr and other nuclear receptors
 <cit> . a cluster of seven relaxed positions is shared by both groups of insects in helix h4-h <dig>  which is included into the putative coactivation surface . in helix h <dig>  the lepidoptera sequences are totally divergent from all other usp-rxr proteins. contrary to ecr, the helix h <dig> of usp has no transactivation activity because it adopts a structure similar to the antagonist conformation observed for rxr
 <cit> . in drosophila and in heliothis, helix h <dig> is locked into this position by the mecopterida specific domain present in the loop l1- <dig>  between helices h <dig> and h <dig>  interestingly, several residues of this specific insertion are evolutionary relaxed in diptera, and even more in lepidoptera . a similar pattern of relaxation seems to occur in the loop between helix h <dig> and the first beta turn , where there is a second mecopterida specific insertion of 20– <dig> amino acids. this divergent region, only partly stabilized in the crystal structures of heliothis and drosophila, is possibly implicated in contacts with ecr
 <cit> . by contrast, the residues that constitute the heterodimerisation interface are constrained in diptera and lepidoptera.

these results show that the main feature of the recent evolution of usp is a relaxation of purifying selection in mecopterida families. the lbp and the dimerisation interface, which underwent important mecopterida specific changes in structure and function
 <cit> , are highly constrained at this time scale and positive selection was not detected. by contrast, an evolutionary relaxation might have affected external surfaces involved in protein-protein interactions between usp and its coregulators.

positive selection on the usp gene during the emergence of mecopterida
since usp lbd underwent important modifications in mecopterida, we wondered whether some of these changes involved functional shifts during the emergence of this group. assuming that evolutionary pressure is changing over time, we used branch-site models
 <cit>  to detect potential site-specific changes in selective constraints  along three successive branches of mecopterida radiation. branch a is the stem lineage of mecopterida, branch b is the subdivision between amphiesmenoptera and antliophora and branch c is the subdivision of diptera into the suborders brachycera and nematocera .

in order to assess whether relaxation or positive selection occurred along these branches, we applied tests  <dig> and  <dig> from zhang et al. <cit> . while test  <dig> is significant for all the three branches, test  <dig>  a direct conservative test of positive selection, is significant only for the two most ancient branches a and b . it appears therefore that positive selection has occurred on specific sites at the origin of the mecopterida clade  and during the divergence between amphiesmenoptera and antliophora . subsequently, some sites  evolved neutrally before becoming under purifying selection within dipteran suborders . since the specificity of these tests could be affected by long evolutionary distances, false positive rates were computed, as a control, from the re-analysis of alignments simulated with evolver in paml
 <cit> . these rates were less than 1% for test  <dig> for the three datasets. for test  <dig>  we obtained false positive rates of 5% for branch a and 2% for branch b. therefore, our detection of positive selection is not significantly biased by saturation of synonymous sites during the large evolutionary times considered in this analysis. the initial episode of positive selection was dramatic, if we consider the percentage of sites involved and the high values of dn/ds for the site class under positive selection . note that the value of  <dig> computed for ω <dig> along the stem lineage of mecopterida  indicates the absence of predicted synonymous substitutions for this short branch , so the dn/ds ratio  is undefined.

lnl: log likelihood. np: number of parameters.

the sites that experienced a functional shift along the three branches were identified by computing the probability for each site to belong to the site-class that experienced positive selection  or neutral evolution , before becoming under negative selection in extant groups . the projection of these posterior probabilities onto the 3d structure of the lbd of drosophila usp reveals that most of these sites under positive selection, or relaxation, are on the external surface of the lbd, notably on branch a. there is no known function for the majority of these sites. a minority of the positively selected amino acids are located on two functional domains of the lbd that are the lbp and the heterodimerisation interface: 36% on branch a, 15% on branch b and 21% on branch c. among the residues with a known function, there is a high fraction which is positively selected or relaxed on branch a , and less for branch b  and branch c .

the large lbp of mecopterida usp is composed of two parts: a channel extending inside from the opening and a deeper pocket, which is similar to the lbp of rxr. the tail of the phospholipid is buried inside this pocket, while its phosphate head group is at the entrance. the amino acids of the channel, from where the ligand penetrates inside the lbp, are under negative selection in the three branches. by contrast, four residues that make contacts with the ligand at the bottom of the internal surface underwent strong positive selection during the emergence of mecopterida . this change of evolutionary pressure is correlated with the specific acquisition of a large lbp filled by phospholipids in mecopterida. in other insects, residues of the loops l <dig> and l <dig> fill the deep unliganded pocket. later, when amphiesmenoptera and antliophora diverged , the same positions became under purifying selection . subsequently, one of them , followed a new path of relaxed evolution during the subdivision of dipteran suborders  . all brachycera share a tyrosine at this position, while nematocera and other mecopterida have a leucine. in the homologous position of rxr there is a valine, which does not interact with the ligand.

a similar evolutionary dynamic is observed for the heterodimerisation interface, where several positions experienced positive selection during the emergence of mecopterida, followed by a phase of constrained evolution . importantly, among these positions, arginine arg <dig> in helix h <dig>  is known to be involved in the mecopterida specific enlargement of the heterodimerisation surface
 <cit> . on the same branch, positive selection is detected on three other residues that, albeit not interacting with ecr, are located within the canonical interaction surface. the arginine arg <dig> in helix h <dig> was predicted to form an electrostatic interaction with ecr in the ancestral mecopterida model
 <cit> . this is interesting because this bond is not seen in the current usp structure of drosophila or heliothis <cit> . another noticeable residue is the glutamine gln <dig> in helix h <dig>  which is variable in mecopterida. indeed, its homologous position in non-mecopterida usp and in vertebrate rxr is a strictly conserved lysine that interacts with the partner of heterodimerisation. this bond was observed in human and mouse rxr heterodimers as well as in the ecr-usp structure of the hemiptera bemisia tabaci white flies, but not in tribolium <cit> .

in conclusion, the structural analysis of the sites under selection shows that both the lbp and the dimerisation interface of usp lbd have experienced modifications of selective constraints during the emergence of mecopterida.

did biased gene conversion contribute to the early evolution of usp in mecopterida?
acceleration of substitution rates can result from other processes than selection, such as gc-biased gene conversion , which enrich the g+c content
 <cit> . we thus measured the g+c content of usp gene and found that it is higher in drosophilidae , when compared to tenebrionidae and blattaria . the highest average g+c content is at third codon positions, where the mecopterida g+c bias is stronger . as a result, the preference for codons ending with a g or a c in usp is higher in mecopterida than in non-mecopterida for most of the amino acids . therefore, the nucleotide composition of usp gene in mecopterida is biased. by contrast, the average cox <dig> g+c content are similar in the three families  and fall into the range of insect’s whole mitochondrial genomes 
 <cit> . since most of the synonymous sites are at the third codon position, such a bias in g+c content may affect the estimation of evolutionary rates of synonymous and non-synonymous substitutions of the usp gene. we therefore tested whether the increase of substitution rate observed in mecopterida usp could be due, at least in part, to gc-biased gene conversion along branch a. first, the two ancestral sequences for the internal nodes at each extremity of branch a were determined by marginal reconstruction performed with codeml within paml software . then, we identified the predicted substitutions along this branch by comparing these two ancestral sequences. we could not detect any bias in favour of at→gc substitutions . this means that the current bias in the g+c content of usp gene was probably acquired later during evolution. it is therefore unlikely that a phase of gc-biased gene conversion had a significant effect in the global increase of evolutionary rates observed in usp during the emergence of mecopterida.

discussion
the ecdysone receptor  has undergone a dramatic phase of mutations during the emergence of the mecopterida superorder
 <cit> . this acceleration of evolutionary rate is correlated with structural and functional changes of the lbp of usp and of the heterodimer interface between ecr and usp
 <cit> . these results suggested that the maintenance of the ecdysone pathway was achieved, at least in part, through molecular adaptation of the usp lbd. we thus tested the possibility that this domain was under positive selection during the emergence of mecopterida.

constraints and relaxation on usp lbd
overall, usp is highly constrained. the majority of the sites are under negative selection on all branches. similar conclusions have been obtained with other nuclear receptors, including rxr, the vertebrate homolog of usp
 <cit> . this result is compatible with the idea that usp could be a hub protein. indeed, proteins with a large number of interactions are usually under purifying selection because any substitution may have pleiotropic effects. at the same time, adaptations are allowed by relaxation in the interactive surfaces that establish transient interactions between protein domains
 <cit> . in the case of the lbd of usp, we detected a relaxation of negative selection within the mecopterida, relative to non-mecopterida insects. most of the relaxed sites, which are on the external surfaces of the protein, may be involved in protein-protein interactions between usp and its coregulators. it is therefore possible that the evolutionary plasticity observed on the surface of the mecopterida usp lbd reflects adaptability to its different partners. unfortunately, the network of protein-protein interactions is largely unknown for usp and experimental data are needed to go beyond these speculations. in fact, the complexity of this matter concern all nuclear receptors, for which the analysis of protein interactions are largely restricted to the dimerisation interface and to the small coregulatory groove
 <cit> . the use of original evolutionary methods can yield a better understanding of these interactive sites. for instance, difference evolutionary trace analysis has revealed a new functional site for steroid receptor located on a surface opposite to currently known protein-protein interaction
 <cit> .

regions of usp lbd under positive selection during mecopterida emergence
our previous results suggested that the main functional shifts affecting usp lbd of insects occurred during the emergence of mecopterida, approximately 280– <dig> million years ago . we therefore used branch-site models to detect changes in selective constraints along this branch. importantly, we also analysed two more recent branches within the mecopterida clade in order to decipher the successive state of evolutionary forces acting on usp lbd. indeed, the interpretation of changes in evolutionary rates must take into account all the biological complexity of the protein, such as the dynamic of the process or the distinction between functional modules. using this approach, we were able to detect positive selection at amino acids located on the lbp and on the heterodimerisation interface of usp lbd.

the episode of positive selection is correlated with the acquisition of a large lbp filled by fatty acids. in the basal insect locusta migratoria , usp is able to bind 9-cis retinoic acid, like homologous vertebrate rxr, which natural ligands are fatty acids
 <cit> . in bemisia  and tribolium , usp is unable to be activated by rxr ligands and acts as a constitutively silent partner of ecr. in fact, in these species, residues of the loops l <dig> and l <dig> fill the deep unliganded pocket and, therefore, usp lacks a proper lbp
 <cit> . all the four residues that underwent strong positive selection during the emergence of mecopterida are located at the bottom of the deep pocket, which is similar to the lbp of rxr. these residues make contacts with the tails of the phospholipid in mecopterida structures. later during the diversification of mecopterida, the same positions became under purifying selection. these results suggest that the mecopterida pocket was positively selected for a new function, which then became highly constrained and remained largely unchanged until now. what was this innovation? we can hypothesize that the presence of phospholipids allowed the stabilisation of the new mecopterida lbd. indeed, this structure is characterised by the acquisition of a new loop l1- <dig> that locks the lbd in a conformation similar to the one seen for antagonist-bound nuclear receptors
 <cit> . in that perspective, phospholipids would be analogous to pharmacological chaperone, which are small molecules that help to maintain the correct folding of mutant proteins
 <cit> . this interpretation is in agreement with a previous proposition, based on an information-theoretic approach, according to which the ligand-contacting residues perform a dual role: a functional role in ligand recognition and a structural role as core residues
 <cit> . thus, the structure of the lbp of usp was highly plastic during insect evolution, adopting three of the four states that are known for nuclear receptors: nutritional sensor , real orphan  and receptor with a constitutive activity . the first evolutionary transition involved a loss of function, from a sensor to an orphan receptor
 <cit> . our results highlight the second transition, from an orphan receptor to a constitutive receptor, which could be seen as a gain of function.

we also detected positive selection in the dimerisation interface during the emergence of mecopterida. this episode of positive selection is correlated with a loss of ability to homodimerise for both ecr and usp. non-mecopterida ecrs are able to homodimerise and are active without usp
 <cit> . by contrast, even in presence of their ligand, the ecr lbd monomers of heliothis and drosophila are very unstable in solution and need usp for solubilisation and stabilisation
 <cit> . similarly, non-mecopterida usps are able to form homodimers, whereas mecopterida usps are not able to do so
 <cit> . it seems therefore that mecopterida usp acts as a chaperone-like partner for ecr stabilisation. we have shown previously that, during the emergence of mecopterida, a relaxation of evolutionary constraints occurred at a site that affects homodimerisation but not heterodimerisation
 <cit> . this residue is the glutamine gln <dig> in helix h <dig>  for which we provide here evidence for strong positive selection on the branch leading to mecopterida . this result confirms our first hypothesis proposing that substitution of this site located in the core of the dimerisation surface may have induced a loss of homodimerisation for usp. positive selection was found at those three sites in an independent study
 <cit> .

importantly, if the homodimerisation ability has been lost in mecopterida, on the contrary, the heterodimerisation between ecr and usp has been conserved by all arthropods and was even reinforced in mecopterida. how can we explain the maintenance of the functional interaction between ecr and usp, despite the challenging burst of mutations that occurred in the stem lineage of mecopterida? the heterodimerisation between ecr and usp depends largely on a core of residues localised in helices h <dig> and h <dig> of the lbds. while the sequence of this interface is well conserved in all insects, in mecopterida, the loop l8- <dig> of usp interacts with the helix h <dig> of ecr, creating a symmetric and larger heterodimerisation surface
 <cit> . this novel surface is a consequence of the mecopterida specific structural divergences of usp, where the loop l1- <dig> and the presence of a phospholipid, which is in tight contact with l1- <dig> and h <dig>  induce a 15°-torsion of a sub-domain of usp lbd towards ecr. if the maintenance of heterodimerisation depends on this new surface, then positive selection should be detected at this specific enlargement on the stem lineage of mecopterida. we have confirmed this prediction for two sites of usp: arg <dig> in helix h <dig> and arg <dig> in helix h <dig> . the arginine arg <dig> is involved in the mecopterida specific enlargement of the heterodimerisation surface, while the arg <dig> was predicted to form an electrostatic interaction with ecr in the ancestral mecopterida model
 <cit> . in addition, we detected positive selection at the site asp <dig>  which is located in the core interface and makes contacts with two residues of the helix h <dig> of ecr. it is thus possible that this substitution played a role in the reinforcement of the ecr-usp heterodimerisation. if we assume that the reinforcement of ecr-usp heterodimerisation is a selectively favoured phenotype, then every amino acid replacement causing a slight increase in interaction would be selectively favoured. however, once binding is optimum, no further changes will be favoured. thus, a phase of purifying selection would follow an initial phase of positive selection. we have confirmed this expectation by showing that the same four positions described above became under purifying selection during the diversification of mecopterida. in conclusion, the dimerisation interface of usp has experienced modifications of selective constraints during the emergence of mecopterida, followed by a phase of constrained evolution.

although our results suggested that coevolution has maintained the interaction between ecr and usp, we could not detect any significant modification of evolutionary constraints in the dimerisation surface of ecr
 <cit> . recent random-sites model analyses confirmed the absence of positive selection in ecr
 <cit> . it seems therefore that the helix h <dig> of ecr, which is implicated in the new mecopterida interface with usp, was able to adapt to its changing partner in a manner independent of selection. in order to explain the evolution of this domain, it may be necessary to explore the role of molecular drive, which includes all the dna turnover mechanisms that change the genetic composition of a population, independently of selection and drift
 <cit> . there is indeed a renewed interest in the evolutionary forces, other than natural selection or drift, that can induce co-evolution between functionally interacting genetic systems in order to maintain essential functions
 <cit> . however, interestingly, six residues with elevated ω were identified in the core interface of mecopterida ecr, suggesting that the dimerisation core of ecr, like that of usp/rxr, may also be under relaxed constraint in the mecopterida clade
 <cit> .

within the family of nuclear receptors, evidence for positive selection has been reported in a few other cases, such as pxr , car  and erα 
 <cit> . for example, positive selection was detected at amino acids involved in ligand binding of the frog pxrs, which have lost broad specificity for ligands and gained efficient activation by endogenous amphibian-specific benzoates
 <cit> . a recent study has shown that rxr, the usp homolog, was under positive selection immediately following the first round  and second round  of whole genome duplications in vertebrates
 <cit> . most of the positive selected sites were located either in the lbd or in the n-terminal region, which contain activation domains  and phosphorylation sites that control rxr expression. during this evolutionary transition, it seems that positive selection did not affect the lbp or the dimerisation interface of rxr . the authors thus conclude: “the presence of positive selection/accelerated rates in the paralogs, coupled with the evidences of altered expression of paralogous genes explains the preservation of the additional rxr copies following genome duplication”
 <cit> . it would be interesting to analyse the evolution of the n-terminal region of usp and ecr, but the structure and the function of these highly divergent domains are largely unknown in insects.

episodic evolution of usp
in conclusion, our results allow to define three phases of evolution for the lbd of usp in mecopterida. we can now propose a model to explain this episodic mode of evolution. we have previously proposed that the ancestral state of usp lbd was characterised by the absence of a lbp and the ability to form homodimers as well as heterodimers with ecr
 <cit> . during the emergence of mecopterida, an unexplained acceleration of evolutionary rate was probably responsible for the insertion of  <dig> residues in the loop l1- <dig>  this insertion is the primordial event in our hypothesis, because it changed the structure of the lbd in two ways. first, it increased the size of the heterodimer interface. second, it restored a lbp. however, this new pocket is very large and filled with phospholipids, which is unusual for a nuclear receptor of the nr2b group. these modifications allowed the exploration of new functions, as revealed by the detection of positive selection at these two regions during the first phase of mecopterida evolution. the new lbp probably allowed the maintenance of a correct folding for the whole lbd, while the new extended surface of dimerisation was associated with a reinforcement of the obligatory partnership between ecr and usp, at the expense of homodimerisation. therefore, the correlation between positive selection and functional innovations suggests that the usp lbd underwent molecular adaptation during the emergence of mecopterida. one limit of this kind of analysis is the difficulty to distinguish between positive selection and relaxation of negative selection
 <cit> . however, the availability of crystal structures and functional data provide a priori biological hypotheses regarding the amino acids upon which positive selection is expected. once the new functions are effective, no further changes will be favoured. thus, the initial phase of positive selection should be followed by a second phase of purifying selection. in agreement with this hypothesis, we found that the new functional domains were under strong negative selection during the subdivision of mecopterida between amphiesmenoptera and antliophora. this second phase of evolution explains the conservation of the new surfaces among mecopterida species. finally, we could characterise a third phase of evolution during the subdivision of diptera into brachycera and nematocera. on this branch, usp lbd evolved mainly under a relaxation of negative selection, with neutrality at some sites. however, the new mecopterida functional domains remained highly constrained . the alternation of selective and conservative periods during the transformation of usp lbd in insects provides an example of the episodic model of protein evolution, a major mechanism recently revealed by application of new methods at the genomic level
 <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
the function of the heterodimer ecr-usp in the ecdysone response is conserved in all insects, including mecopterida
 <cit> . therefore, although we cannot exclude the possibility that other biological functions have changed with usp, it seems that adaptation of this protein allowed maintenance rather than innovation. it is an important property of living organisms to remain constant in the face of change. the concept of canalisation describes the capacity of a population to produce the same phenotype despite genetic or environmental variability. at the molecular level, the capacity of a protein to restore functionality after a mutational event could be qualified as “molecular resilience”. in the case of usp, the insertion in the loop l1- <dig> was likely the initial “trauma”, induced by a phase of increased mutation rate at the origin of mecopterida. resilience was probably dependent on the existence of pre-existing functionally neutral mutations that accumulated in the lbd of usp. once the insertion occurred, only a specific combination of these permissive mutations became adaptive, because they could compensate for the structural changes induced by the insertion. epistatic contacts between and within proteins are essential to allow a genetic network to assimilate new genotypes while remaining functional, because any loss of function could be deleterious
 <cit> . like canalisation, molecular resilience would therefore allow evolvability by accumulation of genetic diversity without modification of the phenotype. in that perspective, the molecular adaptation of usp could be seen as a process of resilience for the ecdysone receptor.

