BACKGROUND
pigeon circovirus , is a non-enveloped virus and is considered to be the viral agent central to the development of young pigeon disease syndrome . ypds syndrome is a multifactorial disease that includes various unspecific clinical signs such as poor racing performance, weight loss, lethargy, anorexia, respiratory distress and diarrhea  <cit> . at present, picv is classified as a tentative member of circovirus family based on its particle size, its associated histopathology and the fact that it shares low-level dna homology with psittacine beak and feather disease virus   <cit> . according to the previous reports on the genomic characterization of picv, picv has been characterized as having an ambisense single-stranded dna genome of about  <dig>  kb  <cit> . there are five open reading frames  present on the ss-dna; v <dig>  c <dig>  c <dig> and c4; these partially overlap within the picv genome. orf c <dig> encodes a 30 kda protein, which is the putative major component responsible for assembly of the viral capsid protein   <cit> . orf v <dig> encodes a non-structural protein with putative replication-associated protein  activity  <cit> . the orfs c <dig>  c <dig> and c <dig> encodes hypothetical proteins, the biological functions of which remain unclear. to date, some conventional methods have been used to detect the picv infection. these include electron microscopy, histological observation and molecular diagnosis including polymerase chain reaction , in situ hybridization and nucleic acid-based dot blot hybridization  <cit> . enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay  is a convenient and popular assay for diagnosis of virus infections and allows the investigator to target virus-specific antibodies in the sera of the host. nevertheless, very few elisa assay systems for detecting picv infection have been established successfully. development of an elisa system relies on the availability of viral antigens that are then used as elisa coating antigen or for antibody production. however, the propagation of picv in cell culture has never been described, and harvesting viral antigen from pigeons is a tedious, ineffective and time-consuming process that results in a low yield. thus, using a recombinant dna method to express a picv viral antigen has been suggested to be a better strategy for the development of an elisa assay system. in previously reports, only two expression systems have been used to produce picv cap protein; these were a e. coli expression system and a baculovirus-insect cell expression system  <cit> . however, the production of the recombinant full-length cap protein was found to be hampered in e. coli due to a failure to express the first  <dig> amino acid residues at the n-terminus of the cap protein, the coding sequence of which includes a significant number of codons that are rarely used in e. coli. moreover, in above system, most of the expressed recombinant cap protein was found to be in the form of inclusion bodies  <cit> . the information available on the baculovirus-insect cell expression system for cap protein expression in sf <dig> does not provide information on productivity on a large scale that would allow further evaluation. in the above context, the e. coli expression system is still easier to carry out and is more cost-effective when applied to viral antigen production than the baculovirus-insect cell system, although the e. coli system does have some limitations.

to develop the cap protein as coating antigen of an elisa system, the above mentioned limitations associated with using an e. coli expression system need to be overcome; these include making sure that the full-length of the cap protein is expressed in e. coli and using an expression system in which the majority of cap protein is produced in a soluble form rather than as inclusion bodies. if successful, this would not only allow the efficient purification of capsid protein on a scale that would allow an investigation of picv structural biology but also the purified recombinant protein would be potentially useful when developing diagnostic kits for the clinical detection of picv infection.

in this study, the picv cap gene was fused to a series of different fusion tags in order to improve recombinant cap  protein expression. the rcap was then expressed attached to three different expression tags in order to evaluate rcap fusion protein expression and production across a number of different e. coli strains. three expression vectors were used, one harboring a glutathione-s-transferase  tag, another harboring a 6xhis tag and finally, a third harboring a thioredoxin-6xhis ; these were investigated to explore the effect of these very different fusion tags on the expression of rcap protein across various e. coli strains. in addition, optimizations of codon usage for various amino acids within the cap gene were also carried out to give the rcapopt sequence and then the effect of these changes on expression of rcapopt in the various e. coli strains was assessed. finally, purified rcapopt protein was examined in order to determine its antigenicity and therefore its usefulness in further serodiagnostic applications. to the best of our knowledge, the yield of e. coli expressed full-length rcapopt in this study after codon optimization of the cap gene is the highest known to date.

RESULTS
the fusion tags and the strain preference falicitates the expression level of recombinant picv capsid protein in e. coli
the various fusion tags and the various e. coli strains had a range of effects on the expression level of the two recombinant picv capsid proteins in e. coli allowing optimization of the protein purification protocol. to investigate the expression of picv capsid protein  using the prokaryotic expression system, the cap gene sequence was individually fused with three different tag sequences, his-tag , glutathione-s-transferase tag  and thioredoxin-his  in three distinct expression vectors . all above fusion tags were fused with recombinant rcap at its n-terminus. the resultant constructs, phis-cap, pgst-cap and ptrx-his-cap were then individually transformed into three distinct e. coli strains in order to address the effect of the fusion tags on the protein expression levels of the cap gene.

as illustrated in figure  <dig>  when e. coli bl <dig> harboring phis-cap, pgst-cap and ptrx-his-cap were examined, there was no significant amount of rcap fusion protein present in the whole cell lysates after iptg induction for 4 hrs . ). proteins at the predicted molecular weights, 32 kda his-rcap, 58 kda gst-rcap and 48 kda trx-his-rcap, were not detected using anti-his monoclonal antibody and anti-gst antibody as appropriate .

as a result of the above findings, expression of the picv rcap fusion protein in e. coli was carried out in two other e. coli strains, bl21-plyss and bl21-ripl and their protein expression levels compared to that of e. coli bl <dig>  the expression patterns of the rcap fusion protein in e. coli bl21-plyss and in e. coli bl21-ripl containing phis-cap, pgst-cap, and ptrx-his-cap are shown in figures 2a, b, c, respectively,. the expression patterns for the rcap fusion protein were relatively poor in bl21-plyss. no matter whether the his-rcap or gst-rcap protein was being expressed, the protein products were almost undetectable. in contrast, the 48 kda specific protein band for trx-his-rcap could be detected using anti-his monoclonal antibody when the bl21plyss strain containing ptrx-his-cap was induced with iptg . in addition, when pgst-cap and ptrx-his-cap were transformed into bl21-ripl strain, the gst-rcap and trx-his-rcap protein could be successfully expressed and detected by both sds-page and western-blot analysis . overall, expression level of the trx-his-rcap protein, was significant higher than that of the gst-rcap protein in bl21-ripl strain. however, in the bl21-ripl strain containing the phis-cap plasmid, expression of his-rcap was still almost undetectable after iptg induction . thus the fusion tags gst and trx-his seem to be able to facilitate expression of picv rcap protein in e. coli and, moreover, the e. coli strain used also plays a crucial role in expression and seems to affect the further application of these strains in large-scale production.

optimization of the codon usage of the cap gene enhances of recombinant picv capsid protein expression in e. coli
based on the results shown in figure 2a, b and c, the expression levels of rcap were improved in e. coil when a trx-his tag or gst tag on the n-terminus of rcap protein was used. the best expression was obtained using the strain bl21-ripl, which harbors extra copies of trnaargu, prol, iley, leuw. this is commercial e. coli host strain used for the gene expression of recombinant proteins that contain e. coli’s rare codons. the expression of trx-his-rcap protein in strain bl21-ripl showing an expression level was significant higher than when the bl <dig> and bl21-plyss strains were used , this suggested that optimization of the codon usage in the rcap protein might further improve the expression level of rcap.

as illustrated in figure 1b, the cap gene does contain a number of e. coli’s rare codons, which were detected when the sequence was examined by the genescript rare codon analysis tool . approximately 18% rare e. coli codons are presented in picv cap gene, and most of rare codons are basic amino acid residues, such as lysine  and arginine  and are presented near the 5’-end of the cap gene. using geneoptimizer software, the codons of the cap gene were optimized without altering the amino acid sequence of the protein to give a gene sequence that had the preferred codon usage of e. coli. as illustrated in figure 1b, this 819 bp dna fragment was named as capopt. three recombinant constructs were then created using the codon optimized cap gene sequence and then transformed into e. coli to explore expression levels . as shown as figure 2a, 2b and c, using sds-page and western-blot analysis, when e. coli bl <dig> or e. coli bl21-plyss were used as host to express the his-rcapopt or the gst-rcap protein, the expression proteins were almost undetectable after iptg induction  and panel 9– <dig> for bl21-plyss). however, when the recombinant e. coli bl <dig> and bl21-plyss strains harbored the pgst-rcapopt plasmid, rcapopt protein was produced at significant levels after iptg induction  and panel 9– <dig> for bl21-plyss to sds-page and western-blot, respectively). the quantitative yield for gst-rcapopt protein production using the bl21-plyss strain was  <dig>  ±  <dig>  µg/ml, which is higher than that of the gst-rcap protein at  <dig>  ±  <dig>  µg/ml when the latter protein is expressed in the bl21-ripl strain , respectively. moreover, the expression level of gst-rcapopt protein in bl21-plyss was even higher than that of bl <dig> . this yield of gst-rcapopt protein in the bl21-plyss was  <dig>  fold higher than that of the gst-rcapopt protein expressed in the bl <dig> strain . furthermore, the ptrx-his-rcopt plasmid in the bl <dig> and bl21-plyss strains also produced a very similar pattern to that of the different e. coli strains expressing gst-rcapopt protein  and panel 9– <dig> for bl21-plyss to sds-page and western-blot, respectively).

furthermore, the quantitative yield for the trx-his-rcapopt protein in the bl21-plyss strain after iptg induction for 4 h reached  <dig>  ±  <dig>  µg/ml at the same optical density  as the cultures, which represents a  <dig>  fold increase over trx-his-rcap in bl21-plyss by densitometric analysis . in addition, the yield of trx-his-rcapopt protein in bl21-plyss was higher than that of trx-his-rcapopt protein at  <dig>  ±  <dig>  µg/ml using bl <dig> strain and iptg induction . these findings confirm that the codon-optimized of the cap gene was able to improve protein expression significantly and allowed large amounts of intact rcapopt protein to be produced in e. coli bl <dig> or in bl21plyss with either the gst or the trx-his fusion tag.

chromatographic purification of recombinant picv capsid protein
to further characterize and purify the rcapopt protein, the solubility of expressed two rcapopt fusion proteins, gst-rcapopt and trx-his-rcapopt was explored. e. coli bl21plyss cells over-expressing either gst-rcapopt or trx-his-rcapopt was separated into the supernatant and pellet fractions after sonication of a suspension of harvested cells. the analysis by sds-page demonstrated that both gst-rcapopt and trx-his-rcapopt protein existed in soluble and insoluble forms . by densitometric analysis, the solubility of gst-rcapopt and trx-his-rcapopt protein were determined . approximately  <dig> % of the gst-rcapopt was soluble, which is higher than the  <dig> % solubility obtained for trx-his-rcapopt protein when bl21plyss cells were used. therefore, purification of the e. coli-expressed gst-rcapopt protein was then carried using a gst affinity column. after affinity chromatography combined with on-column cleavage by thrombin, the presence of collected soluble rcap protein was clearly detectable by sds-page analysis . the specific 30 kda band obtained from the column was approximately 90% pure , which indicates that rcap protein had been successful cleaved from gst fusion tag. to further improve the purity of the rcap, the gst-column purified rcap was subjected to cation exchange chromatography. as shown in figure 5b, the purity of rcap was significantly increased by this process. once the purification process had been completed, only cleaved gst fusion protein was present at almost homogeneity . when the chromatographic purified rcap protein was examined by maldi-tof, five peptides from rcap protein were identified after trypsin digestion and these demonstrated good alignment and a high score when compared to the predicted protein . the longest peptide fragment, plgvdittwkgfghtvpmydar consisted of  <dig> amino acid residues and, overall, the coverage was 27% of the published amino acid sequence of the picv cap protein  without any miss-match . these maldi-tof results confirmed that the purified 30 kda protein is picv cap protein and that the optimization of e. coli’s preferred codon usage within the cap gene had not altered the amino acid sequence .

application of recombinant picv capsid protein on sero-diagnosis
next we investigated whether the picv rcap protein expressed by e. coli has antigenic activity when against to picv-infected pigeon serum. as illustrated in figure  <dig>  western blot analysis using picv-infected pigeon serum from five picv-infected pigeon showed that the e. coli expressed picv rcap proteins had the correct antigenic characteristics in terms of the detection of a specific band of approximately 30 kda . in contrast, when picv-noninfected serum was used, there were no any corresponding bands present on the pvdf membrane . these findings supports e. coli expressed picv rcapopt protein as retaining the protein’s original antigenic activity when used against picv-infected pigeon serum.

discussion
picv infection is associated with development of young pigeon disease syndrome . at present, no vaccine is available to prevent picv infection. among circovirus, capsid proteins have been investigated as to their usefulness as immunogens for developing subunit vaccines  <cit> . the cap protein is the only capsid protein encoded by picv. generally speaking, picv cap protein is thought to be a promising target for the production of a recombinant vaccine or the development of a sero-diagnostic kit  <cit> . recently, a truncated form of picv cap protein has been shown to have been successful expressed in e. coli <cit> . however, expression of full-length recombinant picv cap protein using an e. coli system has remained very difficult.

e. coli remains the most attractive expression system when assessing the expression of a heterologous protein for many different purposes  <cit> . using an e. coli expression system to express a heterologous recombinant protein has several advantages; these include cost-effectiveness, ease of production, time-saving and others. in this study, we have successfully produced for the first time the full-length cap protein of picv using an e. coli expression system previously, it has been suggested that the cap protein is likely to be the sole structural protein of picv and this protein thus controls viral capsid assembly. thus, have purified full-length cap protein will help with the detailed study of picv's structure biology and it will also help with picv vaccine development and the production of a serodiagnostic kit for picv detection. the picv cap protein has been demonstrated to have antigenic activity and to be able to recognize by picv specific antibodies  <cit> . however, up to the present, a lack of highly purified full-length cap protein has hindered research in these areas. the main problem with the e. coli approach to producing picv cap protein has been poor protein expression and low protein solubility. previous studies have shown that the production of recombinant cap protein using an e. coli expression is relatively difficult and therefore this has become a bottle-neck  <cit> . this study surmounts this problem and will allow the efficient production of recombinant picv cap protein for future investigations.

a number of different strategies are available when improving protein expression and enhancing the protein solubility in e. coli. these factors include cultivation parameters, the fusing of an affinity tag of one type or another to the target protein and the optimization for e. coli of the codon usage of the foreign gene.  <cit> . this study explored how three different fusion tags, gst, his-tag and trx-his tag, affected cap protein expression; other fusion tag remain untested and may give further improvement in the future. both a gst and a trx-his fusion tag was found to significantly improve the yield of rcap protein compared to a 6 × his tag . in a previous study, liu et al. described how the expression of the cap protein of porcine circovirus  was successfully improved in e. coli by fusing the maltose-binding protein  to the target protein  <cit> , but the mechanism by which a fused mbp-8xhis tag is able to improve protein expression remains unclear. nonetheless, one possibility is that protein solubility was improved  <cit> . similarly, in our previous study, the addition of a gst tag to the cav vp <dig> protein also improved expression in e. coli significantly compared to a his ×  <dig> tag  <cit> . thus some fusion tags would seem to be able to help improve the solubility of e. coli expressed proteins more than other tags; this occurs perhaps by promoting the correct folding of their selected fusion partner  <cit> .

like porcine circovirus , beak and feather disease virus  and chicken anemia virus , picv is also rich in basic amino acid residues close to the n-terminus of the capsid protein. this region has been predicted to be a nuclear localizing sequence and a nucleic acid binding domain via the dnabinder software package . in previous studies, this n-terminal regions of capsid proteins have often caused problems with recombinant protein expression using a prokaryotic system  <cit> . deletion of the n-terminus of the capsid protein can often overcome this problem allowing the protein to be expressed successfully in e. coli; nonetheless, the usefulness of the truncated protein for diagnosis or for the development of a subunit vaccine is likely to be hampered. obviously only the intact capsid protein contains all of the epitopes for elicitation of virus neutralizing antibodies by the host. thus, it is best to express full-length picv capsid protein rather than a truncated form when developing a vaccine or a diagnostic kit.

the present study found that the e. coli strain bl21-ripl, when used to express trx-his-rcap, gave the highest level of protein expression, significantly higher than any other combination . this demonstrated that extra copies of trnaargu, prol, iley, leuw are able to improve picv cap protein expression usefully. in addition, it confirms that the e. coli rare codons with the cap gene have a significant effect on its expression. using the genescript rare codon analysis tool, it was found that approximately 18% of the codons in the picv cap gene are rare e. coli codons. it had been suggested than when a target gene contains >10% rare cordons of e. coli, protein expression efficiency is likely to be decreased  <cit> . rosenberg et al. also described how the efficiency of protein translation might be affected by an abundance of rare codons near the 5’-end of the gene. thus, when a codon-optimized cap gene was used, rcapopt, rather than rcap, expression of the cap protein was significantly enhanced in e. coli compared to supplying extra copies of the rare trna genes via the expression strain.

we also investigated which of two different recombinant e. coli strains, bl <dig> and bl21plyss, was able to improve protein production and yield. with both gst-capopt and trx-his-capopt, expression was better with bl <dig> and produced more cap protein than bl21-ripl . it is worth noted that bl21plyss has a higher growth rate than bl <dig> or bl21-ripl when expressing trx-his-capopt or trx-his-cap. . this discrepancy may involve either higher protein stability or trx-his-capopt having a less cytotoxic nature when present in bl21plyss. however, these effect were not present during the production of gst-capopt protein using e. coli bl21plyss at high expression levels. the superiority of trx-his-capopt expression in bl21plyss may be due to the presence in the strain of the plyss plasmid during protein induction. the cytotoxicity tolerance of bl21plyss might be associated with the expression of t <dig> lysozyme which attenuates transcription leakage by t <dig> rna polymerase. however, this phenomenon was not significant when gst-capopt was expressed grown using bl21plyss. gst-capopt was decreased when there was induction by iptg. one possibility is that the cytotoxicity of gst-capopt may be higher that that of trx-his-capopt in bl21plyss. in other words, a “protein burden” may not yet have been encountered when bl21plyss was used to express trx-his-capopt. overall, we concluded that bl21plyss is the preferred choice for expressing trx-his-capopt.

the solubility of recombinant cap protein is a potential problem and in this context the solubility of gst-capopt protein is superior to that of trx-his-capopt. furthermore, it is very easy to apply the protein to a gst-affinity column in order to carry out a protein purification. moreover, the cap protein contains basic amino acid residues rich at its n-terminus. such highly positive charge amino acids within the recombinant cap protein allow easy polishing by cation exchange column as part of down-stream processing. therefore, it seems likely that, a higher purity of cap protein can be obtained when an affinity column is combined with an ion-exchange chromatography during vaccine development.

in this study, positive picv-infected pigeon sera were used to evaluate the antigenic activity of the e. coli-expressed recombinant picv cap protein. all tested picv-infected pigeon sera were able to demonstrate that e. coli-expressed recombinant picv cap protein has the correct antigenic activities. this might be a result of the e. coli-expressed recombinant cap protein displaying all of the appropriate protein antigenic regions on the protein surface for recognition by the pigeons' antibodies. however, rcap protein when used against some pigeon sera did not show very strong antigenicity. this perhaps suggests that the titers of antibodies against picv cap protein have various levels in pigeons and such variation might explain in lower performance of antigenicity in certain birds.

CONCLUSIONS
in conclusion, using a prokaryotic system, the optimal expression of recombinant full-length picv cap protein was established successfully during this study. furthermore, by fusing the cap protein to an affinity tag, by using the appropriate preferred e. coli and by optimizing the codon usage of the polypeptide, it was possible to increase the yield of cap fusion protein significantly. in this context, a convenient and cost-effective strategy for increasing the expression of cap protein, which was used herein, was the direct engineering of the codons of the cap protein to fit the e. coli codon preferences. this approach paves the way for the large-scale efficient production of the picv cap protein. in the future, this will also allow recombinant cap protein to be used as a potential antigen for the development of a picv diagnostic test.

