BACKGROUND
invasive, even transformer, species  <cit>  of the genus reynoutria are plants that have many potential applications due to their high genotypic variability, their high growth potential and the quality of their biomass. because they efficiently cover waste substrates even under adverse environmental conditions, these species may be useful for revitalizing man-made landscape features such as ash deposits or coalmine spoil banks. restrictions must be set in place to prevent the spread of these plants into the surrounding landscapes. our aim was to test the efficiency with which the production of resveratrol, resveratrol derivatives and emodin could be stimulated in reynoutria × bohemica, as well as to evaluate the suitability of clayish coalmine spoil banks for pharmaceutical production. these substrates do not contain heavy metals and there is no danger of the spread of knotweed by water because coalmine spoil banks are far from running water bodies. there are waste areas composed of these substrates waiting for reclamation and revegetation in the czech republic, and the cultivation of knotweed for pharmaceutical use would require only a few acres of land in order to meet the market demands. to our knowledge, there have been no attempts to date to grow knotweed, namely r. × bohemica, for pharmaceutical use as a medicinal plant.

the spoil banks examined in this study were formed by clay deposited during the removal of materials overlaying brown coal, which has been mined extensively from large areas in northern and western bohemia. reclamation of these nitrogen-deficient clay deposits requires long periods of time; therefore, processes that promote the revegetation of these areas are of great interest. thus, we planted knotweed in an experimental arable field near coal mines that was composed of clay deposits, and aimed to track the growth rates and the production of stilbene and emodin under field conditions over a three year period. clay was also used as a substrate in our two-year pot experiment in combination with other reclamational substrates such as loess, compost and a slow-soluble natural fertilizer.

reynoutria × bohemica  <cit>  has been described in the czech republic as a hybrid species of r. japonica houtt. var. japonica and r. sachalinensis  nakai. this species has become widespread due to its high genetic diversity, eco-plasticity, and growth rate. because r. japonica is well known and has been used for stilbene production, we sought to determine whether the hybrid species could be used for a similar purpose.

the main aim of this study was to test the suitability of different substrates for knotweed growth and for the production of resveratrol, its derivatives, and emodin. resveratrol  is a naturally occurring plant polyphenol that is present in grapes, berries, and peanuts in significant levels. it has been shown to have antifungal  <cit> , antioxidant, antimutagenic, anti-inflammatory, chemopreventive  <cit> , and cytotoxic effects in different tumour cell lines  <cit>  including those of breast cancer  <cit> . knotweed is a plant that is traditionally used for the production of resveratrol in asia, and particularly in china. in europe, wine is the main source of this substance; a variety of stilbenes have been found in wine, including astringin  <cit> , cis- and trans-piceid, trans-resveratrol and astringin  <cit> , trans-astringin, trans-piceid, trans-resveratrol and cis-resveratrol  <cit> , trans-astringin, cis- and trans-piceid, and cis- and trans-resveratrol. in addition to studying the potential of "inland" sources of resveratrol in r. × bohemica, we also wanted to determine the content of other stilbenes in this plant and to assess the contributions of its different components to the production of these compounds. it has been suggested that resveratrol-glucosides  are degraded in the gut by bacteria and that resveratrol is then released  <cit> , thereby increasing the amounts of resveratrol available to the organism. measuring all of the stilbenes present is thus important, so we monitored the full range of resveratrol-containing substances, apart from emodin.

under harsh conditions, plants would be expected to possess advantageous features, such as mycorrhizal symbiosis, that would enable them to overcome the challenges of their environment. melilotus  lam) is a typical plant that is capable of surviving, and even thriving, on low-nitrogen spoil banks due to the presence of mycorrhiza and nitrogen-fixing rhizobia  <cit> . both the parental species of reynoutria × bohemica are, however, described as non-mycorrhizal species  <cit> . the hybrid is therefore also expected to be non-mycorrhizal. surprisingly, mycorrhizal colonisation was found in the roots of r. × bohemica sampled from an alnus glutinosa forest . an arbuscular type of mycorrhiza was also found in the roots of knotweed plants growing on the volcanic soils of mt. fuji, japan  <cit> . we therefore wanted to determine whether the experimental introduction of mycorrhizal fungi to knotweed roots with a nurse plant  <cit>  might stimulate the production of resveratrol and its derivatives.

we designed a pot experiment in which r. × bohemica was grown on different substrates with or without melilotus alba , a plant typically occupying spoil banks. we hypothesized that melilot could serve as a potential donor of mycorrhizal fungi and would also increase soil nitrogen content.

RESULTS
pot experiment
x = non-tested

ns = non-significant

the aboveground biomass of knotweed showed several significant differences between the substrates in  <dig> and  <dig> . the highest biomass was produced in plants grown on compost in both years. there was also a difference observed between plants grown on clay and claycs in  <dig>  similar results were obtained for knotweed grown with melilot. the growth of melilot was unrestricted in  <dig>  which resulted in competition between melilot and knotweed. the presence of melilot significantly decreased the biomass of knotweed grown on loess and compost. however, decreasing knotweed biomass was noted in all of the substrates . a significant decrease of knotweed biomass in the presence of melilot was also noted in  <dig> when melilot growth was restricted, but this was only observed for the two low-nutrient substrates, clay and loess .

there was a significant difference in the lateral branch number of knotweed plants between  <dig> and  <dig>  relatively high numbers of lateral branches  were found in  <dig>  and these numbers decreased significantly in  <dig> to  <dig> and  <dig> in plants grown on compost in the presence and absence of melilot, respectively. the numbers of lateral branches were reduced further to 0- <dig> in plants grown on the other substrates .

the belowground biomass of knotweed was only measured in  <dig>  belowground biomass was significantly lower in plants grown on clay, significantly higher in plants grown on clay enriched with nutrients, and was highest in plants grown on compost. the belowground biomass of plants grown on loess was intermediate between plants grown on clay and those grown on enriched clay. the presence of melilot decreased the underground biomass of knotweed grown on clay, clayc, and loess .

the percentage content of resveratrol in knotweed rhizomes and roots was higher in the presence of melilot in  <dig>  except in the case of knotweed grown on compost and clayc. similar but non-significant trends were observed in  <dig>  generally, the highest concentrations of resveratrol were found in plants grown on claycs in the presence of melilot. the lowest concentrations were found in plants grown on loess without melilot in  <dig> . piceid is a glucoside of resveratrol. the content of this piceid was also significantly higher in the presence of melilot for plants grown on clay and loess . these results suggest that melilot may stimulate the production of glucosides in knotweed grown on low-nutrient substrates.

resveratrol and its derivatives, including the glycosidic and aglyconic stilbenes, resveratrol, piceatannol, piceid and astringin, were significantly higher in plants grown in the presence of melilot on clay , loess  and claycs . in the absence of melilot, the highest concentration of resveratrol derivatives was found in plants grown on clayc and the lowest was found in plants grown on clay in both  <dig> and  <dig>  in  <dig>  higher concentrations of resveratrol derivatives were recorded for plants grown in the presence of melilot on loess, but in  <dig> the effect of substrate was not significant.

emodin was significantly higher in plants grown in the presence of melilot on compost in  <dig> and in plants grown on all substrates in  <dig> . in the absence of melilot, a high concentration of emodin was found in plants grown on clayc in  <dig>  a low concentration of emodin was found in plants grown on compost in  <dig>  in the presence of melilot, the effect of substrate was not significant in either year.

in the presence of melilot, the nitrogen concentration of knotweed rhizomes and roots only increased in plants grown on compost in  <dig>  while in  <dig>  it increased in plants grown on all substrates except for clayc. though nitrogen concentrations in knotweed grown without melilot were equal for plants grown on all substrates, nitrogen concentrations were highest in knotweed grown with melilot grown on the two low-nutrient substrates, loess and clay . the effect of melilot was more pronounced in the second year of the experiment, particularly with respect to plants grown on clay, loess and claycs. in terms of nitrogen production , the highest levels in knotweed roots and rhizomes were found when plants were grown on compost  and on claycs . these plants accumulated approximately one gram of nitrogen in their belowground structures, which is about twice as much as that observed in plants grown on clay and/or loess.

carbon concentration in knotweed roots and rhizomes was not affected by the presence of melilot, except in plants grown on loess in  <dig> . there was a positive correlation between carbon and the concentrations of resveratrol derivatives in  <dig>  both in the absence  and presence  of melilot, suggesting that a substantial proportion of organic carbon was bound in resveratrol and its derivatives.

phosphorus in knotweed rhizomes showed similar values in  <dig> as in  <dig>  the concentration of phosphorus in melilot decreased in both years in plants grown on loess and clayc, and in plants grown on clay in  <dig>  however, there was a distinct trend of reduced phosphorus levels in plants grown on all substrates. the highest concentration of phosphorus was found in knotweed grown on compost with and without melilot in both  <dig> and  <dig> . the same results were obtained using the production data  due to the positive correlation between phosphorus and knotweed biomass.

mycorrhizal colonisation was found only in the roots of knotweed grown with melilot; melilot appeared to serve as a mycorrhiza donor for knotweed. a positive correlation was observed between the mycorrhizal colonisation of knotweed and melilot biomass in both  <dig>  and  <dig> , fig. 8b. the mycorrhizal colonisation rate was higher  in  <dig>  when the growth of melilot was not suppressed, than in  <dig> . in  <dig>  the lowest colonisation rate was found in plants grown on compost, while in  <dig>  plants grown on clay with conavit had the lowest rate of colonisation . in both years, the highest colonisation rate was found in plants grown on nutrient-poor substrates, clay and loess. although the degree of mycorrhizal infection in melilot did not differ between the substrates , there was a higher mycorrhizal colonisation of knotweed due to melilot when knotweed was grown on low-nutrient substrates than when knotweed was grown on fertile substrates.

field experiment
the growth rate and production of stilbene and emodin in the same knotweed clone of r. × bohemica were examined under field conditions from  <dig> to  <dig> to investigate the potential for industrial cultivation. data serving to compare the biomass and production of stilbenes between the field and pot conditions are shown in figs.  <dig> and  <dig>  respectively. substrates in arable fields were most similar to the clay and loess substrates used in the pot experiment, both in terms of particle size and chemical composition. though the biomass values are comparable, the pot experiment yielded a relatively high belowground biomass in the second year of the experiment , whereas comparable values were not reached by plants grown in the field until the third year . the between-year reduction of knotweed aboveground biomass  observed in the pot experiment due to lateral branch reduction was not observed in the field. in the field, the following values were measured in september  <dig>   <dig> and  <dig>  respectively:  <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> g/plant .

the content of stilbenes shown in fig.  <dig> revealed a high seasonal transfer  of biomass, as the values of spring belowground biomass  were lower in both years than those of the preceding autumn. thus, it is clear that the best time to harvest the belowground biomass of knotweed for stilbenes is the autumn . the yield of stilbenes observed at the end of the third growing season  is promising.

discussion
our three-year basic field experiment enabled us to verify, under field conditions, some of the conclusions of the two-factor pot experiment. the production of both knotweed biomass and stilbenes was comparable in the pots and in the field. the longer period required to attain a substantial level biomass in the field was due to a long period of summer drought at the beginning of the field experiment. the field experiment, in which knotweed production reached  <dig>  t dry mass per hectare, confirmed that some of the vast coalmine spoil banks can be used for the targeted production of reynoutria × bohemica for pharmaceutical use.

in a well established knotweed stand in loughborough, uk,  <cit>  reported nearly  <dig> t/ha of belowground biomass for r. japonica in the upper  <dig> cm of the soil layer. our expectation is that extensive growing of more productive species of r. × bohemica on low-fertile soils with no irrigation would produce a biomass of up to  <dig> t/ha and would contain  <dig> kg of stilbenes.

in the pot experiment, we observed an interesting interaction between the two main factors, the substrate and the presence of melilot, which affected the production of resveratrol and its derivatives  and emodin. figs.  <dig> and  <dig> show that melilot increased the concentration of resveratrol derivatives and emodin in plants grown on low-nutrient substrates. in general, the effect of melilot appeared to be more pronounced than the effect of the substrates. this was revealed by smoothing the extreme values detected for the levels of resveratrol, its derivatives and those of emodin.

we found that a large amount of biomass was produced on compost with a high concentration of phosphorus and a low concentration of nitrogen , giving very low average n:p ratio . this suggests that the growth-limiting nutrient in compost is nitrogen, not phosphorus. this is in accordance with the evidence brought by  <cit>  indicating that n limitation might occur when the n:p ratio is as high as  <dig> . on the other hand, the nitrogen and phosphorus contents of all of the other  substrates were much lower  and biomass values of knotweed plants grown on these substrates were lower and had lower phosphorus values but similar nitrogen values as the plants grown on compost . the concentration of nitrogen was substantially higher  in the presence of melilot, while the concentration of phosphorus decreased . this suggests that on clay and loess, phosphorus limits or co-limits  <cit>  the growth of knotweed and that knotweed accumulates nitrogen but not phosphorus. the limitation of phosphorus reported by  <cit>  was due to a n:p ratio greater than  <dig>  while in  <cit>  this effect was due to a n:p ratio greater than  <dig> 

we provide the following explanation for the low nitrogen fixation observed only on compost. nitrogenase is known to be sensitive to oxygen. oxygen-free areas within the plant roots are thus created by the binding of oxygen to haemoglobin, which ensures anaerobic conditions necessary for nitrogen fixation http://www.biologie.uni-hamburg.de/b-online/e34/34b.htm.

compost is a well aerated substrate, especially in contrast to clay or loess. lower nitrogen fixation is thus expected in compost in comparison to clayish substrates. indeed, our data from the second year of the pot experiment showed large quantities of nitrogen accumulated by melilot on low-nutrient clay and loess substrates but not on compost . this finding agrees well with field observations that melilot grows well on heavy, clayish soils but not on organic substrates.

in contrast to nitrogen, phosphorus was predominantly taken up from soil substrates. knotweed deposited surplus amounts of phosphorus in rhizomes, especially when plants were grown on high-phosphorus compost.

a synthesis of our data on plant biomass, resveratrol and its derivatives, emodin, nitrogen and phosphorus, and the relationships between these variables, are shown in fig.  <dig> 

regardless of whether or not melilot was present, the biomass of roots and rhizomes was positively correlated with phosphorus content and negatively correlated with nitrogen content. nitrogen content was negatively correlated with phosphorus content. the phosphorus content of the plants was highly positively correlated with the phosphorus content of the substrate. however, the total nitrogen content of the substrate was not correlated with the nitrogen content of knotweed rhizomes and roots . in the absence of melilot, there were no relationships between either phosphorus or nitrogen and resveratrol or resveratrol derivatives. there was, however, a negative correlation between phosphorus and emodin and a positive correlation between nitrogen and emodin .

the presence of melilot increased the concentration of resveratrol and/or resveratrol derivatives , but did not increase the concentration of phosphorus in knotweed grown on low-phosphorus substrates . these resulted in a negative relationship between phosphorus and resveratrol and/or resveratrol derivatives. on the other hand, knotweed plants grown on a high-phosphorus substrate  exhibited a high phosphorus content but low contents of resveratrol and/or resveratrol derivatives. the presence of melilot also revealed a positive relationship between nitrogen and resveratrol or resveratrol derivatives because it increased both nitrogen content and the content of resveratrol or resveratrol-derivatives . moreover, we observed a significant relationship between melilot biomass in  <dig> and nitrogen content in the rhizomes and roots of knotweed in  <dig> . also, there was a difference in knotweed root and rhizome nitrogen content between  <dig> and  <dig> that was correlated  with the quantity of melilot biomass produced in  <dig>  these results provide evidence that the nitrogen deposited in knotweed roots and rhizomes was supplied by melilot and its rhizobia.

a significant negative relationship was found between resveratrol and both nitrogen  and phosphorus  in grapevine leaves  <cit> . also, vine berries with high nitrogen levels exhibited a decreased resveratrol content  <cit> . the negative relationship between resveratrol and phosphorus is in accordance with our findings. however, we found a positive relationship between resveratrol and nitrogen in the presence of melilot and no significant relationship in the absence of melilot. nitrogen fixation of rhizobia has a high energy cost because the fixation of  <dig> gram of nitrogen requires  <dig> g glucose under favourable conditions http://www.biologie.uni-hamburg.de/b-online/e34/34b.htm. if glucose is transported from knotweed to melilot to cover the energy spent on nitrogen fixation, less glucose would be available to form resveratrol glucosides in a knotweed-melilot-rhizobia system that fixed relatively high amounts of nitrogen. thus, relative to the quantity of resveratrol glucosides, more resveratrol would be observed. in our pot experiment, the ratio of resveratrol to resveratrol glucosides in knotweed was indeed significantly higher in the presence of melilot  than in the absence of melilot  for low-nutrient clay and loess.

not only the presence of melilot but also the efficiency of melilot to fix nitrogen  was significantly correlated  with the ratio of resveratrol to resveratrol glucoside . this clearly depicts the differences between all of the substrates. compost is revealed to be a substrate with a low efficiency of n fixation and, at the same time, with a higher proportion of resveratrol glucosides compared with its aglycones. the opposite is true for the clayish low-nutrient substrates, clay and loess. our data thus suggest the existence of glucose transport between the two plants, knotweed and melilot, and illustrate how costly nitrogen fixation is.

as for the transport of nitrogen, the following observations have been made: 1) the rhizobia bacteroid membrane is permeable to amino acids  <cit> ; 2) bacteroids cycle amino acids to the host plant http://www.biologie.uni-hamburg.de/b-online/e34/34b.htm; 3) roots exude both amino acids and sugars  <cit> ; and 4) fungal hyphae are able to transport nitrogen  <cit> , even amino acids  <cit> , and can transport sugars both passively and actively  <cit> . the plants in our system are clearly interconnected by fungal hyphae, as the melilot acts as a donor plant of mycorrhizal fungi; vesicules and hyphae, but no arbuscules, have been found in the roots of knotweed growing together with melilot, but none have been observed in the absence of melilot. transport of substances via hyphae is to be expected in our system. however, we did not examine the mechanisms of transport, which require further study.

CONCLUSIONS
a three year field experiment revealed that  <dig>  t of dry mass and  <dig>  kg of stilbenes are produced per hectare of knotweed. spoil bank soils are thus promising areas to grow knotweed, namely this hexaploid clone of r. × bohemica, as a medicinal plant for production of resveratrol and resveratrol-containing substances.

in a pot experiment, the highest knotweed biomass production was observed in plants grown on high-nutrient substrates, namely compost. however, the concentrations of organic constituents studied were higher in plants grown in the presence of melilot on clayish low-nutrient substrates. melilot significantly increased the contents of resveratrol-derivatives in knotweed roots and rhizomes in plants grown on clay, claycs and loess. on most substrates, the contents of nitrogen and emodin in the roots and rhizomes of knotweed were also increased by the presence of melilot. melilot showed a more pronounced effect than the substrate on production of resveratrol derivatives and emodin. relationships were found between nitrogen, phosphorus, emodin, and belowground knotweed biomass. the presence of melilot revealed additional relationships between these characteristics, and resveratrol and resveratrol derivatives. knotweed phosphorus was predominantly taken up from the substrate and the content of knotweed phosphorus was negatively correlated with resveratrol derivatives. on the other hand, knotweed nitrogen was primarily supplied by melilot and was found to be positively correlated with resveratrol derivatives.

the following generalised schemes for knotweed roots and rhizomes grown with melilot on low  and/or high  nutrient substrates can be thus formulated:  low biomass ↔ low phosphorus concentration in biomass ↔ high nitrogen concentration in biomass ↔ limitation or co-limitation of plant production by phosphorus ↔ high resveratrol, resveratrol derivatives and emodin production; and/or  high biomass ↔ high phosphorus concentration in biomass ↔ low nitrogen concentration in biomass ↔ limitation of plant production by nitrogen ↔ low resveratrol, resveratrol derivatives and emodin production.

the efficiency of nitrogen fixation  was significantly correlated  with the ratio of resveratrol to resveratrol glucoside. this indicates that knotweed contributed to the energy cost of nitrogen fixation for melilot and that there is an exchange of organic substances between these two plant species. there appeared to be differences between the substrates. compost was revealed to have a low efficiency of n fixation and, at the same time, showed a higher proportion of resveratrol glucosides compared with its aglycones. the opposite was true for the clayish low-nutrient substrates, clay and loess.

