BACKGROUND
resistance of animals to parasitic infections is influenced by various factors, among them genetic predisposition, environmental conditions, and nutritional state  <cit> . the role of nutrition in infectious diseases has been extensively investigated, as it is thought to affect establishment, pathogenesis, and duration of infections . the consensus is that under- or malnutrition impairs immunocompetence leading to increased susceptibility to and severity of infection. however, it becomes increasingly clear that disease patterns generated by the diet can be much more complex. host – parasite interactions can be affected by the foraging activity per se  <cit> , the amount of available food, as well as its quality  <cit> . while the search for food often establishes the contact between host and pathogen, food quantity and quality may play a role later in the infection process. infected hosts and their parasites compete for the same nutrients acquired by the host  <cit> ; i.e. nutrient supply could have direct effects on growth and reproduction of the host and simultaneously on the performance of the parasite. moreover, certain components of the host’s defence mechanisms could be affected by dietary nutrients and, in consequence, indirectly influence pathogen success  <cit> . in contrast to what is often seen in mammals, food quantity limitation of the invertebrate host seems to impair the parasite, resulting in reduced within-host proliferation and decreased transmission  <cit> .

although still in their early stage, the combined efforts of nutritional ecology and eco-immunological research have brought to light exciting aspects of food quality effects under parasite challenge in invertebrates. for example, ratios of dietary protein to carbohydrates or dietary carbon  to phosphorus  have been shown to modify the incidence and intensity of infections  <cit> . while dietary deficiencies in elements can have severe consequences for the consumer’s fitness  <cit>  there are other essential nutrients which have rarely been considered in research on the role of nutrient supply in pathophysiology of invertebrate hosts.

a dietary deficiency in polyunsaturated fatty acids  can severely constrain growth and reproduction of consumers  <cit> . under parasite challenge, pufa requirements may change and single pufas may be assigned to other roles. three of the c <dig> pufas – arachidonic acid , eicosapentaenoic acid , and dihomo-γ-linolenic acid  – are the substrates for a family of hormone-like substances called eicosanoids, which in vertebrates and invertebrates act on reproduction, the immune system, and ion transport physiology  <cit> . the importance of an adequate functioning of the arachidonic acid cascade for host defence mechanisms has been demonstrated in experiments in which animals were unable to clear an imposed bacterial infection when eicosanoid biosynthesis was blocked; this block could be bypassed by the injection of ara into the body cavity  <cit> .

in order to shed light upon the potential of dietary pufas to modulate infection in invertebrates we used the freshwater crustacean daphnia magna, which is well understood regarding its nutritional ecology. an adequate dietary supply with pufas has been shown to support proper growth and reproduction and to influence temperature acclimation  <cit> . furthermore, first evidence suggests that eicosanoids are active in daphnia physiology  <cit>  and that the eicosanoid biosynthesis machinery responds to the level of dietary precursor pufas  <cit> . to challenge our host, we chose pasteuria ramosa, a castrating endoparasitic bacterium, for combined life history – infection experiments. the d. magna – p. ramosa system has been thoroughly investigated  <cit>  and several aspects of the infection process and the inheritance of resistance have been elucidated  <cit> .

depending on the conditions experienced by mothers, eggs may be provisioned differentially with nutrients. thus, offspring performance can greatly be affected by stress- or resource-related maternal effects  <cit> . daphnia preferentially allocates pufas into their eggs  <cit> . hence, if dietary pufas have the potential to influence an infection when consumed directly, offspring of mothers differing in their dietary pufa provisioning might experience the same benefit or harm even if they do not have access to dietary c <dig> pufas.

here, we provided hosts  with food sources differing in their pufa content and composition and additionally manipulated a diet deficient in c <dig> pufas by ara and epa supplementation. subsequently, we reared offspring of mothers raised on the different food regimes exclusively on the c <dig> pufa-deficient food to be able to assess pufa-related maternal effects. animals of both generations were exposed to the parasite  and fitness consequences were recorded as host reproductive success, susceptibility to the parasite and within-host reproduction of the parasite.

RESULTS
elemental and biochemical composition of the food sources
the algal food organisms were characterized by low molar carbon to nitrogen  and carbon to phosphorus  ratios, i.e. high contents of nitrogen and phosphorus . as the c:p ratios of the algae were rather low, a p-limitation of the host could be excluded. moreover, c:p ratios within the range observed here  are unlikely to change the elemental conditions within the host in a way that the parasite’s establishment or growth is hampered  <cit> .

s. obliquus
n. limnetica
cryptomonas 
data are means of three replicates ± s.d. . food suspensions consisting of s. obliquus and pufa -containing liposomes contained either  <dig>  ±  <dig>  ara or  <dig>  ±  <dig>  epa , respectively.

fatty acid profiles differed considerably between the three algae, especially with regard to pufas . s. obliquus contained linoleic acid , high amounts of α-linolenic acid , and stearidonic acid , but no pufas with more than  <dig> c atoms. in contrast, the pufa composition of n. limnetica was characterized by the presence of dgla and ara as well as exceptionally high amounts of epa. c <dig> pufas were present only in very low concentrations or were not detectable at all in n. limnetica. cryptomonas sp. contained the three c <dig> pufas lin, ala, and sta and, additionally, considerable amounts of epa, albeit in much lower concentrations than n. limnetica, and small amounts of dha.

pufa profiles of d. magna eggs
eggs basically reflected the pufa composition of their mothers’ food source. in eggs produced on a s. obliquus diet no pufas of more than  <dig> c atoms could be detected . eggs of n. limnetica-consuming mothers contained considerable amounts of ara and epa. when mothers where raised on cryptomonas sp., their eggs contained epa and also low amounts of ara, although ara could not be detected in cryptomonas sp. supplementation of s. obliquus with control liposomes did not affect the pufa composition of the produced eggs. in contrast, low amounts of ara or epa were detected in eggs produced on ara- or epa-supplemented s. obliquus, indicating that these supplemented pufas were allocated into the eggs .

susceptibility of the host
the parasite’s success in establishing an infection in spore-exposed hosts varied with food quality, regardless of whether the food sources were consumed directly  or were experienced only as maternal provisioning in the second generation experiment, where all offspring were raised on s. obliquus, irrespective of the food regimes their mother were raised on . however, direct and maternal effects differed substantially in pattern and extent. when animals were raised directly on the different food sources, the infection efficiency dropped significantly on a n. limnetica diet. only ~40% of exposed animals were infected, which is a 6-fold decrease  compared to the s. obliquus diet . the other food treatments did not induce significant changes in infection efficiency . the second generation experiment revealed that the maternal food regime strongly influenced the infection success of the parasite. although all offspring fed exclusively on s. obliquus, the proportion of infected animals increased ~ 6-fold  when mothers were raised on diets containing c <dig> pufas, i.e. n. limnetica, cryptomonas sp., as well as ara- and epa-supplemented s. obliquus.

reproductive success of healthy and infected hosts
the cumulative numbers of viable offspring produced by healthy and p. ramosa-infected d. magna during the experiments were influenced by the quality of the different food source, both when these food sources were consumed directly  and when they were used as maternal food sources only . strikingly, direct and maternal effects generated very similar patterns. when directly consumed, long-chain pufas increased offspring production of control  animals up to the level obtained with n. limnetica as food. animals feeding on cryptomonas sp. produced the highest numbers of offspring. these effects were conveyed to the next generation. in the maternal effects experiment, control animals whose mothers were provided with ara or epa produced significantly more offspring than those from mothers without dietary ara or epa supply. this trans-generational food quality effect was even stronger when n. limnetica or cryptomonas sp. were used as maternal food source.

error distribution = quasi-poisson, link function = log.  d. magna raised under different food regimes .  d. magna raised under the same food regime , but mothers raised under different food regimes .

p. ramosa is a castrating parasite and thus greatly impacts the fitness of its host. in accordance with what was seen in earlier studies  <cit> , parasite-induced mortality was absent during the experimental period. however, infected animals of all treatments showed a distinct decrease in the production of viable offspring . total numbers of offspring produced by infected animals were comparable between both direct  and maternal  food regimes. supplementation of s. obliquus with ara or epa significantly increased offspring production of infected animals relative to the liposome control treatment in the mother generation , but this trend was not significant in infected animals of the next generation. in both generations, offspring numbers produced by infected animals were significantly higher when n. limnetica and cryptomonas sp. were provided as food source. when feeding on pufa-rich diets directly, infected hosts were able to produce offspring after the sterile phase caused by p. ramosa . this ‘castration relief’ was most prominent on a cryptomonas sp. diet where more than 50% of total offspring were produced after the sterile phase. this restart of reproduction could be observed also, albeit to a lower extent, on n. limnetica as well as ara- and epa-supplemented s. obliquus. in the second generation experiment, animals started to reproduce again only when their mothers were raised on either n. limnetica or cryptomonas sp.

spore production by the parasite
the life cycle of p. ramosa within its host ends with the formation of endospores in the body cavity and thus the spore load can be used as a proxy for the reproductive success of the parasite  <cit> . in the first generation experiment, when exposed directly to the different food regimes, the total number of endospores per individual host was affected by food quality . the spore load per individual was significantly higher in animals raised on, n. limnetica, cryptomonas sp., or epa-supplemented s. obliquus as compared to animals raised on unsupplemented s. obliquus. compared to the liposome control treatment, however, only animals raised on n. limnetica had significantly higher spore loads . in the second generation experiment, food quality mediated effects on the total number of endospores per individual were virtually absent .

discussion
the potential of dietary pufas to modulate vertebrate and invertebrate physiology has intrigued researchers for decades. however, their role in host – parasite interactions and the consequent ecological significance are yet to be revealed. by providing our invertebrate host with food sources differing in their pufa content and composition, we investigated direct and maternal effects of dietary pufas on the outcome of an infection with a bacterial parasite. our results show that dietary pufas influence host – parasite interactions both when provided with the diet and when derived from maternal resources.

pufa-mediated food quality affects the susceptibility to and the severity of infection
by using a compatible host – parasite pair we could attribute the observed food quality effects specifically to changes in the ability of the host to cope with the parasite after it entered the host  <cit> . whether the host can initially prevent the establishment of the parasite must therefore be associated with differences in within-host defence mechanisms. feeding on n. limnetica, which contains high concentrations of ara and epa, resulted in a 6-fold reduction of the host’s susceptibility to infection. as the clearance of the invading parasite is an event very early in the infection process it is rather unlikely that competition for resources plays a role . thus, the biochemical composition of n. limnetica, characterized by high ara and epa concentrations, is most likely responsible for the higher resistance to infection. ara and epa serve as precursors for eicosanoids, signalling molecules which are known to modulate invertebrate immune responses  <cit> . it has been shown that feeding on diets differing in their pufa composition can affect the expression of key enzymes within the eicosanoid pathway in daphnia <cit> , suggesting that the high dietary supply with pufas has supported a more pronounced immune response to the invading parasite resulting in increased resistance. transcriptomic and metabolomic studies will help to elucidate links between defence mechanisms and the eicosanoid pathway in daphnia. supplementation of s. obliquus with ara or epa did not lead to higher resistance, possibly because a higher concentration or the combination of both pufas is required to obtain a similar effect as observed with n. limnetica.

an alternative explanation for the increased resistance against p. ramosa on a n. limnetica diet could be directly related to effects of the exceptionally high amounts of epa present in this alga. although pufas are typically covalently bound to lipids in living tissue, free pufas might be released from phospholipids of n. limnetica as a consequence of cell damage during the feeding process of d. magna <cit> . free pufas are cytotoxic and bactericidal  <cit>  and thus may have directly impaired the invading bacterium. however, we did not find evidence for the release of free pufas out of n. limnetica after cell damage .

interestingly, once the parasite was able to establish an infection, parasite performance was not impaired by the pufa-rich n. limnetica diet. on the contrary, these hosts exhibited the highest spore load per animal. this implies that the immune system of d. magna is rather ineffective against p. ramosa once the parasite could overcome the initial defences. in general, animals reared on high pufa food by tendency contained more spores per individual than animals reared on the moderate food source s. obliquus, indicating that host-parasite interactions later during the infection are subject to resource competition and that increased food quality sustains increased within-host reproduction of the parasite. similar findings have been reported for food quantity and elemental food quality  <cit> . in accordance with previous studies  <cit> , the reproductive output of healthy hosts was significantly higher on food sources containing c <dig> pufas, including supplemented diets, than on c <dig> pufa-deficient food . similarly, infected hosts benefited from feeding on high quality algae and pufa supplementation. the higher reproductive output of infected animals was partially due to reproduction after the parasite-induced sterile phase . the ability to produce eggs late during the infection has been observed previously in the same combination of host and parasite clones  <cit> ; we show here that this castration relief is clearly affected by food quality.

p. ramosa inherently pursues the strategy to castrate its host. thus, resources that are normally invested in host reproduction and consequently lost to the parasite stay within the host and are available for parasite growth. whether pufas or host-produced pufa metabolites that are being retained by this re-allocation process are of special interest to the parasite cannot be conclusively stated at this point.

pufa-mediated maternal effects on unchallenged and infected hosts
in the second generation experiment we found that the quality of the maternal diet has far-reaching consequences for offspring fitness with and without parasite challenge. the pufa composition of the eggs mirrored that of the maternal food, indicating a limited capacity to modify dietary pufas and to adjust the allocation of specific pufas into the eggs. it has been reported that dietary epa and ara are preferentially allocated into the eggs by d. magna, suggesting that these pufas are particularly important for egg production and offspring development  <cit> . even the low concentrations of ara and epa detected in eggs produced on the supplemented diets in our study had pronounced effects on offspring fitness. the impact of maternal pufa supply on the reproductive output of their offspring was of unanticipated extent. even though the offspring have never consumed pufa-rich diets they produced the same numbers of offspring as their mothers over a period of 30 days. this is especially intriguing as the amounts of supplemented pufas that were allocated to a single egg were a lot smaller than the amounts the mothers received daily with their diet. apparently, this “starter kit” provided by the mothers was sufficient to significantly improve offspring fitness. the finding that these animals managed to keep up high offspring production during 30 days suggests low c <dig> pufa requirements and a strong ability to retain these pufas  <cit> . alternatively, this could be a consequence of better developed reproductive organs in neonates maternally provisioned with pufas allowing for high reproductive success independent of a direct dietary c <dig> pufa supply.

under parasite challenge, effects of maternally derived pufas on host resistance were strikingly clear. whenever mothers had access to dietary pufas the susceptibility of their offspring to infection increased more than 6-fold. it has been reported previously that mothers raised under good conditions  produce offspring which are more susceptible to parasite infection  <cit> . a possible explanation could be that these offspring constitute a more favourable environment where resources  are abundant and where parasites find good conditions for proliferation. thus the situation would be similar to the one described above for the direct consumption of dietary pufas . however, our results did not show increased spore production thus arguing against this possibility. this suggests that pufa-mediated benefits for host reproduction were conveyed to the offspring in a form not accessible to the parasite. hence, the fitness advantage linked to the maternal pufa-supply lies primarily on the side of the host. alternatively, animals might face a trade-off between immunity and reproduction as both are costly traits and might rely in part on the same resources  <cit> . figuring that daughters of animals which have had access to dietary c <dig> pufas had already started to invest more extensively into reproduction at parasite exposure  resources might not have been sufficiently allocated towards immunity-related functions. this potential trade-off could be more pronounced in the second generation, because the offspring had no direct access to dietary pufas and thus relied on the limited amounts of pufas allocated into the eggs . pufas can play a role in both reproduction and immunity, presumably via the action of eicosanoids, and hence we propose that the significantly higher investment in reproduction observed in offspring of mothers raised on pufa-containing food sources has compromised defence mechanisms and thus resulted in the very high infection success.

CONCLUSIONS
we show here that biochemical food quality can strongly affect both host and parasite fitness. differences in resistance and reproduction can be mediated by single dietary pufas. furthermore, our results pointed out that pufa-mediated effects on the characteristics of infection are not limited to the direct consumption, but can also be conveyed to the offspring. however, direct and maternal effects may differ greatly in the extent and direction of fitness consequences for the host. thus, food quality in general and the availability of pufas in particular have a great potential to affect host – parasite interactions making them a significant factor to be considered when studying disease patterns and dynamics in the field.

