BACKGROUND
classical strategies for nucleic acid detection require labelling the analyte or the probes with fluorophores or other reporter molecules  <cit> . labelling steps add cost, often complexify the reaction mixture, and are not useful when rapidity of the assay is essential, such as for some molecular diagnostic applications. fluorescent conjugated polymers have already been shown to allow the sensitive detection of dna and rna in liquid phase by complexation of the cationic fluorescent polymer to negatively-charged nucleic acids  <cit> . the use of dna/rna-binding fluorescent polymers on microarray could allow unlabelled nucleic acid detection, and thus prevent the need for a nucleic acid labelling step. using pna capture probes, we show a simple and sensitive electrostatic approach which enables the direct detection and specific identification of unlabelled target nucleic acid analyte using a standard microarray scanner.

RESULTS
experiments with commercially available aldehyde-functionalized glass slides, while giving strong signal when fluorophore-labelled target dna hybridized to dna probes, gave no signal when detection was conducted using pna probes . we developed aminoalkylsilane slides activated with carbonyldiimidazole and compared them with commercial aldehyde slides. our chemistry was compatible with detection on pna capture probes using cy3-labelled oligonucleotides or using the fluorescent cationic polymer, while aldehyde slides gave no signal. the aminated slides activated by carbodiimidazole were thus chosen to immobilize both dna and pna capture probes for all experiments described here.

fluorescent conjugated polythiophene derivative used in this study binds nucleic acids via electrostatic interactions with negatively-charged phosphate groups of the dna backbone  <cit> . this is illustrated in figure  <dig> where single-stranded and double-stranded dna oligonucleotides  both produce fluorescent signals due to the formation of dna-polythiophene complexes. thus, discrimination between hybridized and non-hybridized dna capture probes is not possible using a conventional microarray fluorescence scanner.

capture probes of neutral charge, such as pna  <cit> , have been successfully used in microarray experiments  <cit> . since pna do not have a charged backbone, they could be used to allow the detection of nucleic acids with cationic polymeric biosensors such as polythiophenes. using pna as capture probes provide a simple and sensitive electrostatic approach on solid support which enables the direct detection and specific identification of unlabelled target nucleic acid analyte with a standard microarray scanner.

the cationic polymer does not bind to unhybridized neutral pna capture probes , but strongly interacts with the negatively-charged backbone of the complementary oligonucleotides bound to pna probes, allowing transduction of hybridization into a fluorescence signal . this clearly demonstrates the usefulness of pna capture probes for the detection of hybridization events with positively-charged fluorescent conjugated polymers on solid support. in a recent study, gaylord et al. have shown detection in solution of a complementary dna hybridized to a pna probe using förster resonance energy transfer  between a water soluble conjugated polymer and a pna probe labelled with a reporter chromophore  <cit> . the present study shows similar results without the need for labelled pna. moreover, we demonstrate that this detection can be performed using pna capture probes tethered onto a solid support. those results suggest that this electrostatic strategy could also be used with other nucleic acid detection methods such as electrochemistry  <cit> , silver staining  <cit> , metallization  <cit> , quantum dots  <cit> , or electrochemical dyes  <cit> .

specificity of detection was investigated by hybridizing mismatched oligonucleotides to pna probes. after room temperature hybridization of oligonucleotides with pna probes, the fluorescent polythiophene polymeric biosensor gave a strong signal over background when target oligonucleotide was fully complementary to the capture probe. oligonucleotides with two mismatches and non complementary oligonucleotides produced near-background signals easily distinguishable from the much stronger signal observed with perfectly matched hybrids  . for a single mismatch, discrimination is related to the position of the mismatch in the capture pna probe. when the mismatch is located at the probe extremity, signal intensity is reduced  <dig>  fold as compared to the perfect match. by contrast, a ratio of  <dig> is observed when the mismatch is located close to the center of the capture probe .

the sensitivity of the detection scheme described here is approximately  <dig>  × 10- <dig> mole of oligonucleotide in a volume of  <dig> μl. in a recent report, nilsson and inganäs  <cit>  have described the use of a zwitterionic polythiophene derivative able to detect  <dig> × 10- <dig> mole of oligonucleotide within a hydrogel matrix. our approach, based on standard glass slide microarray technologies, is approximately five orders of magnitude more sensitive. moreover, it is expected that further progress in terms of sensitivity should be obtained by reducing the size of the microarray spots and of the hybridization reaction volume. also, the detection of larger dna molecules  should increase sensitivity since the amount of complexed fluorescent cationic polymer is theoretically proportional to the amount of possible electrostatic interactions. the development of scanners specifically fabricated to excite at the wavelength of this fluorescent cationic polymer should also contribute to increase the analytical sensitivity. indeed, recent optimizations of the fluorometric detection applied to our polymer technology has enabled the detection of only a few hundred molecules of genetic material in  <dig> ml of aqueous solution  <cit> . this clearly indicates the great potential of cationic conjugated polymers as highly sensitive fluorescent transducers.

CONCLUSIONS
in this study, we presented a simple and specific nucleic acid detection method onto solid support which does not require labelling of the analyte prior to hybridization. this methodology opens new possibilities for genetic analysis applied for the diagnosis of infections, identification of genetic mutations, and forensic inquiries. for instance, this technology would be useful for the identification of pathogens and related antimicrobial resistance genotypes using microarrays. finally, the electroactivity of the present fluorescent cationic polymer could be exploited for a real-time electrical discrimination of single nucleotide polymorphisms  onto solid support.

