BACKGROUND
irradiation with light wavelengths from the far red  to the near infrared  spectrum  has been shown to have beneficial effects in mammalian tissues  <cit> . red light therapies have been used to treat several disease conditions in humans and in animal models for over 30 years including treatment of soft tissue injuries, diabetic wounds, radiation-induced ulcers, inflammatory and neurodegenerative conditions  <cit> .

in the last 10 years, there has been an increasing interest in the use of 670 nm red light to manage retinal injuries. early reports demonstrated the ability of 670 nm red light to attenuate damaging effects of methanol intoxication in rat retinas and laser-induced injury in primate retinas  <cit> . more recent studies have shown that 670 nm light treatment provides significant protection to photoreceptors in retinas exposed to damaging levels of light  <cit> . we have previously reported that 670 nm light treatment is effective in maintaining retinal function, and in significantly reducing expression of markers of inflammation and oxidative stress in rat retinas damaged by bright white light exposure  <cit> . although the underlying mechanism of its therapeutic effect remains controversial, current evidence suggests that 670 nm light has a direct effect on the key mitochondrial enzyme, the cytochrome c oxidase . upon absorption of 670 nm wavelength light, the activity of cco increased along with energy production in the form of atp  <cit> . although unproven, this process is also thought to stimulate signalling pathways resulting in improved mitochondrial energy metabolism, antioxidant production, cell survival and regulation of non-coding rnas  <cit> .

prolonged exposure to an elevated concentration of oxygen  is toxic to a number of tissues in the respiratory and central nervous systems  <cit> . in the retina, early investigations in neonatal and adult rabbits and in adult mice demonstrated that exposure to hyperoxia can cause severe damage to photoreceptors  <cit> . the most commonly-observed pathological effects in the hyperoxia-induced mouse model are photoreceptor and endothelial cell death, increased inflammation, oxidative stress, erosion of the blood-retina barrier  and loss of functional vision  <cit> . these changes are site-specific, such that the irreversible loss of photoreceptors is most prominent in the circumscribed area of the inferior retina, approximately 500 μm from the optic disk  <cit> .

although the precise mechanism for the photoreceptor vulnerability to hyperoxia is not completely understood, it is postulated to be initiated and sustained by a “toxic cycle” of events  <cit> , involving hyperoxia-induced oxidative stress in the outer retina through generation of free radicals and reactive oxygen species . given the ineffective or lack of autoregulatory mechanism for the oxygen supply in the outer retina  <cit> , prolonged exposure to hyperoxia will inevitably cause an increase in ros production by the photoreceptors. generation of ros will subsequently trigger various pathological changes, such as oxidative damage, particularly in photoreceptors. these light sensitive cells contain a large number of polyunsaturated fatty acid , that are also highly sensitive to ros  <cit> . the hyperoxia-induced depletion of photoreceptors can also contribute to the rise of oxygen tension, ros accumulation which in turn leads to further cell death, and progression of degeneration. these changes are also featured in the later stages of age-related macular degeneration  and retinitis pigmentosa   <cit> , suggesting that hyperoxia may be a suitable model for investigating novel rescue strategies to slow down the progression of these diseases.

in this study we aimed to examine the effects of pretreatment with 670 nm light on levels of oxidative stress, apoptosis and inflammatory response in the hyperoxia-induced retinopathy in adult mouse retina.

RESULTS
photoreceptor survival
firstly, we evaluated the time course of the effects of hyperoxia on photoreceptor survival across the retina . as depicted in figure 1b, there was no significant change in outer nuclear layer  thickness in the superior retina at any of the timepoints. in the inferior retina, there was no significant change in onl thickness following 3d and 7d exposure to hyperoxia. however, a significant reduction in onl thickness was observed in the inferior central retina at 10d and 14d exposure . in the inferior peripheral retina, a small  reduction in onl thickness was detected at 10d followed by a significant thinning at this location at 14d exposure .

secondly, to further explore the regional effects of photoreceptor loss, we measured the onl thickness and photoreceptor nuclei density at 1 mm intervals along the vertical meridian of the retina in both groups, nontreated  and treated , at all timepoints. these data are summarized in figures  <dig> and  <dig>  the results showed no significant difference in retinal thickness and photoreceptor nuclei density in the nt and tr groups at 0d . following 3d exposure to hyperoxia , there was also no change in the onl thickness between nt and tr groups. at 7d, treated animals  showed a thicker onl, but the difference between these and the 7dnt animals  is not statistically significant . after 10d exposure, the onl is thinner in the inferior retina in both groups  but indicates no significant difference between these groups . however, after 14d exposure to hyperoxia the onl in the inferior retina is significantly thicker in 14dtr  animals compared to 14dnt  . there is no significant difference in onl thickness in superior region of the retina  in these groups . furthermore, the photoreceptor nuclei density counts in the inferior central area  revealed a 60% decline in nontreated retinas  following 14d of hyperoxia exposure; while the 670 nm-treated groups  only showed a reduction of 15% compared with control baseline. the difference between 14dnt and 14dtr groups is statistically significant .

tunel  analysis
findings from the terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase dutp nick end labeling  assay analysis are shown in figures  <dig>   <dig>  and  <dig>  there was virtually no tunel + labelling detected in control retinas from 0dnt and 0dtr groups . in the 3dnt group there was a photoreceptor-cell specific death  confined almost exclusively to a circumscribed area approximately 500 μm inferior to the optic nerve head   consistent with a previous report  <cit> ; in 3dtr animals, only a small increase in tunel + cells was detected above baseline in the hotspot area . after 7d exposure to hyperoxia there is a further increase in incidence of tunel + cells in nt animals, in the hotspot area  and in superior retina . in 7dtr animals, tunel + cells were detected in the hotspot  and a few tunel + cells were also present in superior retina. numbers of tunel + cells were further increased in both groups  after 10d and 14d exposure to hyperoxia, in both the superior and inferior retina; however, the numbers of tunel + cells present in the 10tr and 14dtr retinas were significantly lower compared with the 10dnt and 14dnt retinas, respectively  .

the quantitative analyses for the average total number of tunel + photoreceptors in nt and tr animals at different timepoints are summarized in figure  <dig>  the data show a sharp increase in tunel + cells associated with increased period of exposure to hyperoxia in nt retinas . although there is also an increase in tunel + cells in the tr animals over the same period, tunel + cells only begin to accumulate in significant numbers until 7d exposure, and there are significantly fewer tunel + cells in tr animals at each timepoint.

metabolic profile and oxidative stress
we used antibodies against cox va and acrolein to qualitatively and quantitatively evaluate the effect of 670 nm pretreatment on retinal metabolism and oxidative stress in animals exposed to hyperoxia. because the damage resulting from hyperoxic exposure occurs mainly in a ‘hotspot’ in the inferior retina these analyses were carried out using images taken from that region. to further assess the level of oxidative stress, we used real time quantitative pcr to measure the heme oxygenase- <dig>  mrna expression.

retinal metabolic status 
qualitative analysis on immunostained retinal sections revealed an abundance of cox va with no discernible differences in the staining pattern between the 0dnt and 0dtr . antibody against cox va strongly labelled the mitochondria in the inner segments  of the photoreceptors and was also detected in the outer plexiform layer  as well as the inner retina . quantitative measurement of cox va showed similar levels of immunoreactivity in the sampled areas at  <dig>   <dig> and 7 days of exposure to hyperoxia  and no difference was detected between the tr and nt groups. at 10d, the inner segments  of the nt retinas were significantly disrupted and shortened, and reduced amounts of cox va immunoreactivity were detected  were detected compared to 10dtr group . in 10dtr retinas, the photoreceptor is were less disrupted  and showed levels of cox va immunoreactivity that were comparable with retinas at 7d . after 14d exposure to hyperoxia, photoreceptor is were shortened in nt animals, but retained good morphology in tr retinas. however, levels of cox va immunoreactivity in the 14dtr animals were similar to those in the 10d groups . conversely, to determine the level of cox va expressed by surviving photoreceptors in the hotspot area following hyperoxic exposure of the nontreated and 670 nm-treated groups, cox va immunostaining in the is was normalised to the number of photoreceptor nuclei. there was a correlation observed between the population of photoreceptor nuclei and the level of cox va expressed in the is. the level of cox va labelling is proportional to the number of photoreceptors in early timepoints  and in retinas with prolonged hyperoxic exposure, except for retinas from 10dnt group . in the 14dnt retinas, the reduction of photoreceptor nuclei density  correlated with the reduction of the level of cox va expression in the is . by contrast, the number of photoreceptor nuclei and the level of cox va immunoreactivity in all 670 nm-treated groups were close to control baseline levels .

oxidative stress status 
baseline immunoreactivity to acrolein was determined from control retinas . a 3-fold increase in acrolein immunoreactivity above baseline was observed in 3dnt retinas , increasing to 20-fold at 7d, 36-fold at 10dnt and 37-fold in 14dnt. in contrast, there was no significant increase of acrolein immunoreactivity in 3dtr retinas above baseline ; after 7 days of exposure to hyperoxia there was a 20-fold increase in acrolein immunoreactivity above baseline, comparable with 7dnt retinas. however, acrolein immunoreactivity was maintained at this level at the later timepoints in the tr groups .

gene expression
expression of hmox- <dig>  c <dig> and fgf- <dig> genes were analysed by quantitative rt-pcr to monitor the hyperoxia-induced stress responses of the nt and tr retinas.

hmox-1
there was no significant change in hmox- <dig> gene expression after 3 days of exposure to hyperoxia, in either nt  or tr  animals . by  <dig> days exposure, there was a  <dig> to  <dig> -fold up-regulation in hmox- <dig> expression in both 7dnt and 7dtr animals . by 10 days, there was a 4-fold up-regulation of hmox- <dig> expression in nt retinas, while in 10dtr retinas, levels of hmox- <dig> expression remained at around 2-fold above baseline. similar data were obtained from the 14d animals. the levels of hmox- <dig> expression in the tr animals were significantly less than in the nt animals at both 10d and 14d .

c3
expression of c <dig> increased over longer periods of hyperoxia exposure  in both tr and nt animals. in the nt group , this increase above baseline was significant at 7d and 14d. at 10d and 14d, there were significantly higher levels of c <dig> expression in nt retinas  compared to tr retinas  .

fgf-2
a small and not statistically significant upregulation of fgf- <dig> was detected at 3d in both tr  and nt animals . after 7d hyperoxia, there was a 10-fold up-regulation of fgf- <dig> in the nt retinas, compared with a 26-fold upregulation in tr animals. levels of expression were significantly different between 7dtr and 7dnt animals . levels of fgf- <dig> continued to increase in nt animals at 10d and 14d; however, in tr animals there was a fall in fgf- <dig> expression at 10d to approximately 15-fold above baseline, which was maintained at 14d in the tr group. at 10d and 14d, expression levels of fgf- <dig> in nt retinas were higher compared to tr retinas, showing significant difference at 14d .

discussion
these findings corroborate earlier studies showing that hyperoxia causes oxidative stress, photoreceptor-specific cell death, and retinal inflammation  <cit> . those studies show that  hyperoxia-induced changes are evident by 3d exposure to hyperoxia,  that there is a focal point of pathology in the inferior central retina, and  this pathology spreads to other regions of the retina over time.

in addition, the present findings show that pretreatment with 670 nm light effectively offsets photoreceptor death induced by oxidative stress. the data demonstrate that pretreatment with 9 j/cm <dig> of 670 nm once daily for  <dig> consecutive days in this model:  delays the onset, and slows the progression of photoreceptor death, and  downregulates the associated oxidative stress markers, acrolein and hmox- <dig>  this decrease in oxidative stress leads to the attenuation of damage to the retina and the reduction of expression of proinflammatory c <dig> expression and reduced expression of the stress-inducible neuroprotectant, fgf- <dig>  significantly, treatment of 670 nm light alone did not cause measurable damage in non-challenged retinas.

670 nm light treatment promotes photoreceptor survival
the timecourse of photoreceptor degeneration in this model has been reported previously  <cit> . in the present study, we find that the severity of the hyperoxia-induced damage in photoreceptors is significantly reduced, but not prevented, by pretreatment with 670 nm red light. we used two methods to quantify damage to photoreceptors: measures of onl thickness, and counts of numbers of apoptotic  photoreceptors. analyses of onl thickness, the cumulative measure of cell loss, indicates that 14dtr animals have an onl thickness profile approximating that of 10dnt animals , suggesting that in this model 9 j/cm <dig>  670 nm light treatment slows hyperoxia-induced degeneration by around 4 days. counts of apoptotic photoreceptors  along the vertical meridian, a definitive indicator of the rate of photoreceptor loss, support this interpretation. the levels of cell death in 14dtr and 10dnt retinas; 10dtr and 7dnt were almost identical , suggesting that 670 nm light delays progression of hyperoxia-induced cell death.

670 nm light attenuates oxidative damage
hyperoxic exposure was previously demonstrated to induce oxidative stress, which differentially affects photoreceptors  <cit> . the high pufa content, increased oxygen tension in the outer retina, and the continuous exposure to light render the photoreceptors vulnerable to oxidative stress  <cit> . the present data confirms those observations and indicates that irradiation with 670 nm light ameliorates oxidative stress such that there are minimal changes in cytochrome oxidase immunoreactivity, and lower levels of expression of the oxidative stress indicators, acrolein and hmox- <dig> 

acrolein, the by-product of lipid peroxidation, and the stress-inducible hmox- <dig> gene are both reliable indicators for oxidative stress and have been linked to a range of degenerative conditions, including amd  <cit> . in the present study, we observed changes in acrolein  and hmox- <dig>  expression profiles indicative of oxidative stress at 7 days of hyperoxia exposure . at  <dig> and 14 days, the nt retinas continued to show upregulation of these markers, implicating progression of oxidative stress. however, in the treated retinas in these time points  there were no further increases in acrolein and hmox- <dig> expression levels. in addition, the intensity of immunolabelling for cytochrome oxidase in these retinas remained unchanged, suggesting that 670 nm light treatment maintains mitochondrial metabolism, leading to the attenuation of hyperoxia-induced oxidative damage.

mitochondrial dysfunction increases oxidative stress, and has been implicated in the development of several retinal degenerative conditions including amd, diabetic retinopathy and glaucoma  <cit> . therefore, any treatment strategy aimed at preventing oxidative stress may prove beneficial in slowing the progression of retinal degeneration. several reports showed that 670 nm light treatment reduces oxidative damage, including a rat in vivo model of methanol-induced retinal toxicity  <cit>  and animals exposed to damaging bright light  <cit> . in the latter study, the levels of expression of the oxidative damage indicators, hmox- <dig> <cit>  and inducible nitric oxide synthase  <cit>  were downregulated following 670 nm light treatment. similarly, it has been reported that transcranial delivery of 670 nm light attenuates secondary oxidative damage in rat optic nerve following partial transection  <cit> . moreover, findings from studies of parkinson’s disease  <cit>  and multiple sclerosis  <cit>  also show that treatment with 670 nm light mitigates oxidative stress in these experimental models. taken together, these observations provide strong evidence that 670 nm light ameliorates oxidative damage in disorders where oxidative stress plays a key role in the progression of pathology.

670 nm light mitigates c <dig> expression
the present study finds that exposure to hyperoxia causes a 20-fold upregulation of the complement component gene c <dig> in nt retinas, by 10d exposure; this upregulation occurs in conjunction with high levels of expression of the oxidative stress markers, and increased rate of cell death . however, in the treated retinas there was a much smaller rise in c <dig> expression . this finding is consistent with reports from studies carried out in aged rodents  <cit>  and in rats exposed to damaging bright light  <cit> .

dysregulation of c <dig> plays a highly significant role in retinal diseases, and dysregulation of complement is highly associated with risk of amd  <cit> . several lines of evidence suggest that oxidative stress triggers complement activation  <cit> , which in turn mediates local inflammation. tissue damage may result from cell-mediated attack, or by the formation of membrane attack complex, which kills cells. the low levels of c <dig> expression in the treated retinas in this study, suggest that 670 nm light is a potential therapeutic tool applicable to retinal degenerative conditions where inflammation is involved, such as amd.

670 nm light treatment reduces retinal damage
several studies of retinal degeneration report an increase in expression of neuroprotective factors such as fgf- <dig> over time, which protects the retina by delaying, or in some cases, reducing photoreceptor cell death  <cit> . it has been reported previously that exposing the retina to a hyperoxic environment induces changes in the expression of fgf- <dig> <cit> . the current study also demonstrates that fgf- <dig> expression is modulated by 670 nm light in hyperoxic conditions, although the effect is complex.

in this model, cell death in the onl increases over time spent in hyperoxia, and at the 7d timepoint there are high levels of cell death in the nt group, and only low levels of cell death in the tr group . consistent with a role in neuroprotection, fgf- <dig> expression is higher in the 7dtr group  compared with the 7dnt group . however, fgf- <dig> expression is significantly lower in 10dtr animals  which is consistent with a finding that by 10d exposure to hyperoxia there are high levels of cell death, even in the retinas of treated animals. beyond this timepoint fgf- <dig> expression remains approximately static. the explanation for the lowering of levels of fgf- <dig> in 10dtr and 14dtr is not immediately apparent, but may reflect the limitations of the efficacy of 670 nm light in offsetting the effects of hyperoxia. however, the reasons why 670 nm light treatment reaches a plateau, or declines, at this stage cannot be explained until we have a better understanding of its mechanism of action.

670 nm light in hyperoxia-induced retinal degeneration
the present findings indicate that the mechanism of action of 670 nm light is likely to involve signalling pathways activated by oxidative stress in the retina. it is generally accepted that oxidative stress initiates and facilitates the progression of hyperoxia-induced damage in the central nervous system and in the retina  <cit> . high oxygen tension is believed to induce metabolic disturbances in the pufa-rich photoreceptor outer segments that trigger formation of ros  <cit> . accumulation of ros leads to oxidative stress, and in turn to inflammation, and ultimately loss of functional vision  <cit> . exposure of the retina to 670 nm light has been suggested to initiate key signalling pathways that activate transcription factors  <cit>  to modulate pro/anti-oxidant balance in tissues  <cit> , inflammatory responses  <cit>  and cytoprotection  <cit> . the present results support those findings in that the data indicates that 670 nm light treatment limits oxidative stress and proinflammation, reducing retinal stress and cell death.

several reports have suggested the important role of mitochondria in mediating the effects of 670 nm light irradiation  <cit> . first, the mitochondrial cytochrome oxidase has been proposed as the endogenous primary photoacceptor molecule in the reception of 670 nm light triggering secondary cellular processes such as enhanced energy-rich adenosine triphosphate  synthesis and other various modulatory effects  <cit> . second, 670 nm light was suggested to influence retrograde signalling between the mitochondria and the nucleus, resulting in enhanced synthesis of dna and rna  <cit> . third, the intra-mitochrondrial activities of nitric oxide  and the cytochrome oxidase have recently been proposed as a novel mechanism of action of 670 nm light  <cit> . no controls oxygen consumption of the tissue through reversible and competitive binding to cytochrome oxidase  <cit> . in a recent review, poyton and ball provided a mechanistic explanation suggesting that 670 nm light may cause dissociation of no from the cytochrome oxidase complex allowing no to bind effectively to oxygen during tissue damage  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
here, we have demonstrated that hyperoxia-induced oxidative stress, cell death, retinal stress and inflammation were significantly mitigated, but not abolished, by 670 nm light treatment. oxygen toxicity has been shown to cause oxidative stress and inflammation triggering photoreceptor cell death which are also implicated in the late stages of retinal degenerative conditions in humans, such as amd, rp and retinopathy of prematurity   <cit> . hence, 670 nm red light treatment has the potential to slow the progression of retinopathies and conditions involving oxidative stress.

