BACKGROUND
transfer cells  are important for plant development as they form at nutrient transport bottlenecks where an apoplasmic/symplasmic transport step is required for acquisition and/or delivery of nutrients  <cit> . tcs are anatomically specialized for this function as they develop extensive wall ingrowths which result in increased plasma membrane surface area which supports an increased density of nutrient transporters  <cit> . seeds of many crop species develop tcs to facilitate seed filling  <cit> , and tcs support both phloem loading and short and long distance transport via xylem/phloem exchange  <cit> . tcs develop by trans-differentiation of existing cell types in response to developmental or stress-induced signals  <cit> , but despite the importance of tcs to plant development, little is known of the molecular processes responsible for their trans-differentiation. this situation is caused in part by tcs typically being located deep within tissues  <cit>  and thus not readily accessible for experimental manipulation and study.

the trans-differentiation of tcs involves differential expression of hundreds of genes. the formation of nucellar projection and endosperm tcs in barley grains involves differential expression of at least  <dig> genes  <cit> , while the development of epidermal tcs in vicia faba cotyledons is predicted to involve up to  <dig> genes  <cit> . these and other observations have led to the proposition that wall ingrowth deposition in tcs involves hierarchical regulation of cascades of gene expression, presumably controlled by key transcription factors  <cit> , a model based on the genetic regulation of secondary wall deposition in xylem tissue  <cit> . the identification of such factors putatively regulating wall ingrowth deposition in tcs is best undertaken in a genetic model such as arabidopsis thaliana .

in arabidopsis, phloem parenchyma  tcs are known to form in minor veins of leaves and sepals where they are proposed to function in apoplasmic phloem loading  <cit> . previous studies examining pp tcs in arabidopsis have relied on transmission electron microscopy  to analyze these cells. indeed, amiard et al.  <cit>  traced cell wall contours of pp tcs viewed by tem to demonstrate a role for high light and jasmonic acid in signaling wall ingrowth development, and similar approaches were undertaken to demonstrate a relationship between photosynthetic capacity and pp tc development  <cit> . analysis by electron microscopy, however, is time-consuming and clearly not compatible for high-throughput screening required to identify genetic factors controlling the trans-differentiation of tcs.

high-resolution imaging of cell walls by confocal microscopy has been achieved using a modified pseudo-schiff base-propidium iodide  staining procedure  <cit> . in this process, treatment of fixed plant tissue with periodic acid results in the formation of aldehyde groups in the carbohydrate moieties of cells walls. these aldehyde groups can then be reacted with various fluorescent pseudo-schiff reagents, such as propidium iodide, resulting in strong covalent fluorophore labelling of cell walls  <cit> . the strong covalent labelling enables the tissue to be extensively cleared and mounted in high-refractive index mounting medium, giving strong and stable fluorescence labelling of cell walls and thus enabling extensive z-stack imaging of cellular organization in complex tissues  <cit> . wall ingrowths of tcs are rich in cellulose and other polysaccharides such as pectins  <cit> , a feature that may provide an opportunity to use the mps-pi procedure to image wall ingrowth deposition in pp tcs.

here we report the successful use of mps-pi staining of arabidopsis leaves to visualize wall ingrowth deposition in pp tcs in minor veins of leaves, cotyledons and sepals by confocal imaging. wall ingrowths in these cells are discernable as highly localized thickenings of wall material deposited along the face of the pp tc adjacent to neighboring cells of the sieve element/companion cell  complex. depending on tissue orientation, this deposition can often be seen as a central band running along each pp tc and superimposing an underlying se or cc. we have used this procedure to also image light-dependent wall ingrowth deposition in cc tcs of pea minor veins  <cit> , and have developed a scoring method based on the extent of wall ingrowth deposition for semi-quantitative analysis of tc development. furthermore, introduction of a simple post-fixation bleaching step as an alternative to extensive clearing procedures in the original technique has simplified the processing steps to enable more efficient staining of tissue. collectively, this procedure now provides the opportunity to investigate the cell biology of wall ingrowth deposition of pp tcs in arabidopsis in a semi-quantitative manner without resorting to electron microscopy, and will also enable high-throughput phenotypic screening of tc development to identify key transcriptional regulators of this process.

RESULTS
a modified pseudo-schiff staining technique using propidium iodide to visualize wall ingrowths in tcs
the development of high-contrast staining of cell walls in cleared plant tissue using a mps-pi procedure has enabled improved confocal imaging throughout plant tissues generally  <cit>  and leaf tissue in particular  <cit> . to develop a procedure for confocal imaging of wall ingrowths in pp tcs in arabidopsis leaves we used the technique of wuyts et al.  <cit> , modified by first peeling away the abaxial epidermis of rosette leaves immediately prior to fixation. removing the abaxial epidermal layer and most of the associated mesophyll tissue and viewing from the abaxial face of the leaf enabled clear viewing of vascular bundles . under these conditions, confocal imaging of mps-pi-stained leaves clearly resolved bands of wall ingrowth material, seen as unevenly thickened and mottled staining, positioned along the face of pp tcs adjacent to cells of the se/cc complex . in these images pp tcs can be identified as relative thin, elongated cells sharing a common longitudinal wall with a larger bundle sheath cell and the opposite wall with neighboring cells of the se/cc complex. the highly localized deposition of wall ingrowths in pp tcs is evidenced by their occurrence only along the wall shared with a cell of the se/cc complex . in figure 1a, the pp tc labelled with a double asterisk shows localized ingrowth deposition on the two faces of the cell neighboring different ccs, indicating that the localizing signal most likely emanates from cells of the se/cc complex. a longitudinal y-z projection of a z-stack through the vascular bundle shown in figure 1a resolved discrete finger-like projections of wall ingrowth material along the face of pp tcs neighboring two ses . this image is highly reminiscent of tem views of finger-like wall ingrowth projections in these cells , thus supporting the conclusion that the structures being imaged are indeed wall ingrowths in pp tcs. an x-z projection of the same z-stack showing the vascular bundle in transverse section, clearly resolved localized patches of wall ingrowth material deposited in pp tcs adjacent mostly to the smaller ses but also to ccs . a survey of pp tcs revealed that in most discernable instances, wall ingrowth deposition in a pp tc was initiated immediately opposite a se, but consolidation of this deposition spreads to areas of the cell wall opposite ccs . this observation supports the suggestion that the source of signals such as reactive oxygen species likely to drive wall ingrowth deposition in pp tcs is derived from ses  <cit> .figure  <dig> confocal imaging of wall ingrowths in pp tcs of arabidopsis leaf minor veins stained by the mps-pi procedure. a. single confocal section of a minor vein junction revealing polarized deposition of wall ingrowths  on the face of pp tcs  adjoining ccs. polarized deposition of wall ingrowth material can be seen in other pp tcs, including the central pp tc  where ingrowth deposition is directed to opposite faces of the pp tc, each adjoining a different cc. the yellow dotted lines labelled y-z and x-z correspond to the projections shown in b and c, respectively. b. y-z projection of a z-stack of the image shown in a revealing finger-like projections  of wall ingrowth material extending from the face of two linearly-arranged pp tcs  adjacent to neighboring ses. c. x-z projection of a z-stack of the image shown in a revealing minor vein architecture in transverse section and the presence of highly-localized depositions of wall ingrowth material  adjacent to small ses  and larger ccs. d. bright-field image of minor vein junction. the boxed area corresponds to the region shown in a and indicates the clarity of viewing vascular tissue when the abaxial epidermal layer is removed and the tissue is viewed from the abaxial surface of the leaf. bs, bundle sheath cell; cc, companion cell; se, sieve element. scale bar = 10 μm in a, b and c. scale bar = 100 μm in d.



when rosette leaves are torn paradermally and viewed by scanning electron microscopy , wall ingrowth deposition can often be seen as a central band of reticulate ingrowth material running along the length of a given pp tc , or as discrete clumps of tangled, finger-like projections . these features are also seen by confocal imaging of mps-pi-stained leaf material, namely central bands of wall ingrowth material running along pp tcs  and isolated clumps of wall ingrowths . the central bands of ingrowth material reflect their highly localized deposition immediately adjacent to neighboring cells of the se/cc complex . this spatial relationship is clearly seen in figure 2b where the focal plane in the middle of the image passes from a pp tc  to an underlying se, revealing how the band of wall ingrowth material in the pp tc superimposes the underlying se . this feature is particularly evident when viewed as a z-stack movie through these cells . at higher magnification, confocal imaging clearly resolved the intertwined, finger-like projections of wall ingrowth material , a feature that is readily evident when viewed by sem .figure  <dig> comparison of wall ingrowths in pp tcs of arabidopsis leaf minor veins by confocal imaging and sem. a, d. sem views of fresh leaf material torn paradermally then subjected to bleach extraction and viewed by sem. b, c, e, f. confocal imaging of minor veins from leaf material stained by the mps-pi procedure. a. sem image of a pp tc showing a central band of reticulate wall ingrowth material . b. highly localized deposition of wall ingrowth material seen as a central band  running along the length of each pp tc . the focal plane of the image passes from the pp tc on the right  into the underlying se, indicating how the band of wall ingrowth material superimposes the underlying se. c. confocal image at higher magnification showing substructure  of the wall ingrowth material in a pp tc . in this image the se to the left of this pp tc is obscured. d. sem view of a minor vein junction of two pp tcs showing examples of isolated patches of wall ingrowth deposition . e. confocal image of minor vein junction showing discrete patches of wall ingrowth deposition . f. higher magnification confocal image showing patches of wall ingrowth deposition  in two pp tcs . bs, bundle sheath cell; cc, companion cell; se, sieve element. scale bars =  <dig> μm in a and d. scale bars =  <dig> μm in b and e. scale bars =  <dig> μm in c and f. the image in a is reproduced in part from edwards et al.  <cit> .



we surveyed different vein orders in mature leaves for the presence of pp tcs. consistent with previous studies identifying phloem involved in assimilate loading in mature leaves  <cit> , we observed typically substantial levels of wall ingrowth deposition in virtually all veins except the midrib and most of the secondary veins . the exception to this observation was minor levels of wall ingrowth deposition seen in small terminating regions of secondary veins . these observations are consistent with the conclusion that wall ingrowth deposition in pp tcs correlates with phloem loading capacity of minor veins  <cit> , which in turn correlates inversely with vein size, as suggested by haritatos et al.  <cit> .

imaging wall ingrowth deposition in cc tcs in leaf minor veins of pea
to test the general applicability of this method for imaging wall ingrowths in other species, we used the mps-pi procedure of wuyts et al.  <cit>  to stain cc tcs in leaf minor veins of pea, where reticulate wall ingrowth deposition occurs on all faces of these cells  <cit> . confocal imaging of minor veins showed mottled labelling across the full face of cc tcs . in contrast, wall ingrowth deposition was not detected in pp cells neighboring cells of the bundle sheath . a y-z projection of a z-stack passing longitudinally through the vertically-orientated minor vein in figure 3a revealed the presence of reticulate wall ingrowths along the longitudinal walls of a cc tc , and similarly, a y-z projection passing transversely through the horizontal minor vein in figure 3a revealed wall ingrowth deposition across all faces of the large, mostly circular cc tcs , consistent with tem images of these cells  <cit> . to verify that these structures were indeed wall ingrowths, leaves were stained from light-grown plants subjected to 4 days of dark treatment, conditions known to cause reduced wall ingrowth deposition  <cit> . accordingly, reticulate wall ingrowth deposition in cc tcs was also greatly reduced, as shown by the y-z projection of a z-stack passing transversely through a vascular bundle . this result confirms that the cc tcs shown in figure 3a contain reticulate wall ingrowths, and that these ingrowths can be detected by confocal imaging of mps-pi-stained pea leaves.figure  <dig> confocal imaging of wall ingrowth deposition in cc tcs of leaf minor veins in pea. a. minor veins from second true leaf of 13 day-old full light-grown seedlings showing mottled wall ingrowth labelling across the full face of cc tcs . no wall ingrowth deposition is seen in pp cells. a y-z projection of a z-stack through the vertical minor vein is shown in inset a’. wall ingrowth deposition detected as fuzzy labelling can be seen along all longitudinal walls of the cc tc . a y-z projection through the horizontal minor vein at the bottom right of a is shown in inset a”. here, fuzzy labelling indicating wall ingrowth deposition is seen around all faces of the cc tcs seen in transverse view. the double asterisk in a and a” indicates a large cc tc. b. minor veins from second true leaf of 9 day-old seedling subjected to 4 days of darkness. no wall ingrowth deposition is seen in cc tcs  seen in b or when the minor vein is seen in transverse view as a y-z projection through this minor vein . bs, bundle sheath cell; pp, phloem parenchyma; se, sieve element; xe, xylem element. scale bars = 10 μm in a, a’ and b. scale bars = 5 μm in a” and b’.



a simplified extraction procedure for mps-pi staining of pp tcs using sodium hypochlorite
the collective analyses described above established that the mps-pi staining procedure adapted from wuyts et al.  <cit>  can be used to image wall ingrowth deposition in tcs involved in phloem loading in both arabidopsis and pea. the wuyts et al. procedure is lengthy, however, involving several extractions in organic solvents and clearing in sds/naoh, followed by overnight treatment with amylase and pullulanase prior to mps-pi staining . to circumvent these lengthy procedures, we tested bleaching of fixed and ethanol-washed leaf tissue in sodium hypochlorite to clear cellular content for subsequent mps-pi-staining of cell walls. sodium hypochlorite was used by sugimoto et al.  <cit>  to extract cellular content from root tissue prior to viewing cellulose microfibrils by field emission sem, and was used by edwards et al.  <cit>  to clear leaf tissue for fluorescence imaging of wall ingrowth deposition in pp tcs using calcofluor white. in this current study, the use of bleach to clear tissue resulted in equivalent, if indeed somewhat improved, imaging of wall ingrowths in pp tcs  compared to the procedure of wuyts et al. the bleach method provided consistently good extraction of cellular content, with the minor exception of cotyledons , and often yielded well defined cellular morphology as revealed by a z-series scan of vascular tissue . given this outcome, we subsequently adopted the bleaching of fixed and ethanol-washed tissue as our standard method for confocal imaging of mps-pi-stained tissue.

wall ingrowth deposition in pp tcs from different tissues of arabidopsis
we used our modified mps-pi-staining procedure to survey other tissues in arabidopsis for the presence of pp tcs. in cotyledons, as typically seen in rosette leaves and other tissues , the morphology of wall ingrowths can vary depending on age of the tissue. for example, early-stage wall ingrowth development in cotyledons of 7 day-old seedlings appears identical to early-stage wall ingrowth deposition in immature leaves of 14 day-old seedlings . in cotyledons from 18 day-old seedlings, however, extensive deposition of wall ingrowths is seen along the face of pp tcs adjacent to cells of the se/cc complex . the morphology of wall ingrowth deposition in cotyledons from such plants was surprisingly varied, ranging from uniform deposition similar to that seen in rosette leaves , to sharply pointed peaks of wall ingrowth material , or very substantial deposition, albeit irregularly distributed along the length of a given pp tc and occupying a considerable volume of the cell . this feature is similar to the manner in which dense fenestrated networks of ingrowth material protrude extensively into the outer periclinal cytoplasmic volume of abaxial epidermal tcs in v. faba cotyledons  <cit> . the images shown in figure 4a-c are of pp tcs in vascular bundles located at the base, middle and tip regions of cotyledons, respectively, reflecting a basipetal gradient of wall ingrowth deposition which correlates with phloem loading capacity in cotyledons  <cit> . variations in wall ingrowth development are also apparent in nearby veins as seen in additional file 4: figure s1a. the pp tc marked with an asterisk in figure s1a and a’ developed very extensive and dense wall ingrowths, while in a nearby pp tc  wall ingrowth deposition was less developed, hence typical finger-like projections can be detected in a longitudinal view  reconstructed from the z-stack image shown in s1a.figure  <dig> confocal imaging of wall ingrowth deposition in pp tcs in cotyledons, cauline leaves and sepal. a. minor vein from the base of an 18 day-old cotyledon showing extensive wall ingrowth deposition  in pp tcs . b. minor vein from the mid-region of an 18 day-old cotyledon showing highly sculptured and extensive wall ingrowth deposition  in pp tcs . c. minor vein from the tip an 18 day-old cotyledon showing massive levels of wall ingrowth deposition  that occupy a considerable volume of each pp tc . the fragments of fluorescent labelling seen in bundle sheath cells in both b and c correspond to remnant starch grains not completely extracted by the bleach treatment. d. wall ingrowth deposition  in pp tcs  in a fully expanded cauline leaf. e. wall ingrowths in a minor vein of sepal, showing numerous localized patches of wall deposition  along each pp tc . f. wall ingrowths in a minor vein of sepal showing apparent consolidation or merging of localized patches of wall ingrowth material  in a pp tc . bs, bundle sheath cell; cc, companion cell; xe, xylem element. scale bars = 10 μm in a, b and c. scale bars = 5 μm in d, e and f.



wall ingrowth deposition in pp tcs was also detected in cauline leaves  and sepals . in cauline leaves deposition of ingrowth material was typically abundant, especially in veins in the tip region of the leaf . in sepal tissue, wall ingrowths were often seen as discrete clusters of wall material positioned along the length of a pp tc . these discrete clusters appeared in places to merge with neighboring clusters to form localized clumps of ingrowth material along a given pp tc . these features were also seen in pp tcs in other tissues , but were more common in sepals. xylem elements were often detected adjacent to pp tcs in sepals  due to the simple structure of vascular bundles in this tissue .figure  <dig> classification system for the extent of wall ingrowth deposition in pp tcs in minor veins of arabidopsis leaves. a. class i - no wall ingrowths visible in pp cells , which are identified by their sharing a common wall with a large bundle sheath cell. b. class ii - evidence of discrete, punctate-like wall ingrowth deposition seen as discrete fluorescent dots  distributed along the face of pp tcs adjacent to either a cc or se. not all pp cells in a given field of view contain wall ingrowths. c. class iii - substantial levels of reticulate wall ingrowth deposition is seen as clusters or continuous stretches of fluorescent labelling  on the face of pp tcs  neighboring cells of the se/cc complex. this level of labelling is seen in most pp cells in a given field of view, but can be somewhat variable. d. class iv - extensive wall ingrowth deposition seen as thick bands of fluorescence labelling  seen in essentially all pp tcs in a given field of view. bs, bundle sheath cell; cc, companion cell; se, sieve element. scale bars = 10 μm in a, b, c and d.



semi-quantitative assessment of wall ingrowth deposition in pp tcs
the clarity of confocal imaging by the bleach-modified mps-pi procedure enabled semi-quantitative assessment of both the extent of trans-differentiation of pp tcs and the abundance of wall ingrowth deposition in a given cell. to facilitate this process, we developed a scoring procedure ranging across four categories of wall ingrowth deposition as defined by our observations. class i represents pp cells with no detectable wall ingrowths . these cells, defined by their elongated, rectangular shape and connection to a neighboring bundle sheath cell, were devoid of detectable wall ingrowths as evidenced by the thin, regular outline of their stained cell walls. in class ii, wall ingrowths were detected in early stages of development as evidenced by limited regions of patchy, mottled staining along the wall of the pp tc opposite that of a bundle sheath cell , or visualized as discrete dots of fluorescence in face view . for this class, not all pp cells in a given region of vein showed evidence of wall ingrowth deposition. in class iii, wall ingrowth deposition was more obvious as wider regions of mottled fluorescence and this level of deposition was commonly detected in most but not necessarily all pp cells in a given field of view . in class iv, wall ingrowths in pp tcs were very abundant and seen as continuous thick bands of mottled fluorescence present in essentially all pp tcs in the field of view .

using this classification system, we qualitatively surveyed the abundance of wall ingrowth deposition in pp tcs in terminating minor veins across leaf development, selecting leaf  <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> as representative of immature, intermediate and mature leaves, respectively . a representation of this survey is shown in figure 6b. immature sink leaves contain predominantly class i pp cells with no wall ingrowths, while intermediate leaves are characterized by a basipetal gradient with class iii pp tcs in minor veins at the tip of the leaf and predominantly class i pp cells at the leaf base. in contrast, mature source leaves are dominated by class iv pp tcs with highly abundant wall ingrowths in minor veins across virtually the entire leaf . the distribution of pp tcs seen in this analysis is consistent with the known sink-source transition that occurs in maturing leaves  <cit> , as well as the development of apoplasmic loading that occurs in a basipetal gradient within a dicot leaf  <cit> . the value of mps-pi staining in this case, however, is that it provides a rapid means to assess the development of pp tcs across an entire leaf in response to different biotic or abiotic signals and within different genetic backgrounds, with high spatial resolution without relying on time-consuming procedures such as tem.figure  <dig> survey of wall ingrowth deposition in pp tcs in minor veins across leaf development in arabidopsis. a. leaf numbering of  <dig>  week-old rosette leaf. b. representation of wall ingrowth deposition in immature, intermediate and mature leaves as represented by color-coding of the four classes of wall ingrowth deposition as described in results. the result shown here is representative of three replicate leaves for each stage of development. immature leaves contain little if any wall ingrowth deposition in pp cells. intermediate leaves show a basipetal gradient from typically class iii at the tip to class i at the leaf base. mature leaves contain class iv wall ingrowth deposition in pp tcs of minor veins throughout the entire leaf, with the exception of a few examples of class iii at the very base of the leaf. skeletonized images of leaves shown in figure 6b were adapted from alonso-peral et al.  <cit> .



manipulating wall ingrowth deposition in pp tcs by defoliation
we next examined the response of pp tc development to altered sink-source status in arabidopsis leaves as a test of the mps-pi staining procedure to provide semi-quantitative assessment of wall ingrowth development. for this analysis we conducted a defoliation experiment on 3-week-old plants by removing all leaves except leaf  <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> . after five days further growth, leaves from control and defoliated plants  were harvested and stained by the bleach-modified mps-pi procedure. in leaf  <dig> from control plants, typically no wall ingrowths were visible in pp cells , but in a few cases class ii wall ingrowth deposition was occasionally seen . in this case, the ingrowths were small discrete clusters of wall material. in contrast to the typical lack of ingrowth deposition in control leaves, the extent of wall ingrowth deposition in leaf  <dig> from defoliated plants was substantially increased . in these cases, class iii deposition was commonly seen, either in early stages of deposition where discrete clusters of tangled wall ingrowths were detected , or as more dense clusters or bulges of ingrowth wall deposition . in the tip region of leaf  <dig> from a defoliated plant, numerous cases of class iv deposition were detected in these leaves  <dig> days-post defoliation .figure  <dig> semi-quantitative analysis of wall ingrowth deposition in pp tcs of leaf minor veins in arabidopsis following defoliation. a. all leaves except leaf  <dig>   <dig>  and  <dig> were removed from 3 week-old plants. the picture shows a control plant  and a defoliated plant  at the beginning of the experiment. b. control  and defoliated plant  after 5 days additional growth. c. minor vein in leaf  <dig> from control plant. no wall ingrowth deposition is seen in pp tcs . d. minor vein in leaf  <dig> from control plant showing early stage wall ingrowth deposition  in a pp tc . e. wall ingrowth deposition seen as discrete clusters  in a pp tc  in leaf  <dig> of defoliated plant. f. denser clusters of wall ingrowth deposition  in leaf  <dig> of defoliated plant. g. extensive wall ingrowth deposition  in pp tcs  in vein near the tip of leaf  <dig> from a defoliated plant. bs, bundle sheath; cc, companion cell. scale bars = 5 μm in d, e, f and g. scale bar = 10 μm in c. h. semi-quantitative analysis of defoliation on wall ingrowth deposition in pp tcs of leaf  <dig> measured in control and defoliated plants 5 days after defoliation. wall ingrowth deposition in pp tcs is greatly enhanced as a consequence of defoliation, with this response being maximal in minor veins from the middle region of the leaf. data shows mean ± se of scores for wall ingrowth deposition in arbitrary units ; n =  <dig> 



to provide a semi-quantitative analysis of the response of wall ingrowth development to defoliation, we used a scoring system whereby class i, ii, iii and iv were assigned  <dig>   <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> points, respectively. using these values, we then scored pp tc development in at least five terminating veins within the base, middle and tip regions of each leaf on either side of the mid-vein . the results of this analysis showed a rapid and significant increase in wall ingrowth deposition in pp tcs in leaf  <dig> of defoliated plants relative to leaf  <dig> in control  plants, with this response being more pronounced in pp tcs in minor veins in the middle sector of leaves  compared to the tip .

discussion
we have developed a simplified mps-pi staining procedure for confocal imaging of wall ingrowths in vascular tcs involved in phloem loading. this procedure, involving clearing of fixed tissue using sodium hypochlorite followed by mps-pi staining and mounting in high refractive index mounting medium provides a rapid means to image wall ingrowth deposition in tcs without the need to use more time-consuming electron microscopy techniques. the clarity of the mps-pi staining enables high-resolution imaging of wall ingrowths in vascular tissue buried deep within leaves, and the use of sodium hypochlorite as a clearing step simplifies the original methods of truernit et al.  <cit>  and wuyts et al.  <cit>  to enable high-throughput processing of samples to suite semi-quantitative assessment of wall ingrowth deposition in tcs. furthermore, the ability to optically section throughout an entire vascular bundle and reconstruct from a series of z-axis images enables the three-dimensional reconstruction of wall ingrowth deposition to analyse the highly polarised nature of this process in tcs.

we used this procedure to analyse the distribution of pp tcs both within individual leaves and in leaves of different developmental stages. haritatos et al.  <cit>  noted that veins of different size from mature leaves have overall similar cellular structure and organization, and since most veins are in close proximity to mesophyll, they can be considered to participate in phloem loading and thus physiologically defined as “minor” veins. our observations support this conclusion since virtually all veins examined from mature leaves, except the midrib and larger regions of the secondary vein network, contained pp tcs with typically substantial levels of wall ingrowth deposition. furthermore, within individual developing leaves, a basipetal gradient of pp tcs was detected . both observations are consistent with development of phloem loading capacity in leaves  <cit>  and demonstrate a presumed correlation between wall ingrowth deposition in pp tcs and their role in phloem loading.

the general applicability of this method for confocal imaging of wall ingrowth formation in tcs was demonstrated by visualizing cc tcs in minor veins of pea leaves. in this case, light-dependent deposition of wall ingrowths to all faces of cc tcs was clearly detected , consistent with earlier studies using tem  <cit> . thus, it is likely that this approach can be used to investigate tc development in other species and tissue locations. in arabidopsis, we observed pp tcs with extensive wall ingrowths in sepals, cotyledons and cauline leaves  as well as the first true leaves of young seedlings . interestingly, in both cotyledons and cauline leaves, the presence of pp tcs with abundant wall ingrowths correlates with the high relative expression of both atsweet <dig> and atsweet <dig> . these sucrose effluxers have recently been demonstrated to be involved in a two-step phloem loading strategy used in arabidopsis leaves, namely unloading of sucrose into the apoplasm by pp tcs driven by atsweet transporters, followed by active uptake into cells of the se/cc complex by atsuc <dig>  <cit> . the extensive wall ingrowth deposition observed in pp tcs of cotyledons is also consistent with cotyledons acting as a strong source of photosynthesis-derived sucrose required to sustain root growth in response to light  <cit> .

an intriguing observation seen most clearly in sepal tissue was the initial deposition of wall ingrowths as numerous discrete clusters along the length of a pp tc . a similar pattern of deposition was seen in young leaves responding to defoliation . these structures are presumably equivalent to the isolated patches of wall deposition observed by sem . these observations suggest that early stages of reticulate ingrowth deposition can be highly localized to discrete regions within an individual pp tc, and then continued deposition causes consolidation of these patches into more continuous regions of ingrowth deposition. the signals directing such localized patches of ingrowth deposition are unknown, but in non-vascular tc types the reactive oxygen species hydrogen peroxide has been implicated as a polarizing signal directing wall ingrowth deposition  <cit> . recently, localized plumes of ca2+ have been implicated in directing the highly localized deposition of individual papillae wall ingrowths in epidermal tcs of v. faba cotyledons  <cit> . a similar mechanism may operate in pp tcs, however the larger clusters of wall deposition seen by sem and confocal imaging  imply a higher level of organization may be operating, possibly aggregation of ca2+ channels, to direct the deposition of wall ingrowths into such clusters. the ability to clearly image wall ingrowths by confocal microscopy in arabidopsis pp tcs will enable a genetic approach to investigate signaling mechanisms driving this process.

the defoliation experiment  illustrates the value of the bleach-modified mps-pi method in combination with semi-quantitative scoring to provide high-throughput and high-resolution assessment of pp tc development in leaves. the significant increase in wall ingrowth deposition in pp tcs in leaf  <dig> remaining after defoliation suggests a rapid switch from sink to source status within this leaf  <cit> , and a requirement for wall ingrowth deposition for this to occur. the predicted concomitant changes in gene expression required for wall ingrowth deposition amid other processes associated with this transition provides an opportunity to identify these genes by transcriptional profiling.

CONCLUSIONS
we have developed a simple method for confocal imaging of wall ingrowth deposition in tcs using mps-pi staining. this method was used to image wall ingrowth deposition in pp tcs in rosette leaves, cauline leaves, cotyledons and sepals of arabidopsis as well as cc tcs in leaf minor veins of pea. the clarity of the staining provides cellular detail of wall ingrowth deposition in these diverse tissues, thus enabling future studies investigating the cellular mechanisms directing the highly polarized deposition of wall ingrowths in tcs without the need to use electron microscopy. the high-throughput potential of this procedure also offers the opportunity to apply reverse genetics to identify genes involved in wall ingrowth deposition in tcs.

