BACKGROUND
the manila clam ruditapes philippinarum  is a bivalve mollusc of the family veneridae native to the indo-pacific region. because of its commercial value as seafood, this species has been introduced to other regions, where it has become permanently established. in europe it was first imported in  <dig> in france. additional introductions occurred from oregon to the united kingdom, followed by numerous transfers within european waters for aquaculture purposes . natural reproduction of introduced individuals favored geographical expansion into the wild, particularly in italy, france, spain and ireland where the manila clam proved to be more resistant and grew faster than the endemic carpet-shell clam, r. decussatus. consequently, r. philippinarum displaced its autochthonous congeneric species in most areas, and now represents the most important species for commercial clam landings in europe. globally, harvest of r. philippinarum has experienced a dramatic increase in the last  <dig> years, currently representing one of the major aquacultured species in the world . china is by far the leading producer  while italy has a smaller but yet conspicuous production of over  <dig>  tonnes per year  <cit> .

despite the relevance of manila clam landings in world aquaculture, genomic resources for r. philippinarum are still extremely limited  <cit> . a small set of genetic markers is available  <cit>  and only  <dig>  transcripts has been sequenced and are already available on genbank. although r. philippinarum is considered a robust species, capable of adapting to a wide range of environments, infectious diseases, chronic parasitic  and bacterial  infections, it has been suffering mass mortality that have caused severe production losses in different areas   <cit> . the impact of infections is often aggravated under particular environmental conditions, such as extreme temperatures or limited availability of oxygen or nutrients. however, massive mortalities are rarely explained by a single parameter. an understanding of the interactions among different biotic and abiotic factors influencing survival is therefore a high priority for clam aquaculture. functional genomics, or more specifically physiological genomics, i.e. a global analysis of transcriptome responses to different conditions, offers unprecedented opportunities to achieve such a goal. for instance, a genomic analysis was recently used to investigate summer mortality in the pacific oyster  <cit> . to this end, the development of transcriptomic tools for the manila clam is the first necessary step.

a second and possibly more important application of global gene expression profiling in r. philippinarum is environmental monitoring. genomic technologies are increasingly used to evaluate the biological effects of various chemical pollutants on aquatic animals under either controlled conditions or in natural environments . while several hurdles remain to be overcome, the outlook for eco-toxicogenomics is extremely promising  <cit> . a sessile, filter-feeding organism living in the seafloor sediment, r. philippinarum represents an excellent "sentinel" species to assess the quality of marine environment. two recent studies correlating different biochemical, cellular, and organismal markers with levels of pollutants in the sediment  <cit>  or accumulated in the animals  <cit>  support this view. however, a limited set of multiple biomarkers is usually employed in most of the studies. therefore, a transcriptomic approach could provide a much broader analysis of different biological processes allowing for an integrated description of responses to xenobiotics  <cit> .

the aim of the present study was to fill the gap in transcriptome sequence data available for the manila clam and to develop a reliable and informative platform for global gene expression profiling, to be then applied to environmental monitoring. to this end, next-generation sequencing was coupled with a technology, in situ synthesized oligo array, which has provided a robust and flexible microarray platform in other species using conventional sanger sequencing  <cit> .

to date,  <dig> mollusc data are available only for mytilus galloprovincialis and bathymodiolus azoricus  <cit> , and to our knowledge, this is the first report of an oligo dna microarray developed using ultra-high throughput pyrosequencing in a mollusc species. a free web-accessible database including extensive transcript annotation and a blast search option was also developed in support of the gene expression platform.

in order to assess the feasibility of this newly developed r.philippinarum microarray to toxicogenomics, a preliminary investigation has been performed by profiling gene expression in gills and digestive glands of clams sampled in the industrial area of marghera, a highly polluted site of the venice lagoon, compared to animals sampled in a clean area of the lagoon of venice.

RESULTS
next-generation sequencing and hybrid contig assembly
starting from a total of  <dig>  sequences , a first run of hybrid assembly grouped  <dig>  reads  into  <dig>  contigs. the resulting assembled sequences and the remaining singletons were then used as input for a second mira run  of assembly in order to produce meta-contigs from a fraction of partially redundant contigs obtained by the first run. this approach produced a set of  <dig>  contigs. summary statistics of the ests generated for r. philippinarum and their assembly are reported in table  <dig>  figure  <dig> shows the distribution of sequence length and the relationship between length and average quality for the  <dig>  contigs. all roche  <dig> flx reads have been deposited in genbank .

transcriptome annotation
putative identities of assembled contigs and meta-contigs were obtained by running blastx and blastn similarity searches on several protein and nucleotide databases . of  <dig>  unique sequences,  <dig>   showed at least one significant match  in the ncbi non-redundant protein database. the use of blast2go software allowed the association of one or more go terms to  <dig>  r. philippinarum data base entries. of these,  <dig>  were linked to "biological process"  go entries,  <dig>  to "cellular component"  entries, and  <dig>  to "molecular function"  entries. unique go terms represented in r. philippinarum entries were  <dig>  for bp,  <dig> for cc, and  <dig> for mf. a simplified view of these go terms using a "generic go slim" showed  <dig> bp,  <dig> cc, and  <dig> mf classes .

in addition to the annotation with blast2go, blast searches against uniprotkb/swiss-prot database, uniprotkb/trembl database and  <dig> different species-specific data bases  were implemented in order to further increase the number of putatively annotated r. philippinarum contigs . this approach provided a significant match for additional  <dig>  transcripts, which showed no previous correspondence with either the ncbi non-redundant protein or nucleotide database, and brought the final number of clam entries associated with a known protein or transcript to  <dig>  .

ruphibase, a ruditapes philippinarum database
all  <dig>  contig sequences as well as different layers of results for data analysis are available through ruphibase  <cit> , a free web-accessible database implemented using mysql and django web framework. ruphibase is centered on contig sequence and annotation, and can be searched by contig id and key word match on different textual fields. moreover, it allows the user to conduct a local blast search on the fly against the transcripts database, in order to identify one or more transcripts significantly similar to a given query sequence. indeed, massive and customizable data retrieval is provided by a browsing system. for each contig, a gene-like entry shows different data and bioinformatic analyses results according to the scheme detailed below:

• contig information. for each contig, identified by an id and a preliminary description, the fasta sequence is given, along with an informative contig description, which is defined by the blast2go natural language text mining functionality, applied to blast hits description. the best hit is used when a blast2go description is unavailable.

• assembly. the list of reads belonging to the contig is given together with two fasta files which include all read sequences, contig with reads and ests sequences and ace format multiple alignment of the contig with reads and ests.

• gene ontology. go terms associated to each transcript are given for bp, mf, and cc, with hyper-link to the go database.

blast results. blast results, for both nucleotide and protein database searches, are shown in a dedicated section in the classic blast output format. these results are hyperlinked to external databases, and include the list of alignment descriptions and details about the pairwise alignments of each transcript with the corresponding blast hits.

microarray quality assessment
a total of seven microarray experiments  were carried out. after data extraction, hybridization success for each probe was inferred if flag "glsfound" values was equal to  <dig> . across all experiments, only  <dig> probes  never showed a signal higher than the background, while  <dig>  probes  were always successful and  <dig>   were successful in at least four experiments.

to evaluate the repeatability of the array results, microarray data for the digestive gland  were normalized. the degree of mutual agreement between replicates was assessed by estimating the pearson correlation coefficients  on the entire set of expression values. pairwise comparisons of replicate experiments showed correlation coefficients with r >  <dig>  and were always significant  , confirming a good reproducibility of the microarray platform. normalized fluorescence data for these comparisons have been deposited in the geo database  <cit>  under accession numbers geo:gse <dig>  the manila clam microarray platform is characterized also by the presence of two duplicated probes, at different coordinates on the same array, for a total of  <dig>  annotated transcripts. the variability between two identical probes for the same transcript was evaluated using the ratio between the two probe intensity levels  as a measure of signal difference. this ratio is expected to assume a value around  <dig>  in figure  <dig> each box plot describes the distribution of observed fold-changes between probe_ <dig> and probe_ <dig> for each array experiment in the digestive gland and gills pools. this is symmetrical, centered around  <dig> and equal across all the experiments. concordance of hybridization signal for probe pairs was confirmed by estimating pearson correlation coefficients between probe_ <dig> and probe_ <dig> for each gene across seven experiments. the correlation coefficient was always greater than  <dig>  and highly significant  .

comparison of gene expression in the digestive gland and gills
fluorescence data microarray experiments of three biological replicates consisting of pooled digestive glands and three pools of gills sampled in alberoni, a clean area in the venice lagoon, were normalized and used to identify genes that were differentially expressed in different tissues.

digestive glands and gills were chosen because of their relevant role on detoxification of xenobiotics as well as filtration of suspended matter and as defense barrier, respectively. these are cellular/organismal processes crucial in the response to chemical pollutants and/or pathogens exposure. processed data were deposited in the geo database  <cit>  under accession number gse <dig>  a two-unpaired class significance analysis of microarray  test was carried out on normalized data, enforcing a false discovery rate  of 3%. a list of  <dig>  significant probes, corresponding to  <dig>  unique transcripts, was obtained. a total of  <dig>  transcripts were up-regulated in pooled samples of digestive gland compared to gills with a fc ranging from  <dig> to  <dig> , while a total of  <dig>  transcripts was up-regulated in the gills compared to the digestive gland with a fc ranging from  <dig> to  <dig> . a putative annotation could be obtained for  <dig>  genes that were differentially expressed in the two tissues . a more systematic functional interpretation of the set of differentially expressed genes was obtained by an enrichment analysis using the database for annotation, visualization, and integrated discovery  software  <cit>  with two alternative strategies. in the first case, r. philippinarum entries were matched to human ensembl gene ids, while in the second strategy r. philippinarum entries were associated with zebrafish ensembl gene ids . human or zebrafish ids corresponding to differentially expressed manila clam transcripts and to all genes represented on the array were then used to define a "gene list" and a "background" in david, respectively. this allows functional annotation of differentially expressed genes through enrichment analyses based on an integrated biological knowledgebase, containing over  <dig> annotation categories. the second strategy allowed the assignment of a putative homologue to a larger number of clam transcripts. in total,  <dig> genes up-regulated in the digestive gland and  <dig> genes up-regulated in the gills found a corresponding functional annotation in david. enrichment analysis for up-regulated transcripts in the digestive gland showed  <dig> kegg  pathways,  <dig> biological process  terms,  <dig> cellular component  terms, and  <dig> molecular function  terms to be significantly over-represented . enriched gene sets were involved in typical liver and pancreas metabolic processes such as cytochrome p450-mediated metabolism of xenobiotics, retinol metabolism and glutathione metabolism. the digestive gland of molluscs is also called "hepatopancreas" and integrates functions that are liver- and pancreas-specific in vertebrates. a notch signaling pathway was found among enriched kegg pathways, although with a low statistical significance value . this pathway has a role in timely cell lineage specification of both endocrine and exocrine pancreas.

here are the biological process , cellular component  and molecular function  represented by at least  <dig> genes. significantly represented kegg pathways  are also reported. gene count, p-value and fold enrichment  corresponding to each term are indicated.

enrichment analysis on genes that were up-regulated in gills showed  <dig> kegg pathway terms,  <dig> bp-go terms,  <dig> cc-go terms and  <dig> mf-go terms, all significantly over-represented . genes over-expressed in the gills were involved in different cellular functions, including cell proliferation, differentiation, and migration. two signaling pathways, wnt and jak-stat, appeared to be significantly over-represented. the wnt signaling pathway, with  <dig> genes over-expressed in gills, describes a complex network of proteins with a broad role in embryogenesis as well as in several cell processes of adult animals. the jak-stat signaling pathway transduces information from various chemical signals outside the cell to transcriptional regulation and it is involved in a wide array of cell activities. other significant pathways, rig-i-like receptor, nod-like receptor, and toll-like receptor signaling suggest a relevant role of immune response for the gills. this is supported by the large amount of hemocytes present in the gills and the presence of lectins and lysozyme among differentially expressed genes . enrichment in genes involved in blood vessel and vascular development is expected in a highly vascularized tissue as the gills, while over-representation of microtubule-associated proteins might reflect the importance of cytoskeletal structures in gill epithelia.

gene count, p-value and fold enrichment  corresponding to each term are indicated.

strand orientation and antisense transcripts
as already mentioned, a great majority of probes showed a higher-than-background signal in four or more experiments, and nearly all of them in at least one. since for  <dig>  transcripts two probes with opposite orientation were designed, bi-directional transcription appears a common phenomenon in the clam transcriptome. in fact, it is now clear that animal genomes are transcribed on both strands  <cit>  and it is not to be excluded that part of the analyzed transcripts has a functional role  <cit> . in order to further explore this issue, microarray data for digestive glands and gills were analysed by examining sense-antisense probe pairs. after the exclusion of probes with missing data, absolute mean fluorescence signal values  obtained across biological replicates after normalization were divided into four classes . class assignment was conducted by considering the mean fluorescence value of the probe showing the lower signal for each pair comparison. likewise, fold change  between sense and antisense probes for each probe pair was assigned to four classes . our results showed that 75% and  <dig> % of probe-pairs had a signal ratio > <dig> in the gills and digestive gland, respectively, and 60% reported a signal ratio > <dig> in both tissues . this suggested a prevalent strand-orientation for the majority of transcribed regions in the clam genome. on the other hand, the absolute fluorescence for the "minor" strand was greater than  <dig> for  <dig>   and  <dig>  probe-pairs in the gills and digestive gland, respectively. in addition, a signal ratio <  <dig> and a minimum of fluorescence > <dig> was recorded for  <dig>  probe-pairs in the gills and  <dig>  probe-pairs in the digestive gland. these results suggested that natural antisense transcripts  may be present in the clam transcriptome. natural antisense transcripts have been originally identified by searching for est collections, and appear to be widespread across species, although at different frequencies  <cit> . various putative functions have been proposed for nats  <cit> . for instance, an important role in the production of endogenous sirnas is increasingly recognized  <cit> . a relevant question is whether nat transcription is correlated, either positively or negatively, with the expression of their sense counterpart or it is independent of it. this was evaluated by analyzing gene/transcripts represented with both sense and antisense probes pairs with sam, in order to identify those that were differentially expressed in gills and digestive glands . setting a threshold for fc to  <dig>  and enforcing a relatively stringent fdr , for  <dig> genes both probes presented a significant q value. of these,  <dig> showed concordant direction in sense/antisense regulation, while for  <dig> genes the two probes were up-regulated in the gills and the digestive gland, respectively. under a less stringent fdr ,  <dig>  probe-pairs resulted differentially regulated, with a proportion of paired probes expressed in opposite directions  similar to the one observed above ..

the number of probes belonging to each fold change  classes  is reported. probes are also distinguished according to the mean fluorescence value of the probe showing the lower signal .

clam genomic markers for environmental monitoring
a wide array of biochemical, cellular, and whole-organism markers have been applied to evaluate the biological effects of different types of pollutants in aquatic animals and to assess the status of marine ecosystems  <cit> . for instance, over-expression of metallothioneins  has been associated with exposure to heavy metals, inhibition of acetylcholinesterase  with organophosphorous, pesticide exposure, and induction of vitellogenin  proteins  with the presence of xenoestrogens .

in the r. philippinarum platform developed in this study at least four transcripts  that appear to be ache precursors and ten different expressed sequences  coding for a putative metallothionein were incorporated into the microarray. finally, a transcript  showing a significant match with invertebrate vg proteins was also included. it is worth mentioning that the lack of a specific anti-vg antibody for many species impairs direct measure of such biomarker, and only indirect estimates of vg concentration can be obtained using an alkali-labile phosphate  assay.

at the cellular level, loss of lysosomal membrane integrity has been observed as a consequence of oxidative stress induced by several class of chemicals. reduced lysosomal membrane stability is also linked to increased autophagy  <cit> . to which extent these biochemical and cellular markers might be mirrored by gene expression markers present in ruphibase based on go-cc annotation,  <dig> lysosomal proteins including several cathepsins and other hydrolases could be found in the current clam transcriptome. of note is a putative homolog  for autophagic transcript  <dig> , an ubiquitin-like modifier necessary for macroautophagy, while several ruphibase entries match with p14/robld <dig>  which is part of a protein complex that recruits mtor , a key negative regulator of autophagy, to the lysosome membrane  <cit> . further studies may be conducted to test whether chemical pollutants affecting lysosomal stability can induce alterations in expression levels of lysosomal and/or autophagy-related proteins. indeed, tributyltin chloride has recently been shown to inhibit mtor in neuronal cells  <cit> .

a separate discussion is required for gsts, which constitute a large protein family  <cit> , with a pivotal role in detoxification of xeno-compounds. these enzymes, involved in the conjugation of reduced glutathione to electrophilic centers on a wide variety of substrates, contribute to the detoxification of endogenous compounds  as well as xenobiotics, and an increased gst activity has been observed after exposure to a broad set of pollutants. a total of  <dig> ruphibase entries were annotated as putative gsts of different subfamilies. apart from four microsomal gsts, putative cytosolic gsts were divided into five subfamilies:  <dig> gst-σ,  <dig> gst-θ,  <dig> gst-π,  <dig> gst-μ,  <dig> gst-ω and  <dig> unclassified gst isoforms. comparison of clam transcripts against single-species complete transcriptomes revealed the highest number of matches  with zebrafish.,  <dig> α-like gsts,  <dig> gst-μ, and  <dig> gst-π isoforms were identified. human-clam comparison returned only  <dig> matches, although subfamily classification was more complex with  <dig> gst-μ,  <dig> gst-π,  <dig> gst-ξ,  <dig> gst-θ and  <dig> gst-ω isoforms. to further explore the incongruence between different annotations, we conducted a detailed analysis of the  <dig> gst-π isoforms classified on the basis of similarity against zebrafish. eight transcripts showed an open reading frame  encoding a putative complete coding sequence for gst, while four transcripts presented an orf encoding a partial gst coding sequence. the remaining sequences  contained either partial or complete gst coding sequences with reading frames interrupted by stop codons. comparative sequence analysis revealed that these frame-shifts were always due to insertions/deletions  within short homopolymeric stretches, a known problem with  <dig> pyrosequencing technology  <cit> . a phylogenetic tree was then reconstructed  using the eight complete ruphibase gsts together with the best matching protein from genbank as well as from human and zebrafish putative homologs . it is clear that the classification based on comparison with zebrafish is incorrect, hiding two groups of sequences, one belonging to the σ subfamily, the other containing bona fide gst-π proteins. using blast results, the remaining  <dig> partial and/or interrupted orfs were assigned to one gst sequence present in the tree in figure  <dig>  to obtain a classification of all  <dig> sequences originally assigned to the π subfamily. a tree-like representation is better suited to analyze and display the evolution of protein families or sub-families including a large number of multiple gene copies. the gene genealogy in figure  <dig> is just an example of what is expected in case of a significant multiplicity is observed, as is the case of the the subset of gst-encoding transcripts analyzed here. to which extent different gst sequences reflect the presence of distinct gst loci in the clam genome? pairwise comparison of best matching clam sequences across  <dig> gst-encoding transcripts  showed that one third of sequence differences  was due to indels, a likely consequence of sequencing errors, but the majority  are nucleotide replacements, which are much less frequently observed with  <dig> pyrosequencing technology. for  <dig> sequences the closest match has 1% sequence divergence, for  <dig> more than 2%. therefore, although part of the observed sequence diversity might be explained as different alleles of single gst loci, a substantial number of gst isoforms appear to be encoded by different genes. it should also be reminded here that this is a conservative estimate because in most comparisons only a fragment of the total sequence for each transcript, generally the one encompassing the coding region, was aligned . a similar problem of classification affects  <dig> sequences assigned to the θ gst subfamily, with  <dig> transcripts finding a pleuronectes platessa  θ gst as their best match in swissprot. this plaice θ gst has been recently re-assigned to a novel gst class, ρ  <cit> . therefore, most clam sequences attributed to the θ class might actually belong to this specific gst protein group, similar to the only putative θ gst from a mollusk species isolated so far  <cit> . on the other hand, the remaining three sequences matched either a mammalian or a avian θ gst protein and might represent the first evidence of molluscan θ gsts.

a correct classification of gst proteins is often difficult  <cit> , but it is mostly important when correlating the expression of different gst-encoding genes with exposure to specific groups of environmental pollutants, as the various gst classes show diverse substrate specificities, catalytic properties, and tissue distribution.

gene expression profiling of manila clam sampled in a polluted area of the venice lagoon
the venice lagoon, the largest in the mediterranean sea, is characterized by the presence of complex mixtures of xenobiotics, derived from both industrial and domestic effluents, which reach higher concentrations in specific areas, mainly close to the industrial zone of marghera. gene expression profiles of digestive glands and gills from manila clams harvested in a cleaner area  of the venice lagoon were compared to the corresponding tissues of clams sampled within the industrial area. this area shows high levels of contamination with different xenobiotics, as confirmed in various studies  <cit>  and it is currently restricted for clam harvesting.

for each tissue and comparison, raw and normalized fluorescence have been deposited in the geo data base  <cit>  under accession number geo:gse <dig>  a two-unpaired class sam test was carried out separately for digestive glands and gills on normalized data, enforcing a false discovery rate  of 10% and fold change  of  <dig> .

comparison of expression profiles between the two areas revealed a remarkably large number of differentially expressed transcripts in both tissues, respectively  <dig>  in the digestive gland and  <dig>  in the gills. a limited set of transcripts  showed differential expression in both tissues. fold-change differences varied from -174- to  <dig> -fold in the gills, with a prevalence for up-regulated transcripts  compared to down-regulated ones  in samples collected in the industrial area. this trend is reversed for transcripts displaying the strongest signal, as  <dig> probes showed fc >  <dig> , whereas  <dig> ones presented fc < - <dig> . in the digestive gland, fc ranged between -30- and 62-fold. a significant bias toward up-regulated transcripts  was observed in animals sampled in the industrial area, a bias that was even stronger for transcripts showing fc larger than ± 5-fold .

putative annotations were obtained respectively for  <dig> digestive gland- and  <dig> gills-specific transcripts by comparison against the ncbi protein non redundant database. when using the zebrafish transcriptome as a reference, respectively  <dig>  and  <dig>  differentially expressed sequences could be associated with one d. rerio ensembl gene ids .

in a comparison between natural population samples different environmental and/or physiological factors can influence gene expression profiles. the objective of the present study was to assess the role of chronic exposure to high levels of chemical pollution. to control for the effects of other factors, histological examination of collected animals was carried out showing similar sex ratio , comparable levels of parasitic contamination, average size , and reproductive stage . water temperature and salinity showed no significant differences between the two analyzed areas. indeed, the temperature and salinity recorded at the time of sampling were 18°c and  <dig> ‰ and 20°c and 34‰ in marghera and alberoni respectively. likewise, it seems quite difficult that strong genetic differentiation occurs at a such a small geographic scale , in the presence of a planktonic larval phase and a sustained water circulation within the venice lagoon. although evidence on population genetics for the manila clam is limited, it has been shown that no genetic structure was present across four population samples in the adriatic sea, including the venice lagoon  <cit> .

systematic functional annotation of differentially expressed transcripts, carried out through enrichment analysis in david  confirmed a putative role of pollution in the regulation of gene expression in the examined samples, especially in the digestive gland. this organ has been generally associated with response to pollutants, particularly with detoxification of xenobiotics. three significantly enriched go_bp terms , response to organic substances , to cadmium ion , and to methylmercury , two enriched kegg pathways, drug metabolism  and metabolism of xenobiotics by cytochrome p <dig> , support the evidence that the digestive gland is responsible for detoxification of environmental pollutants and suggests it as a target organ for the detection/identification of biomarkers of pollution. manual annotation of significant transcripts identified additional genes in the digestive gland with a known role in the response to environmental pollution.

details about "biological process", "molecular function" and "kegg pathways" represented by at least  <dig> genes up regulated in each tissue.

four transcripts encoding mts  and two encoding sulfotransferase    are over-expressed in samples from the industrial zone. mts provide protection against metal toxicity, are involved in the regulation of physiological metals  and provide protection against oxidative stress. mts can be induced either by essential metals  or non-essential ones  in both vertebrates and invertebrates. increased levels of mts after experimental exposure to high cu concentrations had been already reported in the digestive gland of r. philippinarum  <cit> , while higher mt protein expression had been found in clams collected at sites nearby the industrial zone of marghera  <cit> .

sults, a family of phase ii detoxification enzymes, are involved in the homeostasis of endogenous compounds as well as in the protection against xenobiotics. it is well known that sulfated products of environmental xenobiotics are more water-soluble and easily excreted from the body. channel catfish  exposed to polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons  showed a marked induction of phenol-type sulfotransferase enzyme activity  <cit> . in addition, sult <dig> was up-regulated in gadus morhua male sampled in two contaminated sites of western norway  <cit> . although these genes play a documented role in the defense from chemicals  <cit> , to our knowledge they have never been proposed as biomarkers in bivalve species.

ache enzymatic activity is inhibited in response to organophosphate insecticides and exposure to other pollutants. eight different clam transcripts encoding a peptide with putative cholinesterase activity are represented in the r. philippinarum microarray.

in the present study, an ache-encoding gene  was over-expressed in both gills and digestive glands of clams sampled in marghera. a similar finding has been already reported by somnuek et al.   <cit> , who demonstrated up-regulation of ache gene expression in hybrid catfish exposed to chlorpyrifos and proposed this gene as biomarker for detecting the effects of organophosphate insecticides. the apparently opposite transcriptional response on ache gene expression likely represents a compensatory modification to counteract inhibition of enzyme activity after xenobiotic exposure.

several gst-coding transcripts were also found up-regulated in samples collected in the polluted area. glutathione s-transferase  catalyses the conjugation of reduced glutathione to electrophilic centers on a wide variety of substrates. this activity detoxifies endogenous compounds  as well as xenobiotics and an increased of gsts activity has been observed after exposure to a broad set of xenobiotics.

gst-coding genes that are over-expressed in clams sampled in marghera either in the gills or in the digestive gland are different, except for a single transcript, which is up-regulated in both tissues . tissue-specific expression and sensitivity to dose/type of chemicals has been already reported in bivalves  <cit> , suggesting a complex regulation of these effectors in the response to toxicants. results obtained in the present study show also that various gst classes/isoforms are putatively involved in response to toxicants and emphasize the need for a proper classification of gst-coding genes. five classes of cytosolic gsts are differentially regulated together with a microsomal isoform in samples from the industrial area. of special interest are two distinct genes, both encoding a gst-θ isoform. as mentioned previously gsts belonging to the θ class have never been isolated in molluscs, and gstθs apparently represent a numerically minor component of the gst arsenal in the manila clam , yet two gstθ-like genes showed marked up-regulation in putatively contaminated samples of the same species . gst-like activity is one of the most relevant biochemical parameters that are measured in environmental studies on chemical pollution, commonly using 1-choloro- <dig> -dinitrobenzene  as a substrate  <cit> . gst-θ enzymes, however, have a peculiar substrate specificity. gst- θ <dig> ko mice showed no difference for in vivo processing of cdnb, while gst-activity against other substrates  was significantly lower after gst- θ  <dig> gene deletion. the results reported in the present study suggest that measuring gst-like enzymatic activity might not completely represent that complex gst-based response to toxicants in bivalves. accurate characterization of gst-encoding genes in species that are used for environmental monitoring coupled with transcriptome analysis could provide a more precise analysis of such a response, differentiating tissue-specificity and disentangling gst isoform diversity.

CONCLUSIONS
whole-transcriptome analysis holds the promise to shed light on the genetic mechanisms underlying cellular and organismal response to physiological and pathological conditions . this is of particular importance for improved shellfish aquaculture and for cost-effective environmental monitoring. the aim of the present paper was to lay the foundations for transcriptomics in the manila clam. to which extent this goal has been achieved? as demonstrated in previous studies  <cit> , the use of next-generation sequencing technology yielded a number of expressed sequences unattainable until only recently. in our study, sequence assembly, annotation and development of a dedicated database resulted in a searchable, functionally annotated transcriptome for r. philippinarum , which was then used to design a species-specific in-situ synthesized oligo microarray. this genomic platform has proven to provide reliable and highly reproducible results for global gene expression profiling  <cit> . moreover, validation of the clam oligo microarray showed tissue-specific expression profiles and highly significant correlations across biological replicates. the current version of ruphibase appears to offer already a good representation of the clam transcriptome, as shown by the broad array of potential markers of response to xenobiotics. of particular relevance is the large number  of gst-encoding transcripts observed in the manila clam, which suggested a potential relationship between filter-feeding behaviour, ability to cope with high levels of pollution and availability of a wide array of detoxifying enzymes. the possible use of this microarray platform for toxicogenomic studies has been also demonstrated by comparative analysis of digestive glands and gills pool of manila clam sampled in areas with different levels of chemical pollution of the venice lagoon.

on the other hand, despite the use of ultra-high throughput sequencing on normalized cdna libraries constructed from all adult tissues, representation of the clam transcriptome is still incomplete. for instance, the signaling pathway for autophagy consists of at least  <dig> different components  <cit> , yet only one of these, atg <dig>  a protein involved in autophagic vescicle assembly, was identified. the problem of incomplete representation of protein-coding transcripts will likely be solved in the near future, when reduction of sequencing costs and an increase in sequencing throughput will allow a much deeper sequence coverage even for non-model species transcriptomes. a more difficult issue to solve is the limited percentage of clam transcripts that can be matched against a known protein-coding gene. the large phylogenetic distance of the phylum mollusca from other metazoan model species  greatly reduces the power of a comparative approach for functional annotation. the only molluscan genome sequenced so far is that of l. gigantea, a gasteropod snail, which is functionally and evolutionarily distant from the class bivalvia.

to conclude on a positive note, the next "call on  stage" is for the pacific oyster, crassostrea gigas. for this bivalve mollusk species, a high quality draft genome sequence is expected in  <dig> thanks to the efforts of the oyster genome consortium. furthermore, worldwide aquaculture production of oysters amounts to over  <dig> million metric tons. the economic importance of the pacific oyster has fuelled a large number of studies on the ecology, physiology, immunology, and genetics of c. gigas populations, and the possibility of targeted gene knock down has been recently demonstrated  <cit> . the opportunity of having a bivalve model species available would allow a more accurate genome annotation for other important molluscs such as the manila clam.

