BACKGROUND
in molecular biology, the consideration of biochemical processes as elements in an abstract network has become more and more important in the last few years  <cit> . these network-oriented approaches bridge the gap between single units and collective behavior. metabolism is, in a sense, the mediator between organisms and their environment. resources, external conditions  and energy all affect the organism via its metabolism. at the same time, metabolism is a key field of application of network biology. the classical approach considers metabolic networks as the pattern of connections of metabolites via enzyme-driven reactions. in this way, reaction networks are straightforward abstractions of what is commonly known as metabolic pathway maps. global structural properties  <cit> , statistical parameters like the degree distribution  <cit>  and the diameter  <cit> , and local properties like the motif content  <cit>  are well studied. in combination with elementary flux mode analysis  <cit> , possible routes between different metabolites are quantified within a metabolic map, while flux balance analysis   <cit>  is suitable to predict the whole-cell behavior by adding constraints to the regulation of metabolic transformations. these theoretical approaches constitute important steps towards dynamics and have the potential to elucidate the fundamental link between topology and dynamics even further. particularly the recent work by almaas et al.  <cit>  points in this direction.

other types of metabolic networks have been established as well in recent time as the orthogonal networks, where enzymes are connected to each other when they share a common metabolite  <cit> , and the correlation networks. in correlation networks a connection between two metabolites  represents an above-threshold correlation in metabolite concentrations.

due to their quality of being derived from metabolic concentrations, they constitute an interesting intermediate between topology and dynamics. here we study the compatibility of this intermediate with its two antipodes: the topological structure given by the network of metabolic reactions and the dynamic behavior given by the time evolution of the correlations between metabolites.

the different relations between metabolites in both types of networks are illustrated in fig.  <dig>  which gives a qualitative view in an idealized situation, where all correlations between metabolites are produced by the reactions in a linear four-element chain. in this schematic example, the correlations are assumed to be high for immediate neighbors in the chain and slightly lower at higher distances. one sees that for small and intermediate thresholds in the correlation matrix the reconstructed network tends to compact the linear chain, while higher threshold values may break the chain. the precise pattern, how correlations decay along the chain, depends on details of the enzyme kinetics  <cit> . though this concept offers an intuitive explanation for a distribution of correlation coefficients it is reasonable to ask how these correlations are influenced in a more complex network structure taking other aspects into account like superior regulatory mechanisms.

such correlation networks have been reconstructed both from experimental data  <cit>  and from numerical simulations  <cit> . steuer et al.  <cit>  used a stochastic system of linear equations based on an underlying metabolic network of biochemical reactions to discover correlations between metabolite fluctuations around a steady-state. this system is related to the metabolic control analysis   <cit> , which also served as a groundwork for linear and non-linear perturbation studies of camacho et al.  <cit>  and vance et al.  <cit> . camacho et al.  <cit>  point out that different sources of variability can, in principle, lead to the observed correlations. all these studies show that the relation between metabolic correlation networks and the actual network given by the metabolic reactions is far from trivial. we therefore look at the similarity of these two graphs with simple topological tools asking, if two nodes are close to each other in the one network, when they are close in the other.

from the experimental point of view, metabolomic technologies provide widely-used tools to identify compounds in biological samples and to describe the current state of a system  <cit> . for details on the quantitative and qualitative analysis of the single metabolites see weckwerth and morgenthal  <cit>  and kell  <cit> . more than  <dig> different compounds have been isolated and identified in a single tissue in this way.

the studies on different samples revealed strong correlations between certain pairs of metabolites, while most other combinations displayed little or no correlation. such a correlation profile may serve as a basis for the construction of a metabolic correlation network. because anti-correlations might have a physiological cause as well, they are treated equally to positive correlations. beyond the identification of compounds via the concept of correlation networks, metabolomics is also capable to describe physiological processes in consequence of development and changing environmental conditions, since tissue samples can be analyzed at any point of time.

the interrelation between the architecture of a metabolic pathway map and the dynamic processes taking place upon it has sparsely been studied. results concern the distribution of node degrees and of metabolic fluxes which have both been found to be scale-free  <cit>  and the metabolic fluxes within the core of the metabolic network of e. coli, h. pylori, and s. cerevisiae  <cit> , but most other studies deal with artificial networks. in the case of metabolic networks one observes discrepancies between theoretical graphs and the real-world networks' topologies. one key publication on gene expression data in yeast  <cit>  indicates that metabolic reaction networks display both scale-free and exponential degree distributions depending on whether one takes all potential paths or particular realizations under certain conditions into account. furthermore, the biochemical modules derived from experimental data deviate from proposed modules in theoretical reaction networks. here we will not focus on topological properties of metabolic correlation networks, but look at them as a mediator between topology and dynamics. since a correlation network represents a dynamic aspect of the metabolic network, it is suitable for comparison with its topological counterpart.

RESULTS
time consistency of metabolic correlation topologies
when analyzing the metabolite correlations in different plant samples at different sampling points in time one has to consider three potential contributions to the data: short-term fluctuations in the metabolites' concentrations represented by all plant samples at a given time point may either reflect intrinsic noise or may originate from plant-to-plant variability. lastly, systematic changes of the steady-state correlation networks over time along a diurnal cycle may contribute to the data. here we want to find out, whether the  correlation networks obtained from different time points are systematically similar. two main effects can be expected:  network similarity should on average be higher for networks at neighboring time points compared to more distant time points,  day-night and night-day transitions should be associated with substantially lower network similarity .

in the first step of our analysis, we investigated this temporal property by studying the similarity σ of different correlation networks  as a function of their relative positions in time. we want to see, if the network similarity depends on the time difference Δt between the corresponding sampling points. due to the non-uniform sampling in time and the strong dependence of σ on the threshold κ, it is convenient to restrict the analysis to the question, whether a conclusion exists between the network similarity σ and the time difference Δt. in the following, the correlation coefficient between network similarity σ and time difference Δt is denoted by θ = θ, which is a measure of the temporal systematics of the correlation networks. for the evaluation of Δt, we assumed a periodic rhythm of  <dig> hours, i.e. the intervals of all sampling points with more than  <dig> hours difference were recalculated according to a  <dig> h cycle. the interval between  <dig> h light and  <dig>  h dark, for example, is  <dig>  h  and  <dig>  h . for each sampling point in time we varied the threshold κ in steps of  <dig> . note that when κ is varied between  <dig> and  <dig>  connectivity varies accordingly. for each value of κ, the similarity of each pair of correlation networks  was determined . the correlation coefficient θ is then determined by forming pairs of σ and Δt. fig.  <dig> depicts the results for different values of the data reliability ω . the consistency of all curves suggests a high robustness of the results to the choice of data. over a wide range of κ, θ exhibits strong anti-correlated values, which indicates a higher network similarity the closer the sampling points lie in time. for values of κ <  <dig>  all networks are approximately the same, thus losing all correlations, while for higher values of κ the emerging fluctuations of θ can be regarded as a consequence of a low connectivity and network fragmentation and the corresponding loss of correlation data. significance issues enter fig.  <dig> on two levels. first, the small number of replicates, which forms the basis of the covariance matrix, provides a lower significance limit of the threshold κ. we used a p-value of  <dig>  for this, leading to κ >  <dig> . second, above a certain level in κ the network is fragmented and some pair-wise distances are no longer defined. for our data fragmentation sets in for κ ≈  <dig> . in fig.  <dig> and the consecutive figures we highlight the range of κ obeying both criteria. analyzing statistically significant deviations from zero of θ in fig.  <dig> for this range of κ, we find a p-value p <  <dig> . the scatter diagram  exemplarily displays the relation between the time difference Δt and network similarity σ. for κ =  <dig>  the corresponding correlation coefficient  is θ = - <dig> . if one repeats this consistency analysis with correlation networks taken at identical connectivities , we also observe a systematic deviation of θ from zero in the interesting range of κ. in order to rule out the influence of any intrinsic network properties on σ we also checked that the consistency parameter θ is close to zero for the relevant range of κ when we maximally randomize the correlation networks.

surprisingly, we find a high network similarity for the night-day transition and a low similarity for the day-night transition. understanding this would, however, require more data. omitting day-night transitions from this analysis and determining the consistency parameter θ at  <dig>  <κ <  <dig>  consequently yields a more pronounced result with comparable p-values.

are correlation networks and metabolic reaction networks related?
on the basis of the data set of ma and zeng  <cit>  and the data set of weckwerth et al.  <cit> ,  <dig> common compounds have been identified, which are present in both networks. this value primarily depends on the number of identified compounds in the metabolomic analysis. unidentified compounds are systematic signals in the metabolomic data, which cannot be unambiguously associated with a node in the reaction network. the effect of unidentified metabolites is difficult to estimate. whether they influence the length scale  or not mainly depends on the individual structure of the network. the known metabolites show approximately the same distribution of pair distances as the complete reaction network and can therefore be regarded as a representative subset of the whole graph in this property. we also checked the influence of unknown nodes on the network similarity σ for two erdős-rényi  random graphs  <cit>   when using less and less nodes for this computation. similarity σ displays only a marginal dependency on the number of contributing nodes even if half of the nodes are used.

the common metabolites may serve as a basis for the computation of the pair distances, the statistical parameter already used in the previous section to determine the relation between two networks. this compound list primarily consists of two biochemical substance classes, namely the carbohydrates and amino acids and their corresponding derivatives . there are a few compounds, which are assigned to the citric acid cycle, the photosynthesis, and the phospholipid and glycolipid metabolism, respectively.

list of compounds belonging to the class of amino acids and carbohydrates which have been found in both metabolic networks of a. thaliana.

again, we generated correlation networks of varied connectivity for each sampling point in time by adjustment of κ between  <dig> and  <dig>  in the following, only the results for ω =  <dig> are discussed, since only marginal differences were observed for ω <  <dig>  results of the network similarity σ for all sampling points are depicted in fig.  <dig>  limits for the significance analysis were applied as described before. in this range of κ two sampling points display minor positive correlations and one sampling point minor negative correlations . the other three sampling points display no systematic deviation from zero . thus, taking all sampling points together the results suggest no correlation between the two network types. due to the three sampling points failing our significance analysis, however, we analyze this correlation also by means of another network property, namely the centrality σc  <cit>  of all common nodes. this topological parameter was tested accordingly  and, here, no significant deviations from zero similarity  and therefore from the pair distance results were observed.

analysis of module-module interaction
the different distribution of metabolites in both types of networks is best illustrated through the comparison of class-specific compounds. we identified all metabolites in the networks, which belong to the group of amino acids and carbohydrates , respectively, and calculated all pair distances within these groups. we checked all sampling points, different values of ω, and adjusted κ in a way to obtain sparsely connected networks, which in their connectivity resemble their topological counterpart. the metabolic reaction network  exhibits a distinct clustering within the biochemical classes, especially for the carbohydrates . fig. 5b depicts the distribution of these selected compounds across the reaction network. the correlation networks  display no significant difference between the intra-class and inter-class specific pair distances, if one takes all compounds into account. we performed a upgma cluster analysis on the distance matrices of the correlation networks in order to find the inter-class and intra-class specific clusters of metabolites with special regard to their day and night time-specific emergence. to insure that more than  <dig> % of the selected metabolites lie within the giant component of the network we restricted this analysis to values of  <dig>  <κ <  <dig> . we recovered a prescribed number nm =  <dig> of clusters each with at least two metabolites by horizontally cutting the tree at a certain hight. therefore, one has to analyze the dependence of the cluster predictions on threshold variation. that way, several omnipresent groups of metabolites could be identified . others appeared either at day or at night. within the night samples, there were two distinct groups one solely containing metabolites of the class of carbohydrates  and one inter-class specific group , while the day samples contained several intra-class specific clusters  and one inter-class specific cluster . all metabolites in the inter-class specific clusters display a pair distance of at least  <dig> in the reaction network.

CONCLUSIONS
in this work we investigated systematically the relationship between metabolic correlation networks and genome-wide predicted reaction networks. in recent studies we investigated how correlation networks are causally connected to the underlying biochemical reaction network and its regulation  <cit> . however, all these studies revealed the discrepancy between predicted pathway connectivity and a simple extrapolation of these hypothetical networks to correlation networks. we detected overall changes in the correlation network topology, which are rather based on specific enzyme activity alterations  <cit> . therefore a systematic comparison of predicted pathway map structure and the experimental metabolite covariance is crucial. based on the prediction that alterations in biochemical regulation will change the correlation network structure  <cit>  we have investigated different correlation network structures during a diurnal time course in arabidopsis plant leaf samples. intriguingly, the structure of these networks did not match the predicted pathway connectivity in plant metabolism, but nevertheless varies systematically in time. moreover, compared to theoretical pathways in arabidopsis the correlation network structure revealed different and novel clusters of compounds such as the correlation of aromatic amino acids and housekeeping sugars which is not predicted by the topology of theoretical pathways . this fact supports our hypothesis that the correlation network largely reflects biochemical regulation. particularly this observation that the systematics of correlation networks are somewhat orthogonal to those contained in pathways networks, suggests that the systematic and differential analysis of metabolite correlation network structures and metabolite covariances will in the future lead to novel insights into biochemical regulation and regulatory hubs in the in vivo system.

