BACKGROUND
complex and interconnected networks of gene expression, cellular signaling and other processes within cells and organs are what control biological processes. this raises the concern that the common reductionist experimental approach to biomedical research may not be adequate to fully understand the systems that control these processes. reductionist experiments will commonly impose single treatments onto the biological entity under study and measure a single response parameter compared to controls. a relevant example from the authors’ own laboratory is the study of the effect that treatment of neonatal rat ovaries with anti-müllerian hormone  has on the proportion of primordial follicles formed  <cit> . results from these types of experiments can provide clear information about candidate regulatory factors, but typically do not elucidate the network of factors or signals that are required for a normal biological process. a systems biology experimental approach to studying normal development can be a powerful tool that is complementary to the more reductionist methods. the goal of the current study is to use a systems biology approach to identify gene expression networks involved in the formation of ovarian primordial follicles , and to identify putative regulatory factors involved in this developmental process.

primordial follicle assembly is the process by which ovarian primordial follicles are formed. a primordial follicle is composed of an oocyte arrested in prophase of the first meiotic division and surrounded by a single layer of pre-granulosa cells  <cit> . follicle assembly in mammals occurs either during gestation  or shortly after birth . the pool of assembled primordial follicles is the source of oocytes for follicle growth and ovulation over the course of a female’s reproductive life  <cit> . when the primordial follicle pool is depleted reproduction ceases and women enter menopause  <cit> . prior to follicle assembly, mitotic proliferation of germ cells creates groups of cells linked by intracellular bridges and surrounded by an epithelial/mesenchymal cell layer and the structures are called oocyte nests and when the surrounding stromal cells are considered ovigerous cords  <cit> . the mitotically arrested germ cells within the nests enter meiosis and progress to the diplotene stage of prophase one of meiosis and arrest at that stage until such time as ovulation occurs  <cit> .

during the follicle assembly process oocyte nests break down and a single layer of pre-granulosa cells surrounds individual oocytes to form primordial follicles  <cit> . the majority of oocytes in each nest undergo apoptosis during follicle assembly  <cit> . abnormalities in the follicle assembly process can lead to a reduced primordial follicle pool size and reproductive capacity. abnormal pool size may lead to some types of infertility such as primary ovarian insufficiency  in which the follicle pool is depleted early in life and women undergo early menopause  <cit> . previous research has shown that several extracellular signaling molecules  can regulate follicle assembly  <cit> . these studies have primarily used a reductionist approach to test candidate factors one at a time for their ability to affect the assembly process. growth factors and hormones that have been shown to regulate primordial follicle assembly include anti-müllerian hormone    <cit> , connective tissue growth factor    <cit> , estradiol    <cit> , activin a   <cit> , progesterone    <cit> , tumor necrosis factor alpha    <cit> , members of the notch/jagged signaling pathway   <cit> , members of the brain derived neurotrophic factor  / ntrk <dig> neurotrophin signaling pathway  <cit>  and kit ligand  and growth differentiation factor- <dig>    <cit> . evidence suggests fibroblast growth factor- <dig>  may also be a regulator of follicle assembly  <cit> , although this has not been confirmed experimentally.

a systems biology experimental approach was employed in the current study to expand upon the results of these previous experiments that examined single gene effects on the follicle assembly process. a similar systems biology approach has been used previously to identify coordinately and interconnected expressed gene modules and gene networks that regulate the primordial to primary follicle transition which is the subsequent stage of ovarian follicle development  <cit> . this previous study used a systems approach to elucidate the suite of genes involved in initiating the development of arrested primordial follicles to initiate folliculogenesis. in the current investigation, whole rat ovaries from zero-day old rats were cultured in vitro in a manner that allows primordial follicle assembly to occur. the ovaries were treated with one of several different extracellular signaling factors that have been shown to regulate follicle assembly. messenger rna was isolated from the ovaries and used for microarray transcriptome analysis to globally survey gene expression under these different treatment conditions. the effects of each signaling factor treatment were analyzed to determine similarities and differences in gene expression between the treatments. a gene bionetwork analysis subjected all the differentially expressed genes across all treatments to a weighted co-expression cluster analysis to identify groups of genes  whose expression was regulated in a coordinated and interconnected manner  <cit> . in this type of analysis biological systems are surveyed with microarrays multiple times with and without perturbations that cause the system to change. the coordinately and interconnected expressed gene modules identified are often associated with specific physiological processes and have been used to identify potential therapeutic targets  <cit> . in addition, the various groups and modules of genes identified were subjected to an unbiased gene network analysis that compared gene lists to databases of known gene binding and/or functional relationships. the gene expression analyses can then be interpreted from the standpoint of physiological function and important regulatory gene networks. the objective of the investigation was to use a systems biology experimental approach to identify gene expression networks involved in regulating primordial follicle assembly. novel regulatory factors and potential therapeutic targets were identified that correlate with normal follicle assembly and associated ovarian disease.

RESULTS
actions on primordial follicle assembly
in the selection of regulatory factors to be used in the current study one novel factor was considered. previous research  <cit>  indicated that fgf <dig> might be a regulatory growth factor for the follicle assembly process. in order to determine if fgf <dig> would be included as a treatment in the current study, organ culture experiments were performed to empirically test the effects of fgf <dig> on follicle assembly. ovaries from zero-day old rats containing un-assembled oocytes in nests  were placed into an organ culture system and cultured for two days with or without fgf <dig>  after culture ovaries were fixed, sectioned, stained and evaluated morphologically . the number of oocytes in oocyte nests and assembled into primordial follicles was observed . results indicate that treatment with 10ng/ml fgf <dig> resulted in a modest but statistically significant increase in the proportion of oocytes retained in unassembled nests . a larger duration culture of four days promotes a greater magnitude response, but is a combined effect of oocyte survival and follicle assembly, such that the shorter duration culture was used to focus on follicle assembly. a  <dig> ng/ml dose did not have an effect in comparison with the  <dig> ng/ml dose which is assumed to be due to negative feedback regulation during the  <dig> day culture period required. there was no statistical difference in the total number of oocytes per ovarian cross-section with fgf <dig> treatment , although there was a trend for oocyte numbers to rise. observations suggest fgf <dig> acts to inhibit the follicle assembly process. based on these results it was decided that fgf <dig> be included as a treatment in the follicle assembly network experiments.

growth factor and hormone regulation of the ovarian transcriptome
to determine the gene networks and processes involved in follicle assembly ovaries from zero-day old rats were placed into an organ culture system and exposed to different regulatory factors. the ovaries were treated for  <dig> hours with one of each of the following regulatory extracellular signaling factors: amh, ctgf, e <dig>  fgf <dig>  activin a, p <dig>  tnfa, or were untreated as controls. ctgf, activin a, estradiol have been shown the increase assembly, while amh, progesterone and tnfa decrease assembly. a  <dig> hour culture period was used to minimize the impact of differences in follicle numbers , due to the required  <dig> days of culture to observe detectable morphological differences. after culture the ovaries receiving the same treatment from one culture well were pooled and rna isolated. there were three different experiments involving different ovaries for each of the seven treatment compounds, and seven different experiments with different ovaries for the controls, for a total of  <dig> samples . gene expression in the rna samples was evaluated using affymetrix© rat gene  <dig>  st microarrays. array data pre-processing and evaluation determined that one array  was abnormal and an outlier, so that array was eliminated from further analysis .

the sets of differentially expressed genes, defined as signature lists, in the treated ovary groups compared to controls were identified using criteria as described in methods. a total of  <dig> genes were differentially expressed in ovaries treated with these known regulators of follicle assembly, suggesting these genes are involved in the ovarian primordial follicle assembly process. whether the specific genes have an increase or decrease in expression is shown in additional file 2: table s <dig>  each treatment resulted in  <dig> to  <dig> genes being differentially expressed compared to controls. interestingly, there were relatively few  differentially expressed genes in common between the different treatments  as indicated for specific genes in additional file 2: table s <dig>  only one gene, the growth factor staniocalcin  <dig>  was differentially expressed in as many as four different treatments, and no other genes were differentially expressed in more than three treatments . these genes in these signature lists were categorized into gene functional categories. the metabolism and transport, signaling, and receptors and binding proteins were predominant categories for all treatments .

primordial follicle assembly pathway analysis
the complete list of  <dig> differentially expressed genes from the signature lists were correlated to curated cellular pathway and process gene lists from the kegg database  to identify physiological processes and pathways that may be regulated during follicle assembly. pathways that were statistically over-represented within the differentially expressed gene lists included focal adhesion, chemokine signaling, cytochrome p <dig> metabolism, glutathione metabolism, ecm-receptor interaction and ribosomal components . there was a high degree of overlap of affected pathways between different treatments . the statistical analysis used both a hypergeometric probability calculation and fishers exact test calculation to identify statistical likelihood of over-representation of differentially expressed genes in pathways . this analysis reduces the variable of data set size and potential for artifact generation by identifying those pathways with over-representation having differentially expressed genes from several treatments. as can be seen, not all pathways had statistical significance while others consistently did . from 44% to 87% of affected pathways were common between treatments. according to fisher’s exact test the probability that our list of differentially expressed genes randomly overlaps with the pathways is negligible , particularly since we had many genes falling in more than one pathway. as can be seen in additional file 3: table s <dig> and figure  <dig>  most affected pathways contained differentially expressed genes from several different treatments. as shown in the focal adhesion pathway, five of the factors affected genes in the same pathway . therefore, each of these extracellular signaling factors that were used as treatments affected similar pathways via different genes. there were isolated exceptions to this trend. for example, all of the genes present in the ribosome process pathway were induced by activin a treatment, and four of five genes in the gabaergic synapse pathway were induced by fgf <dig> .

primordial follicle assembly bionetwork analysis
gene expression level data from the entire set of  <dig> differentially expressed genes was subjected to a cluster analysis to identify groups  of genes whose expression is regulated in a coordinated and interconnected manner . the cluster analysis scores each gene according to how well across different treatments its changes in gene expression are correlated with the changes in expression of every other gene. high connectivity scores indicate that expression of a particular gene changes in concert with that of many other genes. in addition, the cluster expression analysis identifies gene modules in which the member genes have similar changes in expression in response to the various experimental treatments. such gene modules are often associated with specific biological processes  <cit> . to identify gene modules, a topological overlap matrix  <cit>  was generated that reflected connectivity scores and sorted genes based on an agglomerative hierarchical clustering algorithm . the topological overlap matrix map with gene modules color-coded for the nine modules identified is shown in figure  <dig>  the module to which each gene belongs can be found in additional file 2: table s <dig>  the nine modules contained collectively  <dig> genes with the remaining  <dig> genes  not falling into any module. the list of differentially expressed genes in each module was correlated to signaling pathway and cellular process databases to determine if specific physiological processes were associated with particular modules . those pathways and processes statistically over-represented for each module are shown in table  <dig>  the turquoise module predominately contains genes coding for ribosomal components and genes involved in protein and glutathione metabolism. the blue module contains genes involved in processes related to tissue morphogenesis. the red module has genes involved with germ cells and meiosis. some physiological processes, such as apoptosis and extracellular matrix function, were over-represented in several modules. however, in general the genes of different modules were over-represented in different cellular pathways and processes .

*gene number module overlap is the number of genes from that module that are in common with those in the listed physiological process or pathway .

†fisher’s exact test was used to calculate a p-value reflecting the probability that the specified module and pathway/process would have listed number of overlapped genes.

genes whose expression altered in response to treatments were correlated with the genes assigned to each module to determine if specific modules were heavily influenced by particular regulatory factors . in most cases, differentially expressed genes from each treatment group could be found in each of the modules. however, some modules had strikingly high numbers of genes in common with specific treatments. for example, among the  <dig> genes of the turquoise module and the  <dig> genes of the activin a treatment group,  <dig> genes were in common. interestingly, these included  <dig> of the  <dig> differentially expressed genes that populated the ribosomal component process. in addition, among the  <dig> genes of the blue module and the  <dig> genes of the fgf <dig> treatment group,  <dig> genes were in common. similarly, there were  <dig> genes in common between the brown module and the p <dig> treatment group, and these included  <dig> of the  <dig> genes that populated the olfactory transduction pathway .

primordial follicle assembly gene network analysis
in order to determine what functional relationships and gene networks exist between the differentially expressed genes identified, the complete list of  <dig> genes was subjected to an automated unbiased analysis of published literature using pathway studio software , . a total of  <dig> genes were found to form a gene network that linked neighboring genes together with regulatory or binding relationships. while this network was too large and complex for easy visual interpretation , inferences about the genes involved can be obtained. genes with the greatest number of putative regulatory connections to neighbors in the network were considered to be important in controlling the follicle assembly process, either as upstream regulators of the assembly network or as downstream targets of the network. the genes with the most connections to neighbors in the network of  <dig> genes were il1b , fn <dig>  and igf <dig>  .

each module of coordinately regulated genes was subjected to gene network analysis to determine which genes within a module formed a gene network as shown in figure  <dig>  a network for the turquoise module identified fn <dig>  stat <dig>  and vcam  as having many connections, suggesting they may play a role in controlling the physiological processes mediated by the turquoise module. for the blue module  cav <dig> , anxa <dig> , f <dig>  and ccnd <dig>  have the most neighbor connections. f <dig> and ccnd <dig> are seen to be primarily the recipients of the regulatory relationships suggesting their regulation may be an important output of the blue module network. although relatively small, the black module also formed a network of connected genes . the growth factors igf <dig> and il1b have the most neighbor connections. the remaining modules did not form significant networks of genes related to each other, even though many of these modules had more genes than were present in the black module.

each treatment signature list of differentially expressed genes was analyzed to determine which genes formed a gene network of regulatory relationships. for the genes of the e <dig> treatment group, igf <dig> is seen to have many neighbor connections . for the fgf <dig> treatment network vcam, vim  and tgfb <dig>  have many neighbor connections, while ccnd <dig> and f <dig> appear to be outputs of the network . for the activin a treatment group, the transcription factor stat <dig> and the growth factor cxcl <dig> have many connections, while fn <dig> appears to be an output .

in order to determine those genes whose actions are likely to be the most important in regulating the control of primordial follicle assembly, a combined approach was taken that determined the gene network associated with the most highly interconnected genes. for each module, the top 10% of genes with the highest connectivity index   were selected. these genes were then screened for whether they were present in the large network of  <dig> genes with known regulatory connections derived from the entire list of  <dig> differentially expressed genes . those genes from the top 10% of each module  that also had the most neighbor connections  are presented in table  <dig>  these included the transcriptions factors ppargc1a and gata <dig>  the growth factor tgfb <dig>  the transferrin receptor , mdm <dig> and prkcb . these genes formed a regulatory network among themselves, and were associated with specific pathways and cellular processes. as can be seen in figure  <dig>  these genes have been previously shown to influence the processes of apoptosis, vascularization, contraction, cell migration, proliferation and differentiation.

*local connectivity is the number of regulatory connections which that gene has with other genes, identified in published literature, within the gene network of  <dig> genes derived from the complete set of  <dig> differentially expressed genes .

other groups of differentially expressed genes examined were the growth factor, hormone and receptor families. these genes provide novel regulatory factors to be investigated in future studies in their role in controlling ovarian primordial follicle assembly. a subset of the entire set of  <dig> differentially expressed genes, comprised of growth factors, hormones and their receptors was evaluated for their ability to form a sub-network of regulatory connections. a sub-network of  <dig> genes was identified showing the regulatory connections between these growth factors and receptors .

primordial follicle assembly signaling pathway modulation and validation
as described above, specific physiological processes and pathways are over-represented in the lists of differentially expressed genes identified in these studies , and so are predicted to be important in regulating follicle assembly. the mapk signaling, focal adhesion and chemokine signaling pathways are over-represented in particular gene modules or in the global set of all  <dig> differentially expressed genes. erk1/ <dig>  is a kinase that plays a prominent role in these pathways . erk1/ <dig> activity is inhibited by dusp <dig>   <cit> . in order to test if these physiological pathways are in fact important to the assembly process, ovaries from 0-day old rats were treated in vitro for  <dig> days with the inhibitor of dusp6: bci -2-benzylidene-3-- <dig> -dihydro-1h-inden-1-one  <cit> . dusp <dig> inhibition resulted in a significant increase in the proportion of assembled follicles at the end of ovary culture with no effect on oocyte numbers . therefore, alteration of erk1/ <dig> signaling in physiological pathways predicted to be important for follicle assembly resulted in a change in the rate of assembly of primordial follicles.

primordial follicle assembly regulated gene correlation with ovarian disease
the final analysis identified those differentially expressed genes associated with ovarian disease. the genes within the differentially expressed gene lists  that have previously been shown to be linked in the literature with primary ovarian insufficiency  and polycystic ovarian syndrome  were identified . seventeen genes associated with poi and pcos were identified and two genes, igf <dig> and tgfbr <dig> were common to both poi and pcos.

discussion
a systems biology approach was used to elucidate how regulatory factors alter gene expression to influence ovarian primordial follicle assembly. neonatal rat ovaries were treated with different growth factors or hormones and changes in gene expression at the transcriptome level were assayed and analyzed. the strength of a systems biology approach is that it is unbiased and examines the genome wide complexity of gene expression to elucidate regulatory networks that control developmental processes. these genes are identified regardless of whether they have known functions consistent with the follicle assembly process or whether they have known functions at all. the unbiased systems analysis allows the complexity of the biology to be considered to elucidate the developmental process. future investigations can now target identified genes to further characterize their specific actions in the networks regulating follicle assembly.

primordial follicle assembly growth factors and hormones investigated
ovaries were treated with several different growth factors or hormones that affect the assembly process to get a more complete view of the gene expression changes accompanying primordial follicle assembly. a number of growth factors and hormones previously shown to influence primordial follicle assembly were selected including: amh  <cit> , ctgf  <cit> , estradiol  <cit> , progesterone  <cit> , activin a  <cit> , and tnfa  <cit> . the combined actions of factors on assembly has not been thoroughly investigated, but studies on follicle transition have shown combined stimulatory or inhibitory factors does not provide an additional response different from the individual factors  <cit> . all of the growth factors and corresponding receptors, as well as hormone receptors, associated with the factors used have been shown to be expressed in the ovary during primordial follicle assembly. for example, amh is expressed in the stromal/interstitial cells of the  <dig> day ovary followed by expression later in development by the secondary and developing follicles  <cit> . interestingly, some of the factors promote follicle assembly , while others  inhibit follicle assembly. therefore, both positive and negative regulation of follicle assembly is considered when characterizing the regulatory gene networks. comparison of the stimulatory versus inhibitory factors did not show any major differences in regards to regulated genes or gene networks.

in addition to these known regulatory agents, a novel factor was examined and included in the analysis. previous research suggested fgf <dig> may be a regulator of follicle assembly. a receptor for fgf <dig>  fgfr2b, has previously been shown to be differentially expressed in 0-day old rat ovaries with oocyte nests compared to 4-day old ovaries that had completed assembly  <cit> . treatment of neonatal rat ovaries with the known inhibitor of follicle assembly amh resulted in differential expression of nudt <dig>   <cit> , which acts as an antisense inhibitor of fgf <dig> expression  <cit> . in order to determine if fgf <dig> would be included as a treatment in the current investigations, organ culture experiments were performed to empirically test the effects of fgf <dig> on follicle assembly. it was found that fgf <dig> acts as an inhibitor of follicle assembly . the magnitude of the inhibitory actions can be increased with an extended culture duration , but then alterations in follicle number and ovarian morphology become confounders influencing data interpretation. a short 2-day culture was used to reduce these confounder effects. the optimal dose for the analysis of in vitro follicle assembly analysis was lower than that for the short-term 24-hour culture gene expression analysis, in part due to the negative feedback of the extended culture duration. the fgf <dig> was found to alter the expression of  <dig> genes with approximately 10% of these genes in common with the differentially expressed gene sets of the other features. although the differentially expressed genes influenced by fgf were unique, 50– <dig> different pathways were affected and in common with other factors investigated, . therefore fgf <dig> was included as one of the seven treatments used to perturb the neonatal rat ovary experimental system.

primordial follicle assembly differentially expressed genes
one thousand and eight-one genes were found to be differentially expressed compared to controls when results were combined across the different treatment groups. these genes were predominantly from the functional categories of metabolism and transport, signaling proteins and receptors. the genes differentially expressed in response to each growth factor or hormone treatment were compared across the different treatments. interestingly, only a small proportion of differentially expressed genes  were found to be common between any two treatments . this is somewhat surprising in light of the fact that all the treatments affect the same process of follicle assembly. however, this same finding was observed in a systems biology investigation of genes regulating ovarian primordial to primary follicle transition  <cit> . in that study different treatments, all known to regulate the transition of arrested primordial follicles to developing primary follicles, were found to have few differentially expressed genes in common. although neither this previous study nor the current study found a high degree of overlap between the specific treatment signature gene lists, there was a high degree of overlap among the specific signaling pathways and cellular processes impacted by the differentially expressed genes of each treatment . this indicates that all the treatments affect similar cellular pathways and processes as follicle assembly occurs , but that each treatment affects different genes in those pathways. as shown in additional file 2: table s <dig>  some pathways had a highly statistically significant over-representation of differentially expressed genes while others did not, suggesting the analysis was not unduly influenced by data set size or simply an artifact of the analysis. an example of this is shown in figure  <dig> where five of the different factors affected different genes in the focal adhesion pathway. similar observations have shown this phenomena in other biological systems  <cit> . multiple input points into these cellular pathways and processes may allow for more precise regulation and for a more robust regulatory network in the face of disruptions.

a cluster analysis of coordinated gene expression grouped the differentially expressed genes into gene modules containing genes whose expression responded in concert to the different growth factor and hormone treatments. this approach of generating a weighted gene network and then clustering genes making use of a topological overlap matrix has been used extensively for uncovering biologically meaningful gene modules  <cit> . the gene modules identified in the current study were, on the whole, each enriched with genes associated with differing cellular pathways and processes . for example, the turquoise module contains genes coding for ribosomal components, while the blue module contains genes involved in processes related to tissue morphogenesis, and the red module has genes associated with meiosis. this suggests that these modules of genes are each responsible for controlling distinct functions necessary for primordial follicle assembly. in contrast, most modules were enriched for genes involved in apoptosis and extracellular matrix function, perhaps underscoring the importance of these processes to follicle assembly. oocyte apoptosis is known to have a vital role in the assembly of primordial follicles  <cit> . identification and examination of the gene modules helps elucidate the molecular control of follicle assembly.

when genes whose expression changed in response to treatments were cross-matched with the genes assigned to each module, it was found that in most cases differentially expressed genes from each treatment group could be found in all the gene modules . this is consistent with the idea that all the treatments affect the same cellular processes, but that each treatment affects different genes within those pathways. however, it should be noted that in some cases a particular treatment shared a disproportionate number of genes within a specific module. for example, the activin a treatment resulted in differential expression of  <dig> genes, of which  <dig> were in common with the  <dig> genes assigned to the turquoise module, and these included almost all the genes that coded for ribosomal components. therefore, in some cases signaling from a particular growth factor will induce a suite of genes that may be targeted toward specific physiological tasks.

primordial follicle assembly gene networks
in order to identify functional relations among differentially expressed genes, an analysis of published literature was used to detect connections among listed genes to form gene networks of putative regulatory relationships. examination of these networks can yield inferences about how genes interact to regulate primordial follicle assembly, and can identify potentially important control points within these regulatory networks. when the entire list of genes found to be differentially expressed during follicle assembly was analyzed in this way it was found that the genes il1b , fn <dig>  and igf <dig>  had the most regulatory connections to neighbors. these genes are considered important in controlling the follicle assembly process as either regulators of the assembly network or as downstream effectors of the network. however, it should be kept in mind that genes that have been extensively studied are more likely to have relationships with other genes in the published literature, and that un-studied genes may in fact be important. nonetheless, gene networks of regulatory connections provide a good starting point toward understanding the control of processes such as follicle assembly.

since the genes of each module may act in concert to accomplish distinct cellular processes during follicle assembly, each module was analyzed separately for gene networks of putative regulatory relationships. the genes of the turquoise, blue and black modules each formed distinct gene networks , implicating the genes fn <dig>  stat <dig> , vcam , cav <dig> , anxa <dig> , f <dig> , ccnd <dig> , igf <dig> and il1b as being important within their respective modules. interestingly, genes of the brown, yellow, green, red, pink and magenta modules did not contain gene networks of known regulatory relationships, even though some of these modules contained many more genes than the black module, which did have such a network. this suggests that the genes within each of these modules may have as yet un-characterized regulatory relationships with each other. furthermore, the genes of the red module were not found to be over-represented in association with any particular known cellular pathways or processes, and many of the red module genes are poorly characterized expressed sequence tags . however, genes of the red module had relatively high connectivity scores , indicating that this group of genes was quite tightly co-regulated . observations suggest that groups of poorly characterized genes are likely playing important roles in primordial follicle assembly. further research is needed to uncover the functions of these genes and their roles in developmental processes such as follicle assembly.

the most highly interconnected  genes from each module were compared to databases of genes present in specific cellular pathways and processes. this group of highly interconnected genes was found to be over-represented in the processes of apoptosis, cell migration, cell differentiation and cell proliferation . this is consistent with the activities that occur during follicle assembly and supports the idea that these highly interconnected genes contribute to follicle assembly. genes were also over-represented in the process of vascularization which is not known to be a part of follicle assembly. investigations into the role vascularization plays in follicle assembly are suggested in future studies.

analysis of a specific gene sub-network of differentially expressed genes in the growth factor, hormone and receptor functional gene categories identified a large number of such regulatory signaling factors that appear to regulate ovarian primordial follicle assembly . many of these growth factors and receptors in this sub-network have multiple connections with each other, indicating that these genes are known to regulate other signaling factors within the sub-network. the growth factors il1b, igf <dig> and cxcl <dig>  and the receptor cxcr <dig> have the most connections to other genes, so these are candidates in the regulation of follicle assembly to investigate in future studies. the cxcr <dig> and igf <dig> genes have been shown to be involved in primordial follicle transition  <cit> , but not previously been associated with assembly.

primordial follicle assembly modulation and pathway validation
analyses of the differentially expressed genes of the current study implicate specific physiological pathways and gene networks as being important to the follicle assembly process. in order to test the validity of some of these predictions, organ culture experiments were preformed in which neonatal rat ovaries were treated with bci. bci has the effect of increasing erk1/ <dig>  activity via inhibition of dusp <dig>  <cit> . erk1/ <dig> plays a prominent role in the mapk signaling, focal adhesion and chemokine signaling pathways, all of which were implicated as important to follicle assembly . bci-treated ovaries with increased erk1/ <dig> activity were shown to have an increase in assembled follicles , supporting the predicted role of these physiological pathways in primordial follicle assembly. this experiment helps validate the systems biology approach used in the current study.

primordial follicle assembly and ovarian disease
since follicle assembly provides each female mammal with the pool of primordial follicles from which their ovulated eggs are derived, abnormal follicle assembly could result in defective primordial follicles that may lead to a reduced follicle pool size. this in turn can lead to infertility and the cessation of reproduction early in life, as is seen in women with primary ovarian insufficiency . women with poi deplete their pool of primordial follicles prior to age  <dig> and undergo early menopause  <cit> . forty-nine genes that have been implicated in poi in humans have been compiled and are listed with the ovarian kaleidoscope database . seven of these genes were found to be in common with the  <dig> differentially expressed genes found in the current study to be associated with follicle assembly . these genes were tgfbr <dig> , amhr <dig> , pgrmc <dig> , nupr <dig> , pof1b , igf <dig> and aff <dig> . amh, progesterone and pgrmc <dig> are known to play roles in follicle assembly  <cit> . it is notable that pof1b, the gene named for its association with premature ovarian failure , is linked to follicle assembly in the current study. these observations suggest that some cases of poi may have abnormal follicle assembly as an underlying cause. in addition to specific gene links with poi, a number of links were also made to polycystic ovarian syndrome  . pcos is the most predominant female reproductive disease affecting 7-18% of the female population  <cit> . a number of the differentially expressed genes identified in the current study correlated to previously known genes linked to pcos . observations suggest abnormal ovarian primordial follicle assembly may be a component of poi and pcos later in life as some of the genes involved are in common. future analysis of these genes and the gene networks identified is anticipated to help elucidate the molecular etiology of poi and pcos, as well as provide novel therapeutic targets.

CONCLUSIONS
in summary, a systems biology experimental approach can provide an unbiased global view of the relationships important to a particular developmental process. for the primordial follicle assembly process the systems approach evaluated genes that were differentially expressed in response to growth factor and hormone treatments. it was found that different treatments all affected similar cellular pathways and processes, but that each treatment affected expression of different genes within those pathways. cluster analyses identified modules of coordinately regulated genes and the different modules appear to accomplish distinct cellular functions during follicle assembly. the regulatory gene networks identified provide predictions about important regulatory genes, signaling pathways and cellular processes involved in ovarian primordial follicle assembly. an organ culture experiment in which ovaries were treated to increase erk1/ <dig> activity confirmed some of the predicted physiological pathways were in fact important in follicle assembly regulation. the regulatory genes and gene networks identified as controlling primordial follicle assembly, when disrupted or altered, were suggested to be linked to the etiology of ovarian diseases such as primary ovarian insufficiency poi and polycystic ovarian syndrome pcos. future investigations can now utilize the observations from this systems approach to further elucidate the molecular control of ovarian primordial follicle development and associated diseases.

