BACKGROUND
the major histocompatibility complex  is a complex multigene family that regulates the function of the adaptive branch of the vertebrate immune system. the mhc is comprised of many different types of genes, such as classical and non-classical mhc genes, as well as non-mhc genes such as natural killer cells and tapasin  <cit> . classical and non-classical mhc genes may be distinguished from each other in that the former are polymorphic and highly expressed, whereas the latter exhibit lower levels of expression and are often monomorphic  <cit> . mhc genes may also be grouped as class i, ii or iii genes based on the types of molecules they encode. class i genes encode receptors that are presented on the surfaces of most nucleated cells and primarily facilitate immune responses to intracellular pathogens, whereas class ii genes are only found on a subset of cells and are associated with immune responses to extracellular pathogens  <cit> . class iii genes encode molecules involved in the complement component of the immune response rather than the adaptive response  <cit> .

the high levels of polymorphism characteristic of classical mhc class i and ii genes may be largely attributed to the peptide-binding region , which displays great diversity of alleles and extensive sequence variation among different alleles  <cit> . the genes of this region encode proteins that form the molecular groove where peptides are bound and then presented to t-cells, resulting in the appropriate immune response being triggered  <cit> . each allele typically responds to a category of potential antigens, so individuals and populations with greater mhc diversity may be better able to cope with a range of infections  <cit> .

a number of models of multigene family evolution, such as the birth-and-death model  <cit>  and the accordion model  <cit> , have been proposed to explain the generally high levels of polymorphism and the large and variable number of classical mhc loci among individuals and species. according to the birth-and-death model, new genes are created via repeated duplication  and then either retained in the genome or eventually lost  after becoming non-functional through deleterious mutations  <cit> . the accordion model, on the other hand, posits that the number of mhc genes expands and contracts in response to fluctuating selection pressure  <cit> . these models are not mutually exclusive, and both models predict the redundancy that occurs in the genome of most species, whereby multiple duplicated gene loci exist in both class i and ii gene regions  <cit> . one explanation for this redundancy is that once alleles are generated, they may remain in the genome even in the absence of selection pressure  <cit> . alleles may be maintained over long evolutionary time scales through speciation events, which may then resolve as trans-species polymorphisms  in phylogenetic reconstructions, where similar alleles are present in groups that diverged over millions of years ago such as rodents and primates  <cit> . on a smaller scale, genetic variation in the mhc may also be generated among alleles and between loci via the processes of point mutation, recombination and gene conversion, and maintained through the influence of balancing selection.

among birds, the most studied and well-described mhc is that of the chicken , which only contains one dominantly expressed molecule of class i and one of class ii  <cit> . the chicken mhc is small and densely arranged; a compact organisation of genes with short introns, small physical size, lack of redundancy, and low overall number of classical class i and ii genes with few pseudogenes, has led to the chicken mhc being described as a “minimal essential mhc”  <cit> . the small size and simplicity of the chicken mhc allows for the co-evolution of genes as haplotypes over considerable periods of time, with no recombination between class i and ii genes having been detected over thousands of experiments  <cit> . the result of this is that the most striking associations between mhc haplotype and resistance or susceptibility to disease have been characterised in chickens  <cit> .

similarly simple genetic organisation and small numbers of expressed classical mhc loci have been noted in a few galliform species, such as the pheasant   <cit> , black grouse   <cit> , and grey partridge   <cit> , although the quail  has been found to have higher levels of gene duplication  <cit> . variable levels of mhc complexity have been characterised among other avian groups, such as penguins, seabirds, raptors, rails, cranes, and waders , and passerine species typically show multiple loci with extensive gene duplication, evidence of recombination, high levels of polymorphism, and the presence of pseudogenes . this suggests the minimal essential model is not applicable to all avian species, as the passerine mhc appears to be larger and more complex than that described in chickens. the passerine mhc, along with a number of non-passerine lineages, has been characterised as having high rates of concerted evolution and/or recent duplications  <cit> , leading to few reports of orthologous relationships among birds . thus, although the overall function of the mhc is conserved across birds, there appear to be considerable differences in the genomic organisation of the mhc between lineages  <cit> .

with a few exceptions , research on the mhc in passerines has focussed on species within the more derived infraorder passerida, whereas very little empirical information exists on the structure and complexity of the mhc in the corvida , a paraphyletic basal clade within the passerines . it remains unclear whether a complex mhc is characteristic of all passerines or is a more derived trait occurring in the passerida and the few species of the corvida that have been studied . here, we used cloning and next-generation  <dig> sequencing techniques to characterise the polymorphism and allelic diversity of classical mhc class ii β exon  <dig>  we focussed on seven australian species from four prominent basal passerine families  to test if there is increasing complexity of the mhc structure from basal to derived passerines: if there is such a progressive increase in mhc complexity, basal passerine lineages should show a more simple mhc structure similar to that described in non-passerine lineages. to better understand the evolutionary origins of complex mhc structure in passerines, we also reconstructed phylogenetic relationships among mhc sequences in these species.fig.  <dig> relationships among major passerine families. grey shading indicates families included in this study and asterisks denote families in the corvida that have been previously studied. phylogeny constructed using the ericson backbone in birdtree.org  <cit>  and rooted with gallus gallus


na - total number of alleles per species; range - range of alleles detected in individuals of each species; nloci – putative number of loci per species; nps - number of pseudoalleles



RESULTS
in order to assess levels of polymorphism and allelic diversity in the mhc class ii genes of basal passerines, we chose the following species: brown treecreeper climacteris picumnus, superb fairy-wren malurus cyaneus¸ spotted pardalote pardalotus punctatus, striated pardalote p. striatus, white-plumed honeyeater lichenostomus penicillatus, fuscous honeyeater l. fuscus, and yellow-tufted honeyeater l. melanops. these seven species are from four families  that comprise a prominent component of the corvida. we amplified a 159 bp region that includes the highly diverse pbr of the mhc class ii β exon  <dig> using cloning and  <dig> sequencing methods. the high level of coverage provided by  <dig> sequencing makes it a convenient method for assessing genetic diversity in highly polymorphic, multilocus systems, such as the mhc  <cit> . we used  <dig> sequencing and cloning with sanger sequencing complementarily to assess levels of genetic diversity in seven basal passerine species.

the two methods resulted in different numbers of alleles being identified in each species. we isolated  <dig> mhc class ii β exon  <dig> sequences from  <dig> individuals using cloning with sanger sequencing , with the total number of alleles detected in each species ranging from  <dig> in the spotted pardalote to  <dig> in the striated pardalote. of the  <dig> sequences isolated,  <dig> were found in more than one species, resulting in  <dig> unique alleles across the seven species. sample sizes were the same in every species and all samples were from the same study region, so the variation in allele numbers across species is unlikely to be a product of sampling design. within species, the number of alleles identified in each individual ranged from  <dig> to  <dig> 

 <dig> sequencing was conducted on  <dig> samples in total , across all seven study species. due to small volumes of available blood samples, different individuals were sequenced using  <dig> compared to sanger sequencing, and from a different location in the study area . using  <dig> sequencing, we obtained  <dig>  reads of the 159-bp region showing a complete match to the forward and reverse primers. after a stepwise filtering procedure, we were left with 66 % of the original reads , with coverage depth ranging from  <dig> to  <dig> reads per allele . this remaining 66 % of reads comprised a total of  <dig> alleles, of which  <dig> were found in more than one species. of the remaining  <dig> unique alleles recovered through  <dig> sequencing,  <dig> were also identified through cloning. similar to the sequences isolated through cloning, numbers of alleles varied widely across species and individuals, ranging from  <dig> in the white-plumed honeyeater to  <dig> in the brown treecreeper. the isolation of more than two alleles from each individual indicates the presence of multiple mhc class ii β loci in each of these species, from a minimum of five loci in the fuscous honeyeater to nine loci in the brown treecreeper. the conservative filtering process we used would have potentially excluded a larger number of true alleles from individuals with higher coverage compared to individuals with lower coverage, so levels of mhc allelic diversity may be underestimated in some species.

despite fewer individuals having been screened through  <dig> sequencing compared to cloning, larger numbers of alleles were identified in total and in each individual . although  <dig> sequencing has the advantage of avoiding some artefacts associated with bacterial cloning, it is still vulnerable to artefacts arising during pcr and has been shown to produce a higher percentage of sequencing errors than sanger sequencing . in contrast, sanger sequencing probably represents a smaller proportion of the allelic diversity of a species, compared with  <dig> sequencing, with a prevalence of locally common alleles while less common  alleles are missed in cloning. our use of both these methods suggests  <dig> sequencing is a much more efficient, although possibly less accurate, way to assess levels of allelic diversity in species and populations.

polymorphism and allelic diversity of mhc loci
we identified a total of  <dig> alleles of the mhc class ii β exon  <dig> across seven species. numbers of alleles varied widely across species and individuals, from  <dig> to  <dig> alleles per species and  <dig> to  <dig> alleles per individual . based on the maximum number of alleles in an individual, we inferred a minimum of 5– <dig> loci per species, a range which falls within the middle of the spectrum for the number of mhc class ii β loci described in passerines . frameshift mutations and stop codons in sequences from five of the seven species suggest pseudoalleles are present in the dataset , a level similar to that found in the infraorder passerida  <cit> . all seven species displayed high levels of allelic diversity, with high intraspecific nucleotide and amino acid distances compared to other passerines . the highest levels of diversity were observed at the pbr in all species, a pattern again consistent with passerida mhc  <cit> .table  <dig> mean nucleotide and amino acid distances

mean nucleotide and amino acid distances among putative alleles from mhc class ii β exon  <dig>  nucleotide distances are corrected for multiple substitutions with the kimura 2-parameter model and amino acid distances are corrected using expectations from the poisson distribution. standard errors are based on  <dig> bootstrap replicates and given in parentheses. pbr peptide binding region



phylogenetic relationships among mhc alleles
bayesian reconstruction of the phylogenetic relationships among mhc class ii β exon  <dig> alleles from the seven species largely reflected taxonomic relationships at the genus level. the majority of alleles clustered in one of three well-supported clades , with alleles from honeyeaters , pardalotes , and treecreepers  grouping separately to each other. the phylogenetic network showed a similar pattern of clustering, with alleles from honeyeaters, pardalotes and treecreepers falling into three distinct clusters . sequences from the superb fairy-wren  were the exception to this general pattern, where approximately half of the sequences  were basal to the main pardalotidae-meliphagidae lineage in the bayesian tree but did not form a monophyletic clade, and other maluridae sequences were intermingled within climacteridae, pardalotidae and meliphagidae.fig.  <dig> relationships of mhc class ii β exon  <dig> sequences among basal passerine species. a bayesian phylogeny of mhc alleles from the seven basal passerine species in this study, rooted with crocodylus niloticus; asterisks denote major branches with posterior probabilities > 90 %, and pseudoalleles are indicated by arrows. b neighbour-net of mhc class ii β exon  <dig> sequences from seven basal passerine species. sequences are colour coded by family



the basal position of the superb fairy-wren sequences may result from recombination generating a pattern of mixed ancestry, which causes recombinant sequences to fall outside the parental clusters  <cit> . the intermingling of other superb fairy-wren sequences within clades in the phylogenetic tree containing other genera may indicate a trans-species mode of evolution, a pattern which has been widely documented in mhc class ii β sequences of both passerines and non-passerines . trans-species polymorphism  is a mechanism by which identical alleles occur in related species by being passed on from ancestral to descendant species  <cit> . this can be difficult to differentiate from convergent evolution, which can produce similar alleles in different species through independent evolutionary pathways. being sympatric, the seven species in this study may display signatures of convergent evolution if they are subject to similar parasite or pathogen pressure. to differentiate between signatures of convergent evolution and tsp, we compared phylogenetic reconstructions based on non-synonymous and synonymous substitutions only. if the species are subject to similar selective pressures, the phylogeny based on non-synonymous substitutions should show mixed clustering of sequences across families whereas the phylogeny based on synonymous substitutions should show alleles grouping according to family or species. if, however, the similarity of alleles across species is a result of tsp, the two phylogenies should show similar patterns of allelic clustering across families  <cit> . a comparison of phylogenies based on non-synonymous and synonymous substitutions showed the latter pattern of clustering, with the majority of clusters in both phylogenies showing alleles from more than one family . mixed clusters predominantly comprised alleles from honeyeaters, pardalotes and fairy-wrens, whereas alleles from treecreepers clustered intraspecifically for the most part. based on our analysis of exon  <dig>  the phylogenetic signatures support a tsp explanation of the clustering pattern rather than one of convergent evolution. although this result suggests the presence of tsp, it must be noted that distinguishing between phylogenetic patterns generated by tsp and other non-tsp patterns and processes is problematic when the loci are unknown. the evolution of exon  <dig> is complex and it is possible that, for example, rates of allele sharing based only on this region are an overestimation, thereby leading to incorrect inferences of tsp  <cit> . comparison of phylogenies based on intron and exon regions, as well as other related species with allopatric distributions, and identification of alleles associated with individual loci, would clarify the roles of convergent evolution, tsp, and other processes in generating these patterns of clustering.

fifteen alleles in the dataset occurred in at least two different species, and there was variation among genera in levels of tsp. in  <dig> instances, alleles occurred across genera between fairy-wrens and another species. in all other instances tsp occurred within genera, either between the two species of pardalotes or three species of honeyeaters. treecreepers did not show any instances of tsp with other study species, which may be related to treecreepers being in a separate evolutionary lineage to the other study species . retention of alleles through tsp between treecreepers and the other basal lineages in this study would therefore need to occur over longer evolutionary timeframes of at least  <dig> million years  <cit> .

inspection of amino acid alignments revealed seven sites with residues unique to each of the climacteridae, pardalotidae and meliphagidae, distinguishing sequences in the three families from each other . fairy-wren sequences, being intermingled within these groups, showed the residues particular to whichever group they fell in with. this pattern of clustering by species is not uncommon in birds and could be explained by either a) recent duplication, where genes diverge following speciation and then duplicate to form similar copies of the gene, or b) concerted evolution, where duplication occurs prior to speciation but the duplicated genes become homogenised through gene conversion  <cit> . both these processes result in intraspecific loci being more similar to each other than to orthologous loci in other species. among birds, patterns of orthology may be obscured because of rapid gene duplication and homogenisation of mhc class ii genes  <cit> .

to assess the relationships among mhc class ii β exon  <dig> sequences in the wider phylogenetic context, we constructed a phylogeny including species from a range of avian taxa . all passerine species formed a well-supported monophyletic clade  that was also strongly supported by topology testing, using a bayesian stepping stone approach . all species from the non-passerine taxa  formed a polytomy at the base of the phylogeny. within the passerine clade, most sequences from honeyeaters, pardalotes and fairy-wrens grouped together, albeit in a clade without strong posterior probability support , whereas treecreeper sequences fell separately to these sequences. the exceptions to this were one group of pseudoalleles and two groups of sequences that had either aspartic acid  or alanine  instead of glutamic acid  in the first position ; these three groups of sequences instead clustered separately from the other sequences in this study in a well-supported clade . the clustering of pseudoalleles and putatively functional sequences  may either indicate the latter are actually non-functional alleles or that the pseudoalleles evolved from these alleles. there was no apparent structuring according to passerine taxonomic relationships, because corvida and passerida sequences were intermingled in the passerine clade. there is some evidence that rates of diversifying and homogenising forces may vary between lineages of birds  <cit> , which could explain the pattern here where some sequences cluster according to species whereas other clusters comprise sequences from different species. the grouping of basal passerine species from this study with species from both the corvida and passerida suggests a complex mhc class ii β structure may be common throughout the passerine order.fig.  <dig> basal passerine mhc class ii β exon  <dig> sequences in the wider avian context. bayesian phylogeny of mhc alleles from passerine and non-passerine families, rooted with crocodylus niloticus. asterisks denote major branches with posterior probabilities > 90 % and filled circles denote passerine species from the corvida. group a contains the majority of sequences from honeyeaters, pardalotes and fairy-wrens. group b contains the remaining  <dig> sequences from these species, which comprise nine pseudoalleles and nine sequences with aspartic acid  or alanine  instead of glutamic acid  in the first position 



CONCLUSIONS
in this study we detected evidence of multiple gene loci, high levels of polymorphism and allelic diversity, and the presence of pseudogenes among classical mhc class ii β exon  <dig> of seven passerine species. our analyses strongly support a monophyletic grouping of passerines from the corvida and passerida, signifying an early evolutionary origin of complex mhc class ii β structure in the passeriformes. phylogenetic analyses based on non-synonymous and synonymous substitutions supported a trans-species explanation for the mixed clustering of alleles across the different families in this study. however, we cannot rule out the possibility that convergent evolution may have also played a role in generating these phylogenetic signatures. phylogenetic analyses based on sequences from other mhc class ii exon and intron regions may clarify the relative roles of tsp and convergent evolution in generating these signatures. a comparison of  <dig> sequencing and cloning methods suggested the former is a much more efficient way to assess levels of allelic diversity in species and populations. continued characterisation of this gene region, as well as other non-coding regions of the mhc, in species from different phylogenetic levels may improve our understanding of the rates of gene conversion, recombination, diversification and homogenisation occurring in the avian mhc. such research will also provide insights into the evolutionary significance of the disparity in mhc complexity between passerine and non-passerine species.

