BACKGROUND
animal models play a central role and are essential to basic medical research. having an established pedigree of use in developmental biology, transplantation research, and cancer research, the chick embryo provides an in vivo model which is both accessible and economical, as it contains all components necessary for development, excepting heat and oxygen  <cit> . pluripotent stem cells lines have been derived from various sources, including chicken  <cit> . using molecular methods to identify and characterize cell surface markers and enzymatic activity, evaluation of the stem cell differentiation process is an essential step towards successful therapeutic use  <cit> . most molecular imaging methods, and traditional imaging methods such as microscopy, require embryonic sacrifice for ex vivo analysis. magnetic resonance imaging  allows embryonic imaging without sacrifice, and has been used in avian embryo analysis, primarily for evaluating anatomy  <cit> . advanced mri techniques, for example, diffusion-weighted imaging , diffusion tensor imaging , magnetic resonance spectroscopy, and blood-oxygen level dependent imaging  can be used to obtain structural, metabolic, and functional information in addition to anatomic information  <cit> . however, anatomic imaging techniques and, in particular, advanced imaging techniques are challenging to implement in embryonic models due to embryonic motion  <cit> .

diffusion tensor imaging  is a method of observing the displacement distribution of water molecules present within an imaging voxel, allowing evaluation of tissue structure at a scale below the spatial resolution of mri  <cit> . fractional anisotropy  is a dti-derived measurement of tissue structural anisotropy ranging from  <dig> to  <dig>  if the diffusion is isotropic , the fa value is  <dig>  if the diffusion is along a single axis , the fa value is  <dig>  tracked fiber length is another dti-derived measurement which represents the average length of a tracked fiber-like tissue structure. evaluation of the displacement distribution provides insight into the structure and organization of tissues, and dti is an established method of studying the microstructure of neural tissue and skeletal muscle  <cit> . a disadvantage of dti for in ovo imaging use is the long imaging duration and consequent data degradation due to subject motion. previous work has shown that mr anatomic imaging, including real-time cardiac imaging using rapid sequence imaging, is possible with embryonic anesthesia  <cit> . more recently, it has been shown that cooling chick embryo from incubation day  <dig> prior to mr imaging allows noninvasive assessment by reducing motion artifact, without significantly affecting normal development  <cit> . the purpose of this study is to show that dti can be used to monitor the development of skeletal muscle in chick embryonic hind limb using a dual-cooling technique, and investigate whether serial skeletal muscle tractography in dti correlates with ex vivo histology from day  <dig> of incubation through hatching.

RESULTS
we were able to discriminate and draw a region of interest  on the hind limb or hind limb bud on t <dig> weighted images from day  <dig>  beginning with day  <dig>  skeletal muscle fibers of the hind limb could be tracked with dti and the fiber length derived. as shown in table  <dig> and figure  <dig>   and , fractional anisotropy , tracked fiber length, and hind limb length show a progressive linear increase with each successive day of incubation. the skeletal muscle fibers of the hind limb did not show histologic formation until day  <dig> or  <dig>  the point at which the myofibers could be visually discerned  with dti. as shown in table  <dig> and figure  <dig>  the composition of myofibers also showed a progressive linear increase with increasing incubation time as quantified by the percentage of skeletal muscle fiber area in histology specimens .

model diagnostics show linear regression parameters for incubation day  dependence of skeletal muscle fa , length of tracked fibers, fiberarea%  and length of hind limb values. ‡: no fibers tracked in dti from day  <dig> to  <dig> 

the result of correlation analysis between fa and fiberarea%, and between length of tracked fibers  and length of hind limb  is shown in figure  <dig>  fa and fiberarea% have good correlation , as do fiber length and limb length .

a single typical example of serially dti-derived skeletal muscle fiber tracking is shown in figure  <dig>  and shows that skeletal muscle fiber length and number increases with each successive day. histologic specimens beginning with incubation day  <dig> are shown in figure  <dig> 

discussion
our data show that dti reflects skeletal muscle fiber formation and growth in hind limb during the incubation period. in contrast to invasive methods of analysis, repeated observations on a single embryo throughout incubation can be implemented using dti and subsequent phenotypic characteristics would be evident at hatching.

chick embryo skeletal muscle development has been investigated in detail by developmental biologists  <cit> . multinucleated skeletal myofibers which contain cross-striated myofibrils are formed by the cytoplasmic fusion of mononucleated myoblasts. the myogenic precursor cells delaminate from dermatomyotome of the paraxial mesoderm and migrate to the limb bud, which then proliferate and differentiate into myoblasts. embryonic myoblasts, which are most abundant on day  <dig> and disappear on days 7– <dig>  have short fibers and contain few  nuclei; these were unable to be tracked with dti in this study. myoblast fiber length and density increase as embryonic myoblasts mature into fetal myoblasts  which contain hundreds of nuclei, and then later mature into adult myoblasts prior to hatching <cit> . adult myoblasts located below the basal lamina of adult muscle appear at the late fetal stage and can be activated to divide, differentiate, and form new muscle fibers following injury in postnatal life  <cit> . dti tracking of fetal and adult stage myoblasts was successful, and progressive increase in myofibril length is evident on fiber tracking images.

the tracked fiber length of the hind limb in dti was not entirely consistent with the length of hind limb. for this study, we used a simple measurement method, the length of tracked fibers, which is an average value and it is affected by the tractography stopping threshold parameters . therefore, while the dti measured tracking lengths are not necessarily representative of a single myofiber, it can be considered to be a useful relative surrogate given the correlation obtained between fiber_length and limb_length.

this study has several limitations. the spatial resolution of  <dig>  t mri limits evaluation of small embryonic structures, particularly during the early incubation period ; spatial resolution would almost certainly be improved with a higher field strength magnet. matching of mri imaging planes and histologic specimens was performed with careful attention to detail but acquiring exact matches is technically challenging and exact matching was not feasible in all cases. the reverse method, used by some researches, would be to use reconstructions of the isotropic or nearly-isotropic 3d mri dataset to match the histological sections, possibly obtaining more accurate imaging-histologic correlation. our dual-cooling method, which reduced the temperature, may influence diffusion measurements  compared to room temperature; we intend to explore this possibility in our next work. furthermore, there may be developmental differences among embryos of the same incubation day, though this could be accounted for by increasing statistical power.

given that dti has the ability to evaluate skeletal muscle differentiation and development, it may be possible to monitor the effect of mutations which affect skeletal muscle migration and development  <cit> . dti also has the potential to observe the embryonic development of other fiber-like tissues, such as smooth muscle, myocardium and nerves. in particular, dti has the potential to provide information about white-matter tract integrity within the developing brain and spinal cord. for example, regional dysmyelination effects were able to be measured with dti within shiverer mouse mutant brain tissue  <cit> , and dti diffusion parameters showed changes in rodent spinal cords receiving moderate t <dig> level injury  <cit> . similar effects may be possible to measure within the chick embryo.

CONCLUSIONS
in conclusion, this study shows that a widely-available  mri system can be used as a powerful investigative tool to evaluate embryonic development with diffusion tensor imaging in ovo from  <dig> days incubation to hatching. we show that acquired skeletal muscle diffusion tensor imaging parameters correlate with histologic specimens from sacrificed embryos. noninvasive evaluation of developmental processes in embryonic models has traditionally been technically difficult and largely restricted to anatomic evaluation. functional imaging with dti mri and other advanced mri techniques permit the evaluation of tissues and cellular processes below the conventional spatial resolution of mri, and is a potentially promising method of improving the understanding of early developmental processes.

