BACKGROUND
decades-long research efforts have resulted in the identification of a large number of human disease genes  <cit> . most of this research has been based on experimental and clinical studies of individual diseases and genes. a conceptually different approach was recently described, namely to study the network properties of human disease genes on a diseasome-wide scale. the studies were based on analyzing disease genes databases, such as the online mendelian inheritance in man   <cit> . the disease genes were classified as monogenic, polygenic or complex and their properties in molecular interaction networks were elucidated  <cit> . further, it was shown that phenotypically similar diseases are often caused by functionally related genes  <cit> . this has led to the exploitation of molecular interaction networks to find novel candidate genes exploring neighbors of a disease-causing gene in a network as they are more likely to cause either the same or a similar disease  <cit> .

pleiotropy, in the context of human genetic diseases, implies that different pathological effects of different mutations within the same gene predispose an individual to different disorders  <cit> . while the previous studies have studied the properties of disease genes classified based on the number of genes involved in a phenotype, it is paramount to study the genes classified based on the number of phenotypes they are involved in. this would aid in identifying disease genes that are specific to diseases , which can be exploited for therapeutic intervention. this would also help to find pleiotropic genes that are shared between different diseases  to understand shared pathogenesis and hence mechanisms underlying co-morbidity  <cit> . network properties of shared genes associated with phenotypically similar diseases have been examined so far, whereas those of pleiotropic genes with effects on divergent phenotypes and genes associated with specific diseases have not been examined. we hypothesized that the network properties of a gene in molecular interaction network and its tissue co-expression with its interactors determines the number of disease phenotypes it is associated with.

here, we retrieved human disease genes and the associated diseases from morbid map . we classified the shared disease genes into genes associated with phenotypically similar diseases  and those that are associated with phenotypically divergent diseases  based on cipher score  <cit> . for instance, akt <dig> which is associated with ovarian cancer, breast cancer, colorectal cancer and schizophrenia was classified as a phenodiv gene while tyrp <dig> which is associated with brown albinism and rufous albinism was classified as a phenosim gene. we demonstrated that shared genes were more central than specific genes while phenodiv genes were more central than phenosim genes. shared genes had a higher number of disease gene interactors compared to specific genes. however, shared genes had a relatively restricted tissue co-expression with its interactors compared to specific genes. essential genes, mutations in which lead to lethality, are known to be high degree nodes , thus occupying a central position in protein interaction network. when compared with specific, shared and phenosim genes essential genes had higher measures of centrality, as expected. however, essential genes and phenodiv genes had comparable connectivities  instigating us to explore for other network attributes of lethality and pleiotropy. we found that essential and phenodiv genes were intra-modular and inter-modular hubs, with the former being highly co-expressed with their interactors contrary to the phenodiv genes. gene ontology analysis identified the essential genes to be predominantly transcription factors residing in nucleus while phenodiv genes were cytoplasmic proteins involved in signal transduction. this study demonstrated that the effect of a disease gene on the number of different and phenotypically divergent diseases is associated with its properties in a molecular interaction network.

RESULTS
centrality of human disease genes in protein interaction network
we retrieved a list of  <dig> human disease genes from omim morbid map. if a gene is associated with only one disease it was classified as specific disease gene and if it is associated with more than one disease it belonged to the shared disease genes category . the importance of a node in a molecular network is often correlated to its centrality  <cit> . there are different measures that capture the centrality of a node in a network. we constructed a human protein interaction network using a modified version of crg interactome  <cit>  and investigated for differences in four different centrality measures namely degree, closeness, betweenness and eccentricity between specific and shared genes. the degree of a node provides the information about how many links  that node has to other nodes in the network. closeness is defined as the reciprocal average distance  to every other node- a node with high closeness is thus, on average, close in graph distance to the other nodes. betweenness is a global centrality measure, which determines the centrality of a node in a network based on the total number of shortest paths going through the given node. thus, nodes that occur on many shortest paths between other nodes have higher betweenness. the eccentricity of a node is the distance to the farthest reachable other node in a network, thus focusing on a maximal property where closeness focuses on an average.

shared genes were more central than the specific genes in the protein interaction network as indicated by all the four measures of centrality . these topological differences could be affected by shared genes in phenotypically similar diseases; such genes would be expected to be topologically similar to specific genes. to account for this we used cipher to distinguish between shared genes associated with phenotypically divergent and similar diseases . our analysis established that phenodiv genes were significantly more central than phenosim genes . the observed differences in all the measures of centrality among the genes belonging to the four categories were well demonstrated by the distribution profiles . further, phenotypic similarity of diseases  showed a significant correlation with the centrality measures in the protein interaction network; we observed significant negative correlations of degree, closeness and betweenness with cipher score  while eccentricity was positively correlated . in a protein interaction network human disease genes, relative to non-disease genes, are known to have a higher tendency to interact with protein products of other disease genes  <cit> . since the shared genes are involved in many diseases they would be expected to interact with more disease genes compared to the specific ones. confirming this, we observed that disease genes were overrepresented among the interactors of shared genes compared to those of specific ones . this observation prompts us to speculate that there is a higher likelihood of finding a disease gene in the network neighborhood of shared genes. phenodiv and phenosim genes had a comparable proportion of disease-gene interactors . the enrichment of disease genes among the interactors of shared genes highlighted their role in shared pathogenesis.

*p-values were determined using mann-whitney u test

genes that are essential for early development, functional changes in which might lead to abortions, are termed as essential genes. essential genes are known to show a tendency to be associated with hubs  <cit> . some of the human orthologs of mouse lethal  genes are known to be associated with human genetic diseases  <cit> . essential genes associated with human diseases were classified as essential disease genes  while others belonged to the essential genes set . as shared genes show higher centrality we speculated that these might be enriched with essential disease genes compared to specific genes. shared genes showed an enrichment of essential disease genes compared to specific . phenodiv and phenosim categories had comparable proportions of essential disease genes. these essential genes can be presumed to be vital for organism survival, sequence variants in which may lead to lethality. we observed that essential genes were significantly more central than specific and shared genes . phenosim genes differed significantly only in degree and closeness while phenodiv genes had all measures of centrality comparable to essential non-disease genes except betweenness. phenodiv genes had significantly higher betweenness than essential genes .

mean ± s.d. values for the specific, shared, phenosim and phenodiv genes are provided in table  <dig>  *p-values were determined using mann-whitney u test

tissue-specificity of disease genes and their interactors
to discern whether centrality in a protein interaction network relates to a broader tissue distribution we checked for differences in the gene expression of the four categories of disease genes in  <dig> different human tissues  <cit> . we could not find any significant difference in the distribution of shared and phenodiv genes compared to specific and phenosim genes respectively . a previous study suggests significant over-expression of disease genes and their complexes in normal tissues where defects cause pathology  <cit> . this led us to check for differences in the 'local' interactomes for the four classes of disease genes in the different tissues. for this, we integrated the protein interaction data with that of the gene expression information. when we checked for co-expression of interactors in the protein interaction network with those of the disease genes we identified that specific genes are more often co-expressed with their interactors than the shared genes . we could not find any differences among phenodiv and phenosim genes . further, we identified that specific genes have a higher tendency of tissue co-expression with their disease-gene interactors compared to shared genes . this, though somewhat unexpected, is in line with the earlier observation of increased co-expression of specific genes with their interactors compared to shared genes. similarly, we could not find differences in co-expression of disease-gene interactors when shared genes were classified into phenodiv and phenosim genes . essential genes had higher tissue co-expression with their interactors compared to the different classes of disease genes except specific genes which had comparable proportions . notably, phenodiv genes had significantly lesser tissue co-expression.

*p-values were determined using mann-whitney u test

pleiotropy and network modularity
in the human protein interaction network, phenodiv genes and essential genes had comparable degrees, closeness and eccentricity. however, phenodiv genes had greater global centrality as indicated by higher betweenness than essential genes . this prompted us to check for differences in clustering coefficient among essential and phenodiv genes. clustering coefficient quantifies the cohesiveness of the neighborhood of a node and is defined as the ratio between the number of edges linking nodes adjacent to a node and the total possible number of edges among them. thus, clustering coefficient characterizes the overall tendency of nodes to form clusters or groups. we observed that phenodiv genes had significantly lesser clustering coefficient than the essential genes . in addition, phenodiv genes showed relatively restricted tissue co-expression with their interactors in contrary to essential genes. taken together, these results imply that these phenodiv and essential genes are classes of high degree genes  which are inter-modular and intra-modular respectively . such hubs have been extensively studied recently  <cit>  and biochemical differences have been reported between these two types of hubs. we hypothesized that the varying topological properties along with their different tissue co-expression profiles with their interactors could be explained by different biological functions. hence, we used gene ontology  to functionally characterize the essential and phenodiv genes for their cellular component, molecular function and biological process . go analysis of essential genes identified organelle, intracellular membrane bound organelle  to be the most significant cellular components with most of the genes in nucleus . contrarily, cytoplasm and membrane  were overrepresented in phenodiv genes. the overrepresented molecular function categories for the essential genes include protein binding and nucleic acid binding  while apart from protein binding overrepresented molecular function classes for phenodiv genes were catalytic activity and signal transducer activity . intriguingly, both these classes of genes are involved in similar biological processes.

discussion
the phenotypic consequence of a variation in a gene is known to be affected to a large extent by the topological position of its protein product in the molecular interaction network. thus, the functional importance of a gene is signified by its centrality in a protein interaction network. previously, we and others have shown that the contribution of variations in a single gene to bring about an associated phenotype is a function of its centrality  <cit> . accordingly, based on centrality different gene classes leading to a phenotype are ordered as essential genes , monogenic disease genes, complex disease genes and non-disease genes . however, the network properties of a gene, mutations in which lead to various phenotypes have not been explored.

based on the current understanding of the human protein interaction network and the results presented here, we demonstrated that the pleiotropic genes  had an intermediate centrality compared with essential genes and genes associated with only one disease . however, classification of the shared genes based on the similarity of the associated phenotypes demonstrated that phenodiv genes leading to divergent phenotypes were more central than phenosim genes. thus based on increasing order of centrality these different disease genes could be arranged as specific, phenosim and phenodiv genes. we note that the observed correlation of measures of centrality with phenotypic similarity provides support that the interpretations might not have been affected by considering median cipher value as a cut-off to classify phenosim and phenodiv genes.

co-expression with interactors is a prerequisite to bring about the function of a gene. thus, specific genes with a very small network neighborhood would always be co-expressed with their interactors. conversely, essential genes are hubs with high co-expression with their interactors. this attribute explains as to why mutations in these genes lead to lethality. contrary to both specific and essential genes, shared genes showed decreased co-expression with their interactors. in addition to an intermediate centrality in the protein interaction network, this could be considered as an important functional property of genes with pleiotropic effects. for instance, the phenodiv gene akt <dig> is associated with divergent phenotypes including schizophrenia, colorectal cancer, ovarian cancer and breast cancer. the network of its interactors varies among these diseases  with some expressed in all disease tissues to very few not expressed in any. on the contrary, the disease-specific genes are co-expressed with all their interactors in the respective disease tissue. this is explicitly demonstrated by the co-expression of clint <dig> associated with schizophrenia with all its interactors in the brain region associated with the pathophysiology of the disease . similarly, rras <dig>  pms <dig> and phb which are associated only with ovarian cancer, colorectal cancer and breast cancer are co-expressed with their interactors in the respective disease tissues .


the similar measures of centrality between essential and phenodiv genes, except betweenness, led us to investigate the properties that determine essentiality  and pleiotropy. one of the most striking observations made here was that the essential genes and phenodiv genes were intra-modular and inter-modular hubs, with the former being highly co-expressed with its interactors contrary to the latter. furthermore, essential genes were predominantly involved in transcription regulation while phenodiv genes in signal transduction.

this study could be affected by knowledge bias pertaining to the disease genes and their associated phenotypes as presented in omim, the human protein interaction network and the information on tissue expression. with an increasing number of genetic studies it is likely that some of the specific genes will be identified as shared and some of the phenosim as phenodiv genes. based on the trend we observed here, it is tempting to speculate that essential disease genes in the specific and phenosim genes categories may have a higher likelihood for this transition. an expansion of knowledge of the diseases and disease genes, protein interactions and tissue expression would aid in better comprehension of the properties associated with genes causing pleiotropic effects. further, it will be interesting to study the temporal co-expression of these genes with their interactors in various tissues.

CONCLUSIONS
here we demonstrated that the ability of a disease gene to influence the cellular network, signified by its centrality and tissue co-expression with its interactors, determines its pleiotropic effects.

