BACKGROUND
neisseria meningitidis  is a transitory colonizer of the human nasopharynx that sporadically provokes life-threatening disease. this microorganism has to interact with cellular barriers for its life cycle  <cit> . after crossing the nasopharyngeal mucosa, meningococci occasionally spread into the blood stream before moving across the blood-brain barrier causing fatal sepsis and meningitis in otherwise healthy individuals  <cit> .

the early stages of an infection with n. meningitidis are governed by specific interactions between the pathogen and the epithelial tissues and are quite well known. indeed, this microorganism has evolved a diverse array of surface structures subjected to phase- and antigenic-variation, which promote adherence and entry into human cells, although it is still unclear whether cell invasion is important in human infections. initial adherence of encapsulated bacteria requires type iv pili, fine hair-like structures protruding from the bacteria surface  <cit> . then, interaction with host cells is achieved by several meningococcal surface adhesins  that have been extensively studied  <cit> . in contrast, later stages of infection, including the intracellular location of the meningococci and their strategies for intracellular survival, are only poorly understood  <cit> .

in vitro studies with cell line infection models are beginning to disclose the essential role of the metabolic adaptation of meningococci to the intracellular environment of the infected cell. the adaptive response includes the stimulation of the capsular biosynthetic genes leading to increased resistance to cationic antimicrobial peptides , important components of the host innate defense system against microbial infections  <cit> , and the activation of the gdhr regulon whose members are involved in metabolism of the available host carbon sources  <cit> .

in this work by using reverse transcriptase-pcr differential display  we have identified a set of meningococcal genes up-regulated during residence of the bacteria in the intracellular host environment including genes involved in l-glutamate transport , citrate metabolism , disulfide bond formation , two-partner secretion , capsulation , and dna replication/repair . pria is a single-stranded dna-dependent atpase, and a 3' to 5' dna translocase/helicase that was discovered originally because of its requirement in vitro for the conversion of bacteriophage phix <dig> viral dna to the duplex replicative form  <cit> . in escherichia coli this protein, at the crossroads of dna replication and recombination, plays a central role in origin-independent, replication restart of collapsed or arrested dna replication forks and is also involved in dna recombination  <cit> . these activities rely on the ability of pria to load replication forks at a d loop, an intermediate that forms during homologous recombination, double-strand break-repair, and stable dna replication. we investigated the role of pria in the meningococcal infectious cycle using a human cell line infection model.

RESULTS
rna differential display analysis of meningococcal gene expression in the intracellular host environment
in an attempt to identify meningococcal genes selectively up- or down-regulated in the intracellular environment of infected host cells we used a previously published rt-pcr-dd strategy that relies on the presence of highly and moderately repetitive transcribed dna sequences in the meningococcal genome  <cit> . oligonucleotides designed on the basis of the dus  or the 26l, 27l nemis sequences  were used as primers in reverse-transcriptase  assays to prepare cdnas from intracellular meningococci  recovered from saponin-lysed hela cells after  <dig> h of infection or control bacteria grown in dmem without hela cells as previously described  <cit> . after  <dig> h of infection bacterial recovery from infected cells reached the highest values  <cit> . we decided to use hela cells because studies with these cells have contributed to our understanding of the molecular mechanisms underlying the infectious cycle of n. meningitidis  <cit> . the analysis of the meningococcal transcriptome during the early stages of an infection has been previously performed using hela cells  <cit> .

the cdnas from intracellular meningococci were then amplified by pcr using the corresponding oligonucleotides and a mixture of random hexamers as primers, and the pcrs were analyzed by polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis. by this approach, several bands corresponding to either up-regulated  or down-regulated genes  were detected in the intracellular bacteria . the bands a, c, f, g, l and n were then excised from the gels, the corresponding cdnas were cloned and subjected to nucleotide sequences analysis. three clones were sequenced form each band. the bands d-, e-, m-, and o-associated cdnas, when subjected to cloning, each gave rise to more than one clone, and therefore they were not further analyzed in this study. bands corresponding to down-regulated genes were not examined.

the nucleotide sequence analysis demonstrated that the band a- and f-associated cdna corresponded to genes that have been shown to be induced in the intracellular environment and have been also implicated in meningococcal pathogenesis . the band a-associated cdna corresponded to nmb <dig>  a gene of the gdhr-regulated gltt operon coding for the l-glutamate abc transporter that is critical for meningococcal adaptation in the low-sodium intracellular environment  <cit> . the band f corresponded to nmb <dig> coding for lipa, a protein required for proper translocation and surface expression of the lipidated -linked polysialic acid capsule polymer  <cit> . the band g-associated cdna sequence fell within nmb1780-nmb <dig>  operon coding for a two-partner secretion  system that has been recently shown to contribute to adhesion of un-encapsulated bacteria to epithelial cells  <cit> . the bands c-, l- and n-associated cdnas corresponded to genes whose role in meningococcal pathogenesis has never been reported so far, including nmb <dig>  encoding pria, the linked nmb <dig> and nmb <dig>  coding, respectively, for a thiol-disulfide oxidoreductase  and the atp-binding protein of an unknown abc-type transporter , and nmb <dig>  encoding glta, the putative meningococcal citrate synthase . fig. 1c also shows the genes surrounding pria . upstream from nmb <dig>  a gene coding for an acra/acre family protein  is located; downstream to pria and in the opposite direction a gene coding for a protein of unknown function  and that for a putative transposase  map.

the role of pria in meningococcal pathogenesis
the role of pria in meningococcal pathogenesis was explored in more detail using the hela infection model. it is noteworthy that over-expression of pria was also observed in an independent screening by limited transcriptional analysis  that was useful to demonstrate up-regulation of lipa in a previous work  <cit> . this screening was performed using a partial sau3ai-restricted genomic library from b <dig>  the library was screened by southern blot using cdna probes derived from intracellular bacteria after  <dig> h of infection of hela cells or control bacteria grown for  <dig> h in cell culture medium. the screening led to isolation of a plasmid harboring two sau3ai fragments,  <dig> and  <dig> bp-long , spanning almost the entire pria gene.

nevertheless, in order to confirm the results of the rt-pcr-dd analysis, slot blot and rt real-time pcr experiments were performed . semi-quantitative analysis by slot blot experiments demonstrated that the pria-specific rna was about three-fold more abundant in meningococci recovered from saponin-lysed hela cells than in control bacteria grown in dmem without hela cells . this result was confirmed by rt real-time pcr demonstrating an about four-fold increase in the amount of pria transcripts in intracellular meningococci . it should be noted that rt-pcr-dd, limited transcriptional analysis and rt real-time pcr were performed on rnas from different sets of infection experiments thus enhancing the argument for a role of this gene in the intracellular environment.

to gain functional information about the role of pria in n. meningitidis, we decided to inactivate it insertionally by transformation with pdexpria . southern blot analysis confirmed the insertion of this suicide plasmid into the pria coding region by a single cross-over event . as a result of the recombination event, two hinfi dna fragments of the expected sizes  were detected by pria-specific probe in the transformed strains b1940Ωpria  in place of the  <dig> bp hinfi fragment of the parental strain b <dig> . in order to be sure that pria inactivation was causal to all of the phenotypes observed below, a functional copy of pria was introduced into leus-Ψdam region of b1940Ωpria by using the integrative plasmid pacpria. successful gene delivery was demonstrated by southern blot analysis . in two transformants  the pria-specific probe detected the presence of both the  <dig> bp hinfi fragment  and the  <dig> bp and  <dig> bp hinfi fragments  .

phenotypic analysis demonstrated that pria inactivation resulted in a growth defect. indeed, under aerobic conditions, b1940Ωpria strain failed to grow in diluted inocula , but when it was inoculated at higher densities  it grew at rates similar to those of the parental strain . however, in high-density inocula viability of b1940Ωpria as determined by cfu was apparently reduced when compared to that of b <dig>  in the experiment shown in fig. 4c, left panel, b <dig>  b1940Ωpria and b1940Ωpria/pria+ were grown aerobically in liquid gc medium to late logarithmic phase . then, serial dilutions of the cultures were plated on gc agar, incubated aerobically in the presence of 5% co <dig>  and the number of cfu determined after  <dig> h. results demonstrated small colony size  and reduced colony number  of the pria-defective strain compared to the parental one . this phenotype was much more severe when gc agar plates containing nitrite were incubated under either aerobic  or oxygen-limiting conditions . under both these conditions the colony number of b1940Ωpria was reduced to about 15% when compared to that of b <dig> under the same conditions . statistical analysis with the student's t-test confirmed that the growth defects in the presence of nitrite or in oxygen limited conditions in the presence of nitrite were more severe than under aerobic conditions without nitrite . the growth defect of b1940Ωpria was not observed during middle logarithmic phase , and could be completely restored by complementation with pacpria in b1940Ωpria/pria+ .

we next investigated the mechanism underlying the growth defect of b1940Ωpria. as there is evidence that in e. coli pria inactivation results in defective cell division that generates long filaments  <cit> , we used scanning electron microscopy  to analyze morphology b1940Ωpria. indeed, the growth defect of this strain as determined by cfu method might have been caused by a cell division defect that in meningococci, which divide in alternating planes generates clumps. however, sem analysis did not reveal any difference between the wild type and the pria-defective strain grown to late logarithmic phase  .

to confirm the hypothesis that the growth impairment of b1940Ωpria might be due to reduced viability, the live/dead staining assay was carried out. this assay employs two fluorescent nucleic acid stains, syto <dig> and propidium iodide, which differ in their ability to penetrate healthy bacterial cells. when used alone, the green-fluorescent syto  <dig> stain labels both live and dead bacteria. in contrast, the red-fluorescent propidium iodide stain penetrates only bacteria with damaged membranes, reducing syto  <dig> fluorescence when both dyes are present. thus, live bacteria fluoresce green, while dead bacteria fluoresce red . using this system we did not observe any significant changes in viability between b <dig> and b1940Ωpria when stain was carried out with bacteria grown in gc medium to middle logarithmic phase . indeed, the percentage of nonviable cells was approximately 10% for both strains. in contrast, b1940Ωpria exhibited marked loss of viability during late logarithmic phase  when the percentage of nonviable cells approximated 35% . the defect in viability was completely restored by complementation . the live/dead staining assay also confirmed the absence of any cell division defect in b1940Ωpria .

assessment of viability after exposure to hydrogen peroxide  or the nitric oxide generator sodium nitroprusside  also demonstrated that b1940Ωpria was much more sensitive to oxidative and nitrosative injuries when compared to the parental strain. the phenotype could be complemented back to wild type levels in b1940Ωpria/pria+.

b <dig>  b1940Ωpria and b1940Ωpria/pria+ were then used in cell invasion and intracellular persistence assays. in these experiments, high density-inocula of meningococci were used and infections were initiated by using comparable numbers of viable bacteria for both strains as determined by both cfu method and live/dead staining. after allowing meningococci to invade hela cells for  <dig> h, intracellular viability was assessed immediately after gentamicin  treatment and  <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> h post-gentamicin treatment . results demonstrated the absence of statistically relevant differences in the ability to invade the hela cells by the three strains . at  <dig> h post-gentamicin treatment the number of recoverable wild type, mutant and complemented bacteria dropped about ten-fold. normally, at this time, a decrease occurs in intracellular viable bacteria, which is also characteristic of gonococcal invasion  <cit> . between  <dig> and  <dig> h b <dig> and b1940Ωpria/pria+ underwent fast duplication and the number of viable bacteria increased more than 50-fold. in particular, intracellular duplication was extremely fast during the first  <dig> h after gentamicin treatment  with an apparent generation time of about  <dig> min and slower during the last  <dig> h  consistent with previous findings  <cit> . in contrast, between  <dig> and  <dig> h the number of viable b1940Ωpria bacteria increased less than 10-fold with an apparent generation time of  <dig> min during the first  <dig> h after gentamicin treatment . it should be noted that intracellular generation times are only apparent, as they reflect the sum of intracellular growth, intracellular death and, eventually, bacterial egression from hela cells and re-invasion. therefore different processes may be affected in this mutant.

to further investigate the origin of the growth/survival defect of b1940Ωpria inside hela cells we used immunofluorescence microscopy. intriguingly, we noted that number of intracellular pria-defective bacteria  <dig> h after infection was about the same as those of wild type and complemented bacteria . this seemed to be in contrast with the data obtained with the cfu method showing a marked decrease in the number of intracellular pria-defective bacteria  <dig> h after infection . however, in contrast to cfu method, immunofluorescence analysis detects even dead bacteria, and this means that most pria-defective meningococci inside hela cells were actually not viable. the evidence that, at variance with wild type and complemented bacteria, most pria mutant bacteria co-localized with the lysosomal associated membrane protein  <dig>  strongly supported this hypothesis. this finding is noteworthy because live meningococci have been shown to use iga protease to cleave lamp <dig> protein  <cit> , accounting for the lack of co-localization of wild type and complemented bacteria with this marker. on the basis of this evidence we concluded that the growth phenotype of the pria-defective mutant inside hela cells was mostly due to reduced viability than to reduced growth rate.

discussion
the goal of our study was to assess the reliability of rt-pcr-dd as a tool to identify genes with increased or decreased expression during meningococcal growth in infected cells. although this analysis was clearly not exhaustive as the repeat sequences that we used to prime the rt-pcr-dd reactions were not randomly distributed in the chromosome, and not found in every gene  <cit> , nevertheless it enabled us to identify three up-regulated genes/operons  with known roles in virulence  and three novel potential meningococcal virulence factors . one of these, pria, was selected for extensive further validation  and characterization.

in infected cells meningococci have to adapt their metabolism to the available host carbon and nitrogen sources and circumvent or subvert a number of host defense mechanisms including lysosomal killing, antimicrobial peptides and oxidative injury. up-regulation of the gltt operon, coding for an l-glutamate abc type transporter that is critical for meningococcal adaptation in the low-sodium intracellular environment  <cit> , and of glta, coding for the citrate synthase, catalyzing the first committed step of the citric acid cycle is part of a metabolic strategy to survive and grow in the intracellular environment. indeed, in the intracellular milieu there is little available glucose, as glucose entering cells is rapidly phosphorylated to glucose-6-phosphate  <cit> , a substrate that, as well as the other glycolytic intermediates, cannot be assimilated by meningococci. the best intracellular carbon sources are pyruvate and lactate or/and several amino acids such as l-glutamate that stimulate the citric acid cycle  <cit> .

stimulation of l-glutamate uptake and respiratory metabolism is also useful to prevent oxidative injury, a major source of dna damage, as this amino acid is the precursor of glutathione  <cit> . in this context the up-regulation of thiol-disulfide oxidoreductase - and pria-encoding genes , and the impaired ability of the pria-defective mutant to replicate in infected hela cells  may be relevant. pria plays a central role in origin-independent replication restart of collapsed or arrested dna replication forks  <cit> . there is evidence that, even under normal aerobic conditions, most, if not all, replication forks do not proceed from the origin of replication to the terminus without hitting a roadblock, in the form of a damaged dna template, a nick in the template, a "frozen" protein-dna complex, or local positive superhelicity, which have the potential to arrest or collapse the fork. inability to reassemble the replisome and resume replication in a timely manner after repair of dna damage can lead to chromosomal rearrangements and consequently, a loss in viability  <cit> .

oxidative injury is a major cause of dna replication fork arrest  <cit> . this accounts for the growth defect mostly due to reduced viability of the pria-defective meningococcal strain , which was much more sensitive to oxidative and nitrosative injuries when compared to the parental strain . reduced viability was also observed in e. coli pria-defective mutants  <cit> . a growth defect was also shown in the neisseria gonorrhoeae pria-defective mutant  <cit> . this strain was also defective in dna repair and dna transformation compared to the isogenic parental strain. however, based on staining with live/dead baclight kit the authors concluded that the growth defect could not be attributable to reduced viability. the different biology of the meningococcal and gonococcal infection may account for the different phenotype of the meningococcal and gonococcal pria-defective mutants. indeed, substantial differences in oxidative defenses between meningococci and gonococci have been reported. when compared to meningococci, gonococci that are usually associated with inflamed urogenital tissues and activated polymorphonuclear leukocytes, have much higher catalase and cytochrome c peroxidase activities in addition to a specific manganese  uptake system involved in resistance to superoxide radicals  <cit> .

the growth defect of the pria-defective meningococcal strain was more severe in the presence of nitrite under either aerobic or oxygen-limiting growth conditions . under these conditions meningococci use nitrite as a terminal electron acceptor in anaerobic respiration. nitrite reduction via nitric oxide to nitrous oxide is the partial denitrification pathway for this mode of growth. in pathogenic neisseriae the pathway involves both a copper-containing nitrite reductase  and a single subunit nitric oxide reductase   <cit> . nitrite reduction leads to the production of nitric oxide, a toxic molecule that exhibits synergistic activity in combination with reactive oxygen species  <cit>  and that in salmonella induces dna replication arrest  <cit> . the inability to restart nitric oxide-promoted arrested replication forks may account for reduced viability of the pria-defective mutant under oxygen-limiting conditions.

the relevance of nitrite reduction and defence mechanisms against nitric oxide injury in neisserial pathogenesis is the subject of investigation. nitrite is present in the diet and is naturally formed in human blood and tissues due to the oxygenation of nitric oxide that is produced by various cell types as a signaling molecule and as a weapon against pathogens and tumor cells. it has been proposed that in microaerobic environments including the human nasopharynx and in the nitric oxide-enriched intracellular environment, meningococcal partial denitrification contributes with oxygen respiration as a route for electron transfer in respiration  <cit> . interestingly, inside hela cells at variance with wild type and complemented bacteria, pria-defective meningococci co-localized with lamp <dig>  that marks highly oxidative and nitrosative cell compartments  <cit> . based on this evidence, it is reasonable to assume that failure of the pria-defective mutant to replicate efficiently in hela cells may reflect the reduced ability to restart arrested replication forks.

CONCLUSIONS
in conclusion, in this study we, on one hand, demonstrate the efficacy of the experimental strategy that we describe, i.e. the analysis of the meningococcal gene expression, for disclosing the mechanisms that n. meningitidis uses to survive and multiply inside the environment of the human cell. on the other hand, we provide evidence that pria, whose expression increases in the intracellular environment, plays a key role in preventing both oxidative and nitrosative injuries, and in intracellular meningococcal replication.

