BACKGROUND
it is a general observation that asexual lineages do not last over very long periods of time, but the precise reasons for this are less clear  <cit> . ancient asexuals are the rare exceptions to this rule and it is of considerable biological interest to know what mechanisms allow them to survive for so long. they must have found a way to overcome the long-term fitness-degrading consequences of genetic processes like muller's ratchet and/or ecological processes like red-queen dynamics  <cit> . muller's ratchet describes the long-term accumulation of slightly deleterious mutations in asexual populations and has been suggested as a key mechanism for the extinction of asexual species on the long term  <cit> . unfortunately most of these predictions remain at a stage of verbal argument  <cit> , making it very difficult to rule out that muller's ratchet may not have had enough time to cause extinction. as the behavior of muller's ratchet can be very sensitive to model parameters  <cit> , realistic values need to be used to predict the consequences of mutation accumulation for a given ancient asexual species. we employ a simple null hypothesis  for testing the threat of extinction from muller's ratchet in the unisexual fish poecilia formosa, the amazon molly.

overcoming the lack of quantification
quantifications of the threat of extinction from muller's ratchet are often not trivial theoretical work that requires either challenging mathematics  <cit>  or complex computer simulations  <cit>  or both  <cit> . therefore some adopt the pragmatic approach that any system with no recombination and a potential for appreciable slightly deleterious mutation rates could be driven to extinction by muller's ratchet  <cit> . such arguments frequently overlook the fact that the particular combination of parameters in that species might not be expected to lead to extinction within the known time of its existence, even if muller's ratchet is clearly operating  <cit> . thus statements about the evolutionary short lives of asexuals are often less quantitative than would be desirable  <cit> . in other words there may not be a genomic decay paradox that calls for any special solutions  <cit> . we advocate the use of a simple model for predicting extinction times caused by muller's ratchet in order to make current discussions about ancient asexuals more quantitative  <cit> , even if that model cannot capture the full complexity of our study species and therefore only leads to tentative predictions. we believe that small steps in model development will allow future models to benefit from the experiences with simpler models. hence our use of a simple model of muller's ratchet that ignores all complications like potential red queen dynamics that might accelerate the rate of muller's ratchet . we focus on testing the null hypothesis that muller's ratchet could not have led to extinction in a given time frame, as described by loewe  <cit> . while this is an important advance over the purely verbal stage, we want to encourage future work to model the various processes that increase or decrease the predicted speed of genomic decay. we also want to encourage more empirical work to establish the precise values of parameters in these models. such work is needed for other asexual species as well.

the amazon molly and muller's ratchet
the fish poecilia formosa was the first unisexual vertebrate that was discovered  <cit> . this all-female species resulted from hybridization between relatives of poecilia mexicana and poecilia latipinna  <cit>  that probably happened between  <dig>  and  <dig>  years ago . reproduction normally occurs by sperm-dependent parthenogenesis, i.e. diploid eggs are produced, which need to be activated for embryonic development by sperm of closely related species. it has been argued that paternal leakage, leading to the expression of paternal genes, plays a pivotal role to stop muller's ratchet  <cit>  that otherwise would have driven the species to extinction in less time than its current estimates of existence  <cit> . paternal leakage and other processes that may slow down genomic decay are discussed below. we want to determine if these processes are necessary to explain the survival of this fish into our times.

habitat and population structure
the amazon molly is a small fish  that lives in a rather limited range from the nueces river in south-east texas southward to the mouth of the rio tuxpan, north of the sierra del abra in mexico. all these river systems flow from west to east and have no connection other than the sea. the population on such a large scale may have some structure, as populations from south texas, for example, have no reasonable connection with those in the río purificación. however, as the amazon molly tolerates marine conditions  <cit> , migration cannot be entirely excluded. a study of fst in subpopulations that span a distance of about  <dig> km in the same river system did not find significant population subdivision  <cit> . some simple models of population subdivision do not affect the effective population size ne and probabilities of the fixation . however, more realistic models of population structure that allow for extinctions and recolonizations can have a substantial impact on deleterious mutation accumulation  <cit> . to simplify our theoretical treatment, we will assume that the whole species has no substructure that is not already accounted for by our assumed ne.

genetics
the amazon molly reproduces gynogenetically, i.e. its eggs contain an unreduced set of chromosomes, that need the sperm of one of the sister species poecilia mexicana or poecilia latipinna as a mechanical trigger to start development  <cit> . usually, only the diploid set of maternal genes is expressed and the paternal genome is expelled. however, occasionally, the paternal genome remains, giving rise to a triploid clone, that reproduces as a triploid gynogen  <cit> . in other cases, only traces of the paternal genome  escape the enzymatic machinery that clears the egg from the nucleus that arrived with the sperm  <cit> . in all cases, the full diploid or triploid set of chromosomes  is clonally passed on to offspring, without an obvious opportunity for recombination  <cit> . based on this lack of recombination it was hypothesized that muller's ratchet should have driven the amazon molly to extinction within the presumed time of its existence, unless processes like paternal leakage would stop genomic decay  <cit> .

aims
here we aim to quantify the verbally predicted effects of muller's ratchet in order to see, whether there really is a genomic decay paradox as defined by loewe  <cit>  that calls for an explanation. results show that indeed a range of realistic parameter combinations should have led to the extinction of amazon molly within the time of its presumed existence.

RESULTS
we quantified the rate of mutation accumulation due to muller's ratchet using the best available analytical approximations  <cit>  and globally distributed individual-based simulations run by simulator005r <dig> of evolution@home  <cit>  assuming our estimates of the most realistic parameter combinations. to this end we used the standard null model of muller's ratchet described elsewhere  <cit>  and extended it to accommodate the slowdown in fitness decay that can be caused by polyploidy and mitotic recombination. we employ the u-shaped plot of extinction times against selection coefficients to allow easy visualization of situations that lead to a genomic decay paradox. the frequency of these situations can be measured by specifying the range of critical selection coefficients sc that are defined by the prediction of corresponding extinction times that are below tage, the presumed age of asexuality in an evolutionary line. for more detailed explanations of this plot see loewe  <cit> .

the results show that values for usdm, the slightly deleterious mutation rate, that are above usdm ≈  <dig> , lead to the extinction of the amazon molly within the estimated tage =  <dig>  years of its existence, even if lower and upper limits for tage are considered . this is also true for our best estimate of usdm in the unlikely case of extremely high levels of mitotic recombination . these findings are rather independent of the effective population size ne, as even ne =  <dig>  will not help against muller's ratchet if mutation rates are too high.

a deleterious mutation rate of about usdm ≈  <dig>  per generation results in extinction times that border with upper limits of estimates of the age of the amazon molly of  <dig> years. at this mutation rate some values of ne, rmax and tgen permit persistence and others cause extinction within this timeframe, where rmax is the maximal reproductive capacity of the non-degenerated ancestors and tgen is the generation time. the variability due to ne, rmax and tgen is indicated for usdm =  <dig>  by the dashed black lines in figure  <dig>  these factors lead to similar variability of extinction times for other mutation rates. if the deleterious genomic mutation rate were only  <dig> , then extinction due to muller's ratchet in the known age of the p. formosa lineage could be excluded, even with the current uncertainty in other parameters.

if deleterious mutation rates are greater than our best estimate of usdm ≈  <dig> , then muller's ratchet will cause extinction of the amazon molly in a few thousand years from the origin of asexuality under the standard model in the absence of mitigating forces. such high mutation rates seem to be supported by our best approximation of the genetic architecture in the amazon molly .

stage 1
:
2usdmsh→0sh
stage 2
:
stage 1
:
2usdmsh→>>0sh
stage 2
:
the table gives the variables in the exponent of n0=ne⋅e−usdm/s, where n <dig> is the number of individuals in the population that are in the 'best class'  in mutation-selection balance. here we propose that muller's ratchet in a given genome type can be approximated by using predictions for muller's ratchet in a haploid asexual genome and applying the scaling given here. usdm = slightly deleterious mutation rate/haploid genome, s = homozygous selection coefficient, h = dominance coefficient, sh = heterozygous selection coefficient, where in this table positive s denote harmful mutations. the two stages for asexual diploids denote the fixation of the first and second deleterious mutation that can occur at a diploid locus. for individual stages, arrows indicate the change of usdm/s with increasing mutation accumulation . '<' or '>' indicate that mutation rates will remain below or above the indicated level, respectably.

following loewe  <cit> , the threat of extinction from muller's ratchet in amazon molly can be quantified in detail as follows:

usdm =  <dig>   yields a minimal extinction time, tex, of tex ≈  <dig> kyr due to most critical selection coefficients, scm, in the range from scm ≈  <dig>  to  <dig> . a genomic decay paradox for this mutation rate exists at tage =  <dig> kyr in the range of critical selection coefficients sc ≈  <dig>  to  <dig> .

usdm =  <dig>   yields a minimal extinction time of tex ≈  <dig> kyr due to most critical selection coefficients in the range from scm ≈  <dig>  to  <dig> . a genomic decay paradox for this mutation rate exists at tage =  <dig> kyr in the range of critical selection coefficients sc ≈  <dig>  to  <dig> .

lower mutation rates under the same conditions lead to minimal extinction times that are longer than the assumed age of the line . see the coloured lines in figure  <dig> for a visual overview.

if mutation rates are increased beyond the natural levels that we estimated , then the most damaging mutational effects are all in the range of several percent or more and resulting minimal extinction times can be surprisingly short. for example, usdm =  <dig> can lead to extinction times of about  <dig> years by accumulating deleterious mutational effects of s ≈ 10%. if mutagenic pollution leads to a further 10-fold increase of usdm, then extinction times are expected to be less than  <dig> years, as increasingly harmful mutations start to accumulate as well .

discussion
this is the first detailed assessment of the threat of extinction from deleterious mutation accumulation through muller's ratchet in the amazon molly. combining our best estimates of the haploid deleterious mutation rate  with our best approximation of the genetic architecture in the amazon molly  leads to an effective deleterious mutation rate of usdm ≈  <dig>  mutations with critical effects/diploid genome/generation. in the absence of significant mitigating forces this would cause extinction of the amazon molly in a few thousand years. more precise results can be taken from figure  <dig> if needed. this represents a big step forward for understanding the asexuality in the amazon molly, since never before have the times to extinction been quantified in such detail for this fish.

genomic decay paradox
combining predicted extinction times with current estimates of the age of asexuality in the amazon molly leads to a genomic decay paradox, as defined by loewe  <cit> . thus mechanisms that extend our standard model of muller's ratchet are needed to explain why this fish has thus far escaped extinction. such mechanisms are not needed if either our most plausible mutation rate estimates are too high or the amazon molly is younger than current age estimates suggest . as current evidence seems hardly compatible with such low mutation rates or such a young age of p. formosa, the quest for mechanisms that help this fish escape genomic decay seems to be valid. this is corroborated by our observation of a fitness correlate, the number of embryos found in females, which does not show significant differences between p. formosa and p. mexicana . while we have no such information for other correlates such as longevity, number of broods per life, offspring survival, etc., our current limited evidence suggests that p. formosa experiences only little or no genomic decay despite our predictions of substantial deleterious mutation accumulation. below we will discuss processes that might be of special importance for maintaining fitness in the amazon molly.

mitotic recombination
some reports of apomixis in the amazon molly suggest a little debated potential solution to the mystery of its long-term survival. rasch et al.  <cit>  reported low, but consistent, levels of tissue graft rejections after prolonged periods  within certain sibships, suggesting that not all inheritance is strictly isogenic in the amazon molly. in the absence of a meiotic prophase these observations have been interpreted as the result of either a mutation rate that exceeds expectations or as the result of somatic cell crossing-over  <cit> . this process is also known as mitotic recombination and is most likely an inevitable result of the way that cells organize mitosis. it was first discovered in drosophila  <cit>  and has been intensively studied in yeast  <cit> , mice  <cit> , humans  <cit>  and daphnia  <cit> . the frequency of mitotic recombination in some fungi was found to be between  <dig> and  <dig> times less than that of meiotic recombination  <cit>  and recent experiments in yeast reported a factor of ≈  <dig>   <cit> . estimates suggest that about  <dig> sister chromatid exchanges per cellcycle can occur in mammalian cells  <cit> . such evidence suggests that the amazon molly experiences mitotic recombination, even if the effective rate of segregation of different mutations is probably much lower than in selfers with meiotic recombination. the fact that asexual daphnia have been shown to experience mitotic recombination  <cit>  means that the amazon molly would not be the only asexual to experience mitotic recombination.

if this is true, the resulting segregation might slow down muller's ratchet for some selection coefficients  <cit> , compared to expectations from the equal-contributions-model described below. however, the fact that the distribution of mutational effects is expected to be very wide on a log scale  <cit>  means that corresponding smaller selection coefficients will continue to drive muller's ratchet. thus it is difficult to see how mitotic recombination could stop the ratchet on its own without the contribution of other processes. we can use a simple model to put an upper limit on the maximal potential of mitotic recombination to stop muller's ratchet. mitotic recombination cannot possibly do more to stop fitness decay than in the case of completely free mitotic recombination. this allows for mutations to segregate at a maximal rate and has been used to model muller's ratchet in selfers  <cit> . as shown below , a simple scaling of mutation rate and selection coefficient is enough to extend the standard model of muller's ratchet to this case. applying such a scaling to our results does not remove the genomic decay paradox that we find . similarly an analysis of the various levels of dominance that are possible for diploids and triploids as shown in table  <dig> does not remove the paradox. thus we will have to search for other solutions.

rare recombination events during oogenesis in the amazon molly are not conceptually different from mitotic recombination in the germ line or selfing. to limit the largest possible contribution of these processes towards stopping genomic decay we assume the most generous form of selfing, which is free recombination between both diploid copies. as our analysis above shows, the largest possible amount of recombination during oogenesis cannot stop muller's ratchet – if no fresh genes are introduced by outcrossing of some sort.

paternal leakage
occasional paternal leakage of fresh genetic material from sexual sister species could serve as a template for dna repair  <cit>  or restore genes that had been destroyed by muller's ratchet  <cit> . paternal leakage has been demonstrated to lead to the expression of paternal genes  <cit> , suggesting a compensatory role in the amazon molly  <cit> . there are two mechanistic scenarios that may facilitate this.

 micro-chromosomes with a size of about 1% of the genome have been observed to leak from a sexual sister species to the amazon molly  <cit> . if they carry an occasional random sample of genes from the non-degraded sexual genome into the degrading amazon molly population, then the possibility exists that they might restore an ancient, non-degraded state of fitness. this could slow down muller's ratchet enough to solve the genomic decay paradox  <cit> . micro-chromosomes have been demonstrated to be stably inherited over many generations  <cit> .

 the finding of triploid clones might encourage the speculation that the third genome copy that is contributed by the sexual sister species might help restore fitness  <cit> . one might speculate that triploids should produce more offspring or survive better and ultimately substitute the diploid individuals. however, observations suggest the contrary, as triploids are rather limited in their range, young, and much less frequently produced than in other asexuals  <cit> . an alternative possibility is that triploids might occasionally lose one of their three genome copies and give rise to secondary diploids that can carry presumably fitter genes from their sexual sister species. if such a gene flow exists from the sexual sister species over paternal leakage and an intermediate triploid stage to a final diploid stage, then such a flow might contribute towards solving a genomic decay paradox  <cit> . however, there is no evidence for such a directed gene flow and triploids are produced much rarer in the amazon molly than in other asexuals or than micro-chromosomes in p. formosa  <cit> .

in any case, paternal leakage should not be confused with true recombination, which has stimulated discussions about the ratchet stopping potential of paternal leakage  <cit> . it has also been speculated that the paternal genome might be used as a template for dna repair, but its precise role remains unclear  <cit> .

other processes
there is a long list of other potential solutions for the genomic decay paradox that has been given elsewhere  <cit>  and thus shall not be discussed in detail here. this list includes the unlikely possibility that the true deleterious mutation rate might be much lower, either because mutation rates in the amazon molly happen to be generally much lower for yet unknown reasons, or because the distribution of mutational effects happens to be strongly bimodal with almost no mutations in the critical intermediate range. these hypotheses are not well supported by comparative analyses of mutation rates and effects in different species . synergistic epistatic effects have also been argued to have the capacity to stop genomic decay  <cit> , but this is only true in combination with very specific distributions of mutational effects. if these distributions are reasonably wide, the potential for epistatic effects to decelerate muller's ratchet is virtually non-existent  <cit> .

we have also ignored advantageous and compensatory mutations, which have a substantial potential to stop genomic decay completely, if they are frequent enough  <cit> . recent work has suggested that a substantial fraction of all mutations is advantageous  <cit> . if the underlying patterns are not caused by other processes and the selection coefficients of the corresponding mutations are large enough, then advantageous mutations can stop muller's ratchet. recent work in viruses has suggested that the ratio of beneficial to deleterious mutations can increase as the mean fitness decreases  <cit> . if similar dynamics hold for fish then muller's ratchet may operate much slower, if at all. a more detailed discussion of back mutations and compensatory mutations can be found elsewhere .

to increase the precision of extinction time estimates it would be desirable to have more direct empirical estimates of mutation rates and effects in the amazon molly. such more precise estimates are needed when specific potential solutions for this genomic decay paradox are to be tested. the evidence presented here makes it seem unlikely that such added information will change our main conclusion that a genomic decay paradox exists for the current age estimates. for more details and additional potential solutions, please see  <cit> .

red queen
it is possible that muller's ratchet is not the only process that leads to genomic decay and that the speed of muller's ratchet may be significantly increased by other processes. the amazon molly and its closely related sister species are known to harbor parasites  <cit> . these parasites probably decrease the fitness of their host substantially in the wild and co-evolve with it in an evolutionary arms race for survival. this scenario is described by the red queen hypothesis  <cit>  and may in itself lead to the extinction of a species. a red queen scenario can also be caused by antagonistic co-evolution in general, which may occur in many circumstances, including evolving predator-prey or plant-herbivore relationships or intra-specific co-evolution. it is also known that the speed of mutation accumulation caused by muller's ratchet is enhanced in a population that experiences red queen dynamics  <cit> . empirical support for a prerequisite of the red queen hypothesis could be found in another member of the family poeciliidae to which the amazon molly belongs  <cit> . thus the amazon molly might participate in such an arms race, however we currently do not know the range of biologically realistic parameter combinations that are needed to quantify red queen dynamics here. the red queen hypothesis predicts an increased load from parasites in asexuals, because they cannot adapt as fast as sexuals to newly evolving parasites. based on this prediction one might not expect substantial red queen dynamics in the amazon molly, since it seems to have about as many parasites as its sexual sister species  <cit> . another attempt to discover red queen dynamics in the amazon molly was also negative  <cit> . if the amazon molly is forced to constantly evolve as under red queen dynamics, then the genomic decay paradox might be more extreme.

implications for the origin of the amazon molly
many attempts to produce fertile asexual hybrids in the laboratory have been unsuccessful  <cit> , but under natural conditions such hybridization attempts between the sympatric parental species of the amazon molly, p. mexicana and p. latipinna, might happen occasionally. if such hybridization events occurred regularly, they could have led to a stable existence of the amazon molly form, even though all individual hybrids are on their way to extinction as they will soon be replaced by fresh hybrids. in this case we expect multiple different young hybrid lines in random samples from the overall population of the amazon molly, as each lineage of hybrids will be closer to its parental species than to other independent hybrids. the corresponding phylogenetic tree is expected to be polyphyletic.

such a scenario is not supported by existing mtdna data  <cit> . amazon molly individuals sampled from a wide range of locations show a paraphyletic tree that is compatible with a single hybridization event in the distant past. this is based on the observation that amazon molly mtdna sequences cluster either with each other or with exactly the same ancestral sequence from the parental species  <cit> . if all sequences sampled in the future follow the same pattern, this rules out polyphyly and casts serious doubts over the hypothesis of multiple hybridizations in the past  <cit> . combining this with the difficulties to produce asexual hybrids in the lab  <cit>  suggests that the amazon molly probably comes from a singularly rare hybridization success. this is in marked difference to some other species, where asexual hybrids are much easier to obtain  <cit> . thus our quantification of muller's ratchet only applies to the descendents of this one clone that appears to have an age of about  <dig> ky.

we cannot distinguish whether the amazon molly originated by a single ancient hybridization event or whether there was a small series of such events involving very similar parental individuals in the distant past. this is of no importance for our conclusions, as the subsequent course of mutation accumulation is not expected to be different from that in a population that goes back to a single hybridization event.

in order for other hybridization events to affect our conclusions, there would have to be a repeated production of fresh clones that could then constantly replace the decaying genomes in the population. this is expected to show in phylogenetic analyses. current analyses show the absence of polyphyly and indicate that there is no ongoing hybridization in the wild  <cit> . thus our analysis is appropriate for the time that came after the population was cut off from geneflow. this is the time tagethat we estimate as the time that muller's ratchet had for degrading the amazon molly. in the case that future work uncovers multiple hybridization events, our analysis is valid for the lifespan of each clone, assuming no additional factors like interclonal competition that is independent of muller's ratchet.

as current genetic data cannot infer what happened before the origin of our current lineage of the amazon molly, this lineage might well be only the last unisexual amazon molly that did not yet go extinct, with many others preceding it. as we know nothing about potential previous clones our ability to test the so-called "frozen-niche-variation model"  <cit>  is rather limited in this case.

conservation genetics
since extinction time is very sensitive to changes in the mutation rate, it is conceivable that the anthropogenic release of mutagenic substances could lead to such a strong increase in mutation rate that extinction times are predicted to be in time frames that are frequently considered by conservation biologists. one of us  could actually observe a typical poeciliid habitat that had lost almost all vertebrate life due to apparent water pollution . although we have no evidence to decide whether this incident was mutagenic or not, pollution in general often has mutagenic side effects. this suggests the possibility of considerable pollution at least of parts of the habitat of the amazon molly and would not be the first instance where pollution in rivers leads to a several-fold increase of mutation rates .

quantifying muller's ratchet in other ancient asexuals is easier now
it is well known that asexual lineages are typically short-lived. while this observation is central to theories about the origin of sex, it still needs to be properly quantified  <cit> . the evolution@home results used in this work make it manageable to quantify the threat from muller's ratchet for the long list of other putatively ancient asexuals that have been suspected of being threatened by genomic decay  <cit> , including the amazon molly's close relative poeciliopsis  <cit> . we suspect that it might not be possible to explain the existence of all these asexuals by the surprising discovery of a recent ancestor with a very young age as in the case of the clonal, hybrid, gynogenetic mole salamander ambystoma  <cit> . even if that were the case, then it would still be interesting to quantify muller's ratchet, as this would shed more light on how fast it actually clicks in clonal lineages, where some evidence is consistent with its operation  <cit> . examples of ancient asexuals that could benefit from a more rigorous quantification of the effects of muller's ratchet include:

 darwinula stevensoni, a small non-marine ostracod. darwinulidae are believed to have lived for about  <dig> myr without sex as the fossil record shows only females  <cit>  – but see smith et al.  <cit> . the species darwinula stevensoni is a member of this group and is thought to exist for more than  <dig> myr now  <cit> .

 bdelloid rotifers. the class bdelloidea of the phylum rotifera is the largest taxonomic group that has apparently lived completely without sex for at least  <dig> myr  <cit> . the ancient asexuality of these  <dig>  to  <dig> mm long animals appears to be as well established as it can possibly be. various special features of this group have been discussed as the reason behind its long-term survival  <cit> .

 oribatid mites. parthenogenetic automicts are frequent among oribatid mites  <cit> . current estimates suggest that some lines have lived parthenogenetically for perhaps  <dig> myr and that their extant distribution was strongly affected by continental drift  <cit> .

practical aspects
to quantify the possibilities of extinction from muller's ratchet in a given asexual system using the evolution@home results database, please contact one of us . you will receive help in completing a survey of various details about your study system  and if enough data is available, a preliminary report will be produced . if necessary, the existing evolution@home infrastructure can be used to compute new parameter combinations. our experience shows that the prediction of extinction times in ancient asexuals can often be simplified by using rough upper and lower limits for important parameters. for some parameters the lack of precision will not be critical, where as for others it will help focus further empirical work towards parameter estimation.

why quantify the ratchet as often as possible?
there are many open questions that can be asked about the general accuracy of the simple standard model of muller's ratchet used for the quantifications presented here  <cit> . we believe that the following reasons justify a series of analyses of extinction times in various asexuals based on our null-model. we expect such work to contribute towards a mature, quantitative discussion about the evolutionary biology of asexuals.

 critical predictions of extinction time help biologists to look for the key data that is also needed for more realistic quantifications of the effects of mutation accumulation. therefore such predictions help in the design of empirical work.

 it can be expected that at least some of the putative ancient asexuals are not examples of the genomic decay paradox, because the known age of their asexuality is smaller than their predicted extinction time. this does not deny the age of their asexuality, it just takes the 'scandal' out of the observations  <cit> .

 those species with an apparent genomic decay paradox can be subject to a more detailed search for mechanisms that solve the paradox and help them to avoid extinction  <cit> .

 experiences with the present simple system for predicting extinction times can be expected to lead to the development of more realistic systems for the quantification of genomic decay paradoxes. such improved systems might include the processes discussed here and might measure their mitigating effects on mutation accumulation.

CONCLUSIONS
a genomic decay paradox is predicted by a large number of biologically realistic parameter combinations for the unisexual amazon molly. this is based on a simple model of muller's ratchet that accounts for the distribution of mutational effects on fitness, the availability of multiple copies of the genome and mitotic recombination. our prediction of a genomic decay paradox strengthens the conclusions of earlier work that suggested the existence of additional biological processes that slow down or halt the mutational decay of fitness in this fish. this conclusion is consistent with our observation that the amazon molly carries approximately the same number of embryos per adult as its sexual sister species. future work will have to establish whether paternal leakage of micro-chromosomes or still other processes have helped the amazon molly to survive until today. if these mitigating processes are weak enough, an increase of mutagenic substances in the environment could easily lead to a rate of mutation accumulation that might allow extinction within time frames that are frequently of interest to conservation biologists.

