BACKGROUND
in the past few years, evolutionary biologists have increasingly bet on population genomics approaches to study the genetic basis of adaptation and speciation. genome scans have flourished in the literature, providing valuable insight into the genetics of local adaptation  <cit> , sympatric speciation  <cit> , host race or ecotype differentiation  <cit> , and response to climate change or exotic invasions  <cit> , among others. in most cases, however, population genomics alone fell short of pinpointing the specific gene or mutation targeted by selection during the adaptation or speciation process  <cit> .

one of the main reasons for this recurring setback is the present lack of genomic resources for most examined species. for example, due to the absence of more powerful alternatives, many population genomics studies rely on genetic markers such as aflps   <cit> , which can generally be obtained easily for any organism. unfortunately, such markers present the double disadvantage of being anonymous and of falling predominantly in non-coding regions of the genome, i.e. far from potential candidate regions for adaptation and speciation  <cit> . moreover, when genomic sequences are scarce or poorly annotated, identifying candidate genes in the vicinity of markers showing a selection signature represents a daunting task that few researchers have undertaken so far . yet, we predict that these limitations are bound to disappear in the near future, especially with the increasing use of next-generation sequencing technologies. in this article, we aim at providing a foretaste of this exciting new era by illustrating how new genomic tools can help unravel the genetic basis of mosquito resistance to bacillus thuringiensis subsp. israelensis  insecticidal toxins.

considered as a safe alternative to chemical insecticides, the bio-insecticide bti is widely used worldwide for mosquito control  <cit> . bti toxicity is mainly conferred by three cry toxins  and one cyt toxin , which aggregate in a proteic crystal produced during sporulation of the bacteria  <cit> . bti is usually sprayed in mosquito breeding sites as a mixture of spores and toxins, which is ingested together with organic detritus by developing larvae. in the larval midgut, bti toxins are first activated by protease/trypsin-like enzymes or aminopeptidases  <cit> . then, they bind to specific receptors of the midgut cells , or directly interact with the cell membrane , ultimately causing pore formation and cell lysis  <cit> . cy1a is also known to act synergistically with cry toxins, increasing the overall toxicity of the bti mixture  <cit> . due to the complexity of bti toxicity mechanisms, some have argued that resistance to bti would likely require adaptive mutations in several genes  <cit> . this argument is reinforced by the fact that only a handful of studies have observed evidence of laboratory or natural resistance to bti in mosquito  <cit> . because of the probable multilocus nature of bti resistance, population genomics appears to be an approach of choice to identify genes involved in this process.

here, we describe the application of population genomics to the search for candidate genes for resistance to a toxic leaf litter containing bti spores. with the mosquito aedes aegypti as a model, we first conducted a genome scan relying on about  <dig> mite -derived markers expected to occur frequently in gene-rich regions  <cit> . by combining the results of this genome scan with data from the publicly available genome sequence of ae. aegypti, we were then able to localize two good candidate genes for bti resistance. finally, these two genes were further analyzed at the sequence and gene expression levels in order to determine if selection was indeed a driving force in their evolution.

RESULTS
genome scan and identification of outlier loci presumably influenced by selection
our search for candidate genes linked to bti resistance was conducted in two aedes aegypti strains differing drastically in their susceptibility to bti as well as to individual bti toxins . the genome of ae. aegypti was screened using a variant of the dart  procedure, where motifs of a particular mite  family called pony served as primer anchors for pcr amplification. in total,  <dig> biallelic dominant markers were surveyed for  <dig> individuals in each mosquito strain, revealing a particularly high genetic differentiation between strains . this strong genetic structure was not surprising given the history of the two strains, and in particular the recent bottleneck experienced by the resistant strain . however, high neutral fst values are expected to reduce the power of methods revealing outlier loci potentially under selection on the basis of an atypically high genetic differentiation. for example, the application of the program dfdist  <cit>  to our data detected only one locus departing from neutral expectations for α = 1%, because the neutral envelope included almost the entire range of possible differentiation values . as a result, we adopted a different strategy and retained as outliers those loci for which alternative phenotypes  were fixed or nearly fixed in each strain. a total of  <dig> such markers were sequenced for further analyses.

outlier sequencing and localization in the genome
among the outlier sequences obtained, one pair differed only by a gap and another one by only a mutation, resulting in a redundancy rate of  <dig> %. after trimming the primer sequence and the pony motif, the  <dig> unique marker sequences  had an average size of  <dig>  bp . of these unique sequences,  <dig> could be assigned to a unique position in the aedes aegypti genome, and all but two of these positions were found on different supercontigs . six sequences were situated on the same supercontig as a candidate gene for bti resistance , and two of them  co-localized with the same gene . it had to be noted that physical distances between candidate genes and outlier markers situated on the same supercontig were considerable, ranging from  <dig> bp  to more than  <dig> mbp . according to these results, the cadherin gene  turned out to be a serious candidate for bti resistance because two outlier markers pointed towards it, one of them at the shortest distance recorded in this study. this gene, which codes for a possible toxin-binding receptor  <cit> , was thus selected for further investigation at the sequence and expression levels. we also focused on the leucine aminopeptidase gene  because of its potential implication in bti toxin activation  <cit> .

candidate gene sequence analysis
a total of  <dig>  bp and  <dig>  bp were sequenced for the cad and lap genes, respectively. all sequences were deposited into genbank, with accession numbers gu <dig> to gu <dig>  as shown in table  <dig>  the two candidate genes shared similarities: both had a higher genetic diversity in the susceptible than in the resistant strain even if more individuals were sequenced in this latter. this observation was consistent with the fact that both strains are separated by  <dig> generations of selection, and that the resistant strain experienced a strong bottleneck at generation  <dig> . both genes also showed similar numbers of haplotypes in each strain . on the other hand, the two candidate genes differed by their overall level of genetic diversity and inter-strain differentiation. for example, the fst value was  <dig>  only for cad vs.  <dig>  for lap. likewise, the nucleotide diversity π estimated for lap in the susceptible strain was about four times lower than that estimated for cad, this ratio reaching  <dig> when considering the resistant strain. however, it has to be noted that polymorphisms were not uniformly distributed along the cad gene sequence, some regions showing globally more variation .

cadherin
n, number of alleles sampled; hap, number of different haplotypes; s, number of segregating sites; si, number of singletons; ns, number of non-synonymous mutations; hd, haplotype diversity; π, nucleotide diversity ; θw, watterson's mutation parameter θ estimated from s ; k; average number of nucleotide differences within strain; k, average number of nucleotide differences between strains; fst, genetic differentiation between strains.

* some measures  are different between the whole sequence and the total of all sequences because of a different number of sampled haplotypes.

these patterns of genetic diversity translated differently at the codon level. we found three non-synonymous sites in the cad sequence, of which none was diagnostic of one strain in particular, whereas for the lap sequence, only two of nine non-synonymous mutations were present in the resistant strain. six non-synonymous sites, among which five could only be found in the susceptible strain, were noticeably situated in 5' and 3' untranslated regions and could thus affect transcript stability and/or translation.

finally, the examination of haplotype repartition between strains allowed this picture to be completed. for the cad gene, one haplotype present in all  <dig> sampled resistant individuals  existed only in  <dig> susceptible individuals . for the lap gene, the most frequent haplotype in the resistant strain  was absent from the susceptible strain.

neutrality tests
for both candidate genes, we tested for deviation from neutral evolution in the resistant strain by applying different neutrality tests to the observed polymorphism data . tajima's d and fay and wu's h highlight a skew in the frequency distribution of variants, h giving more weight to high-frequency polymorphisms, whereas fu and li's d* and f* detect a discrepancy between either the total number of mutations  or the average number of differences between two sequences  and the number of singletons. as a result, each one of these tests is based on different diversity parameters and gives different information on the type of selection presumably in action. in this study, every test except fay and wu's h gave positive values for both genes , which is consistent with the recent bottleneck experienced by the resistant strain. none of the tests was significant for lap, whereas d*, f* and h remained significant for cad even when accounting for the particular demographic history of the strain . the positive values of d* and f* suggested a deficiency of recent  mutations, whereas the negative h indicated an excess of high compared to intermediate frequency mutations.

a, performed following the method of hudson  <cit>  implemented in dnasp; b, performed using the program ms  <cit> .

gene expression analyses
real-time reverse-transcription pcr  analyses revealed that levels of gene expression were reduced in the resistant strain compared to the susceptible strain for both candidate genes . non-parametric mann-whitney tests indicated that reduction in expression levels was significant for both genes . however, only the expression fold change observed for the cad gene  was higher than the two-fold change conservatively used as a significant threshold in expression studies  <cit> .

discussion
a mite-based genome scan to search for candidate genes
the goal of this study was to identify genes conferring resistance to the bio-insecticide bacillus thuringiensis subsp. israelensis  in an aedes aegypti mosquito strain selected for several generations with a toxic leaf litter containing bti spores. the genetic basis of bti resistance is likely to be multigenic  <cit> , and in ae. aegypti, we listed as many as  <dig> serious candidates by virtue of their known function and/or proven association with bti resistance in other species . as a result, we chose to tackle this study by adopting a population genomics approach. the underlying idea was to examine many mite-derived dart markers scattered in the genome to get an accurate estimate of the overall background  genetic differentiation between the selected  and control  strains. this in turn allowed detecting markers with an atypically high inter-strain genetic differentiation, and thus possibly linked to a gene under positive selection due to bti resistance. our genome scan revealed an overall high level of neutral genetic differentiation between the two strains , which is not unexpected in the light of the history of the resistant strain, and especially of the bottleneck it experienced at generation  <dig> . yet, the fst value obtained between the same two mosquito strains using aflp markers is substantially lower . aflp and dart markers are biallelic, dominant and, to a certain extent, randomly distributed in the genome so they should provide similar genetic differentiation estimates. however, the dart markers developed for the purpose of this study are intimately associated with a specific family of mites called pony, whose characteristics might explain the discrepancy between the two fst measures. pony elements constitute about  <dig> % of the genome of ae. aegypti  <cit> , and although their transposition mechanism is still unclear, it could be triggered by unfavorable environmental conditions as was shown for other mites in plants for example  <cit> . several authors have even underlined the potential contribution of mites to rapid adaptations and, ultimately, genome evolution  <cit> . one can thus speculate that the environmental stress imposed by toxic leaf litter selection stimulated pony transpositions, hence inflating estimates of inter-strain genetic differentiation as measured by our pony-associated markers. like many mites, pony motifs are also known to frequently occur in the non-coding regions of genes  <cit> . because of this last characteristic of pony elements and of their high mutational potential possibly enhanced by stress, pony-based darts are ideal random markers to explore the genome of ae. aegypti and search for genes conferring resistance to bti.

dart marker sequences and identification of candidate genes
we decided to sequence the mite-based dart markers showing the highest inter-strain differentiation , as those are the most likely to be linked to genes conferring resistance to bti. of the  <dig> sequences obtained,  <dig>  matched to unique locations in the genome of ae. aegypti, while the rest consisted of repeated sequences. as less than 40% of the genome of this species is constituted of single or low copy sequences  <cit> , this result confirms the fact that mite-based darts tend to fall near low-copy, possibly coding, sequences. the  <dig> genomic locations involved were all but two situated on different supercontigs of the ae. aegypti full genome sequence, suggesting that there was no real bias in the distribution of our markers in the genome, at least for highly differentiated ones. unfortunately, the ae. aegypti genome has a weak gene density  <cit> , and most of our outlier sequences  fell in supercontigs with few or no putative genes. furthermore, we recently performed a differential transcriptome analysis of ae. aegypti larvae exposed to different xenobiotics. this study, based on the sequencing of millions of cdna tags using next-generation sequencing, detected more than  <dig> loci situated outside predicted genes and showing a significant transcription signal . there is thus an obvious need for a better gene annotation in the ae. aegypti genome, and one efficient strategy to tackle this task would be to concentrate the effort on regions of interest, like those showing signatures of selection.

the selection with toxic leaf litter was a recent event in the history of the resistant strain so linkage disequilibrium is probably extensive in the vicinity of selected genes  <cit> . in those conditions, detecting selection signatures in a genome is somewhat easier even with a relatively small marker density  <cit> , but on the other hand, the existence of large haplotype blocks makes it more difficult to pinpoint the exact gene under selection. in this study, the distance between outlier markers and candidate genes was considerable  and might exceed the window of linkage disequilibrium around selected genes. in other words, we might have overlooked closer genes genuinely responsible for the signatures of selection, but not already annotated or absent from our list of candidates.

the cadherin and leucine aminopeptidase as candidate genes
among the five candidate genes discovered in the proximity of outlier markers, we decided to examine further the cadherin  and leucine aminopeptidase  at the sequence and expression levels, to confirm or infirm the selection footprint. this step was all the more crucial since selection but also particular demographic histories can generate an atypically high genetic differentiation  <cit> .

neutrality tests are often used to verify the influence of selection in intraspecific sequence data  <cit> . however, they have often been criticized for their lack of power and their sensitivity to demographic events like bottlenecks or population expansions which can mimic selective effects  <cit> . in this study, this possible bias was overcome by performing tailor-made coalescence simulations based on the known demographic history of the resistant strain, in order to assess the significance of the tests. no firm evidence of selection was found at the nucleotide or expression level for the lap gene, which rules out its implication in bti resistance, at least as a gene with major effects. for the cad gene, fu and li's d* and f* tests highlighted a deficit in rare mutations, which is usually the trademark of balancing selection  <cit> . fay and wu's h statistics indicated an excess of high compared to intermediate frequency mutations, which on the contrary suggests the spread of an advantageous mutation at a linked site   <cit> . although those conflicting results might be hard to interpret at first glance, one has to keep in mind that the selection with the toxic leaf litter started only  <dig> generations ago. in addition, the resistant strain experienced a recent bottleneck which probably further eliminated low frequency variants. new mutations certainly have not had time yet to appear in the population, which would explain the positive d* and f* values. for the same reason, tajima's d can be transiently positive right after a bottleneck  <cit> . as for the h statistics, it is not as sensitive to the loss of rare variants, so it is presumably more reliable here and we can reasonable think that the cad gene shows genuine signs of positive selection. this evidence is further reinforced by the significant under-expression of this gene in the resistant strain. cadherins are indeed known to bind to cry toxins in other insect species  <cit>  and to be involved in many cases of cry resistance in insects . here, under-expression of the cadherin gene could reduce the number of a certain type of cry receptors and thus hinder pore forming, ultimately limiting susceptibility to bti. similarly, resistance to the toxin cry1ac has been shown to be linked to reduced levels of membrane receptors in the cotton pest heliothis virescens  <cit> , or in the cabbage moth plutella xylostella  <cit> . nevertheless, cadherins are usually specific to one particular cry toxin  <cit> , and it is unlikely that the cad gene alone is responsible for resistance to bti which is a mixture of several cry toxins. one can thus hypothesize that this gene's effects supplement those of one or several other genes that remain to be identified.

CONCLUSIONS
beyond their implications for the understanding of the genetic mechanisms of bti mosquito resistance, these results illustrate how genome scans can build on the body of new genomic information  to finally hold their promises and help pinpoint candidate genes for adaptation and speciation  <cit> . in the near future, a wealth of genomics tools will be available for a much wider range of species, mostly thanks to the rapid development of next-generation sequencing technologies  <cit> . we predict this new knowledge will boost in many respects the use of population genomics for the study of the genetic bases of adaptation and speciation. several limitations of current genome scans will certainly be soon overcome, with for example  the development of new genetic markers allowing screening the genome more finely  or specifically targeting coding regions ;  an easier access to outlier sequences as well as full genomic sequences serving as references to locate outlier loci and identify nearby candidate genes; and  a better gene annotation. in short, population genomics will at last have the means to meet our expectations when it comes to identify genes under natural or artificial selection.

