BACKGROUND
array-based comparative genomic hybridization  provides a quantitative measure of differences in copy number between two dna samples  <cit> . the technique is typically applied to cancer studies because chromosome aberrations frequently occur during tumor progression  <cit> . array-cgh facilitates the localization and identification of oncogenes and tumor suppressor genes, which are likely to be present in chromosomal regions gained and lost, respectively, in cancer cells.

recent developments in the statistical analysis of array-cgh data have focused on high-level analysis, typically the identification of breakpoints from the genomic profile  <cit> , rather than normalization. most of the normalization techniques used to date for array-cgh data analysis have therefore involved the simple transposition of methods originally designed for expression data  <cit> , correcting for differences in the labeling efficiency of the two dyes, spotting effects , and local or global intensity dependence of the ratios  <cit> . as far as we are aware, khojasteh et al.  <cit>  have reported the only method specific to cgh arrays.

investigation of the systematic sources of variation in the array-cgh data studied showed that the effects affecting expression arrays were negligible with respect to spatial effects of two types. we describe here an algorithm for spatial normalization, which can also be combined with existing normalization methods for handling non-spatial artifacts. we will define and illustrate these two types of spatial effect, and show that such effects are not properly taken into account by traditional normalization techniques.

two distinct types of spatial artifact
the methods proposed here were originally developed for the analysis of bladder cancer data from tumors collected at henri mondor hospital   <cit> , analyzed by hybridization on cgh arrays , including  <dig> clones spotted at the university of california san francisco   <cit> . they were then adapted to several data sets for cgh arrays produced and hybridized at the institut curie, including the breast cancer data  and the neuroblastoma data  <cit>   used to illustrate the technique.

we identified two types of spatial effect with fundamentally different natures: local spatial bias ) and continuous spatial gradients ):

local spatial bias
the array image shows clusters of spots with a discrete signal shift, with the other spots of the array remaining unchanged. these clustered shifted spots on the array image ) have no biological explanation, and correspond to outliers on genomic profiles  and 6). in the data sets studied here, this artifact was found to affect about half of all arrays. we describe it as local because it affects only limited areas of the array.

continuous spatial gradient
the array image shows a smooth gradient in signal from one side of the slide to the other ). this artifact leads to genomic profiles with high variability, even between regions with the same dna copy number. when this effect is observed, it affects all spots to various degrees.

these two types of effect are experimental artifacts of non-biological origin:

- they occur on arrays designed such that neighboring spots on the array correspond to non-neighboring clones in the genome, so there is no obvious biological reason for the clustering of high  signals on the array;

- they are frequently observed on control  hybridizations, and even on background signals .

the methods proposed are designed to remove or reduce these two types of spatial effect, while preserving the true biological signal.

the need for a spatial segmentation method
the spatial effects described above cannot be attributed to spotting, for two reasons: firstly, they are not limited to array rows, columns or blocks; secondly, they are not reproducible from one array to another, even for arrays taken from batches of slides printed at the same time. therefore, it is not possible to correct for them properly with the normalization methods generally used for expression arrays, in which "spatial" effects are captured only by row, column, or print-tip group effects. for a method to be appropriate, it must take into account the spatial structure of the array as a whole, and the arbitrary shape of these biased areas.

several different studies have taken into account spatial effects in expression microarray data and have provided signal correction methods. for example, workman et al.  <cit>  defined a spatial gradient normalization method using a two-dimensional gaussian function to estimate local background bias in a probe neighborhood. baird et al.  <cit>  proposed a mixed model for cdna array data, using splines with spatial autocorrelation, assuming the existence of a one-step correlation between adjacent spots in a row or column. colantuoni et al.  <cit>  proposed a method for normalizing the element signal intensities to a mean intensity calculated locally across the surface of a dna microarray. others studies have combined intensity-dependent and spatially-dependent effects. wilson et al.  <cit>  have proposed fitting a single loess curve on the ma plot and then spatially smoothing the residuals using a median filter to estimate the spatial trend. tarca et al.  <cit>  proposed correcting intensity-dependent and spatially-dependent effects using a feed-forward neural network. khojasteh et al.  <cit>  have compared different cgh array data normalization methods and suggested that a three-step normalization that combines print-tip loess with spatial correction using moving median and microplate effect correction gave the best results.

these methods may be suitable for correcting continuous spatial gradients, but they were not designed to detect abrupt changes in signal value across the array, and therefore may not adequately handle local spatial bias: figure  <dig> illustrates the need for a spatial segmentation method to handle such local spatial effects. from the median-centered log-ratios  we estimate a spatial trend  by two-dimensional loess regression  <cit> ; subtracting this spatial trend from the raw values partially corrects the spatial effect , but the array trend after correction  demonstrates that the spatial effect is undercorrected at the inner border of the biased area, and overcorrected at the outer border, consistent with the observation that signal disturbances vary steeply at the border of the biased area. this systematic overcorrection or undercorrection may lead to misinterpretation in the corresponding genomic profile.

a similar type of spatial effect was reported for expression microarrays by reimers et al  <cit> . for cgh arrays, this type of effect should be easier to detect and correct, as they have a much smaller range of signal ratio variation than expression microarrays. however, this smaller range necessitates a much greater measurement precision for array-cgh data.

we describe here a spatial segmentation algorithm for the automatic delineation and elimination of unreliable areas, facilitating the exclusion of local spatial bias from array-cgh data. this algorithm consists of three steps, which are explained in detail in the methods section:

: estimation of a spatial trend on the array using two-dimensional loess regression  <cit> 

: segmentation of the array into spatial areas with similar trend values using nem, an unsupervised classification algorithm including spatial constraints  <cit> 

: identification of the areas affected by spatial bias.

a wide variety of microarray techniques based on bacs, cdnas or oligonucleotides  may be used to quantify changes in dna copy number. from a technical aspect, our method could be applied to any of these microarray types, although we detected local spatial bias only on bac arrays.

therefore, we focused on this technology, which has also been the most widely used so far. we provide examples of the implementation of this method and illustrate its performance with three data sets collected on two cgh-array platforms:

- the first data set  was produced at the ucsf. in this data set, local spatial effects were observed on 57% of  <dig> arrays, with a median of  <dig> affected spots, and no visual evidence of spatial gradients;

- the two other data sets were produced at the institut curie, inserm u <dig>  they consist of a breast cancer data set, in which local spatial effects were observed on 45% of  <dig> arrays, with a median of  <dig> affected spots, and a neuroblastoma data set  <cit> , with local spatial effects on 23% of  <dig> arrays, and a median of  <dig> affected spots.

manor: an algorithm combining segmentation and signal correction
in addition to local spatial bias, we also frequently identified continuous spatial gradients, especially in breast cancer data set ) and neuroblastoma data set. a straightforward way to correct for spatial gradients ) is to subtract from the log-ratios an estimate of the spatial trend on the array ). the first step of the spatial segmentation algorithm for detecting local spatial bias  provides such an estimate. this estimate is calculated using two-dimensional loess regression as explained in detail in the methods section.

in many cases, the cgh arrays were affected by both types of spatial effect: local spatial effects and continuous spatial gradients. in practice, we do not know in advance what type of spatial effect affects a given array. thus, we propose the following two-step approach:

 <dig>  run the spatial segmentation algorithm  to identify potential areas of local spatial bias

 <dig>  correct spots not excluded during the first step for continuous spatial gradients .

this algorithm, implemented in the manor package, will be referred to as seg+2dloess in the remainder of this article. the rationale underlying this two-step approach is that arrays affected by continuous spatial gradients only will not be detected as containing local spatial bias by the step seg, and will therefore be properly corrected by the step 2dloess. this two-step approach is suitable for the spatial normalization of data sets containing both types of spatial effect.

RESULTS
we have used our method for the spatial normalization of array-cgh data from two different platforms. in this section, we provide information about the practical implementation of the method on these two platforms, and quantitative results comparing our method to ten other normalization techniques. these compare the values of three quality criteria calculated after normalization of each array: the first, sigma, estimates the experimental variability between replicates, whereas the others, smt and dyn, evaluate quality in the context of the estimation of differences in dna copy number between test and reference samples: smt quantifies the smoothness of the signal over the genome, and dyn assesses the dynamics of the signal, defined by the signal-to-noise ratio between gained and normal regions; these criteria are defined more formally and explained in detail in the methods section.

to our knowledge, the ten normalization procedures used for the comparisons cover all the different types of approaches proposed so far and include the methods proposed by tarca et al.  <cit> , yang et al.  <cit>  and khojasteh et al.  <cit> . these methods are detailed in the methods section. for each normalization method, we calculated the three quality criteria for each array. when comparing two methods, we calculated a relative performance for each quality criterion, and assessed the significance of this performance using a student's t-test, as explained in the methods section. we show that our proposed method outperforms all previously published approaches for the three data sets.

application to data produced at ucsf
the bladder cancer data set to which our algorithm was applied concerns  <dig> arrays that were spotted and hybridized at ucsf. these arrays consist of  <dig> spots, corresponding to  <dig> clones – all of which are bacs  – with the following design:

- neighboring clones in the genome are dispersed on the array – a necessary condition for distinguishing between spatial artifacts and real biological information;

- each clone is replicated three times on the array, and the three replicated spots are adjacent, so a high level of consistency for the three corresponding ratios does not prove that there are no spatial effects.

for this data set, spatial normalization is the last step in the following comprehensive normalization process. after image analysis of the arrays with spot  <dig>  software  <cit> , we screened for low-quality spots: spots with a foreground reference signal  less than 125% of the background reference signal  were discarded, as were clones with a log-ratio standard deviation exceeding  <dig> . clones for which only one of the three replicates was retained after these steps were then also discarded.

finally, we applied the proposed spatial normalization method seg+2dloess as follows: the spatial segmentation seg was applied to the log-ratios of this filtered array, with k =  <dig> and β =  <dig> , followed by the correction for continuous spatial gradients 2dloess.

spatial normalization step
our segmentation algorithm detected local spatial effects on  <dig> of  <dig> bladder cancer arrays ; the median proportion of biased areas on these arrays was  <dig> %. figure  <dig>  illustrates the successive steps of the algorithm, from centered log-ratios to array trend, spatial segmentation of the array, and finally the delineation of biased areas. red dots on the corresponding genomic profile  correspond to the spots discarded during spatial normalization .

evaluation of the performance of the seg+2dloess method
for each normalization method , we calculated the three quality criteria for each array and performed pairwise comparison of methods using the estimate and significance of their relative performance for each criterion, as explained in detail in the methods section.

for the smt criterion, seg+2dloess also significantly outperforms all methods .

section  <dig> of the additional file  <dig> shows similar plots to figure  <dig>  but for the smt and dyn criteria, and for the smt and sigma criteria. tables  <dig> to  <dig> of the additional files  <dig> and  <dig> summarize the results of all the pairwise comparisons of methods for the three quality criteria.

taken together, these results show that the seg+2dloess method outperforms its competitors for the bladder cancer data set.

application to data produced at institut curie, inserm u 509
the institut curie, inserm u <dig> has developed its own high-density cgh array; all steps in the production of these chips are performed in institut curie laboratories, including array spotting, dna preparation, hybridization, scanning and image processing. the current version of the array contains  <dig> clones, each of which is spotted at least three times on the array, giving a total of  <dig> to  <dig> spots .

this array was designed to facilitate distinction between relevant biological effects and experimental artifacts: "empty" spots and spots of water were included as controls, clone replicates were scattered over the array, and the positions of clones on the array are not correlated with their actual positions in the genome. a reliable ratio value can therefore be calculated even if one of the three replicates is flagged. the arrays were scanned using an axon genepix 4000b scanner, and images were processed with genepix pro  <dig> .

we analyzed a breast cancer data set and a neuroblastoma data set from this platform.

for this platform, we applied the proposed spatial normalization method seg+2dloess as follows: the spatial segmentation seg was applied to the background signal as explained in the paragraph below, and the spatial gradients were corrected by 2dloess calculated over the log-ratios. a post-processing step that includes spot and clone screening was then applied .

detail of the spatial segmentation step
although we can correct the foreground signal for background intensity, a significant proportion of arrays still show localized spatial patterns that cannot be attributed to biological causes. visual examination of spatial representations of the four signals  revealed that the bias was much clearer for the background signal of cy3-labeled samples , which was not the case for bladder cancer data. we therefore applied the spatial segmentation method described above to the background signal of the cy <dig> channel, with k =  <dig> and β =  <dig> .

biased areas of the cgh array are flagged and excluded from subsequent analysis. as clone replicates are not adjacent on the array, at least two of the three replicates generally remain after spatial bias correction, and a reliable ratio value can still be calculated. figure  <dig> shows the results of this spatial segmentation step in the case of an array with local spatial bias but no spatial gradients.

evaluation of the performance of the method seg+2dloess 
as for bladder cancer data, we calculated the three quality criteria for each normalization method and for each array for the breast cancer data set and the neuroblastoma data set. we then compared the methods paiwise using the estimate and significance of their relative performance for each criterion, as explained in detail in the methods section.

figures  <dig> and  <dig> show the results of comparing the ten methods with seg+2dloess for the dyn and sigma criteria. seg+2dloess significantly outperforms all other methods for the three criteria on the breast cancer data set .

the neuroblastoma data set gives similar results: seg+2dloess quality criteria are always better than those of the other methods, except for dyn, in which adjseg+2dloess is slightly better  but not significantly so . for smt, seg+2dloess is only slightly better than ptl+movmed and the methods including the 2dloess step, but not significantly so for adjseg+2dloess and ptl+movmed. in these cases, the small size of the data set  affects the statistical power.

section  <dig> and  <dig> of the additional file  <dig> and tables  <dig> to  <dig> of the additional files  <dig> and  <dig> detail and complement these results.

these results show that the seg+2dloess method outperforms the other methods on the two data sets produced on the institut curie, inserm u <dig> platform. the results also allow the methods to be ranked in terms of performance. those methods that include a two-dimensional loess step are the highest ranked, with the methods proposed by  <cit>  and  <cit> , which all include some spatial processing, being next, and the other methods being the lowest ranked .

CONCLUSIONS
we have designed an efficient and automated algorithm for the spatial normalization of bac array-cgh data, and defined a set of parameters for cgh array data quality assessment. we have shown that our method significantly improves the quality of data from two different bac-array platforms and outperforms other normalization techniques on three data sets.

the proposed algorithm is particularly suitable for correcting spatial effects not related to array design : indeed, the arrays studied show two distinct types of such spatial effect , which can simultaneously affect any given array. in such cases, using spatial trend correction after spatial segmentation helps to remove or reduce these two types of spatial effect, while preserving the true biological signal.

this method is original in the application of a segmentation algorithm for detecting and removing local spatial bias, preventing the misinterpretation of experimental artifacts as biologically relevant outliers in the genomic profile.

this method was developed for array-cgh experiments, and gave very good results. however, it can be applied to any microarray experiment having the same types of spatial effect.

availability and requirements
our method is implemented in the r package manor   <cit> , which is available from the bioconductor site  <cit> . it can also be tested on the capweb bioinformatics platform  <cit> .

