BACKGROUND
pomatoceros lamarckii is a tube-building serpulid annelid. the hard, calcareous tubes are common features on hard substrata such as rocks, marine infrastructure, molluscan shells and large crustacean exoskeletons. as such they can become important biofouling agents as well as being a concern to the aquaculture industry, for example, mussel farming. p. lamarckii has also proven to be a useful model in marine ecotoxicology, being widespread in the intertidal and sub-littoral zones  with easily accessible embryonic and larval material  <cit>  as well as a distinctive karyotype amenable to evaluation of gross chromosomal aberrations and changes  <cit> .

as an annelid p. lamarckii is a member of the lophotrochozoa clade, or super-phylum, of bilaterian animals. the lophotrochozoan clade is still relatively poorly represented in terms of genomic resources compared to the other two major clades of bilaterians; the ecdysozoa  and the deuterostomia   <cit> . this imbalance needs to be redressed in order to obtain a more balanced understanding of animal genome evolution and comparative biology.

coral ests  <cit>  and the nematostella vectensis genome  <cit> , and to a lesser extent the genome of trichoplax adhaerens  <cit> , have revealed a surprisingly high level of gene conservation between radiate, or diploblast, animals and bilaterians, in terms of numbers of genes, gene family representation and gene organisation. this level of surprise has to a certain extent been due to the erroneous estimated levels of gene conservation across the bilateria due to the bias in sampling from mainly deuterostomia and ecdysozoa. the coral est data  <cit>  in particular revealed that many genes that had previously been thought to be deuterostome or vertebrate innovations, are in fact conserved with this non-bilaterian animal and hence have been lost in the lineages leading to the ecdysozoan genomes sampled. to truly understand these patterns of lineage and clade-specific gene losses and conservation, a broader phylogenetic sample of taxa must be compared. although the recent diploblast/radiata to triploblast/bilateria comparisons have clearly revised our concept of the complexity  of the last common ancestor of these groups, there is still a huge amount to be determined about the major events in animal evolution at the transition between these two groups, and about the nature of the last common ancestor of the bilateria. reconstructing the gene catalogue or complement of this ancestor, from which 99%  of the extant animal kingdom subsequently evolved is a crucial goal for understanding animal evolution.

of the handful of annelida that do have collections of gene sequences available, most data-sets tend to have been produced from material exposed to specific conditions or protocols  and hence whilst they give extremely valuable information about those specific processes they do not necessarily provide enough information for obtaining a more general picture of bilaterian evolutionary genomics. for those annelids that do have more extensive sequence data available  <cit> , or in production  <cit> , a preliminary picture is emerging of the great potential utility of polychaetes for comparative biology, since species like platynereis dumerilii appear to have retained more of the ancestral characters  from the bilaterian ancestor than other protostome model systems  <cit> . pomatoceros provides a useful complement to annelids such as platynereis with regard to its life history, morphology and potentially its phylogenetic position. pomatoceros is sedentary, living in a permanent, fixed tube, whilst platynereis can be considered an errant annelid, moving around its benthic habitat. pomatoceros has a heteronomous body form, with a tentacular crown and distinctive head, thorax and abdominal regions, whilst platynereis is more homonomous, with a head and more uniform trunk. with regard to phylogeny pomatoceros and platynereis are considered as members of two of the major divisions of polychaetes, the aciculata  and the canalipalpata   <cit> . however, recent molecular phylogenetic data highlights the fact that the family-level phylogeny of the annelids is rather poorly resolved and the aciculata and canalipalpata may not be bona fide groupings  <cit> . clearly, a wider sampling of taxa is essential to test the general utility of polychaetes, or whether the "less-derived" characteristics of species such as p. dumerilii are more restricted to specific taxa.

more widely in the lophotrochozoa whole genome sequences are now available for a very small number of taxa, and est data is also available for a handful of species  <cit> . as this type of data increases further we will be able to expand and refine the types of analyses performed and obtain a much clearer picture of the patterns of gene and gene family conservation, gain and loss across the bilaterians, and hence the gene complement of the bilaterian ancestor from which the vast majority of present-day animals evolved.

here we report the characterization of over  <dig>  ests from the annelid p. lamarckii, and make detailed comparisons of these ests with data from across the animal kingdom. we find that p. lamarckii exhibits relatively short branches in molecular phylogenetic trees, permitting clearer, more robust comparisons to genes from other taxa than is possible with very long-branch organisms such as caenorhabditis elegans and ciona intestinalis. we have classified the p. lamarckii sequences that have orthologues in other animals into categories that reveal patterns of gene loss from the ecdysozoa and/or deuterostomia. it is clear that the ecdysozoan genomes sampled to date have undergone a significant amount of gene loss relative to the other bilaterian clades. if we are to understand the function of these genes we cannot rely on the more traditional protostome model systems of insects and nematodes from which these genes have been lost. as well as genes that are widely conserved across two or three of the major bilaterian clades we find a class of genes that is ancient in the animals, being conserved with non-bilaterian animals, but which appears to have been retained only in a single bilaterian super-phylum, in this case the lophotrochozoa. such genes may reveal specific aspects of lophotrochozoan biology. a further class of genes that are restricted to only lophotrochozoan animals are also promising candidates for understanding the evolution and biology of this important group of animals, and may provide candidates for exploitation for resolving the phylogeny of the lophotrochozoan phyla.

RESULTS
a collection of larval genes in p. lamarckii: assembly statistics
a total of  <dig> ests were generated from a non-normalised cdna library of p. lamarckii larvae. these sequences are available under genbank accession numbers gr <dig> to gr <dig>  the processest in-house pipeline programme denoted  <dig> of these as singletons, and clustered the remainder to form  <dig> contigs. singletons have a mean length of  <dig> bp, whilst contigs have a mean length of  <dig> bp. of the  <dig> clusters containing  <dig> or more est individual sequences, the majority code for ribosomal proteins, together with house-keeping genes such as elongation factor 1-alpha . however,  <dig> clusters do not yield significant matches to any other proteins or ribosomal rna in any database at all. they consist of at least  <dig> ests respectively, indicating that  <dig> unique sequences are expressed at a high level, when considering the contig for elongation factor  <dig>  is composed of  <dig> ests. they do not show any matches to registered micro rna datasets on the mirbase  <cit>  and further work must identify what these sequences code for and why they are expressed at relatively high levels in development of p. lamarckii.

gc content averages at 40% across all singletons and contigs, which do not present evidence for genome-wide selection for particularly high or low gc content in p. lamarckii. against half of all ests, we conducted a search for start methionine residues, which yielded  <dig> ests for which it was very likely that the start codon had been reached based on matches to the start site of orthologous proteins along with in-frame stop codons being further 5' to these putative start codons. 5'-untranslated regions  have a mean length of  <dig>  bp, although these 5'-utrs are not necessarily all complete due to the way the library was constructed by reverse transcription. local blastn searches within the 5'-utrs of p. lamarckii revealed no evidence for trans-splicing, which has been observed in several other bilaterian phyla  <cit> .

shorter p. lamarckii branch lengths than 'traditional' invertebrate genomic models
to obtain a general view of p. lamarckii gene evolution, we conducted a phylogenetic analysis with  <dig> other species. these species were chosen due to availability of genome data and also to provide a balanced representation of the three bilaterian super-phyla along with an outgroup, consistent with the latest views of animal phylogeny  <cit> . a total of  <dig> orthologous genes were found in all  <dig> species, forming a concatenated alignment of  <dig>  sites, of which  <dig> % are informative. see additional file  <dig> for a complete list of orthologues and their accession numbers used for this analysis. the concatenated amino acid sequence of a sea anemone  was used in order to root the tree.

the phylogenetic analysis  is noteworthy for two principal things; topology and branch lengths. first, the tree topologies of both the neighbour-joining and the maximum likelihood methods are consistent with the latest views on animal phylogeny of the three clades of the bilateria  <cit> , with very high support values. the classification of the three super-phyla in the bilateria, namely the ecdysozoa, lophotrochozoa and deuterostomia, was first proposed by aguinaldo et al.  <cit>  based on the sequences of small subunit ribosomal rna. as this view of phylogeny was contradictory to the traditional view of bilaterian phylogeny based mainly on the anatomy of the coelom, the proposal of the three bilaterian clades has often been criticised  <cit> . however, growing evidence from analyses with datasets from more taxa, and using more appropriate analytical methods, support the three-superphylum phylogeny  <cit> . our analysis also conforms to the three bilaterian superphylum topology . amongst  <dig> bilaterian species analysed,  <dig> species  are grouped into one clade corresponding to the ecdysozoa,  <dig> species  to the lophotrochozoa and  <dig> species  to the deuterostomia. it is noteworthy that our trees place c. elegans into the ecdysozoa. although c. elegans is a major model species for invertebrates, it is often excluded from this sort of phylogenetic study to avoid possible tree topology artefacts due to the extremely increased rate of base substitution observed in this species. the long-branch length in our trees reflects the rapid sequence evolution of c. elegans, but this has not prevented the resolution of ecdysozoa in this case. our trees are also compatible with the recent revision of chordate phylogeny  <cit> , in which the cephalochordate, amphioxus , is now considered to be the basal extant chordate lineage and the urochordates the sister group to the vertebrates. another noteworthy point is the grouping of a. mellifera with t. castaneum as sisters. this is contrary to the prevalent view of insect phylogeny in which beetles would be the most basal lineage of the insects represented in our trees  <cit> . this variability in tree topologies amongst different studies may reflect insect phylogeny being in the process of revision with the input of large molecular datasets in recent phylogenomic studies  <cit> .

secondly, the branch lengths clearly highlight the significant  disparity in evolutionary rates between the 'traditional' genomic models of drosophila, caenorhabditis and ciona and other bilaterians . by contrast to these model species, polychaetes  are amongst the lineages with some of the shortest branch lengths along with amphioxus  in the deuterostomia and beetle  in the ecdysozoa. these 'shorter branch length' species, therefore, are likely to be less derived from the ancestral bilaterian condition and so potentially be of greater utility for future phylogenetic and gene evolution analysis than the traditional protostome models of flies and nematodes. we also conducted a similar analysis with a p. dumerilii dataset included  and these branch lengths were not significantly different from the trees shown here. hence, polychaetes as a whole are probably good models for understanding sequence evolution.

gene conservation between the three bilaterian super-phyla
of a total of  <dig> est clusters,  <dig> % gave no significant match to other sequences in genbank or to selected whole genome assemblies  at a blast cut-off score of 10- <dig> . this percentage is strikingly similar to that recently found in a large-scale est sequencing project in the hemichordate saccoglossus kowalevskii, where 48% of the unique sequences had no significant match against genbank when using the same cut-off value  <cit> . this similarity indicates that the p. lamarckii genome is not subject to any pronounced stochastic process that precludes gene identification by similarity searches.

the remaining  <dig> % of the est sequences were divided into classes based upon their putative orthology  to sequences  in major metazoan groupings. the majority of these  were found in both deuterostomes and ecdysozoans. in addition to genes with general function such as house-keeping genes, this group includes some key genes in animal development that have just recently been shown to be conserved in the lophotrochozoa as well as the other two groups. for example, orthologues involved in the notch signalling pathway   <cit>  or toll signalling   <cit>  are found in our collection .

a relatively large proportion  was found in lophotrochozoans and deuterostomes only, and not ecdysozoans . these genes may well have been lost in the lineage of the ecdysozoa. by contrast only  <dig> genes  are conserved between lophotrochozoans and ecdysozoans only, and are seemingly absent from deuterostomes. from this contrast of the numbers between these two groups , we can infer that gene loss has been more prevalent from the ecdysozoa than the deuterostomia. in many analyses, hypotheses about gene evolution only take into account data from a limited range of model animals in either the deuterostomia or the ecdysozoa, due to the paucity of information available for the lophotrochozoa. this analysis indicates that these studies are likely to overestimate the number of novel genes in the deuterostomia, as ecdysozoans appear to have undergone significant gene loss.

using the blast cut-off score of 10- <dig> is a rather conservative approach and undoubtedly there will be some orthologues that will be missed by using such a cut-off, particularly for genes with comparatively high evolutionary rates. however, there is no a priori reason to expect that this failure to detect orthologues for 'fast-clock' genes should be biased towards any particular animal super-phylum, since each super-phylum contains 'slow clock' as well as 'fast clock' lineages. furthermore, use of a more permissive cut-off of 10- <dig> altered the total numbers of genes in each class, but did not change the overall patterns reported here. further whole genome sequences, particularly from the ecdysozoa and lophotrochozoa, will enable the patterns described here to be refined and the hypothesis of greater levels of gene loss in the ecdysozoa to be tested even more robustly.

in this analysis, we chiefly compared the numbers of p. lamarckii est genes in three groups;  a group comprising genes conserved in all three bilaterian super-phyla,  a group containing genes found only in deuterostomes and lophotrochozoans, which therefore may well have been lost from the ecdysozoa, and,  a group lost from  the deuterostomia . figure 3a and 3b show the comparison of gene ontology  classifications associated with est sequences in each of the three groups using characteristics based on mappings to predicted "molecular function" and "biological process". as the numbers of genes and annotated go terms in each group are varied, it would not be appropriate to draw detailed conclusions directly from this comparison. there are no obvious major biases of go classification in the types of gene that are being lost, notwithstanding the fact that the 'lophotrochozoa and ecdysozoa" class, that represents genes either lost from, or never gained by the deuterostomia, contains only  <dig> genes and will inevitably be subject to category sampling error. the possible exception is the genes of the "structural molecule activity" category, which contains 11% of go annotations associated with the ests conserved in all three super-phyla, but only 3% of go annotations associated with the ests lost from ecdysozoa . moreover, our statistical analysis using the fisher's exact test showed that the genes related to the "structural molecule activity" are significantly overrepresented in the group conserved in all three super-phyla, and underrepresented in the other two groups against the whole dataset . perhaps genes related to structural function are less likely to be lost during animal evolution. details of genes in each of the three groups and their annotation are found in additional files  <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> 

interestingly, go annotations in the 'reproduction' category contribute 2% of the go annotations for the genes conserved within all the three super-phyla but 7% of the go annotations conserved between the "lophotrochozoa and deuterostome only" . perhaps the genes in this category tend to be more easily lost particularly from the ecdysozoan lineage: this observation is statistically supported . the pomatoceros reproductive genes of which orthologues are not found in any ecdysozoan genomes but which are conserved with the deuterostomia include; sperm flagellar  <dig> protein , spermatogenesis associated  <dig> protein , spermatogenesis serine-rich  <dig> protein , sperm associated antigen  <dig> protein  and spermatogenesis associated  <dig> protein . little is known about the evolutionary origin of spermatogenesis as the majority of research on spermatogenesis is limited to mammalian systems. spermatogenesis research outside vertebrates is primarily conducted on drosophila. although some similarity of drosophila spermatogenesis to mammals is already known  <cit> , our data suggest that molecular mechanisms underlying spermatogenesis have possibly been more modified in the lineage of the ecdysozoa, including drosophila, than in the lophotrochozoa. it may well be fruitful to investigate the molecular genetics of spermatogenesis in annelids, to gain a more robust picture of the extent of conserved mechanisms between protostomes and deuterostomes. also, in relation to these 'reproduction' genes, a pomatoceros orthologue of vertebrate placenta-specific  <dig> protein is present in the "lophotrochozoa and deuterostomia only" group. although we do not know the functional properties of this protein, this is one of the most highly expressed genes in our est collection , suggesting a prominent role in an early larval biology process in p. lamarckii.

the number of the genes from our dataset that have been lost from the ecdysozoa is  <dig>  far more than the  <dig> genes lost from the deuterostomia. together with the phylogenetic analysis discussed in the previous section, this result indicates that ecdysozoan genomes have undergone more modifications during evolution, and as a result, are more divergent from, and have lost more genes than those of the two other super-phyla in the bilateria, namely the lophotrochozoa and deuterostomia. as our analyses are based on sequences of lophotrochozoans, primarily p. lamarckii, we could not estimate the number of the genes that might have been lost in the lineage of the lophotrochozoa from our data. however, in a study using a cnidarian est dataset, a similar conclusion of extensive ecdysozoan gene loss has also been suggested  <cit> . the study compared  <dig> ests of a sea coral acropora millepora with genomic data from d. melanogaster, c. elegans and h. sapiens. since this coral est report, more molecular data from a greater variety of taxa and several more genome projects have become available. we included the latest information available here . we can, therefore, infer with more confidence that extensive gene loss may have occurred not only in the model ecdysozoans such as d. melanogaster and c. elegans but could be a more general event for the ecdysozoa as a whole. however, the majority of genomic data is still biased towards two major groups in the ecdysozoa, nematodes and arthropods, and we need genomic information from further ecdysozoan phyla  to enable us to draw this conclusion with even greater confidence.

one of the major differences from the previous cnidarian est work is that because our analysis is based on sequences of the lophotrochozoa, it provides more precise information about the gene loss/gain situation within the bilateria. from comparison between the cnidaria and the three model animals in the deuterostomia and ecdysozoa, it is impossible to decide whether the genes that are uniquely found in deuterostomes are novel genes in the deuterostomia, or they were already present in a common metazoan ancestor but were subsequently lost in the cnidaria as well as the ecdysozoa. inclusion of lophotrochozoan data, as we have done here, provides much greater resolution as to the genes that are, and are not, deuterostome-specific and so have been changed on the lineage leading to ourselves. a good example is the thyroid hormone system. it was originally thought to be a unique system in chordates as the genes related to this system had not been found elsewhere  <cit> . indeed the amphioxus thyroid system has recently been shown to induce metamorphosis  <cit> , suggesting that mechanisms underlying metamorphosis are conserved between protochordates and vertebrates. when the related genes were then found in non-chordate animals, including the lophotrochozoan aplysia  <cit> , the evolutionary origin of the genetic basis of this important hormonal system was realised to be older than previously thought. in our study, we also detected a pomatoceros gene orthologous to the chordate iodothyronine deiodinase gene . this est encodes the downstream region of a domain known to be important for vertebrate deiodinase function  <cit> , but further work to isolate more upstream sequence of this gene will be required to determine whether this gene encodes an active deiodinase. in any case, functional analysis of these genes in lophotrochozoans will facilitate our understanding of the evolutionary origin of the thyroid system as well as metamorphosis.

metazoan genes lost from both deuterostomia and ecdysozoa
reconstructing the gene complements, or repertoires, of the last common ancestor of the bilateria and metazoa are important goals for evolutionary biology, due to these ancestors having been the starting points for the major diversifications of the animal kingdom. several recent whole genome scale studies  <cit>  suggest that ancient animal genomes may have been more complicated than originally thought, with previous misconceptions arising from limited taxon sampling that was largely restricted to a small handful of  model organisms. in this regard, lophotrochozoan data such as our p. lamarckii est dataset can reveal genes that originated in the common ancestor of the metazoa and were retained into the bilaterian ancestor, but have been lost in both the deuterostomia and ecdysozoa, and were therefore previously regarded as genes specific to non-bilaterian animals.

by comparison of our data with available genomes, including three non-bilaterian species  <cit> ,  <dig> genes appear to be exclusively shared between non-bilaterians  and p. lamarckii, but have been lost in all other bilaterian taxa so far examined. these  <dig> ests were fully sequenced and further characterised since these genes have the potential to reveal particular aspects of lophotrochozoan and bilaterian ancestor biology that cannot be extrapolated from the traditional model systems in the ecdysozoa and deuterostomia. the information gathered for each gene is summarised in table  <dig>  seven of these genes are conserved with cnidarians  . two ests  are conserved even with the unicellular choanoflagellate monosiga which is a protist lineage relatively closely related to the metazoa. the remaining  <dig> genes have been lost even in the cnidarian genomes sampled, and are only conserved with placozoan or sponge genomes. from these latter  <dig> genes, contig  <dig>  and  <dig>  are similar to each other but are in fact different genes .

pl_xlvo_24g08
pl_xlvo_43h12
pl_xlvo_46h11
pl_xlvo_56c06
domain prediction and descriptions are from interproscan and/or prosite. three columns at right side show presence/absence  of orthologue for each est in non-bilaterian genomes searched. the entire sequences of these ests are available under genbank accession numbers gq <dig> to gq <dig> 

of the  <dig> genes, four appear to have an enzymatic function, two are presumably involved in calcium signalling, one has similarity to apextrin  , one has similarity to nucleoporin and therefore appears to be a structural protein, and three are completely uncharacterised. apextrin is also found in echinoderms and in amphioxus, therefore if pl_xlvo_53g <dig>  is an apextrin orthlogue, it is also found in non-lophotrochozoan bilaterians and should be discounted from the lophotrochozoan/non-bilaterian group. interestingly, pl_xlvo_53g <dig> also contains a kringle domain , which is absent from all other apextrins, and places doubt as to the orthology assignment to apextrin. it is likely that pl_xlvo_53g <dig> is in fact a distinct protein and only matches apextrin in blast searches due to the mac domain  which is shared between these genes. this example demonstrates that the methods utilised to assign orthology in large scale est surveys such as ours  are susceptible to error and can only be used to obtain a broad idea of the biology of p. lamarckii, more precise assessments of orthology require further, focused sequencing and individual assessment of each gene.

of the  <dig> genes that are shared between p. lamarckii and non-bilaterian animals,  <dig> are conserved with other lophotrochozoan animals, capitella and/or lottia. in a study analogous to our analysis, moroz and colleagues used an aplysia est dataset, and reported  <dig> genes that were uniquely shared between the cnidarian hydra and aplysia  <cit> . one specific example was the universal stress protein superfamily  that had been thought to be limited to the archaea, eubacteria and plants. following the discovery of cnidarian orthologues  <cit> , moroz and colleagues found aplysia orthologues and argued that such genes have been lost from the other two bilaterian super-phyla. we also found a p. lamarckii orthologue . however, in our analysis we classified this gene into the group of the genes that are lost in ecdysozoa  since we found some orthologues in a ciona genome . as this example shows, this type of analysis benefits from more data from a wider variety of species, and our results could be revised after more information becomes available. nonetheless, some of these genes could be keys to understand unique features of lophotrochozoan biology, as well as aspects of the bilaterian ancestor that cannot be inferred from traditional ecdysozoan and deuterostome model systems.

pomatoceros genes restricted to lophotrochozoans
the lophotrochozoa are not only an important clade for understanding the ancestry of metazoans and bilaterians, but are also themselves an extremely diverse group of animals exhibiting much evolutionary change and novelty which is likely to involve, at least to some extent, lophotrochozoan-specific genes. we found that  <dig> pomatoceros ests are uniquely conserved within the lophotrochozoa only. the genes classified into this group are shared between p. lamarckii and at least one more species in the lophotrochozoa. amongst the  <dig> genes,  <dig> genes are conserved only in annelids . since most blast matches in this lophotrochozoa-restricted group are to merely computationally predicted proteins, we do not have much information about their biological function at present. thus we analysed functional domains and cellular localisation using the computer programmes, interproscan, cdd and psort. the results are summarised in additional file  <dig>  this list of the genes will provide a basis for future molecular analysis of p. lamarckii, annelids and the lophotrochozoa.

although functional characterisation and annotation for most of the genes in this category requires future analysis, the biological properties of a small number  have been functionally analysed in other lophotrochozoan species, and they predominantly have neuromuscular roles. all seven of them show a high level of similarity at the protein level and their function is likely to be conserved in pomatoceros. table  <dig> lists the p. lamarckii ests with functions characterised in other lophotrochozoan taxa.

pl_xlvo_33f01
pl_xlvo_55b08
domain prediction and descriptions are from interproscan. inferred functions are from other studies .

est  shows high similarity to an aplysia prqfvamide precursor protein . the prqfvamide was identified as a novel pentapeptide from aplysia  <cit> , expressed in the central nervous system and gut. it suppresses contraction of the gut and vasculature and is suggested to act as a modulator within the feeding system. interestingly, pl_xlvo_23a <dig> does not have a repeat of the exact prqfv motif identified in aplysia. instead, its repeated motif has a deletion of a glutamine at the third position or it has other types of -fv amide motif that are shared with the three neuropeptide families in aplysia such as amrps  <cit>  and enterins  <cit> . we therefore completely sequenced the clone from which the original est was derived and obtained a provisional full-length cdna  . it is still difficult to determine the correspondence of this gene to the three aplysia precursors of -fv amide neuropeptides, however, the neuropeptides from this pomatoceros gene are likely to act on the gut in pomatoceros as well, since all three families of aplysia -fv amide neuropeptides have a similar function.

two est clones  are well conserved amongst annelids, p. lamarckii, capitella sp. i and h. robusta. these two genes have related sequence motifs, but encode two different proteins . and both show the same top match to the lumbricus 29-kda galactose-binding lectin   <cit>  that was originally identified as a galactose-specific lectin. the top blast match, as well as the outcome of interproscan and cdd, indicated that these predicted proteins are pomatoceros galactose-binding lectins with the ricin b lectin motifs . this identification was confirmed by completion of the entire est clone sequence of 58g <dig>  which provided a probable full-length cdna  .

the est pl_xlvo_42f <dig> is highly similar to a capitella gene  that shows a unique match to cerebrin prohormone , which has a profound effect on the feeding motor pattern in aplysia  <cit> . despite its remarkable effect on the feeding motor pattern, there are no similar peptides reported outside gastropods; however, as both annelid genes encode a highly conserved region corresponding to the 17-residue peptides of cerebrin as well as two dibasic cleavage sites , it is very likely that these genes encode pomatoceros and capitella orthologues of aplysia cerebrin prohormone.

although a clustered sequence  does not show any significant blast matches, apart from a capitella predicted sequence , the interpro analysis predicted that the protein encoded by this gene includes amino acid sequences that appear orthologous to the myoactive tetradecapeptide family isolated from the gut of earthworms, eisenia foetida and pheretima vitata  <cit>  . the peptides of both earthworm species have a potent excitatory action on spontaneous contractions of the anterior gut. similar tetradecapeptides have also been purified from molluscan lophotrochozoans  <cit>  and have either excitatory or inhibitory effects on muscles, mainly of the gastrointestinal tract. figure 4b shows an alignment of the conserved tetradecapeptide sequences so far reported within the lophotrochozoa, including the two polychaete sequences identified here. we also found that not only is the tetradecapeptide conserved, but the gene also has an ef-hand calcium-binding domain at the c-terminal. to our knowledge, no animal species outside the lophotrochozoans has this gene.

contig  <dig> encodes a partial sequence of a precursor protein containing  <dig> copies of fmrf motifs  of which the top blast match is the fmrfamide precursor protein of lymnaea stagnalis   <cit> . this tetrapeptide was first identified as a cardioexcitatory agent from molluscs  <cit> . although it was thought that the distribution of the fmrfamide itself was limited to molluscs, later it was shown that the fmrfamide is a part of a large family of related peptides  and present in every major metazoan phylum examined. the function of the fmrfamide has been extensively studied in molluscs and they are involved in a wide variety of physiological processes such as feeding and reproduction . according to a strict interpretation of our categorisation of genes, on the basis of the 10- <dig> blast cut-off score, the pomatoceros fmrfamide and mollusc genes represent lophotrochozoan-specific genes, and are counted as such in our classification here. however, further work may be required on the classification and phylogeny of these genes and their gene family to understand their phylogeny and taxonomic distribution more clearly, and the relationship between these lophotrochozoan fmrfamide genes and the "extended fmrfamide" genes of insects  <cit>  and the wider family of farps  <cit> .

an entire sequence of one of the est clones forming the contig  <dig>  was determined . it was originally categorised into the group shared with both the deuterostomia and ecdysozoa in line with our classification criteria using blast; however, we found that this gene encodes a protein with an interesting structure that is only conserved within the lophotrochozoa . the predicted protein is clearly an orthologue of aplysia californica dopamine beta hydroxylase-like protein   that was initially cloned by a large-scale nucleotome study  <cit> . the c-terminal of this protein is similar to the c-terminal of dbh-like mono-oxygenase proteins that are widely conserved across bilaterians, including two conserved regions of mono-oxygenase . the dbh-like mono-oxygenase family has a domon domain  in common at the n-terminal. in contrast, the n-terminal of both the pomatoceros and aplysia proteins are only conserved with a different aplysia protein, the pheromone temptin   <cit>  and with a gene predicted from the genome of the basal metazoan lineage trichoplax . the function and structure of aplysia temptin have been analysed in detail, and the central  <dig> region of temptin  as well as two disulfide bonds  determined by a structure analysis using recombinant temptin  <cit>  are well conserved amongst these genes. we have found that this unique combination of the temptin and mono-oxygenase sequences is also present in the lottia genome  but is not found outside the lophotrochozoa. this may be a good example of the evolution of new genes by combining genes or exchanging domains, with the result that this novel temptin/mono-oxygenase 'hybrid' gene is now a lophotrochozoan synapomorphy.

on the basis of our comparative sequence searches we have concluded that this category of "lophotrochozoan-specific genes" is likely to have evolved on the lineage leading to the lophotrochozoa. an alternative possibility is that at least some of these genes had a more ancient evolutionary origin in the metazoa, but have then been lost from the non-lophotrochozoan taxa for which genomic data is currently available. also the genes in this category may have orthologues outside the lophotrochozoans, but we failed to detect them due to high rates of sequence divergence. this is unlikely to apply to all genes in this category however, and so these genes still form a useful starting point for understanding the evolution of lophotrochozoan-specific biology.

finally, the functions of some of the genes in this group can be predicted from previous studies using other lophotrochozoan species like aplysia. all of these genes with functionally characterized orthologues in aplysia are small peptides that affect neuronal or behaviour activity, such as neuropeptide or mating pheromones. in addition to the genes listed in this group, our est dataset includes several bioactive small peptides . biological effects of these peptides on pomatoceros could potentially be analysed relatively easily via peptide synthesis, without protein purification. considering the importance of p. lamarckii as a biofouling agent in the marine environment, our collection of genes provides a set of candidates that could potentially be used to control p. lamarckii populations.

CONCLUSIONS
comparison of patterns of gene retention across different metazoan groups implies that ecdysozoan genomes, including the established model systems of flies and nematodes, have undergone higher levels of gene loss than other animal groups. such analysis also provides a clearer picture of the gene complement at major nodes of animal evolution, such as the origin of the metazoa, the origin of the bilateria, and the origin of the lophotrochozoa. molecular phylogenetic analyses demonstrate the usefulness of annelids for evolutionary study as less divergent species from these ancestral states than several, more traditional, invertebrate model systems. our est analysis also highlights the potential for the rapid isolation of evolutionary novel genes at various evolutionary and taxonomic levels.

