BACKGROUND
most of the research concerning the effects of gonadal hormones on the baroreflex bradycardia has focused on 17β-estradiol. however, our preliminary findings  <cit> , confirmed later by el-mas et al.  <cit> , have provided evidence that androgens  play an important role in the mediation of baroreflex bradycardia. reported findings including ours  <cit>  have shown that testosterone depletion attenuates baroreflex-mediated bradycardia and that a restoration of baroreflex-mediated bradycardia occurs subsequent to testosterone replacement.

although the effect of androgens on baroreflex bradycardia has been previously reported, no studies have investigated the possible involvement of the androgen receptor in mediating the effect of testosterone on baroreflex bradycardia. therefore, flutamide, a relatively lipophilic nonsteroidal competitive central and peripheral androgen receptor blocker devoid of mixed agonist/antagonist effects  <cit>  was used in the present study. notably, there are two actions that must be considered when flutamide is administered. first, it leads to significant elevation in serum testosterone due to its ability to increase plasma levels of lutenizing hormone  via preventing the activation of the testosterone-mediated negative feedback influence on the hypothalamic-pituitary axis  <cit> . second, it is possible that the increase in serum testosterone will result in an increase in 17β-estradiol, due to aromatization of testosterone to 17β-estradiol via the enzyme aromatase  <cit> . like testosterone, 17β-estradiol enhances baroreflex bradycardia in male rats  <cit> . flutamide causes an increase in plasma dihydrotestosterone  in male sprague-dawley  rats  <cit> . the increase in serum testosterone compromises flutamide clinical efficacy  <cit> . nonetheless, the ability of flutamide to penetrate the blood brain barrier  <cit> , its relatively pure antiandrogenic activity  <cit> , and its similar affinities for the androgen receptor in various androgen-sensitive tissues  <cit> , make this drug a useful agent in investigating the role of the central and peripheral androgen receptor in androgen-mediated responses. in addition, previous research has shown that a gender difference exists in the baroreflex-mediated bradycardia in young rats  <cit> . male rats exhibited a greater vagal outflow to the heart in response to baroreceptor activation versus age-matched female rats  <cit> . testosterone's contribution to the vagal outflow and not to the sympathetic outflow to the heart of male rats was confirmed by el-mas et al.  <cit> .

hence, the main objective of this study was to test the hypothesis that androgens act via the androgen receptor to enhance the baroreflex sensitivity  in male rats. the hypothesis was tested by determining whether a) androgen depletion causes an attenuation of baroreflex bradycardia, b) androgen receptor blockade by the competitive antiandrogen, flutamide , produces a dose-dependent inhibition of baroreflex bradycardia, and c) the reflex increase in testosterone, which follows androgen receptor blockade  <cit>  leads to an increase in serum 17β-estradiol. the studies were undertaken in conscious instrumented rats to avoid the confounding effects of anesthesia  <cit> .

RESULTS
effect of androgen depletion on baroreceptor reflex control of heart rate
baseline mean arterial pressure and heart rate values were similar between the sham-operated and orchiectomized rats . all baseline values were obtained on the day of the experiment. phenylephrine elicited similar rises in mean arterial pressure in all groups . however, at any given rise in blood pressure, the reflex bradycardic response was significantly attenuated in castrated rats . therefore, the baroreflex bradycardia was significantly reduced compared with the sham-operated rats . this represented an approximately 30% reduction in baroreflex bradycardia. serum testosterone levels declined subsequent to orchiectomy .

effect of androgen receptor blockade on baroreceptor reflex control of heart rate
baseline values of mean arterial pressure and heart rate obtained on the day of the experiment were similar for the treatment and control groups . the effect of flutamide  on baroreflex bradycardia was assessed 20– <dig> h after drug administration. phenylephrine elicited similar rises in mean arterial pressure in all groups . however, only the highest dose of flutamide produced a significant  attenuation of the baroreflex-mediated bradycardia ; a reduction of approximately 45%. although the reduction elicited by the  <dig> lower doses of flutamide did not reach statistical significance, , a significant inverse correlation  was observed between baroreflex bradycardia and all doses of flutamide. in all treatment groups, flutamide elicited significant  rises in serum testosterone, which were not dose-related . treatment with flutamide did not change serum 17β-estradiol .

discussion
the current study presents three new findings. first, androgen receptor blockade by the competitive antiandrogen flutamide attenuates baroreflex sensitivity , which suggests the involvement of the androgen receptor in the androgen-mediated enhancement of baroreflex bradycardia in sexually mature male rats. second, the associated reflex increase in serum testosterone caused by flutamide, which competitively inhibits flutamide activity at the androgen receptor  <cit> , may have counteracted the effect of the lower doses of flutamide on baroreflex bradycardia. third, serum 17β-estradiol level did not change in spite of the significant elevation in serum testosterone in flutamide-treated rats, which rules out the involvement of 17β-estradiol in counteracting flutamide's influence on baroreflex bradycardic responses.

we report here, for the first time, that flutamide attenuates baroreflex bradycardia, which suggests the involvement of the androgen receptor in the androgen-mediated facilitation of baroreflex bradycardia. in a preliminary study  <cit>  later confirmed by el-mas et al.  <cit> , we determined that androgen depletion produced a 30% reduction in baroreflex bradycardia, which suggests that androgens are necessary for the maintenance of baroreflex bradycardia in sexually mature young male rats. the consequence of androgen receptor blockade on baroreflex bradycardia was investigated to elucidate a mechanism for the previously determined androgen-mediated facilitation of baroreflex bradycardia in male rats  <cit> . remmers et al.  <cit>  showed that androgen receptor blockade can be achieved in rats 20– <dig> h after flutamide administration. therefore, a similar treatment regimen was adopted in addition to using  <dig> doses of flutamide  to determine a possible dose-dependent effect via the androgen receptor on baroreflex bradycardia. a significant inverse correlation was observed between baroreflex bradycardia and the doses of flutamide, suggesting that the higher the dose of flutamide, the greater the reduction in baroreflex-mediated bradycardia. the substantial reductions in baroreflex bradycardia observed following androgen receptor blockade and androgen depletion were not significantly different. it is notable, however, that the findings of the present study pertain to androgen modulation of the bradycardic component of the cardiac baroreflex response. whether androgen receptor blockade affects similarly or differently the tachycardic response  remains to be investigated.

some evidence, although controversial, suggest that androgens may confer some cardiovascular protection  <cit> . consistent with this view are the present findings that androgens enhance baroreflex bradycardia via the androgen receptor. the flutamide-induced attenuation of baroreflex bradycardia, if continued on a chronic basis, may lead to hypertension, because in some models of hypertension, an attenuated baroreflex sensitivity plays a contributory role  <cit> . in effect, some reports indicate that chronic flutamide treatment can produce cardiovascular problems  <cit> , including hypertension  <cit>  in some prostate cancer patients. by contrast, ganten et al.  <cit>  and reckelhoff et al.  <cit>  demonstrated an antihypertensive effect for flutamide in young male spontaneously hypertensive rats. in these reported studies, the changes in blood pressure resulted from chronic flutamide treatment, while in the present study a single dose of flutamide was administered to normotensive rats.

the lower doses of flutamide failed to inhibit baroreflex bradycardia, which may be attributed to an associated reflex increase in serum testosterone and 17β-estradiol. the flutamide-induced increase in serum testosterone  <cit> , as well as the higher affinity of testosterone for the androgen receptor  <cit> , enable testosterone to compete with flutamide at the androgen receptor. therefore, the reflex increase and the higher affinity of serum testosterone may have counteracted the effect of the lower doses of flutamide on baroreflex bradycardia. contrary to our findings, wichmann et al.  <cit>  reported no increase in serum testosterone subsequent to flutamide treatment although they used similar doses  and a similar dosing regimen . the discrepancy between both studies may be attributed to their use of male mice and/or their collection of blood samples after euthanasia  <cit> .

serum 17β-estradiol derived from testosterone  <cit>  enhances baroreflex bradycardia in male rats  <cit> , and may have counteracted the inhibitory action of flutamide on baroreflex bradycardia. however, the absence of an increase in 17β-estradiol after a single dose flutamide argues against a role for this hormone in the present findings. notably, 17β-estradiol elevation occurred following chronic  administration of flutamide  <cit> .

the effect of serum dihydrotestosterone   on baroreflex bradycardia has not been investigated in rats thus far. serum dht has a higher affinity for the androgen receptor than testosterone  <cit> . in addition, an increase in serum dht has been demonstrated  subsequent to flutamide treatment in male rats  <cit> , which may also explain the absence of an effect of the lower doses of flutamide on baroreflex bradycardia. previous studies  <cit>  have demonstrated that the attenuation of baroreflex bradycardia subsequent to testosterone depletion is reversed by testosterone replacement. in addition, we confirmed this finding  <cit> . this provides strong evidence in favour of testosterone-mediated enhancement of baroreflex bradycardia. nonetheless, the effect of serum dht on baroreflex bradycardia needs to be investigated in future studies.

the site of testosterone action on baroreflex bradycardia remains unknown. however, the ability of flutamide to penetrate the blood brain barrier  <cit> , the presence of androgen receptor mrna in the brainstem regions which control the baroreceptor reflex in male rats  <cit>  and the presence of androgen receptor protein in similar regions in male rats  <cit> , suggest that testosterone's effects may be centrally mediated.

CONCLUSIONS
the present findings suggest that the attenuation of baroreflex bradycardia by castration or androgen receptor blockade involves the interaction between androgens  and the androgen receptor. androgens may enhance baroreflex bradycardia via the androgen receptor at the level of the baroafferents, the central nervous system or the heart. however, this remains to be determined. flutamide-induced inhibition of baroreflex bradycardia if continued on a chronic basis, may explain hypertension observed in flutamide-treated patients  <cit> . a significant reflex increase in serum testosterone, but not 17β-estradiol, seems to limit the ability of the lower doses of flutamide to produce significant attenuation of baroreflex bradycardia. these findings highlight a major role for the androgen receptor in the mediation of the baroreceptor reflex heart rate response.

