BACKGROUND
lyme disease is the most common vector-borne disease in the united states, with almost  <dig>  cases reported between  <dig> and  <dig>  and approximately  <dig>  new cases reported each year  <cit> . the disease is contracted from a tick  infected with the spirochete borrelia burgdorferi. ixodes ticks typically feed on small vertebrates such as the white-footed mouse, but humans are sometimes an accidental host. if an infected-feeding tick is not removed before transmission occurs, b. burgdorferi disseminates from the site of inoculation and approximately 70% of the time causes a characteristic bulls-eye rash around the site of the tick bite known as erythema migrans. an untreated infection may become systemic and involve connective, neurologic and, to a lesser extent, cardiovascular tissues resulting in clinical complications such as arthritis, encephalitis or atrioventricular block  <cit> . while antibiotic treatment and tick avoidance are effective in lyme disease management and prevention, efforts to understand the molecular mechanisms underlying the pathogen's life cycle and host colonization strategies remain important for the development of new prophylactic measures.

b. burgdorferi exists exclusively in an enzootic cycle, moving between its tick vector and vertebrate host. in order for the tick to transmit b. burgdorferi, it must first obtain the organism from an infected host as spirochetes are not passed transovarially. once infected, the tick remains so throughout its life-cycle and can pass the bacterium to naïve hosts during subsequent blood meals. spirochetes exist in low numbers within the unfed-infected tick and are associated with the midgut epithelium, an interaction mediated by outer surface proteins such as ospa and ospb  <cit> . however, as the infected tick takes in a blood meal the number of spirochetes begins to increase. by  <dig> hours after initiation of the blood meal, bacteria begin to migrate from the tick midgut to the salivary glands where they can be transmitted to a new host  <cit> .

b. burgdorferi is a limited-genome organism and relies heavily on its host  for many essential nutrients  <cit> . for example, n-acetylglucosamine  is required to generate peptidoglycan for cell wall synthesis and may be shuttled into the glycolytic pathway to generate atp  <cit> . spirochetes must obtain glcnac from their surrounding environment, and an abundant source of bound glcnac is encountered within the tick in the form of chitin. this polymer of alternating glcnac residues linked by β--glycosidic bonds functions as a scaffold material for the tick. it is the major component of the exoskeleton and an integral part of the peritrophic membrane  <cit> . the peritrophic membrane forms as the tick feeds and is composed of chitin, proteins, glycoproteins and proteoglycans. it encases the blood meal and serves as a permeability barrier between the food bolus and the midgut epithelium, enhancing digestion and protecting the midgut epithelium from attack by toxins and pathogens  <cit> .

previous work has demonstrated that b. burgdorferi can utilize chitobiose in the absence of free glcnac  <cit> , and it has been suggested, but not shown, that this bacterium can also utilize longer glcnac oligomers   <cit> . the ability to degrade chitin could potentially serve two purposes for the spirochete within the tick midgut. first, remodeling of the peritrophic membrane during the molt may serve as an important source of glcnac in the form of free glcnac, chitobiose or longer glcnac oligomers  <cit> . the ability to degrade longer glcnac oligomers into chitobiose or free glcnac would allow b. burgdorferi access to an essential nutrient in the nutrient-poor environment of the unfed tick midgut. second, studies in i. ricinus, the european vector for b. burgdorferi sensu lato strains, suggest that the peritrophic membrane in nymphal ticks remains intact for at least  <dig> days after repletion  <cit> . thus, spirochetes apparently must cross the peritrophic membrane in order to successfully colonize the tick midgut epithelium. studies in b. burgdorferi demonstrate that ospa and ospb mediate spirochete association with the tick midgut epithelium shortly after ingestion  <cit> , a process that would presumably be facilitated by a chitinase activity. a similar mechanism for vector colonization has been investigated in other organisms that cause vector-borne disease. it has been demonstrated in leishmania  <cit>  and plasmodium  <cit>  that chitinases and n-acetylglucosaminidases play a role in weakening the peritrophic membrane, thereby allowing invasion of the midgut epithelium of the sandfly and mosquito, respectively.

inspection of the b. burgdorferi genome reveals both enzymes and transporters that may be involved in chitin degradation. there are two genes predicted to be involved in the cleavage of β- glycosidic bonds, a putative β-n-acetylhexosaminidase  and a putative β-glucosidase . in addition, previous reports have characterized the chitobiose transport system in b. burgdorferi, which is encoded on circular plasmid  <dig>   <cit> . it is possible that this transport system plays a role in the utilization of chitin breakdown products , a mechanism that has been investigated in other chitin-degrading microorganisms  <cit> .

as described above, b. burgdorferi cannot generate glcnac de novo and must import this essential sugar from the surrounding environment. therefore, during in vitro propagation the addition of free glcnac is necessary for cells to reach optimal cell densities in a single exponential phase. in the absence of free glcnac, b. burgdorferi exhibits a unique biphasic growth pattern. in the first exponential phase cells utilize the residual glcnac and chitobiose present in complex medium components and grow to approximately  <dig>  ×  <dig> cells ml- <dig>  <cit> . cells then become starved for glcnac and exhibit a death phase in which cell numbers decrease to  <dig>  ×  <dig> cells ml- <dig>  by  <dig> hours cells begin to grow in a second exponential phase and reach cell densities greater than  <dig>  ×  <dig> cells ml- <dig>  while the source of glcnac in the second exponential phase remains unknown, it is possible that sequestered forms of this sugar such as chitin or glycoproteins present in complex medium components play a role. the goals of this study were to determine if b. burgdorferi could utilize chitin as a source of glcnac and to identify genes important in the process.

RESULTS
chitinase activity in rabbit serum
previous reports have described a chitinase activity in mammalian tissues and serum  <cit> . in order to investigate chitin utilization by b. burgdorferi, we first determined if there was an inherent chitinase activity in the growth medium  that would interfere with subsequent growth analyses of b. burgdorferi in the presence of chitin. to test this, we incubated rabbit serum or bsk-ii supplemented with 7% rabbit serum with three artificial fluorescent substrates used to detect chitinase activity: 4-methylumbelliferyl n-acetyl-β-d-glucosaminide , 4-methylumbelliferyl β-d-n,n'-diacetylchitobioside  and 4-methylumbelliferyl β-d-n,n',n"-triacetylchitotrioside . results demonstrated that rabbit serum has a chitinase activity, as both 4-muf glcnac <dig> and 4-muf glcnac <dig> were cleaved in the presence of serum or with bsk-ii supplemented with 7% serum . interestingly, rabbit serum did not cleave the 4-muf glcnac substrate , indicating that it does not contain a β-n-acetylglucosaminidase activity. next, we inactivated the chitinase activity in rabbit serum by boiling so that a chitinase-free medium could be used to evaluate growth of b. burgdorferi on chitin substrates. rabbit serum was diluted  with sterile water prior to boiling  as undiluted serum solidified when boiled. boiling for a total of  <dig> minutes  completely inactivated chitinase activity in rabbit serum .

a chitinase activity was measured as relative fluorescence units

b average activity of  <dig> replicate experiments.

c se, standard error of the mean

growth of wild-type b. burgdorferi on chitin
inactivating the chitinase activity in rabbit serum allowed us to perform growth experiments to determine if b. burgdorferi possesses a chitinase activity and can utilize chitin in the absence of free glcnac. previous reports by our laboratory  <cit>  and others  <cit>  demonstrated that b. burgdorferi exhibits biphasic growth when cultured in the absence of free glcnac, and that chitobiose can substitute for free glcnac resulting in growth to maximum cell density in a single exponential phase. we repeated those experiments here using bsk-ii lacking glcnac and supplemented with 7% boiled rabbit serum. as shown in fig.  <dig>  boiling the serum did not have an adverse effect on cell growth. in addition, when cells were cultured in the presence of  <dig> μm chitotriose,  <dig> μm chitohexose or  <dig> % coarse chitin flakes, maximum cell densities were reached in a single exponential phase, similar to growth on  <dig>  mm glcnac or  <dig> μm chitobiose . these results demonstrate for the first time that b. burgdorferi can use glcnac oligomers  and chitin in the absence of free glcnac.

we conducted two additional growth experiments in which either the entire medium was inactivated by boiling  or the serum was removed altogether . first, bsk-ii was prepared without bovine serum albumin  and supplemented with 7% rabbit serum . removing the bsa from the medium allowed us to boil bsk-ii with 7% rabbit serum without the medium solidifying. the medium was boiled  to inactivate serum chitinase activity, and the growth experiment described above was repeated. removing the bsa from the medium did not noticeably change cell growth . in contrast, boiling the medium did slow cell growth with maximum cell densities decreased by more than one order of magnitude . however, cells still showed the same growth pattern for chitin utilization as described above, suggesting that they could use chitotriose and chitohexose in the absence of free glcnac.

in another set of growth experiments, rabbit serum was replaced with a lipid supplement previously described by cluss et al  <cit>  to rule out the possibility of residual chitinase activity in boiled serum that was not detected by the artificial fluorescent substrates. cells were subcultured at least twice in a medium containing the lipid supplement prior to initiating growth experiments without glcnac. growth of wild-type cells in serum-free bsk-ii lacking glcnac and supplemented with  <dig>  mm glcnac,  <dig> μm chitobiose or  <dig> μm chitohexose resulted in a single exponential phase and a maximum cell density of approximately  <dig>  ×  <dig> cells ml- <dig> . while the maximum cell density was approximately one order of magnitude lower than in bsk-ii containing 7% boiled rabbit serum, the growth pattern was the same as that observed previously with chitin substrates . of note, cells cultured without glcnac in this serum-free medium only reached a maximum cell density of  <dig>  ×  <dig> cells ml- <dig> in the second exponential phase, which is more than one order of magnitude lower than that observed in medium containing 7% serum.

growth of a β-n-acetylhexosaminidase and β-glucosidase double mutant on chitin
bb <dig>  and bb <dig>  are the only obvious genes annotated in the b. burgdorferi genome that encode enzymes potentially involved in the degradation of chitin. we generated mutations in bb <dig> and bb <dig> to determine if eliminating the function of either or both of these genes would result in a defect in chitobiose or chitin utilization . both of the single mutant strains and the double mutant strain were cultured in bsk-ii containing 7% boiled rabbit serum, lacking glcnac and supplemented with  <dig> μm chitobiose or  <dig> μm chitohexose. as expected from a previous report  <cit> , the bb <dig> mutant  showed no defect in chitobiose utilization, and no defect in the ability of this mutant to utilize chitohexose was observed . similar results were also obtained for the bb <dig> mutant, rr <dig> . the double mutant  also showed no defect in chitobiose or chitohexose utilization , suggesting that either these genes are not involved in chitin degradation or that a redundant activity is encoded elsewhere in the genome. we also attempted to generate mutants in two genes with lysm motifs  since lysm domains are involved in binding to peptidoglycan and chitin, typically through the glcnac moiety  <cit> . we constructed a bb <dig> mutant, but it showed no defect in utilization of glcnac oligomers when cultured in bsk-ii lacking glcnac and supplemented with 7% boiled rabbit serum and chitobiose or chitohexose . several attempts to generate a bb <dig> mutant were unsuccessful suggesting this may be an essential gene due to a role in cell wall synthesis or remodeling.

growth of a chbc mutant on chitin
previous work demonstrated that b. burgdorferi uses a phosphotransferase system  to import chitobiose, and bbb <dig>  encodes the transporter for this system  <cit> . we wanted to determine if chbc is necessary for chitin utilization in b. burgdorferi, as chitobiose transport has been shown to be important in the chitin utilization pathways of other organisms  <cit> . to test this, a chbc deletion mutant was generated  and cultured in bsk-ii containing 7% boiled rabbit serum without glcnac and supplemented with either  <dig> μm chitobiose,  <dig> μm chitotriose or  <dig> μm chitohexose . under all conditions rr <dig> failed to grow to optimal cell densities, and only reached  <dig>  -  <dig>  ×  <dig> cells ml- <dig> before blebbing and entering a death phase. in contrast, wild-type cells with a functional chbc transporter grew to maximal cell densities without exhibiting a death phase, when cultured without free glcnac and supplemented with chitotriose or chitohexose . in addition, rr <dig> did not exhibit a second exponential phase when cultured in the absence of free glcnac for  <dig> hours, whether or not glcnac oligomers were present. these results strongly suggest that chbc, and by extension chitobiose transport, is necessary for chitin utilization by b. burgdorferi.

to confirm that chbc is necessary for growth on chitin and second exponential phase growth in the absence of free glcnac, we created a complementation plasmid to restore wild-type function. the complemented chbc mutant  was cultured in bsk-ii containing 7% boiled rabbit serum, lacking free glcnac and supplemented with  <dig> μm chitobiose,  <dig> μm chitotriose or  <dig> μm chitohexose . comparison of the wild type , the chbc mutant , and the chbc-complemented mutant  under these growth conditions demonstrate that the presence of the functional chbc gene in the complemented mutant restored wild-type growth on all three substrates in the absence of free glcnac.

growth of an rpos mutant on chitin
previous work in our laboratory demonstrated that the alternative sigma factor rpos partially regulates chitobiose utilization, by regulating the expression of chbc during glcnac starvation  <cit> . since chbc is necessary for chitin utilization, we hypothesized that rpos may also be involved in the regulation of other genes in this pathway. to test this, we cultured an rpos mutant  in bsk-ii without free glcnac, supplemented with  <dig> μm chitobiose or  <dig> μm chitohexose and containing either 7% unboiled  or boiled  rabbit serum. as in our previous report  <cit> , culturing the rpos mutant with chitobiose in the absence of free glcnac resulted in biphasic growth. this was observed in the presence of both unboiled  and boiled  rabbit serum with the second exponential phase starting at  <dig> hours in either medium. comparison of chitohexose utilization by the rpos mutant in unboiled  or boiled  serum revealed biphasic growth under both conditions, but with a delay in the initiation of the second exponential growth phase only in a medium supplemented with boiled serum. the delay in second exponential phase growth ranged from  <dig> to  <dig> h in the three replicate experiments conducted. these data suggest a role for rpos in the regulation of chitin utilization separate from its role in regulating chbc expression.

discussion
chitin is one of the most abundant polymers in the environment  <cit>  and is a major structural component of arthropods, including ixodid ticks, the vector hosts for b. burgdorferi. b. burgdorferi must obtain glcnac from its tick and vertebrate hosts and does so by transporting either free glcnac or chitobiose into the cell  <cit> . recently, tilly et al  <cit>  reported that b. burgdorferi cells exhibit biphasic growth in the absence of free glcnac in vitro. it was proposed that the second growth phase observed during glcnac starvation was due to the up regulation of chbc and the utilization of chito-oligomers present in the yeastolate component of bsk-ii  <cit> . while we were able to confirm that the induction of chbc expression during glcnac starvation is responsible for chitobiose utilization, our observations suggested that yeastolate is not the source of sequestered glcnac for second exponential phase growth  <cit> . thus, we set out to determine if b. burgdorferi could utilize chitin given that it is a major component of the tick peritrophic membrane  <cit> . chitin utilization could prove beneficial to spirochetes in the nutrient-limited environment of the unfed-infected tick midgut and aid in the colonization of the midgut epithelium.

prior to conducting growth studies in the presence of chitin, we determined if there was an inherent chitinase activity present in the medium. previous reports characterized chitinase activity in goat serum  <cit> , guinea pig blood  <cit> , human macrophages  <cit>  and a variety of mouse tissues  <cit> . while chitinase activity has not been previously described in rabbit serum, the evolutionary conservation of this enzymatic activity in rodents and primates  <cit>  suggested that it may also be present in rabbit serum. we demonstrated heat-sensitive chitinase activity in rabbit serum . in addition, rabbit serum showed no activity against 4-muf glcnac, suggesting that it possesses chitinase activity but not a β-n-acetylglucosaminidase activity in which free glcnac is released from the non-reducing end of chitin. these results support our observation that the source of sequestered glcnac in the second exponential phase is not due to chito-oligomers present in the yeastolate component of bsk-ii  <cit> . any chito-oligomers present in yeastolate would be degraded to chitobiose by the chitinase activity present in rabbit serum, and imported into the cells by the chbc transporter.

to determine whether b. burgdorferi could utilize chitin and glcnac oligomers longer than chitobiose, we either inactivated the chitinase activity in rabbit serum by boiling before adding it to bsk-ii or we replaced the rabbit serum with a lipid extract. in both cases, b. burgdorferi cells provided with chitin or various chitin oligomers as the sole source of glcnac grew in one exponential phase to optimal cell densities . in the absence of these added sources of glcnac, the cells failed to grow to high cell densities. these data strongly suggest that b. burgdorferi has the genes necessary to degrade and utilize chitin or glcnac oligomers in the absence of free glcnac.

additionally, glcnac starvation in the absence of rabbit serum resulted in biphasic growth, but with a lower maximum cell density in the second exponential phase . this suggests that rabbit serum and one or more other components in bsk-ii contribute the sequestered glcnac necessary for growth in the second exponential phase, possibly in the form of glycoproteins or glycosaminoglycans. it is interesting to note that boiling the serum or the entire medium had an impact on the ability of cells to grow in a second exponential phase in some experiments . for example, in boiled medium without bsa, cells did not exhibit a second exponential phase in the absence of free glcnac . in another case, a reduced growth rate and a reduced cell density in the second exponential phase was observed for rr <dig>  in the absence of free glcnac . however, results with rr <dig> do not lead us to conclude that either of these genes play a significant role in obtaining sequestered glcnac in the second exponential phase, because the wild-type strain grew to the same final cell density as rr <dig> in this experiment . additionally, rr <dig> was cultured in bsk-ii lacking glcnac and supplemented with serum that was not boiled, and cells grew to >  <dig>  ×  <dig> cells ml- <dig> in the second exponential phase . the lack of a second exponential phase observed in boiled bsk-ii  and the slower second exponential phase accompanied by reduced cell density observed with rr <dig>  was occasionally observed and seemed to correlate with different batches of boiled medium or serum. this suggests that prolonged boiling alters components within the serum that b. burgdorferi normally utilizes for second exponential phase growth.

in addition to growth experiments, we attempted to detect b. burgdorferi chitinase activity using the artificial fluorescent substrates described above . we used both culture supernatants and cell lysates from cultures starved for glcnac and supplemented with 7% boiled rabbit serum and various glcnac oligomers or chitin. while cells grew to maximum cell densities as expected, we were unable to detect cleavage of any of the artificial fluorescent substrates. these results were surprising in light of the growth experiments  and the known ability of b. burgdorferi to utilize chitobiose  <cit> . it is possible that the enzyme activity expressed was below the detection limit of our assay or that the artificial substrates were not recognized by these enzymes.

while attempts to knockout chitinase activity in this study were not successful, we did identify other candidates by genome analysis. we examined genes annotated by the institute for genomic research  as hypothetical or conserved hypothetical using the ncbi conserved domain database  to target those genes with domains that could be involved in chitin degradation or chitin binding. we generated a list of potential targets that included five genes with a potential hydrolase domain , three with a potential lysin motif , one with a potential goose egg white lysozyme domain  and one with a cyclodextrin transglycosylase domain . as noted above, the bb <dig> mutant showed no defect in utilization of glcnac oligomers and attempts to generate a bb <dig> mutant were unsuccessful suggesting this is an essential gene with a role in cell wall synthesis or remodeling.

a recent report on ralstonia a- <dig> described a novel goose egg white-type lysozyme gene with chitinolytic activity  <cit> . blast analysis of the catalytic domain against the b. burgdorferi genome shows 36% identity at the amino acid level  to bb <dig>  which has a gewl domain. we did not attempt to knockout this gene, but it may be a target to consider in future studies.

since chitobiose transport is important for chitin utilization in other organisms  <cit> , we evaluated the role of chbc during chitin utilization in b. burgdorferi. as expected from previous studies  <cit> , rr <dig>  was unable to grow on chitobiose in the absence of free glcnac . similarly, no growth was observed when rr <dig> cells were cultured in the absence of glcnac and supplemented with chitotriose or chitohexose, demonstrating that chbc is also required for the utilization of glcnac oligomers longer than chitobiose. complementation of the chbc mutant by introduction of the wild-type chbc gene on a shuttle vector  restores the wild-type phenotype. together, these results demonstrate that chitobiose transport is necessary for the utilization of chitobiose and longer glcnac oligomers, and suggest that an unidentified enzyme involved in the degradation of chitin is secreted, either extracellularly or into the periplasm. in addition, these results show that chitobiose transport is necessary for utilization of sequestered glcnac in the second exponential phase, and support our hypothesis that glcnac oligomers are not the source of sequestered glcnac in the second exponential phase.

previous work conducted in our laboratory suggested that rpos, one of two alternative sigma factors present in b. burgdorferi, regulates chitobiose utilization in the b31-a background by partially regulating expression of chbc during glcnac starvation  <cit> . here we cultured an rpos mutant in bsk-ii lacking glcnac and supplemented with chitobiose or chitohexose and 7% unboiled  or boiled  rabbit serum. biphasic growth of the rpos mutant in the presence of chitobiose was nearly identical in unboiled and boiled rabbit serum. this is important because it further demonstrates that unboiled serum does not possess a β-n-acetylglucosaminidase activity that cleaves chitobiose to monomeric glcnac. in contrast, growth of the rpos mutant supplemented with chitohexose was delayed in boiled serum compared to that in unboiled rabbit serum. this delay supports the data presented in table  <dig> showing an inherent chitinase activity in unboiled rabbit serum as rpos mutant growth on chitohexose in unboiled serum  mirrors that on chitobiose, suggesting the chitinase activity in the rabbit serum degraded the chitohexose to chitobiose. in addition, the delay in chitohexose utilization in boiled serum strongly suggests that rpos regulates chitin utilization not only through the regulation of chbc  <cit> , but also through the regulation of other gene important for degradation of chitin. recently, caimano et al  <cit>  characterized the rpos regulon in the  <dig> c <dig> background after temperature-shift in vitro and after maintenance in dialysis membrane chambers in rats or rabbits. we were unable to find any of our candidate chitin utilization genes upon examination of differentially regulated genes identified in their study. it is possible that starvation for glcnac is necessary for the induction of these genes, a condition that was not tested by caimano et al.

in this study we provide evidence that b. burgdorferi can utilize glcnac oligomers and chitin in the absence of free glcnac, and we show that chitobiose transport via chbc is required for utilization of these substrates. a previous report suggested chbc is not required for maintenance or transmission of the organism between ticks and mice  <cit> . however, these studies were conducted in a controlled laboratory environment using pathogen-free ticks and mice. it is possible chbc plays a role in infection in a natural setting by providing a competitive advantage to spirochetes in colonizing ticks that are often colonized with more than one microorganism. in addition, chbc is required for obtaining sequestered glcnac during second exponential phase growth in vitro which most likely comes from glycoproteins or glycosaminoglycans, so there may also be a role for this transporter in the mammal. however, it is also possible that chitinase activity, rather than chitin utilization, is required for transmission, as chitinase activity may be important for penetration of the peritrophic membrane and colonization of the tick midgut. in this instance, the chbc gene may be retained, but chitobiose uptake and utilization may be of secondary importance.

CONCLUSIONS
in this study we provide evidence of an inherent chitinase activity in rabbit serum, a component of the b. burgdorferi growth medium, bsk-ii. we inactivated this activity by boiling, and showed that cells can utilize glcnac oligomers and chitin as a source of glcnac in the presence of boiled serum or a lipid supplement. in addition, we demonstrated that transport of chitobiose via the chitobiose transporter, chbc, is required for chitin utilization by this organism. finally, delayed growth of an rpos mutant on chitohexose suggests that this alternative sigma factor is involved in the regulation of chitin utilization.

