BACKGROUND
mosquitoes transmit devastating infectious diseases that kill up to three million people and debilitate hundreds of millions every year  <cit> . large-scale control campaigns have been attempted to lessen this enormous burden, but despite initial promise they have become increasingly inefficient – largely because of emergence and spread of drug resistance in pathogens and insecticide resistance in the mosquito vectors. as a result, the numbers of cases of mosquito-borne diseases is rising  <cit> , which points to an urgent need to devise more effective control strategies. developing novel mosquito-based approaches requires an extensive knowledge of mosquito biology. the ecology, population genetics, molecular biology, and genomics of anopheles gambiae and aedes aegypti, major vectors of malaria and yellow fever/dengue, respectively, have been intensively studied in recent years, which culminated in sequencing of their genomes  <cit> . however, many aspects of their biology relevant to control efforts remain poorly understood.

the life cycle of vector mosquitoes depends on a protein-rich bloodmeal required for egg development, and repeated blood feeding assists in the transmission of pathogens. because only female mosquitoes are involved in these processes, laboratory research efforts have been directed almost exclusively at understanding the female physiology and molecular biology, with the goal of identifying features that may be used in innovative interventions to fight the diseases  <cit> . however, when control methods, aiming either at reduction of mosquito populations or population replacement, are considered, males cannot be ignored and their characteristics, including male-specific transcripts and proteins should also be viewed as potential targets. in this respect, genes expressed in male reproductive organs are of particular interest for three reasons. first, their protein products may constitute suitable targets of novel classes of agents that would cause male sterility. theoretically, male-sterilizing insecticides may be superior to the currently used ones. in several animal groups, including insects, male-expressed genes evolve significantly faster than female-biased genes, or those with sex-unbiased expression  <cit> , and a number of genes expressed in testes have been hypothesized to originate in recently evolved lineages  <cit> . therefore, insecticides affecting proteins involved in spermatogenesis may target exclusively mosquitoes and be harmless to non-target organisms. moreover, mutations causing resistance to such insecticides would probably seriously affect fertility and individuals carrying the mutations would be quickly eliminated from the population. second, cis-regulatory sequences of genes expressed in male germline may be used in genetic control strategies as elements of gene drive system to spread desired characteristics, such as resistance to pathogens, into wild mosquito populations. several driving systems, based on activity of selfish genetic elements, have been proposed  <cit>  and major advances have been made in the creation of modified transposons and homing endonucleases  <cit> . however, to be spread to subsequent generations, such selfish elements must be activated in the germ line; moreover, they should be restricted to these tissues to limit the mutagenic effects of transposition in soma, which may reduce the fitness of transgenic mosquitoes  <cit> . two genes, oskar and nanos, expressed in the female germ line were proposed as candidates for donating regulatory sequences to control modified transposons in mosquitoes  <cit> , and the regulatory elements of nanos have been demonstrated to mediate transposition in a. aegypti in a developmentally regulated manner  <cit> . homing endonucleases have never been found in animals; however, the activity of fungus-derived enzymes have recently been reported in an. gambiae  <cit> . the potential of driving transgenes using male germ line promoters remains to be tested, but any such attempt is hampered by inadequate information about testis-specific expression patterns. third, such genes may be targeted to induce male sterility in an improved sterile insect technique  <cit> .

several microarray analyses explored differential gene expression between adult female and male mosquitoes, providing a genome-wide overview of male-biased expression  <cit> . moreover, in silico analysis identified a number of genes expressed in the adult male accessory glands  <cit> . however, information about gene expression in testes is almost completely lacking, the only exception being the analysis of β <dig> tubulin gene, earlier identified to be testes-specific in drosophila  <cit> , and found to have conserved testes expression in aedes aegypti  <cit> , an. gambiae  <cit> , and anopheles stephensi  <cit> .

to gain a better understanding of gene expression in males we targeted transcripts from the reproductive tissues of anopheles gambiae male pupae. using a cdna subtraction strategy we identified five genes, whose spatial and temporal patterns of transcription suggest involvement in the late phases of spermatogenesis. comparative genomic analysis revealed that three of these genes have homologs detectable only in mosquitoes, suggesting that they have a rapid evolutionary rate or have a relatively recent origin in the mosquito lineage. the two other genes have homologs in a wide range of taxa, with which they share short conserved sequence regions; one of these genes may have a highly conserved function in controlling sperm flagellum motility. in addition to in silico sequence analyses, we conducted an analysis of ortholog expression in three mosquito species and discovered substantial differences in expression profiles of three genes, which in aedes and culex are expressed in a sex-unbiased pattern.

RESULTS
isolation of male-specific transcripts by suppressive subtractive hybridization
enrichment of male transcripts was done using a suppressive subtractive hybridization  strategy, in which fragmented male cdna was ligated to adaptor sequences and subjected to liquid hybridization with an excess of female cdna. subsequently, a selective amplification of the male-specific cdna was performed in two rounds of pcr using external and nested primers complementary to the adaptors. the second round of pcr performed using nested primers yielded  <dig> fragments, ranging in size from  <dig> bp to >  <dig> kb, discernible on a smeary background upon fractionation on an agarose gel . each fragment was excised from the gel, cloned, and sequenced. the sequences were subjected to blastn searches against ncbi's anopheles gambiae est collection to eliminate transcripts known to be expressed in female tissues. the sequences that had no match to female ests were tested by rt-pcr for male-specific expression using pupal male and female total rnas as a template. five sequences showed strong expression in male pupae and were analyzed further .

the ssh strategy implemented yields fragments of cdnas. the full-length sequences were assembled following identification of the transcripts' ends using 5' and 3' race and found to correspond to five different genes. four of those do not match any an. gambiae gene predictions and only a fragment of one gene has previously been predicted to encode an an. gambiae protein . basic sequence characteristics of each gene are presented in table 1; their cdna sequences are available in genbank under accession nos. fj869232–fj <dig>  the putative full-length protein-coding regions were used as queries in tblastn searches for their homologs in other organisms. orthologous sequences of all five genes were identified in the aedes aegypti and culex quinquefasciatus genomes. two of those genes also have putative orthologs in a wide range of taxa, including humans, in which they encode poorly characterized or uncharacterized proteins; here we name them agropn1l and agdzip1l, after their putative human orthologs. three genes, named here mts , ams  and aams , code for proteins that exhibit no similarity to any genbank entry derived from non-mosquito taxa, and as such they are regarded as orphan genes. they may have originated in the mosquito lineage or have been under a strong positive selection resulting in a rapid evolutionary rate and divergence from their non-mosquito orthologs beyond detection using the tblastn search.

length
 <dig> protein sequence identity/similarity calculated after exclusion of gapped regions. values for the an. gambiae/ae. aegypti comparisons are given in the rows corresponding to aedes aegypti; these values are also representative of the identity/similarity between an. gambiae and cx. quinquefasciatus. the identity/similarity between ae. aegypti and cx. quinquefasciatus proteins is given in the cx. quinquefasciatus rows.

 <dig> the ensembl gene id  is given for genes with complete  or partially  predicted sequence in the recent vectorbase gene builds ; genes that do not match any gene predictions are marked as unannotated.

 <dig> several alternative transcription start sites identified.

 <dig> nd – not determined

 <dig> data based on a portion of a gene sequence; see text for details.

expression profiling of male-specific genes
the temporal profile of gene expression was evaluated by rt-pcr using total rna templates isolated separately from male and female an. gambiae sampled from each postembryonic developmental stage. for each gene the expression was practically limited to male pupae and adults . there was comparable mrna abundance in pupae and adults or a slight increase was observed in two-day-old adult males and subsequently maintained at that level until at least  <dig> days post emergence . an evident departure from this pattern was found in the agdzip1l profile, in which a low level of expression was ubiquitously present in male larvae and all female stages in addition to a strong expression in pupae and adult males. moreover, an earlier onset of transcription, during the fourth larval instar, was detected for the ams gene .

the spatial expression pattern was analyzed using rt-pcr and, for two selected genes , using whole-mount rna in situ hybridization to the male reproductive tissues. total rna from the undissected head, thorax and abdomen, and dissected abdominal tissues of adult males served as templates for rt-pcr experiments. relatively abundant transcripts of each gene were detected in the abdomen, where most of the expression was apparently limited to the testes . various amounts of rt-pcr products were also detected in the accessory gland samples. in situ experiments confirmed the localization of the ams and mts transcripts in the testes, however, no hybridization signal was evident in the accessory glands ; this hybridization pattern likely holds for the other three genes not examined using rna in situ method. while a low level of transcription in the gland tissue cannot be excluded , it is possible that the rt-pcr product in those samples is an experimental artifact, arising from the reproductive tissue dissection method. first, some testis rna carry-over to the accessory gland samples could have occurred during dissection. second, because the accessory glands were excised with fragments of vasa deferentia and seminal vesicles, which in adult males may contain mature sperm, it is likely that the transcripts detected in the accessory gland rna samples have actually originated from the spermatozoa. indeed, for both genes tested by in situ hybridization, a faint signal is present in the testis sperm reservoir . the retention of a complex mrna population in the ejaculated sperm is well documented in humans, but is known to occur in the male gametes of many species  <cit> . we assume that the expression detected in the late preimaginal stages is, as in adult males, limited to the reproductive tissues.

the localization and timing of transcription suggests that the identified genes are involved in the mid-late phases of spermatogenesis. spermatogenesis proceeds in succession from primordial germ cells differentiated in the embryo, through primary and secondary spermatogonia, primary and secondary spermatocytes, to spermatids and, ultimately, spermatozoa  <cit> . the last step in this process, called spermiogenesis and involving cytodifferentiation of round spermatids into long mature spermatozoa, is particularly complex. in mosquitoes spermiogenesis is thought to occur mainly during the pupal stage, but considerable temporal variation of this process exists in different mosquito groups  <cit> . in anopheles, spermatogenesis progression has been described in the fourth instar larvae, pupae and newly emerged adults of a european species an. atroparvus   <cit>  and, indirectly, in adults of an. culicifacies  <cit> , an. gambiae  <cit> , and an. stephensi  <cit>  . in an. atroparvus spermatogenesis progression is fast, with the first spermatozoa observed in the  <dig> hours old fourth instar larvae  <cit> . all phases of spermatogenesis still occur in young pupae, in which early germ cells occupy the apical part and maturing spermatozoa the posterior part of the testis. in late pupae and newly emerged adults most of the testicular cell population is represented by mature sperm bundles. in contrast, in representatives of cellia spermatogenesis continues well into the adult stage. in newly emerged males over half of the testis is occupied by spermatocysts containing immature germ cells at different stages of development. with age, posterior-most spermatocysts mature and rupture to release spermatozoa, resulting in an increasing proportion of testis occupied by the sperm reservoir. in virgin males the rate of spermatogenesis progressively slows down, however, mating-associated sperm depletion leads to an increase in the number of spermatocysts, indicative of a capacity of adults to rapidly resume spermatogenesis  <cit> . age-related changes in the numbers of spermatozoa have not been studied in anopheles, but in virgin males of ae. aegypti the sperm count increases more than two-fold between day  <dig> and day  <dig> after eclosion  <cit> .

to date, β <dig> tubulin remains the only gene reported to be testis-specific in an. gambiae. similar to drosophila β <dig> tubulin  <cit> , it presumably functions in meiotic spindle formation, sperm cell shaping, and axoneme assembly, and is activated in primary spermatocytes during the late third instar larval stage  <cit> . the genes identified in our study are activated in fourth instar larvae or pupae, but their expression is also initiated in the  primary spermatocytes, as demonstrated by rna in situ hybridization to ams and mts transcripts . interestingly, hybridization patterns of these two transcripts differ, indicating involvement of each gene in different spermatogenic processes. ams transcript abundance persists unchanged in secondary spermatocytes and is later gradually reduced. the mts transcripts are partially eliminated in the secondary spermatocyte stage, but, unexpectedly, their level is significantly increased in spermatids. it is generally believed that in drosophila genes required during meiosis and all post-meiotic spermatogenic processes are transcribed exclusively in primary spermatocytes and stored in the cytoplasm for later use. however, transcription of  <dig> genes has been recently detected in the fly's spermatids  <cit> , similar to the mts gene.

a relatively late onset of expression with respect to the spermatogenic program suggests that the promoters of the identified genes may not be optimal for driving transgenes in genetic mosquito control strategies. however, absence of data on gene regulation in mosquito testes prompted us to search for the putative testis-specific cis-regulatory elements. for this purpose we used the pattern discovery tool from rsat program to identify overrepresented hexa-, hepta- and octamer motifs in the  <dig> kb regions upstream from the putative translation start sites of the five genes. no significantly overrepresented motifs common to all sequences were found, however, 5' flanks of four genes contained a cgttgaa heptamer. its significance remains to be tested, but it should be noted that a putative regulatory motif with similar sequence  has been identified in a screen of upstream regions of all orthologous genes annotated in anopheles, aedes and culex genomes  <cit> .

intriguingly, the agropn1l, agdzip1l, and aams were also transcribed at low levels in the head. the significance of this observation remains unknown, but it is tempting to speculate that their products may be involved in modulation of adult male physiology and behavior, such as female seeking and mating. finally, ams was expressed at very low levels in the head and thorax.

comparison of orthologues from other mosquitoes
using rt-pcr, we explored the expression patterns of all an. gambiae orthologs in both sexes of ae. aegypti and cx. quinquefasciatus pupae and adults. all orthologs were expressed in males of both species, but only the mts gene was apparently expressed in males exclusively . the other genes were expressed in aedes and culex females at various levels, ranging from very low  to high . the latter cases, concerning the ropn1l gene in culex, the dzip1l gene in aedes, and the ams orthologs in both aedes and culex, indicate either additional functions for these genes in females or different functions in these species altogether. contrary to our study a microarray-based comparison of gene expression in ae. aegypti adults showed no male bias in ropn1l and mts transcript levels  <cit> . this discrepancy probably results from a lower sensitivity of microarrays as compared to rt-pcr in detecting differential gene expression. our observations of expression divergence between anopheles and culicine orthologs are not surprising in the light of drosophila studies, which showed that male-biased genes are particularly prone to shifts in expression patterns leading to a gain, loss, increase, decrease, or reversal of sex-biased expression even in closely related species  <cit> . such changes may be driven by sex-dependent natural selection, as suggested by significantly greater ratios of interspecific expression divergence to intraspecific expression polymorphism among male-biased genes compared to female-biased genes, or genes with sexually monomorphic expression patterns  <cit> .

we searched the ncbi est collection for mosquito expressed sequence tags matching the identified genes to provide additional evidence for their transcription . the transcripts were very poorly represented in the database. only one out of ~ <dig>  an. gambiae ests unambiguously matched a fragment of one gene,  <dig> out of ~ <dig>  ae. aegypti ests matched fragments of the three genes, and none of ~ <dig>  ests from cx. quinquefasciatus were found to correspond to the identified genes.

individual genes identified in the present study are described in more detail below.

agropn1l
the agropn1l exhibits the highest degree of sequence and structure conservation among all the identified genes. its encoded protein shares 65% similarity with aedes and culex orthologs , and 47% similarity with the human putative ortholog, ropporin 1-like protein . ropn1l has been shown to interact with the sperm-specific a-kinase anchoring protein, akap <dig>  via the amphipathic α helix region of akap <dig>  <cit> . akaps are a family of structurally diverse proteins that in somatic cells bind through this α helix domain to protein kinase a  after activation of the camp signal transduction pathway  <cit> . human sperm-specific akaps are crucial to regulation of sperm motility and their function apparently relies on the interaction with ropn1l  <cit> . remarkably, ropn1l shares high sequence similarity with the pka region, known to form the groove necessary for docking to the amphipathic α helix of akaps  <cit> .

the agropn1l orthologs are widely distributed across the animal kingdom. apart from human they were identified in other vertebrates, most insects, a sea urchin strongylocentrotus purpuratus, a blood-fluke schistosoma japonicum, and an organism as distant as the sea anemone nematostella vectensis. in addition, a protein homolog of ropn1l  was found within the radial spokes of the axonemal complex in a unicellular flagellate alga chlamydomonas reinhardtii. a recent study showed that rsp11-deficient chlamydomonas mutants display abnormal motility  <cit> , which strongly suggests that the ropn1l homologs constitute a critical component of the machinery controlling function of the flagella in a very wide range of organisms. however, the low level of agropn1l expression in the head implies an additional function of the protein in mosquitoes. all ropn1l homologs are highly similar to each other and to pka at the n terminus, where perfectly conserved positions mark residues apparently vital to the correct groove formation and binding to akaps . a number of conserved sites among the ropn1l orthologs extending up to ~ <dig> residues beyond the docking domain must also be important for the correct protein functioning . the insect ropn1l orthologs are up to three times longer than the orthologs from other organisms due to a single highly variable insertion region. its significance remains unknown, because apart from the n-terminal akap-binding domain, insect proteins do not contain any recognizable motifs.

surprisingly, no proteins similar to agropn1l were identified in the drosophila melanogaster genome. similarly, no significant hits were returned from a tblastn search of the  <dig> drosophila genomes available in the ncbi's wgs database. although ropn1l may have diverged in the drosophila lineage past detection by blast search, this scenario seems unlikely taking into account conservation of the protein sequence in other animal groups. alternatively, it could have been lost in the drosophila ancestor, which implies that the presumed mechanism of sperm flagellum motility control in drosophila may be different than in other insects. remarkably, no sequences homologous to agropn1l were identified in caenorhabditis genomes, but, unlike in drosophila, sperm cells in nematodes are aflagellate, have amoeboid shape and move using pseudopods  <cit> . moreover, caenorhabditis lacks motile cilia  <cit> , which, in other organisms, share elements of molecular motor machinery with flagella.

agdzip1l
the agdzip1l is relatively well conserved. at the amino acid level, it shares 58% similarity with culicine sequences and 46% similarity with its human putative ortholog daz interacting protein 1-like protein . dzip1l remains uncharacterized and its function is unknown, but the gene ontology terms associated with its genbank record include: "nucleic acid binding", "protein binding", "zinc ion binding", and "germ cell development". in addition, according to the unigene est profile viewer, the dzip1l gene is expressed in a number of tissues, including testis. the dzip1l shares 58% sequence similarity with the human daz interacting protein  <dig> , which is expressed in testis and co-localized with deleted in azoospermia  protein playing a pivotal role in the male germ cell development  <cit> .

the agdzip1l predicted protein contains a single c2h <dig> zinc finger domain. c2h <dig> zinc finger proteins comprise a large family of regulatory proteins involved in binding nucleic acids or proteins  <cit> , and most of them contain between  <dig> and  <dig> c2h <dig> domains.  <cit> . in those that possess a single domain, high affinity dna binding is achieved by a zinc finger complemented by short stretches of highly basic amino acids flanking the domain  <cit> . in agdzip1l, a highly basic sequence region found at the n-terminal flank of the domain  is consistent with a putative agdzip1l involvement in nucleic acid binding, which is further supported by the wolf psort analysis suggesting localization of the protein to the nucleus.

ams
ams appears to be an extremely rapidly evolving gene in anopheles. because of its divergence, the tblastn search failed to identify its homologs even in other mosquitoes. since such a search strategy may not be sensitive enough to detect highly diverged sequences, we used microsynteny information in an attempt to identify the ams orthologs in culicines. tango <dig>  and xdh genes, which flank the ams in an. gambiae, have conserved linkage in the culicinegenomes. the sequences spanning between tango <dig> and xdh in aedes and culex share a short similarity region bearing a protein coding capacity, with orfs in the same orientation as the a. gambiae ams relative to the flanking genes. using rt-pcr and species-specific primers encompassing the most conserved culicine orfs we confirmed that this hypothetical gene is expressed  in both aedes and culex . two transcripts, differing in size due to an intron splicing or retention, were strongly expressed in the ae. aegypti females, while in males strong expression corresponded to a transcript with an intron spliced out. in cx. quinquefasciatus a single transcript with an intron retained was expressed in a female-biased fashion. in both aedes and culex intron retention leads to a transcript that may encode a truncated, but functional, putative protein. it is also possible that intron retention is a result of a faulty splicing event, and such a transcript, with a premature termination codon , is destined to degradation via the nonsense-mediated mrna decay  pathway  <cit> . however, the latter scenario seems implausible for culex, in which the only identified transcript form contains a potential ptc. the culicine sequences are highly similar to each other at the amino acid level, but only remotely similar to the ams gene , leaving a large degree of uncertainty as to the homology between ams and the putative culicine genes. however, because there is no other contradictory evidence, we regard these genes as putative orthologs.

the an. gambiae ams protein is weakly basic . according to the trespasser program analysis, it contains a leucine zipper motif , which is found in α-helical segments. leucine side chains from such segments can interact with other α-helices to form coiled coils. existence of a coiled coil domain encompassing the leucine zipper motif is indeed predicted in the ams protein by the coils program from the predictprotein package. coiled coil proteins exhibit a wide range of functions, including cellular motility, signal transduction and modulation of transcription  <cit> . it should be noted, however, that because leucine is the most frequent amino acid and the motif is very simple, such a pattern may have arisen in the ams protein by chance  <cit> . no leucine zipper motifs have been found in the culicine orthologs, but their large divergence from the an. gambiae ams in both sequence and expression pattern implies that the proteins in culicines have attained different structure and function.

mts
sequences homologous to mts could be identified only in mosquitoes. the mts transcript encodes a protein that contains no identifiable motifs that would allow us to infer its function. however, the highly basic character of mts  provides a hint about its potential involvement in chromatin condensation. detection of mts transcription in spermatids  further strengthens this supposition. in mammalian spermiogenesis a set of highly basic proteins is involved in chromatin restructuring, associated with a displacement of histones by transition proteins, which are subsequently replaced by protamines  <cit> . in effect, chromatin becomes transcriptionally silent and tightly packaged into a sperm nucleus, which is reduced in volume more than  <dig> times  <cit> . during maturation of the drosophila sperm, the volume of the nucleus is reduced over 200-fold  <cit> , apparently via similar mechanisms as those operating in mammals. chromatin condensation in drosophila is also associated with the removal of histones and accumulation of protamines. a temporal gap exists between the presence of histones and protamines and during that time a highly basic protein tpl94d, presumably a functional homologue of mammalian transition proteins, is transiently expressed in the nuclei  <cit> . there are several other highly basic drosophila proteins expressed in testes and likely to be involved in sperm maturation, which may functionally correspond to mts, however, their specific functions remain unknown  <cit> .

aams
the rt-pcr experiments showed that the aams gene encodes two transcripts expressed in testis . one transcript consists of two exons coding for a 1188-residue protein. the second transcript, characterized by a shorter orf generated by a transcript-specific intron splicing, may encode a truncated protein form . alternatively, it may represent a misspliced transcript that bears a premature termination codon and, as such, is subject to degradation by nmd.

sequences homologous to aams were identified only in mosquitoes, in which they exhibit substantial variability in length and sequence . the predicted aams protein orthologs lack any clearly defined conserved domains that would suggest their function or subcellular localization. the toppred program predicted two transmembrane domains in the long version of the protein and one domain in its putative truncated form in anopheles, two domains in its culex ortholog, and between one and three domains in the aedes protein, however, no such domains were identified in any of these proteins by the tmhmm program. the protein is acidic  and according to secondary structure and globularity prediction programs from predictprotein server, half of its length forms loops interspersed among helices and strands, and its sequence folds into a compact structure.

CONCLUSIONS
our study sheds light on the virtually uncharacterized developmental processes in male mosquitoes. the strategy applied allowed us to identify five genes expressed in testes during late phases of spermatogenesis. the high complexity of testis function dictates that the number of genes involved must be much larger. in d. melanogaster there are over  <dig> genes thought to be testis-specific  <cit> . only about a  <dig> of those have homologs detectable in an. gambiae . because the diversity of testis transcripts in mosquitoes is expected to be comparable to that in drosophila, we predict that in addition to these conserved genes , many rapidly evolving genes, not detectable by a simple homology search, are expressed in mosquito testes. further analysis of the ssh products using a more elaborate differential screening protocol is likely to provide more male-specifically expressed genes in an. gambiae. likewise, further studies targeting transcripts from dissected testes are expected to give more information about testis-specific expression. microarray analysis seems an attractive alternative to cdna subtraction, however, the results in this method rely exclusively on the quality of microarray probes. it is likely that a considerable percentage of fast evolving genes expressed in anopheles testes still awaits discovery . by definition, probes corresponding to such genes are absent from gene-based microarrays, therefore, their expression would remain undetected. this study demonstrates that the existing gene annotations can be further improved by the careful comparative analysis of the available mosquito genomes. yet, because of a deep phylogenetic divergence reaching 145– <dig> million years  <cit> , detection of rapidly evolving genes or correct delineation of their coding regions constitutes a major challenge in sequence comparisons between anopheles and culicines. consequently, further refinement of the anopheles gambiae genome annotation may require genome sequences of additional anopheles species and, still, supporting experimental evidence seems unavoidable.

the discovery of testis-expressed orphan genes opens new prospects for the development of innovative mosquito control methods. the proteins encoded by the orphans are unique in their potential as mosquito-specific targets of sterilizing chemicals. such sterilizing insecticides could be a very useful alternative to irradiation in the production of sterile males for their subsequent release in the sterile insect technique approach to control. furthermore, following proper testing, these chemosterilants could potentially be applied for direct control of wild mosquito populations and become an important component of an integrated management program for an. gambiae.

