BACKGROUND
the delimitation of closely related species and the reconstruction of their evolutionary history can be complicated by shared ancestral polymorphisms, introgression or inadequate taxonomy  <cit> . these problems may result in discrepancies between gene trees and a species classification based on other data, which may became apparent if the markers are sequenced from several individuals of each species. the probability that ancestral polymorphisms are shared between species increases with decreased time between speciation events  <cit> . the likelihood that isolation mechanisms are incomplete and introgression happens is also higher if species originated in a short time span and, hence, were at least initially genetically similar  <cit> . inadequate taxonomy, the third cause for discrepancies between gene trees and a species classification, is more likely, if several species originated in a short period of time and are morphologically similar. thus, the delimitation of species and the reconstruction of their relationships are especially challenging in species radiations  <cit> . species that are nonmonophyletic in gene trees have been found in diverse groups, e.g., in radiations of east african cichlids  <cit> , darwin's finches  <cit> , moorean tree snails  <cit> , hawaiian swordtail crickets  <cit> , north american lycaenid butterflies  <cit> , ambystomatid salamanders  <cit> , argentinean liolaemid lizards  <cit> , north american crotaphytid lizards  <cit> , and barley  <cit> .

we investigated the radiation of the land snail genus xerocrassa  on crete. eleven native xerocrassa species can be distinguished on crete based on morphological characters of the shell and the genitalia  <cit> . all native species living on crete are endemic  except the more widespread xerocrassa cretica. it has been supposed that the radiation of xerocrassa on crete was a non-adaptive radiation probably triggered by sexual selection  <cit> . only six of the morphologically defined species are monophyletic in a mitochondrial gene tree  <cit> . we checked the morphological species delimitation using a tree and a network based on aflp markers  <cit>  and tested the efficiency of several approaches for delimiting genotypic clusters based on multilocus data without a prior knowledge of the number of species. we used an integrative approach combining several criteria to discriminate between incomplete lineage sorting and introgression as causes for the nonmonophyly of species in the mitochondrial gene tree of the xerocrassa radiation on crete.

RESULTS
mitochondrial gene tree
separate models for the three codon positions as determined by modeltest based on the aic were used for the maximum likelihood analysis , because the resulting tree had a lower aic value  than the tree based on a uniform model for the complete dataset . the maximum likelihood tree of  <dig> partial coi sequences  of cretan xerocrassa species and two trochoidea species as outgroups is shown in figure 2a . coi gtr+g distances varied from  <dig> % to  <dig> %  between cretan xerocrassa species and from  <dig> % to  <dig> %  within cretan xerocrassa species.

according to chi-square tests the base composition at the first and second codon positions of the used coi sequences are not heterogeneous , but there is significant heterogeneity at the third codon positions . the results of the matched-pairs tests of symmetry are compatible with these results. according to the matched-pairs tests of symmetry  <dig> % of the pairwise comparisons of the nucleotides at the third codon positions indicate significant  heterogeneity, whereas only  <dig> % of the pairwise comparisons of the nucleotides at the first codon positions and  <dig> % of the pairwise comparisons of the nucleotides at the second codon positions indicate significant heterogeneity.

to reduce the compositional heterogeneity at the third codon positions we recoded the nucleotides at the third codon positions as purines and pyrimidines. this ry-recoding resulted in a loss of information so that the resulting tree was poorly supported. the haplotype group of x. mesostena that is sister to all other haplotypes of endemic species except x. subvariegata and x. grabusana  became nested in x. siderensis haplotypes from eastern crete. this haplotype group of x. mesostena is distributed in a region southwest of the psiloritis mountains and will be called the 'psiloritis haplotype group' in the following.

the analysis with the nonstationary model implemented in nhphyml-discrete requires a starting tree. we used the maximum likelihood tree obtained with the unmodified dataset as well as the maximum likelihood tree obtained with the ry-recoding of the third codon positions as starting trees. the psiloritis haplotype group of x. mesostena has the same basal position as in the maximum likelihood tree obtained with the unmodified dataset and the stationary model  in both resulting trees. according to the approximately unbiased test, the tree obtained using the maximum likelihood tree calculated based on the unmodified dataset as starting tree  was significantly  better than the tree obtained using the other starting tree.

both reconstructions of the mitochondrial gene tree  show that the haplotypes of the morphologically delimited species x. cretica, x. subvariegata, x. grabusana, x. lasithiensis, x. heraklea and x. kydonia form monophyletic groups, but the haplotypes of the other five morphologically delimited species do not. the haplotypes of the widespread x. mesostena are paraphyletic with respect to all other endemic xerocrassa species with the exception of x. subvariegata and x. grabusana and form two deeply separated main groups. whereas the majority of the x. mesostena individuals have haplotypes that form a terminal bush-like group, most individuals living in a region southwest of the psiloritis mountains have mitochondrial haplotypes that form a strongly supported early branch in the mitochondrial gene tree, the 'psiloritis haplotype group'. the haplotypes of x. rhithymna are paraphyletic with respect to x. kydonia. the haplotypes of x. franciscoi are nested in the major x. mesostena group. in the tree calculated with the stationary model  most haplotypes of x. amphiconus form a clade that is nested in some haplotypes of x. siderensis, which together form the sister group of the x. heraklea/rhithymna/kydonia clade. the second group of x. siderensis haplotypes forms the sister clade of the major x. mesostena group. in contrast, the two haplotype clades of x. amphiconus and x. siderensis form a single clade, which is the sister group of the x. heraklea/rhithymna/kydonia clade, in the tree calculated with the nonstationary model . in both reconstructions, one haplotype of x. amphiconus is nested in the major x. mesostena group.

tree and network based on aflp data
using six primer combinations, we scored  <dig> fragments of 70- <dig> bases length in  <dig> xerocrassa specimens. the aflp data can be found in additional file  <dig>  a neighbor-joining tree based on jaccard distances between aflp data of cretan xerocrassa is shown in figure  <dig> and a neighbor-net is shown in figure  <dig>  nine of the eleven morphologically defined species are monophyletic in the aflp tree. this is also true for x. rhithymna, x. franciscoi and x. mesostena, which are nonmonophyletic in the mitochondrial gene tree. the discordances between the mitochondrial gene tree and the tree based on the aflp data with regard to the monophyly of these species and the relationships between the species are not the result of a poor resolution of the mitochondrial gene tree according to an approximately unbiased test . of the morphologically defined species, only x. amphiconus and x. siderensis are polyphyletic in the mitochondrial gene tree as well as in the neighbor-joining tree and the neighbor-net based on the aflp data. however, x. amphiconus and x. siderensis together form a separate group in the tree and the neighbor-net based on the aflp data, whereas the haplotypes of the x. amphiconus/siderensis group are polyphyletic in the mitochondrial gene tree .

x. mesostena as defined by morphological characters forms a separate group in the tree  and the neighbor-net  based on aflp markers. however, this group is divided into distinct subgroups by deep splits. these subgroups are geographically more or less separated and might be considered cryptic species. however, they are neither congruent with mitochondrial haplotype groups nor are they correlated with morphological differences. for example, one of the aflp based subgroups is restricted to the region southwest of the psiloritis mountains where also the psiloritis haplotype group occurs. most of the x. mesostena individuals that are characterized by psiloritis haplotypes are concentrated in the geographically corresponding aflp cluster . however, there are also individuals with other haplotypes in this aflp cluster and some individuals with psiloritis haplotypes belong to other aflp clusters. this demonstrates that there is gene flow between the metapopulations corresponding to the aflp clusters.

species delimitation based on gaussian clustering of aflp data
gaussian clustering of the aflp data resulted in a classification of the  <dig> xerocrassa specimens into eleven clusters if no noise component was used. these clusters are shown in the first two dimensions of a four-dimensional non-metric multidimensional scaling of jaccard distances . this partitioning differs from the morphological classification in combining the three morphologically differentiated species pairs x. subvariegata and x. grabusana, x. kydonia and x. rhithymna, and x. amphiconus and x. siderensis each and in splitting the widespread species x. mesostena into three groups and x. cretica into two clusters. if gaussian clustering with a noise component was used to indicate outliers,  <dig> specimens were included into the noise component and seven clusters were recognized. the four clusters of the partitioning without noise that include less than eight specimens were completely included into the noise component.

species delimitation based on structure analyses
there was no distinct maximum of the mean estimates of the posterior probabilities of the data calculated with structure for a given cluster number k for k between  <dig> and  <dig>  if the model without admixture  was used. the statistic Δk proposed by evanno et al.  <cit>  to estimate the number of clusters k showed a maximum at k =  <dig> . however, Δk for k =  <dig> can not be calculated. thus, neither the mean estimates of the posterior probabilities of the data for a given cluster number k nor the Δk values gave a clear indication how many xerocrassa species can be distinguished on crete.

the mean estimates of the posterior probabilities of the data had a maximum at k =  <dig>  if the model with admixture  was used. however, the highest likelihood has been obtained in a run with k =  <dig>  Δk showed again a maximum at k =  <dig> . in the run with k =  <dig> that had the highest likelihood the clusters correspond to x. cretica, x. subvariegata + x. grabusana, x. kydonia + x. rhithymna + x. heraklea + x. lasithiensis, x. franciscoi, x. amphiconus + x. siderensis and four clusters including parts of the x. mesostena complex.

species delimitation based on a structurama analysis
structurama calculated the posterior probability that the dataset includes  <dig> clusters as  <dig> . in the mean partition these clusters correspond to x. cretica, x. subvariegata + x. grabusana, and a complex including the other eight endemic cretan xerocrassa species.

admixture analyses for inferring introgression
an admixture analysis with the aflp data of x. rhithymna and x. kydonia with k =  <dig> revealed that all x. rhithymna individuals including the specimen with the haplotype that is sister to the x. kydonia haplotypes had an inferred ancestry of  <dig> - <dig> % in their own cluster. that means that there is no evidence for introgression of x. kydonia alleles into x. rhithymna individuals. the inferred ancestry of five x. kydonia individuals was also between  <dig> - <dig> % in their own cluster, but one individual had an inferred ancestry of only  <dig> % in its own cluster and  <dig> % in the x. rhithymna cluster.

an admixture analyses with the aflp data of x. franciscoi individuals and the geographically neighbouring ten individuals of x. mesostena with k =  <dig> showed that the x. franciscoi individuals had an inferred ancestry of  <dig> - <dig> % in their own cluster. nine of the ten x. mesostena individuals had an inferred ancestry of  <dig> - <dig> % in the x. mesostena cluster, but the one from ano kapetaniana  <dig>  km towards agios ioannis, only a few hundred meters from the boundary of the distribution area of x. franciscoi, had an inferred ancestry of only  <dig> % in the x. mesostena cluster and  <dig> % in the x. franciscoi cluster. this indicates that there might be some introgression between x. mesostena and x. franciscoi.

discussion
species delimitation in a radiation
there are strong discrepancies between the mitochondrial gene tree of the radiation of the land snail genus xerocrassa on crete based on coi sequences  and the species classification based on morphological characters of the shell and the genitalia  <cit> . in the mitochondrial gene tree only six of the eleven morphologically defined xerocrassa species living on crete are monophyletic. a topology test showed that the lack of monophyly of the morphologically delimited species is not the result of a poor resolution of the mitochondrial gene tree  <cit> . we could also exclude the possibility that the lack of monophyly of the morphologically delimited species in the mitochondrial gene tree is an artefact resulting from systematic errors in tree reconstruction due to compositional bias by using a nonstationary model for the maximum likelihood analyses .

we generated a multilocus dataset using aflp markers to investigate whether the discrepancies between the morphologically based species classification and the mitochondrial gene tree are artefacts resulting from inadequate taxonomy or whether they can be explained by evolutionary processes. nine of the eleven morphologically delimited cretan xerocrassa species form separate groups in the tree  and the neighbor-net  based on  <dig> aflp markers. thus, the aflp data corroborate the morphological species classification with the exception of the separation of x. amphiconus and x. siderensis, which together form a separate clade, but are intermingled within this clade. this species pair is also exceptional with regard to morphology and distribution. whereas most other xerocrassa species can be distinguished by characters of the genitalia, the genitalia of x. amphiconus and x. siderensis show no differences. these two species differ only in shell characters. whereas the other endemic species have largely allopatric distribution areas, the ranges of x. amphiconus and x. siderensis broadly overlap. nevertheless, they usually do not occur together. they tend to prefer different altitudinal zones  <cit> , though there are several populations of each species occurring in the zone preferred by the other species. only few individuals show intermediate shell characters indicating possible hybridization. the lack of clear genetic differentiation of the two species might indicate that the species diverged only very recently. at present, we cannot rule out the possibility that the two forms actually represent only extreme morphs of a single species.

we also applied three methods for delimiting provisional species based on dominant multilocus markers without any a priori knowledge. we compared the performance of gaussian clustering  <cit>  with two bayesian approaches that are based on the assumption of approximate hardy-weinberg equilibrium within clusters, namely structure  <cit>  and structurama  <cit> , in delimiting species of the cretan xerocrassa radiation.

the classification of the cretan xerocrassa specimens produced using gaussian clustering based on the aflp data is most similar to the morphological classification, but differs from it in combining three morphologically differentiated species pairs and in splitting the two most widespread species into two, respectively three groups. the major disadvantage of structure was its inability to determine the number of species that can be distinguished. compared to structure, the advantage of structurama is that it directly estimates the number of clusters into which a sample can be divided. however, compared with gaussian clustering the classification success of structurama was much lower. only three provisional species were delimited. thus, this approach failed to distinguish eight taxa that can be distinguished morphologically and form separate groups in the tree  and the neighbor-net  based on the aflp data.

the problems in determining the appropriate number of clusters with structure and the low resolution obtained with structurama confirmed former studies suggesting that with many dominant markers strategies coupling ordination and cluster analyses like gaussian clustering become more efficient in species delimitation than bayesian approaches that are based on the assumption of hardy-weinberg equilibrium within clusters  <cit> . however, none of the methods used recognized all species that can be distinguished by morphological characters and that form separate groups in the tree  and the neighbor-net  based on the aflp data. this failure is probably the result of the low number of specimens sampled of the regionally more restricted species. with few sampled individuals separate clusters cannot be recognized and specimens of the underrepresented species are included in clusters of the most similar species, if no noise component is used in the analysis. the introduction of a noise component to include outliers in gaussian clustering is meaningful, because it indicates problems in the data, in this case insufficient sampling of the regionally restricted species, that might remain unrecognized otherwise.

the problem in recognizing underrepresented species has important consequences for dna-based biodiversity surveys. because there are usually many rare species and just a few common species  <cit> , many rare species will remain undiscovered, if all species are sampled randomly. therefore, investing in a morphological prescreening to raise the representation of rare species in dna-based surveys might increase the effectiveness of such surveys considerably.

the genotypic clusters determined with gaussian clustering and the two bayesian approaches correspond to species in some cases , but they may also correspond to other groups like geographically isolated meta-populations  or groups of species . thus, the determination of the status of such groups should be corroborated by a comparison with a classification based on other evidence. we compare the partitions obtained with the multilocus markers with the morphological classification that is mainly based on differences in the genitalia that may directly be involved in reproductive isolation.

causes of the nonmonophyly of species in the mitochondrial gene tree
the nonmonophyly of x. mesostena, x. franciscoi and x. rhithymna in the mitochondrial gene tree  are not likely explained by inadequate taxonomy, because they form separate groups in the tree  and the neighbor-net  based on aflp markers. we analyzed the potential mechanisms resulting in the nonmonophyly of these species in the mitochondrial gene tree by applying several criteria that have been proposed to discriminate between incomplete lineage sorting and introgression. these criteria are the depth of the coalescences in the mitochondrial tree  <cit> , the geographical occurrence of the individuals of species that are nonmonophyletic in the gene tree  <cit> , and concordance with results of admixture analyses of nuclear multilocus markers  <cit> .

the most remarkable pattern is seen in x. mesostena, the most widespread of the endemic species. whereas individuals living in a region southwest of the psiloritis mountains have mitochondrial haplotypes that form a strongly supported early branch in the coi gene tree , the individuals from other regions of the island have haplotypes that form a terminal bush-like group. in the tree  and the neighbor-net  based on aflp markers individuals with psiloritis haplotypes are intermingled with individuals with other haplotypes indicating that there is gene flow between populations with different mitochondrial haplotype groups. there is no indication that one of the two haplotype groups found in x. mesostena was introduced into that species by introgression, because these haplotype groups were not found in other species, with the exception of x. franciscoi and one x. amphiconus specimen that have haplotypes that are nested in the major x. mesostena haplotype group. thus, the psiloritis haplotype group represents probably an ancestral polymorphism that was conserved in x. mesostena. it can be considered a paradigm for one of the causes of the high mitochondrial sequence diversity within land snail species discussed by thomaz et al.  <cit> , namely long-term persistence of ancient polymorphisms resulting from the strongly subdivided population structure of land snails. the population structure of land snail species often consisting of many more or less isolated populations  <cit>  that sometimes can reach high densities in favourable patches of habitat in conducive to the persistence of ancestral polymorphisms, because such a population structure increases the effective population size  <cit> . a more detailed analysis of the phylogeographic structure within x. mesostena is in preparation.

the second case of nonmonophyly in the mitochondrial gene tree  concerns x. rhithymna. in the coi gene tree x. rhithymna is paraphyletic with respect to x. kydonia. the two species are sister species according to the aflp tree. the ranges of the two species are separated by more than  <dig> km  <cit> . thus, dispersal of x. rhithymna individuals to the range of x. kydonia and hybridization between the two species are rare events at most. this is also confirmed by an admixture analysis of the aflp data that did not provide evidence for admixture, neither for the x. rhithymna individual with the haplotype that is sister to the x. kydonia haplotypes nor for any other x. rhithymna individual. a small amount of admixture in one x. kydonia individual is not necessarily the result of introgression, but might be due to shared ancestral polymorphisms. thus, it is more likely that the nonmonophyly of x. rhithymna in the mitochondrial gene tree is the result of incomplete lineage sorting and not caused by an introgression of a x. kydonia haplotype into x. rhithymna. this is further supported by the deep coalescence of the x. rhithymna haplotype which is more closely related to the x. kydonia haplotypes than to the other x. rhithymna haplotypes.

the last species that is monophyletic in the aflp tree , but not in the mitochondrial gene tree , is x. franciscoi. the small range of this endemic species adjoins directly on the range of x. mesostena. its coi haplotypes are nested within the main coi haplotype group of x. mesostena and are separated from x. mesostena haplotypes only by shallow distances. this might indicate introgression. actually, the structure analysis of the aflp data shows admixture between x. franciscoi and a representative of the neighbouring x. mesostena population in agreement with the observation of a narrow hybrid zone between the two species  <cit> . however, the nonmonophyly of the mitochondrial haplotypes of x. franciscoi, the shallow distances between them and x. mesostena haplotypes and the admixture of x. franciscoi and neighbouring x. mesostena can also be explained by a recent origin of x. franciscoi from x. mesostena by peripatric speciation. it is difficult to determine the relative roles of incomplete lineage sorting and hybridization in generating nonmonophyly of recently separated species in gene trees.

the mitochondrial gene tree hints to the phylogenetic origin of x. franciscoi from neighbouring populations of the x. mesostena complex, whereas the aflp tree reflects the genetic cohesion of the individuals of each of the species caused by intraspecific gene flow and recombination that, on the other hand, obscured the details of the relations between the species. thus, both marker types supply complementary information with regard to the phylogenetic history of the xerocrassa radiation on crete, similar to the situation concerning the radiation of the cichlid genus tropheus in lake tanganyika  <cit> .

the discrimination of incomplete lineage sorting of ancestral polymorphisms and introgression as causes of nonmonophyly of species in gene trees is difficult  <cit> . our study showed that the most likely cause of nonmonophyly can be inferred at least in some cases by a combination of several criteria, namely the depth of the coalescences in the gene tree, the geographical distribution of shared genetic markers, and concordance with results of admixture analyses of nuclear multilocus markers. however, all these criteria have limitations. randomly distributed genetic markers shared with allopatric species with limited dispersal abilities might indicate incomplete lineage sorting. however, the expectation that genetic markers that are concentrated geographically near species boundaries indicate introgression  is not necessarily true, because such a pattern might also be derived from a pre-existing cline in the stem species. likewise, introgression of mitochondrial dna cannot be completely excluded, even if there is no evidence for admixture of multilocus markers, because maternally inherited dna like mitochondrial dna may introgress much more rapidly through prezygotic barriers than biparentally inherited dna  <cit> . such shortcomings of individual criteria are ameliorated by using several criteria in an integrative approach. gene trees of several additional genes would provide more definitive evidence for discriminating between incomplete lineage sorting and hybridization.

CONCLUSIONS
most cases of nonmonophyly of species in the mitochondrial gene tree of the xerocrassa radiation on crete are not caused by inappropriate morphological taxonomy, but are the result of evolutionary processes. by using nuclear multilocus data and a combination of several criteria, namely the depth of the coalescences in the gene tree, the geographical distribution of shared genetic markers, and concordance with results of admixture analyses of nuclear multilocus markers we could infer that some of these cases are probably the result of incomplete lineage sorting, whereas introgression might have been involved in other cases. although most species are monophyletic in a tree based on the aflp data, methods for delimiting genotypic clusters based on multilocus data alone did not recognize all these species. this is at least partly the result of an unequal representation of the species in the dataset and highlights the importance of a morphological prescreening to raise the representation of rare species in dna-based biodiversity surveys.

