BACKGROUND
diplomonads are a diverse group of small mitochondrion-lacking diplokaryotic flagellates found in anaerobic or micro-aerophilic environments  <cit> . most research on diplomonads has focused on giardia lamblia , which is a major cause of water-borne enteric disease in humans in both industrialised and developing countries  <cit> . however, there are important variations in lifestyles among diplomonads; although many are endocommensals or parasites associated with animals, there are also several free-living species, mainly within the genera trepomonas and hexamita, that are found in aquatic environments rich in organic matter and deficient in oxygen  <cit> . most members of the genus spironucleus are parasites, typically of fish but also of birds and mice; several spironucleus species have been shown to cause disease in their hosts  <cit> , although essentially nothing is known about the virulence mechanisms of spironucleus species. spironucleus salmonicida, the focus of this study, can cause systemic and organ infections in cultivated salmon, posing a significant problem for the aquaculture industry  <cit> . this isolate was previously known as spironucleus barkhanus  <cit> , but pathogenic isolates of this species were recently redescribed as s. salmonicida to distinguish them from morphologically identical, but genetically distinct, fish commensal isolates of s. barkhanus  <cit> .

diplomonads were once thought to belong to the earliest-diverging lineage within the eukaryotes  <cit> . accordingly, they were described as 'biological fossils', true eukaryotes with many peculiarities  that retained some ancestral prokaryotic properties  <cit> . however, advances in molecular phylogenetics and cell biology during the last decade strongly suggest this view is incorrect  <cit> . the current interpretation of the phylogeny of eukaryotes lends no support for diplomonads as the earliest eukaryotic branch  <cit> . indeed, a sister-group relationship between diplomonads and parabasalids to the exclusion of other eukaryotic lineages and the root has recently been demonstrated, based both on phylogenetic analysis of concatenated protein-coding sequences  <cit> , and on shared gene acquisitions  <cit> . diplomonads and parabasalids are now classified within the eukaryotic supergroup excavata  <cit> . furthermore, diplomonads seem to have all features previously thought to be lacking in "primitive" eukaryotes, including an organelle with mitochondrial ancestry   <cit>  and intron-containing genes  <cit> , while some prokaryotic properties are probably the result of lateral gene transfers from the prokaryotic realm  <cit> .

recently, enteromonads  were surprisingly found to branch robustly with trepomonas and hexamita in phylogenetic analyses to the exclusion of spironucleus  <cit> . these results suggest that the diplokaryotic state of diplomonads arose multiple times independently, or that the monokaryon of enteromonads is a derived feature. large genetic and biological variation also exists within diplomonads. for example, spironucleus, trepomonas and hexamita, form a monophyletic clade to the exclusion of giardia in phylogenetic trees  <cit> , and use an alternative genetic code whereby taa and tag, rather than being stop codons, encode glutamine  <cit> .

to gain insights into the evolutionary history and genomic architecture of diplomonads in general and spironucleus in particular, we initiated a genome survey project in s. salmonicida. to maximize gene discovery we obtained expressed sequence tag  and genomic survey sequences , and completely sequenced eleven contigs. here, we present analyses of the complete set of sequences obtained in the genome survey project. although we present data that only partially covers the s. salmonicida genome, these data provide key insights into the genome-level properties of s. salmonicida such as its coding content, base compositional biases, gene content, gene architecture, and patterns of gene acquisitions. from these analyses, we are able to make inferences about the biology of a poorly-understood fish parasite, as well as gain a first glimpse into genome evolution within the enigmatic protist phylum diplomonadida.

RESULTS
the first sequence data from spironucleus on the genomic level
this sequence survey of s. salmonicida has been the starting point for several projects regarding different aspects of the genetics and molecular evolution of this diplomonad  <cit> . together with a few other studies, these have resulted in about thirty s. salmonicida genes in the public databases. the present analysis of the complete set of  <dig> est and  <dig> gss sequences, combined with a the complete sequence of eleven contigs corresponding to  <dig> kbp unique sequence , extend this information to include  <dig> unique protein coding genes, two ribosomal rna genes and  <dig> trna genes . altogether our sequence data cover more than  <dig>  mbp of the s. salmonicida genome. the only genome size reported from a diplomonad is  <dig> mbp for the genome of g. lamblia  <cit> . the genome size of s. salmonicida is unknown, but the degree of sequence overlap between independent clones in our random genomic shotgun library yielded a very rough estimate of approximately  <dig> mbp of unique sequence . interestingly, the observation that 33% of the est sequences have matches within the gss sequences suggests a genome size in a similar range, unless the same genes are preferentially cloned in both the est and gss sequences. thus, there are no indications within our sequence survey project that the s. salmonicida genome is larger than the g. lamblia genome. these observations indicate that our obtained sequences potentially represent one third of the complete genome.

variable g+c content along the genome
on the whole, the s. salmonicida genome was found to be g+c poor; the average g+c contents were  <dig> %, and  <dig> % within the  <dig> gsss and the eleven finished sequences, respectively. however, the eleven finished contigs showed large variation in g+c content, with average g+c contents ranging from  <dig> % to  <dig> % . this probably cannot be explained by the presence within each contig of genes with the higher values; the coding content of sp <dig> is 96% and its g+c content is only 31%, while the coding content of sp <dig> is 75% and its g+c content is 58% . in fact, the g+c content sometimes varies drastically within each contig. for example, the average g+c content in the region between 1– <dig> kbp from the 5' end of sp <dig> is around 30%, while between 6– <dig> kbp its g+c content is almost 70% . similar sharp shifts in g+c content along the genome are observed in some other contigs . these shifts in g+c content do not seem to be correlated with the presence and absence of genes: both g+c rich and poor regions are fairly dense with genes, with the exception of the g+c poor contig sp <dig> and the 5' end of sp <dig>  however, these observations are consistent with the existence of different mutational biases in different regions of the s. salmonicida genome; the g+c contents of both the third synonymous position of protein coding genes and the non-coding regions varies as expected if mutational bias shapes the g+c content  <cit> , with the gc <dig> values of genes higher than the average g+c content for genes in g+c rich regions and lower in g+c poor regions . a similar pattern is observed for non-coding regions , and the codon usage analysis indicates large variations of the g+c contents among genes .

s. salmonicida has a compact genome
analysis of the eleven completely sequenced contigs showed that the coding density varies significantly between contigs . some parts of the genome appear to be very gene-dense, with short intergenic regions. in fact, six cases of putative overlapping open reading frames  were identified, similar to earlier findings in g. lamblia  <cit> . the lengths of the overlapping regions range from  <dig> to  <dig> bp; in four cases they are encoded in the same direction, while in the other two cases the 5' regions overlap. experimental studies are needed to determine which initiation codons actually are used in these putative genes to determine if they are truly overlapping transcribed orfs that encode functional proteins. nevertheless, the whole genome does not seem to be packed with genes; no protein coding sequence could be detected in the almost 5-kbp contig sp <dig>  nor in a long region upstream of the 18s ribosomal rna gene in sp <dig> . in g. lamblia, the genes for ribosomal rna have been found to be associated with telomeres  <cit> . however, we were unable to detect any sequence similarity to genes that are associated with telomeres in g. lamblia, or any telomere repeats, in the long region upstream of the rrna genes in s. salmonicida sp <dig> 

the transcription of protein-encoding genes in giardia is atypical for eukaryotes. the promoters are short; less than  <dig> bp is needed for efficient expression of most genes, even if they are stage-specific  <cit> . the 5'-utrs of the transcripts are usually only 1– <dig> nt, and the genes lack tata boxes or other cis-acting promoter elements characteristic of typical eukaryotic promoters; at-rich sequences around the g. lamblia atg initiation codons determine the transcriptional start site and are essential and sufficient for promoter activity  <cit> . the s. salmonicida promoters apparently lack tata-boxes and other typical eukaryotic promoter motifs . however, at-rich stretches are found close to the translational start sites, or in the first  <dig> bp upstream  and the intergenic regions are very short . thus, the s. salmonicida transcriptional machinery appears to resemble the 'atypical' machinery previously characterized in g. lamblia  <cit> .

the position of the polya tail in relation to the termination codon could be mapped in  <dig> est clones. the 3' untranslated regions  of s. salmonicida genes appear to be short; the average distance between the termination codon and the first a in the polya tail is  <dig>  bases and in  <dig> of the  <dig> cases the distance is between  <dig> and  <dig> nucleotides . such very short 3' utrs have previously been observed in g. lamblia, but this is in stark contrast to most other studied eukaryotes where 3' utrs have been proposed to play important roles in regulating messenger rna  stability and translation  <cit> . in g. lamblia, agtraay has been identified as a consensus polyadenylation signal  <cit> . our analyses do not identify any strong consensus sequence outside the conserved unique termination codon tga, although we observe a preference for a in the position two bases upstream of the termination codon, and a t immediately downstream . interestingly, the three most conserved nucleotides in the g. lamblia polyadenylation signals are the central tra nucleotides, which is similar to the situation in s. salmonicida. furthermore, a preference for a u-rich region close to the polya tail is also apparent, a pattern conserved in many eukaryotes but not giardia  <cit> . it has been reported that a fraction  of complementary dnas  from g. lamblia represent polyadenylated sterile anti-sense transcripts that may result from a loose control of transcription  <cit> . the rarity of such sterile transcripts in our cdna library  indicates that this phenomenon is not universal for diplomonads. indeed, our data indicate considerable variation in the specificity of the transcription and polyadenylation machineries within diplomonads.

the availability of both est and genomic sequences was used to identify putative introns. an intron should be detected as a sequence gap in an alignment between the est and the corresponding genomic sequence because the est sequences typically represent the spliced version of the gene sequence. this approach was used to identify potential introns using similarity searches with the est sequences as probes against the gss and finished contig genomic sequences.  <dig> out of  <dig> ests matched with an e < e- <dig>  and manual inspection failed to detect any introns. the s. salmonicida genome appears to be very intron-poor. given that only a few introns have been detected within the diplomonad g. lamblia  <cit> , a paucity of introns could represent the ancestral state of the diplomonads. however, two introns were detected in one of the first genes sequenced from carpediemonas  <cit> , an excavate taxon and possible sister lineage to diplomonads. thus, introns may have been more frequent in a common ancestor of diplomonads and carpediemonas, and that the ancestral diplomonad lineage experienced genome-wide intron loss, an evolutionary phenomenon that is not uncommon  <cit> . a basic spliceosomal organisation is present in giardia suggesting that the spliceosome is ancestral to extant eukaryotes  <cit> . although our analyses did not identify any proteins likely to be involved in splicing in s. salmonicida, further sequencing and more detailed analyses are needed to determine whether introns and a functional spliceosomal apparatus are present in s. salmonicida.

coding capacity of s. salmonicida
in this study we have identified more than  <dig> novel genes, distributed among all functional categories, representing a twenty-fold increase of the number of genes with assigned functions identified in the s. salmonicida genome . among these were genes involved in translation:  <dig> genes encoding ribosomal proteins, many translation factors, and fifteen different trna synthetases were identified . twenty trna genes were identified, which cover  <dig> of the  <dig> sense codons allowing for the normal wobble rules for codon-anticodon pairing. no trna was identified that decodes uag or uaa codons, which encode glutamine in spironucleus, although such trna genes have been identified previously  <cit> . interestingly, all  <dig> codons appear to have the potential to code for incorporation of amino acids into proteins in s. salmonicida; both trna identification programs used in our analyses identified a putative trna with the anticodon uca, annotated as a selenocysteine  trna. the identification of a putative sec trna, which is a central component of selenoprotein biosynthesis  <cit> , in our data set suggests that spironucleus is able to use the single stop codon  to incorporate this rare amino acid into selenoproteins. indeed, the usage of selenocysteine seems to be widespread feature in protists; sec trnas have recently been identified in dictyostelium, tetrahymena, and plasmodium  <cit> .

the identified proteins within the cellular, environmental information, and genetic information process categories in our data set clearly reflect a coding potential similar to a typical eukaryote, including eukaryotic translation and transcription machineries, many proteins involved in eukaryotic signal transduction pathways, a large family of dynein proteins, and five genes encoding members of the rab small gtpase family . this is indeed expected from the current view of diplomonad phylogeny and cell biology . interestingly, only eight rab genes were found in g. lamblia, while a large number of rab gtpases were found in trichomonas vaginalis, most likely related to the apparently more-complex endomembrane system in this parabasalid  <cit> . two of the five rab proteins identified in our survey lack identifiable orthologs in the g. lamblia genome, but branch with t. vaginalis rab sequences in phylogenetic trees , suggesting that s. salmonicida has retained rab proteins that have been lost in the lineage leading to g. lamblia.

absences of genes are very difficult to infer from partial genome data, but some general trends may be observed. for example, relatively few enzymes involved in amino acid metabolism were detected . aminoacyl-trna synthetases are classified into this category, but they are atypical since they are essential for protein synthesis. furthermore, only a single protein  associated with the tricarboxylic acid  cycle was found. however, malate dehydrogenase actually functions in a pyruvate synthesis pathway in g. lamblia  <cit> , rather than in the tca cycle, suggesting a similar role in s. salmonicida. in contrast, several glycolytic proteins are present in our data set . this pattern of metabolic proteins is expected from a fermentative phagotrophic heterotroph which has access to organic compounds from its host, and indeed is very similar to the pattern found in entamoeba histolytica  <cit> . these similarities between s. salmonicida and e. histoytica are almost certainly due to independent adaptations to such an environment in the two lineages. indeed, a considerable fraction of the metabolic proteins was found to be more closely related to prokaryotic rather than eukaryotic homologs in the phylogenomic analyses, suggesting acquisition of these genes by gene transfer .

does s. salmonicida possess mitosomes?
a new organelle, the mitosome, has recently been identified in g. lamblia, that is probably a remnant of a mitochondrion  <cit> . currently, the only known function of mitosomes in giardia is iron-sulfur  cluster synthesis  <cit> . the phylogenetic relationship between g. lamblia and s. salmonicida, the likely mitochondrial origin of the organelle, together with mitochondria and their derived organelles currently being thought to be universally present in all extent eukaryotes  <cit>  strongly suggest that the common ancestor of the two species contained an organelle with mitochondrial ancestry. here we identified two strong cases of candidate mitosomal proteins in s. salmonicida, a chaperon groel  a key protein for mediating protein folding in mitochondria  <cit>  and a cysteine desulfurase , a key enzyme of the fe-s cluster synthesis pathway  <cit>  . orthologous proteins of hsp <dig> and nifsp are known to localize and function in s. cerevisiae mitochondria and g. lamblia mitosomes  <cit> . localization studies of these two proteins should indeed be very useful to investigate whether s. salmonicida contains mitosomes.

a full-length orf encoding a dynamin-like protein that is found on contig sp <dig>  is another protein potentially linked with the mitosome. the g. lamblia genome encodes a single dynamin-like protein and phylogenetic analyses recover the two diplomonad sequences as monophyletic . the function of the g. lamblia single dynamin-like protein is currently unknown. yet, a single dynamin-like protein encoding gene is also found in three kinetoplastid genomes   <cit>  and the microsporidium encephalitozoon cuniculi  <cit> , whereas most eukaryotic genomes encode several dynamin-like paralogues that function either in membrane trafficking or organelle division   <cit> . interestingly, the single dynamin-like protein from trypanosoma brucei was shown to be involved in mitochondrial division  <cit> . hence the single dynamin-like proteins in spironucleus, giardia and encephalitozoon could all be involved in mitosome division.

a large family of cysteine-rich proteins
the predicted amino acid sequences of  <dig> genes were found to contain more than 10% cysteine and were classified as cysteine-rich proteins. most of these were annotated as conserved hypothetical proteins, although some could be assigned to a functional category . most of the cysteine residues were found as cxxc motifs . such an arrangement is similar to the large protein family of variant-specific surface proteins  found in g. lamblia  <cit> , which is estimated to comprise  <dig> % of the genome  <cit> . however, less than 10% of the cysteine-rich proteins in s. salmonicida showed highest sequence similarities to g. lamblia cysteine-rich proteins, and the two conserved motifs of g. lamblia vsp proteins, crgka and ggcy  <cit> , were not found within any of the amino acid sequence of s. salmonicida cysteine-rich proteins. indeed, in similarity searches the majority were most similar to putative proteins discovered in the ciliate tetrahymena thermophila genome project   <cit> . these observations indicate that diplomonads vary greatly in their cysteine-rich proteins; the gene families indeed appear to have expanded independently in the giardia and spironucleus lineages. the biological role of vsp proteins is not well understood, but vsp proteins are immuno-dominant in g. lamblia and expressed on the cell surface  <cit> . among the  <dig> cysteine-rich proteins coding sequences two are likely to represent full-length orfs. these are strong candidate surface proteins since they possess a transmembrane  domain and a cysteine-rich domain made of furin-like and/or epidermal growth factor -like domains typical of surface or secreted proteins, a feature shared with g. lamblia vsps . a total of  <dig> sequences encoding partial proteins with cysteine-rich domains possess similar structural organization as the one shown in figure  <dig>  i.e. they possess a tm domain with the cysteine-rich domains likely to face the extra-cellular milieu. no tm domains could be found in the remaining cysteine-rich proteins within our dataset. however, in several cases these partial cysteine-rich proteins show high similarity to cysteine-rich proteins containing tm domains, suggesting that they could represent partial surface protein sequences . this observation is consistent with the genome of s. salmonicida encoding a large gene family of cysteine-rich variant surface proteins, as established for the vsp protein family in g. lamblia where only one of the  <dig> vsp genes is expressed per cell. in g. lamblia the vsp gene family displays antigenic variation and new vsp genes are induced at a relatively high frequency, which is important for escaping the host's adaptive immune system  <cit> . further sequence data and analyses, as well as expression and cellular localization studies are needed to understand the function of this large protein family in s. salmonicida.

insights into the molecular basis of s. salmonicida pathogenicity
spironucleus species have been described as a cause of disease in hosts that include birds, fish and mice  <cit> ; s. salmonicida, for example, is a problem for the fish industry  <cit> . however, essentially nothing is known about virulence factors in spironucleus. in healthy fish, the parasite spironucleus vortens is commonly found in the flagellated stage  in the lumen of the upper intestine, where it remains attached to the intestinal mucosa, controlled by the mucosal immune system of the host. this stage of infection can cause diarrhea, but villus atrophy, ulceration or inflammation are thought to be absent  <cit> , which is similar to observations during g. lamblia infections  <cit> . antigenic variation among the identified cysteine-rich proteins in s. salmonicida could potentially protect the parasite against secretory antibodies at the mucosal surfaces. nitric oxide  and reactive oxygen species  are important factors in the host's protection against mucosal pathogens  <cit> . s. salmonicida encodes at least two rubrerythrins, two a-type flavoproteins and arginine deiminase . these proteins, which are coded by genes putatively acquired from prokaryotes via gene transfer , protect other microbes against ros and no  <cit> , and similar roles are likely in s. salmonicida.

in the laboratory, spironucleus muris is transmitted as cysts in fecal material like giardia  <cit> . cysts of the genus spironucleus share many morphological features with those of giardia including the presence of two to four nuclei, flagellar axonemes, and a distinct cyst wall. cysts of s. muris even display the same immunostaining as giardia cysts when labeled with antibodies specific for giardia cyst wall  <cit> . we identified one homolog of g. lamblia cyst wall proteins, and two enzymes involved in the production of the sugar components of the cyst wall . the presence of these three genes indicate that s. salmonicida may also be able to form cysts, an interesting possibility since nothing yet is known of how s. salmonicida is spread and how it initiates infection in fish. these genes are stage-specifically expressed in the g. lamblia life cycle, suggesting that studies of their expression might identify regulatory regions of stage-specific genes in spironucleus. characteristic features of giardia cysts include fragments of the adhesive disk but this structure, involved in attachment of giardia, is conspicuously absent from spironucleus cells. none of the genes encoding disc-specific proteins in g. lamblia were identified in this genomic survey, consistent with the absence of this structure in s. salmonicida.

in contrast to g. lamblia, trophozoites of s. salmonicida can enter the blood causing systemic and organ infections  <cit> . cysteine proteases are essential for pathogenicity and invasion of the intestine of e. histolytica  <cit> . therefore the several cysteine proteases that were found in our genomic survey are potential virulence factors possibly involved in invasion/tissue destruction by s. salmonicida. secretion of cysteine proteases was indeed recently shown to occur from trophozoites of g. lamblia upon interaction with epithelial cells  <cit> . cysteine protease activities are also important for excystation and encystation of giardia  <cit> , suggesting yet another potential role for these enzymes in s. salmonicida.

distinct codon usage patterns in highly versus weakly expressed genes
genome-wide mutational processes have been identified as the main determinant for codon-usage variations among genomes in all three domains of life, while variations within genomes may be explained by selection  <cit> . we analyzed sequences of  <dig> genes to examine the variations of codon usage in the s. salmonicida genome . the random sequencing of ests from a non-normalized cdna library provided a rough estimate of the expression levels of s. salmonicida genes, since the number of occurrences of a specific gene among the sampled clones should be correlated with the amount of mrna in the cells that the cdna library were created from. analysis of the genes represented by more than ten est clones  showed a strong codon-usage bias where one or two codons dominate for each amino acid, while some codons are very rare . a distinct pattern was found for genes never found in the est library , for which codon usage is more uniform, with no codons strongly dominating. to compare our results with a previous study from giardia  <cit> ,  <dig> g. lamblia homologs to the s. salmonicida genes included in the codon-usage analysis were extracted. in the absence of information on expression levels, the g. lamblia genes were categorized according to the number of ests for their s. salmonicida homologs. the analysis revealed a pattern very similar to the previous study on a much smaller dataset  <cit> : codons ending with c or g dominate over codons ending with a or u in putatively highly expressed genes, while the putatively weakly expressed genes have a more uniform amino acid usage.

1)s. salmonicida genes represented by more than  <dig> ests 

2)s. salmonicida genes unrepresented among the ests 

3)g. lamblia homologs to s. salmonicida genes represented by more than  <dig> ests 

4)g. lamblia homologs to s. salmonicida genes unrepresented among the ests 

5)relative synonymous codon usage; the most and least abundant codons for each amino acid are indicated with boldface and italic font, respectively.

6)uaa and uag encode glutamine in spironucleus, and are termination codons in giardia  <cit> .

selection on codon usage in highly expressed s. salmonicida genes
to investigate the codon usage in more detail, we plotted the effective number of codons calculated with a method that accounts for variations in the nucleotide composition   <cit>  against the g+c content in the third synonymous position , and performed correspondence analyses on the relative synonymous codon usage, for both the spironuclues and giardia datasets . the highly expressed s. salmonicida genes are centered in the plot with gc3s values around  <dig> , and show lower nc' values than the weakly expressed genes with similar gc3s values, indicative of non-random synonymous codon usage . for g. lamblia, the putatively highly expressed genes exhibit slightly higher gc3s and lower nc' values than the majority of the genes . however, a separation of the genes into different categories can be observed: the vast majority of the weakly expressed genes have gc3s values between  <dig>  and  <dig> , while the highly expressed genes have slightly higher values . correspondence analyses showed that the g+c content in the third synonymous position is the main determinant of the codon usage in both s. salmonicida and g. lamblia; gc3s showed a strong correlation with the first axis . expression levels strongly influence the second axis in the correspondence analysis for s. salmonicida; the highly expressed genes are located at the top separated from the majority of the weakly expressed genes, when axis  <dig> is plotted against axis  <dig> . no such trend is observed for g. lamblia, for which the putative expression levels seem mainly to be correlated with axis  <dig>  . these analyses clearly indicate that there is selection on codon usage in s. salmonicida genes classified as putatively highly expressed, and suggest that their g. lamblia homologs also are under selection . translation efficiency has previously been suggested as the cause of the selection in highly expressed genes in g. lamblia, based on a much smaller data set  <cit> , even though only estimates of expression levels were available for a few of the genes. our study provides, for a much larger dataset, a connection between the subset of genes with a strong codon bias, and an indirect indication of expression levels , corroborating the earlier conclusion and extending it to the distantly related diplomonad s. salmonicida.

a shift in codon usage within diplomonads
interestingly, the favored codons differed between s. salmonicida and g. lamblia for ten amino acids, while the same codon is most abundant for eight  . in nine of the cases where there is a difference between the two species, s. salmonicida preferentially uses a codon ending with u, while g. lamblia uses a c-ending codon in eight cases and a g-ending codon once. the tenth case is a two-fold degenerate amino acid where s. salmonicida and g. lamblia prefer a- and c-ending codons, respectively . thus, in general s. salmonicida favors a+u rich codons, while g. lamblia prefers codons with g or c in the third position in putatively highly expressed genes. there is a distinction between the base compositional biases in g. lamblia and s. salmonicida; the average g+c content of the s. salmonicida sequences in our dataset is 36%, and the majority of the weakly expressed genes have gc3s values around 20%, while the weakly expressed g. lamblia genes have gc3s around 50% close to the genomic g+c content of g. lamblia  <cit>  . this is an expected pattern if mainly mutational processes have shaped the codon usage  <cit> . however, the genomic g+c content differences seem to have influenced the codon preferences in the two diplomonad lineages in the highly expressed genes as well. in the absence of information about codon usage in a closely related outgroup, it is difficult to determine in which of the two lineages reassignment of the optimal codons has occurred. at any rate, the usage of an alternative genetic code in spironucleus but not giardia  <cit>  indicates that codon usage have been remodeled in the lineage leading to spironucleus, at least for the stop and glutamine codons. the canonical stop codon uaa is indeed the most common codon for glutamine in our dataset , as expected in a g+c poor genome if the codon usage is close to mutational equilibrium  <cit> .

unusual codon usage in a subset of s. salmonicida genes
we observed large variation among gc3s values for weakly expressed genes in s. salmonicida. unexpectedly, the nc' values for genes with gc3s above  <dig>  are negatively correlated with gc3s ; if only the background nucleotide composition shaped the codon usage for these genes, the nc' values should be close to the maximum. this pattern indicates that there is selection on the codon usage in the group of weakly expressed genes with high gc3s values. however, selection for the set of optimal codons for highly expressed genes does not explain this pattern, as they include both g+c rich and g+c poor codons . also, the large spread of the genes to the left on axis  <dig>  argues against selection for an alternative set of optimal codons in these genes. furthermore, the deviating gc3s values in these genes are probably not due to recent introductions into the s. salmonicida genome from heterogeneous sources by lateral gene transfer . although some genes with high gc3s values do show indications of gene transfer in the phylogenomic analyses, the majority do not . in fact, many of these genes have homologs in giardia, indicating that they were present in the common ancestor of the two lineages, strongly suggesting that the deviated gc3s and nc' values arose during the evolution of diplomonads on the branch leading to s. salmonicida.

analyses of the finished contigs also yielded unexpected results; the base compositional bias in segments of the s. salmonicida genome seems to be markedly towards g+c, while the largest part of the genome shows a compositional bias towards a+t . this pattern is in contrast with the a+t rich genomes of d. discoideum, e. histolytica, and plasmodium falciparum, which show a relatively uniform nucleotide composition across all chromosomal regions  <cit> . the genes with deviating g+c content are correlated with these genomic regions of high g+c content . furthermore, genes in g+c rich regions have higher gc3s values than the average g+c content for the genes . conversely, as expected, genes in g+c poor regions have low gc3s values. thus, genes with unexpected codon usage  are located in specific regions of the genome. however, neither mutational or selection scenarios can easily explain their non-random codon usage, nor the fluctuations in g+c content along the genome. heterogeneity in overall g+c content  across the genome has been also observed in saccharomyces cerevisiae  <cit>  and in vertebrate genomes   <cit> . for s. cerevisiae  a number of possible explanations have been advanced such as regional variation in propensities for mutation or recombination and partitioning of the genome into "distinct replicational and transcriptional domains" during specific cell cycle phases that may experience different chemical environments . longer genomic fragments, as well as comparative data from more-closely related diplomonads, will be needed to characterize the pattern further in s. salmonicida and to tease apart possible causes for this peculiar phenomenon.

phylogenomic analysis reveals frequent lateral gene transfer
we and others have previously studied the occurrence of lgt in diplomonads on a single-gene basis  <cit> ,  <cit> . here we present a systematic phylogenomic analysis of the complete est and gss data sets with the goal of identifying s. salmonicida genes that have been involved in lgt. we used the phylogenie package  <cit>  to assemble aligned amino acid data sets automatically from databases including both published sequences and data from ongoing eukaryotic genome projects . among the  <dig> genes with three or more identified homologs for which more than  <dig> amino acid positions could be aligned,  <dig> were retained as genes putatively involved in lgt affecting the s. salmonicida lineage, on the basis of unexpected phylogenetic positions . cases where two s. salmonicida genes branched as a monophyletic group in the phylogenetic tree to the exclusion of other sequence were interpreted as gene duplication event after the gene transfer. taking this into account, the  <dig> genes putatively involved in lgt corresponded to  <dig> unique gene transfer events at most; multiple genes may indeed have been introduced in a single event in some cases.

in principle, contamination in our libraries could falsely indicate a pattern of frequent gene transfer affecting the s. salmonicida genome. however, we strongly believe this not to be case.  <dig> of the  <dig> putatively transferred genes formed a monophyletic group with g. lamblia homologs in the phylogenetic analyses indicating that these genes were present in the common ancestor of the two species . furthermore, on average five in-frame uag and uaa sense codons  were detected in  <dig> of the remaining  <dig> putatively transferred genes, strongly suggesting a true s. salmonicida origin also for these genes. four of the six genes without uag or uaa codons formed a monophyletic group with a s. salmonicida gene which does utilize such codons, indicating a likely origin by gene duplication. we cannot formally exclude contamination on the basis of presence of alternative codons for the remaining two sequences , but notice that the absence of in-frame uag and uaa codons in these genes could likely be due to a recent introduction from a donor utilizing the canonical genetic code. at any rate, together these observations indicate that the phylogenetic pattern we interpret as putative lgt events are unlikely to result from substantial contamination of our libraries.

the strength and type of support for the inferred gene transfer events varied between genes in the phylogenomic analysis. some spironucleus genes were strongly associated with genes from distantly related organisms. for example, the s. salmonicida carotenoid isomerases were found to be nested within proteobacterial sequences . such anomalous positions of the diplomonads genes strongly suggest gene transfer events. many datasets contain sequences from only one or a few eukaryotic taxa other than diplomonads , and in some, diplomonads are the only eukaryotes present . although the separation of diplomonad from the other eukaryotic sequences is sometimes weak , we suggest that lgt is a more likely explanation for their origin than differential gene losses and/or phylogenetic artefacts, as we have argued previously for genes with a patchy phylogenetic distribution among eukaryotes  <cit> .

there are indeed examples of inferences of lgt based on unexpected patterns of phyletic distribution that have previously been shown to be wrong. re-analyses of the putative bacteria-to-vertebrate gene transfer events in the human genome using phylogenetic analyses instead of similarity searches showed that more parsimonious alternative explanations existed for the vast majority, if not all, of the reported cases  <cit> . phylogenetic analyses may also lead to false positive interpretations of lgt. for example, phylogenetic analysis indicated an lgt origin of the t. vaginalis hydrogenosomal nuof protein distinct from the mitochondrial homologs  <cit> , a conclusion shown likely to be incorrect upon re-analysis using more realistic models of sequence evolution  <cit> . on the other hand, re-analyses using extended taxon sampling and more advanced models of sequence evolution of four genes putatively affected by prokaryote-to-protist lgt resulted in support for a larger number of inter-domain gene transfer events, rather than a fewer number as expected if differential gene loss, and/or phylogenetic artefacts caused the initial indications of gene transfer  <cit> . obviously, inferences about lgt from the phylogenetic analyses depend on the accuracy of the phylogenetic method, as well as on the breadth of organismal representation in sequence databases. therefore, it is inevitable that the list of putative lgts will include both false positives and false negatives . nevertheless, our phylogenomic analysis indicates that vertical inheritance combined with gene duplication and gene loss is rather unlikely to have produced the observed phylogenetic relationships and patchy taxonomic distributions and that gene transfer is the simplest hypothesis currently available to explain these trees. hence our analyses indicate that lgt has been an important mechanism in the evolution of the s. salmonicida genome.

acquisitions of prokaryotic metabolic genes in the evolution of protist genomes
the vast majority of genes inferred to be involved in gene-transfer events are metabolic genes  or encode conserved hypothetical proteins  . this bias is not unexpected, as a higher rate of transfer for metabolic genes compared to informational genes has been observed for prokaryotes  <cit>  and, on a smaller scale, in diplomonads  <cit>  and e. histolytica  <cit> . in the latter study it was suggested that this protist parasite had expanded its metabolic repertoire via gene acquisitions from prokaryotes present in the environment, and the same may apply for s. salmonicida. for example, amino acids have been identified to be a source of energy in diplomonads via the arginine dihydrolase pathway  <cit>  especially under limited oxygen conditions  <cit> . among eukaryotes, this pathway has been detected only in trichomonas and diplomonads. the genes for two enzymes in the pathway, arginine deiminase and ornithine transcarbamoylase, appear to have been acquired from prokaryotes in a common ancestor of diplomonads and parabasalids, whereas carbamate kinase may have distinct lgt origins in the two groups . similarly, s. salmonicida encodes rubrerythrins and a-type flavoproteins, proteins putatively involved in the protection against the host's defense   <cit>  that are also found in anaerobic prokaryotes and eukaryotes including entamoeba   <cit> . the phylogenetic distributions of these genes suggest a role related to an anaerobic lifestyle, consistent with the hypothesis that these acquisitions provided metabolic advantages to the recipient protist lineages. indeed, distantly related lineages that live in the same environment appear to frequently transfer genes  <cit> . increased taxon sampling and more detailed studies of the ecology and metabolism/biochemistry of the organisms represented by sequences in our trees will likely recognize shared environments between the donor and recipient lineages for additional acquired metabolic genes .

continuous exchange of genes with all domains of life
in this study we have identified  <dig> genes of putatively lateral origin, and in previous phylogenomic studies  <dig> e. histoytica genes, almost  <dig> kinetoplastid genes,  <dig> in cryptosporidium parvum and  <dig> genes in anaerobic ciliates were found to represent candidate lgt genes  <cit> . thus, numerous inter-domain gene transfer events have been identified in four divergent protist lineages – spironucleus, entamoeba, kinetoplastids  and anaerobic ciliates – supporting the idea that gene acquisition from prokaryotic organisms is a common evolutionary mechanism in unicellular eukaryotes  <cit> . in all these studies, metabolic genes have been found to be the most common functional category among the genes implicated in lgt genes. this observation, which is consistent with the complexity hypothesis  <cit> , could indicate that metabolic adaptation is a selective force for inter-domain gene transfer events from prokaryotes to protists  <cit> .

g. lamblia homologs that form clades with the s. salmonicida sequences were found in  <dig> of the  <dig> putative lgt events, while no closely related g. lamblia homologs were found in the remaining  <dig> cases . thus, at least 72% of the putative lgt events happened before the divergence of the spironucleus and giardia lineages. the remaining  <dig> events could have taken place in the s. salmonicida lineage after the divergence from the lineage leading to g. lamblia, although gene losses in the latter could also explain the observed pattern. if these represented relatively recent gene transfers, they should show a codon-usage pattern distinct from that of other s. salmonicida genes. some in fact do show deviant codon usage indices  suggesting a more recent acquisition compared to the other cases. however, there are many other s. salmonicida genes with deviant codon usage that do not show any indication of lgt , suggesting that codon usage pattern alone is a poor indicator of lgt in s. salmonicida, as shown in other systems  <cit> . in  <dig> cases where both spironucleus and giardia sequences are present, t. vaginalis sequences are found as a sister group to the diplomonad cluster. this pattern has previously been observed for candidate laterally transferred genes  <cit>  and almost certainly reflects a common ancestry of diplomonads and parabasalids to the exclusion of other sampled eukaryotic lineages, although the possibility of gene transfer between the two lineages cannot be formally excluded. however, a diplomonad-parabasalia relationship has recently been shown to be robust in several phylogenetic analyses of concatenated protein sequences  <cit> . as some acquired genes are unique to s. salmonicida, others shared with g. lamblia, and some are also shared with t. vaginalis, this strongly suggests that genes have been acquired by lgt in these excavate lineages continuously throughout their evolutionary history. further characterization of the phylogenetic distribution of these genes may provide information about organismal relationships within excavata  <cit> .

in the four previous phylogenomic studies of lgt in protists  <cit>  only prokaryote-to-eukaryote transfer events were examined. our selection procedure allowed us to detect additional evolutionary scenarios where a prokaryotic gene is transferred to a eukaryote, and then possibly further transferred to a second eukaryotic lineage. for example, the arginine deaminase gene was likely acquired from a prokaryote by an ancestor of diplomonads and parabasalids, and then transferred to the lineage leading to dictyostelium . seventeen genes were putatively affected by intra-domain lgt, corresponding to  <dig> unique events . twelve of these cases are exchanges between the lineage leading to s. salmonicida and amoebozoan lineages; five cases involve gene exchange with the dictyostelium lineage, six cases with the entamoeba lineage, and a single case with the mastigamoeba lineage . in sharp contrast, only a single intra-domain gene transfer event representing other eukaryotes was detected, although opisthokonts are comparatively well sampled with genome sequences, and several diverse and complete, or nearly complete, chromalveolate sequences were present in our data sets . it is noteworthy that only genes that have been acquired from prokaryotes and have subsequently been transferred within the eukaryotic domain will be detected using our selection procedure. additional eukaryote-to-eukaryote transfers may actually have occurred among the genes that did not show any indication of prokaryote-to-eukaryote transfer. a few examples of gene transfers between unicellular eukaryotic organisms have indeed been published recently  <cit> . the  <dig> putative intra-domain transfers identified here further suggest that lgt between protists is an evolutionary mechanism that should not be neglected.

CONCLUSIONS
the vast majority of eukaryotic diversity is represented by protists  <cit> , yet only a few protist genome sequencing projects have been published. our sequence survey study has indicated that a combined approach using both random sampling from the genome  and ests is successful in identifying genes . we identified  <dig> genes from the gss sequences, while  <dig> genes with homologies in other organisms were detected among the est sequences. as we have collected more than twice as many gss as est sequences, est sequencing would appear to be slightly more effective for gene discovery, if only quantity is considered, as expected. however, est sequencing is biased towards identification of highly expressed genes, such as genes involved in genetic information processing, especially translation, while gss sequencing detects a more random selection of genes . this functional bias of the genes detected in est surveys may be an advantage if the objective of the study is mainly to identify genes previously identified in other organisms using the same approach, but is a limitation if sampling gene diversity is the aim.

we found that a combined approach of both gss and est sequencing can be successful in detecting both highly expressed  genes and a more diverse gene set. in combination with complete sequencing of a few contigs, this approach was efficient in revealing much about the s. salmonicida genome. although we could identify more than  <dig> genes with annotated functions, conserved hypothetical proteins still represent the largest category , indicating that the genes with annotated functions give only a partial picture of the true coding potential. furthermore,  <dig> among the  <dig> genes identified within the contigs did not show any significant sequence similarity to genes in the databases, and 81% and 45% of the gss and est sequences, respectively, failed to show significant similarity to any known genes. this suggests that a large fraction of the genes in s. salmonicida genome lack sequence similarity to known genes, despite the fact that a nearly complete g. lamblia gene complement is included in the public database. thus, the s. salmonicida genome has a significant, and mostly unknown, coding potential. still, the analyses of the genes that could be annotated not only identified individual s. salmonicida genes and metabolic pathways that provided insight into the biology and evolution of the organism. in addition, these analyses revealed several lineage-specific properties suggestive of a large genomic diversity between s. salmonicida and other studied eukaryotes, including its closest intensively studied relative, the diplomonad g. lamblia.

our analyses indeed indicate that diplomonad genomes are diverse. for example, in the s. salmonicida genome we identified gene acquisitions, a base compositional bias that varies along the genome, a codon usage distinct from that of g. lamblia, and differences in basic molecular biological processes such as polyadenylation. g. lamblia and s. salmonicida represent only two species within diplomonads, a paraphyletic group which may also include enteromonads and retortamonads, organisms with distinct morphological features  <cit> . the understanding of these interesting groups of protists is very limited on the genomic level, and the genome projects of g. lamblia  <cit>  and spironucleus vortens  <cit> , another fish pathogen, will make major contributions. still, diplomonads are very diverse, as manifested by a large degree of sequence divergence between members of the group, and, as indicated here, large variation in the genomic structure and content. circumstantial evidence for a relatively small genome , together with an overall g+c content of 36% and a low frequency of repeats, makes s. salmonicida an ideal candidate for a whole-genome sequencing project. such an effort would yield further insights into the parasitic lifestyle of this organism, the fascinatingly diverse biology of diplomonads, and expand our appreciation of genome diversity and evolution among eukaryotes.

