BACKGROUND
the successful mating of ewe lambs within their first year of age reduces the effective cost of replacement ewes, increases the lifetime productivity of ewes in the flock, reduces the generation interval  <cit>  and reduces the culling risks  <cit> . moreover, an earlier first lambing brings about a higher productivity of the ewe throughout its life  <cit> . in some breeds such as the rasa aragonesa, even though females reach an adequate live weight at 12–13 months, the mean age at first lambing is 17–18 months  <cit> , leading to extended unproductive periods. therefore, it is challenging to find endocrine markers that could help to select the most precocious ewes, particularly if they could be used very early in life.

sheep, as other mammals, are born with a limited and highly variable number of ovarian germ cells, which decreases drastically with age  <cit> . at birth, the oocytes are mostly contained in resting primordial and early growing follicles that constitute the so-called follicular reserve. genetic factors and maternal nutrition during gestation both seem to contribute to this inherently high variation in the follicular reserve in sheep  <cit> . at 12–14 weeks after birth, an important population of gonadotropin-sensitive follicles is already present in the ovary  <cit> . moreover, recent results suggest that the number of growing antral follicles present in the ovaries of young adult cattle may be related to their fertility  <cit> . therefore, the follicular populations present in the ovaries of young ruminants seem to have a great impact on their adult reproductive life.

presently, anti-müllerian hormone  is the best endocrine marker of the ovarian follicular reserve of growing follicles, and it is used as a predictor of the ovarian response to gonadotropins in the human  <cit> , mouse  <cit>  and bovine species  <cit> . in the cow, amh concentration in plasma is highly correlated with the number of antral follicles of  <dig> to 7 mm in diameter, which are the main targets of superovulatory treatments  <cit> . also, amh measurement can help to predict the aptitude of individuals to produce high or low numbers of embryos after superovulation, a repeatable and possibly heritable trait in the cow  <cit> . recently, similar results were reported in mares, indicating that amh could be a predictor of the number of follicles available in a follicle aspiration program  <cit> . although a direct relationship between amh and fertility has not been reported to date in domestic animals, some evidence supports this idea. on one hand, in young adult cattle, a high degree of correlation among amh, antral follicle count  and the number of healthy follicles and oocytes in ovaries has been demonstrated; and on the other hand, lower numbers of antral growing follicles  have been related with suboptimal fertility  <cit> . up to now, there are no data on plasma amh concentration in sheep, though it would be of great interest for the future selection of animals for embryo production, as well as of young animals with a high fertility in the adult age.

therefore, the aims of the present study were, first, to determine if amh can be detected in the plasma of prepubertal rasa aragonesa ewes and to evaluate its relationship with the ovarian response to a gonadotropin treatment, and second, to relate amh with fertility at first and second mating opportunities. with this aim, the plasma amh concentration of ewe lambs aged around  <dig>  months was assessed as well as the ovarian response to an equine chorionic gonadotropin  challenge, and their fertility was established after mating at  <dig> and 14 months.

RESULTS
plasma amh concentration and its relationship with ecg-induced ovulation in prepubertal ewe lambs
amh was detected in the plasma of  <dig> out of  <dig> ewe lambs . the concentrations were highly variable between animals, ranging from  <dig>  to 590 pg/ml. the age and weight of the ewe lambs with nondetectable amh concentrations ranged from  <dig> to 126 days and from  <dig>  to 28 kg. amh was detected in the youngest lamb of this study  as well as in the lightest lamb , reaching  <dig>  and  <dig>  pg/ml, respectively.

amh concentration in plasma was not correlated with age  or live weight . plasma amh concentration was correlated with the occurrence of ovulation in response to ecg  but not with the number of ovulations when only considering ovulating ewes . neither the occurrence of ovulation nor the number of ovulations of ovulating ewes were correlated with age  or live weight . as expected, age and live weight were highly correlated .

non-ovulating ewe lambs had lower plasma amh concentrations than ovulating ewe lambs with  <dig>   <dig> or ≥  <dig> ovulations . however, no significant differences in amh were found between the different groups of ovulating ewe lambs. no significant differences in live weight or age were found between any of the groups.

within columns, means with different superscripts differ significantly: a,b: p <  <dig> .

relationship between plasma amh concentration of prepubertal ewe lambs and their fertility at the first and second service periods
ultrasound pregnancy diagnosis was coincident with fertility results both in the first  and in the second mating , at  <dig> and 14 months, respectively, revealing the absence of abortions and of mistakes in the lambing records. the overall fertility after the two consecutive mating opportunities was  <dig> %.

the fertility of adult ewes at first, at second and after both consecutive service periods was correlated with their amh concentration in the prepubertal phase . at the first mating, neither age nor live weight was significantly different between pregnant and non-pregnant ewes . prepubertal plasma amh concentration was higher in ewes that became pregnant at the first mating than in those which failed to conceive at first but became pregnant at the second mating  or in non-pregnant ewes after two service periods . it was also higher in ewes which became pregnant at the second mating than in non-pregnant ewes .

the performance of amh concentration at prepubertal age for predicting the fertility of adult ewes at first mating is shown in figure  <dig>  the receiver-operating characteristic  curve represents the relationship between the sensitivity of the diagnostic test based on amh concentration at prepubertal age to predict the occurrence of pregnancy in adults  and  <dig> minus the specificity of the test to predict the failure of pregnancy  at first mating.

the predicting performance of plasma amh concentration, assessed by the auc , was  <dig>  ±  <dig> , significantly different from  <dig>   . the auc values estimated by the leave-one-out validation and 10-fold cross-validation methods were somewhat lower , although also different from  <dig>  .

the cutoff point of plasma amh concentration that could be used for a screening test of the future ability of ewes to get pregnant at first mating was found to be 97 pg/ml. this amh concentration corresponded to a sensitivity value to predict the occurrence of pregnancy of  <dig> %  and a specificity to predict the failure of pregnancy of  <dig> % . the positive and negative predictive values  were  <dig> % and  <dig> %, respectively . the fertility at first mating of ewes with amh concentrations equal or higher than 97 pg/ml before puberty was  <dig>  percentage points higher than that of ewes with lower amh concentrations .

within columns, percentages with different superscripts differ: a,b: p <  <dig> .

the fertility at second mating or after both consecutive service periods was also higher in ewes with amh concentration equal or higher than 97 pg/ml before puberty .

in the present work, the benefit of selecting replacement ewes by amh , was  <dig>  percentage points. as ppv  depends on the prevalence of the character in the population  <cit>  , ppv for assumed flock fertility values at first mating from  <dig> to 95% has been depicted in figure  <dig>  it is shown that the benefit obtained selecting replacement ewes by prepubertal amh would be higher for intermediate than for either high or low flock fertility values.

discussion
this study shows for the first time that:  amh is present in the plasma of prepubertal ewe lambs;  plasma amh concentration is related to the occurrence of ovulation in ewe lambs after administration of an ovarian stimulation treatment, possibly reflecting that a population of gonadotropin-responsive follicles is already present at this age in most ewes; and  plasma amh concentration before puberty could be used as a predictor of the fertility of adult ewes at first mating. this test would allow farmers to perform a precocious selection of replacement ewe lambs with the highest expected fertility at first mating. in the conditions of the present study, plasma amh concentrations did not depend on age and weight, being detectable in most ewe lambs. nevertheless, longitudinal studies would be necessary to accurately determine the age and weight at which amh becomes detectable as well as the precise relationships of amh with age and live weight.

in ewe lambs at around  <dig>  months of age, plasma amh concentration was about 3–4-fold higher in ovulating than in non-ovulating ewe lambs after ecg treatment. this difference could be due to the presence of a different numbers of antral gonadotropin-responsive follicles between animals at this age. in this way, the mean age of the ewe lambs of this study  would be coincident with a period where a peak in the total number of follicles ≥ 3 mm has been observed in other breeds of sheep, varying between 14 weeks  <cit>  and 16 weeks  <cit> . therefore, the relationship found between the ovulatory response to ecg and plasma amh concentrations could be explained by the fact that they likely both reflect the presence of antral gonadotropin-responsive follicles in the ovaries of ewe lambs. in adult cows, a high correlation of plasma amh concentrations with the number of corpora lutea after superovulation was found  <cit> . however, in the present study a relationship between amh and the number of ovulations in ovulating ewe lambs was not found. this discrepancy could be attributed to physiological differences between prepubertal and adult females and/or to differences in the ovarian stimulation treatments. in this way, the ovarian response to a single ecg treatment without previous progestogen priming might be different to the response to a superovulation protocol consisting in multiple fsh decreasing doses with previous progestogen synchronization.

in the present work, neither plasma amh concentration before puberty nor fertility at first mating was related with age or live weight. moreover, all ewes received the same feeding plane during the whole experiment. therefore, the observed differences in plasma amh concentrations amongst ewes of similar age and similar live weight may be due to inherent variations in the follicular population, possibly influencing fertility at first mating. genetic factors or maternal nutrition during pregnancy could therefore be responsible for this asynchronous follicular development; as in sheep, alterations in the maternal diet have been demonstrated to affect fetal ovarian development  <cit> . nevertheless, further studies are needed to elucidate the causes of this asynchronous development of the ovary between the same aged and weighted ewes, as well as to determine whether it could affect ovarian function and reproductive performance during the adult life.

apart from age, live weight and nutritional status, it is widely known that successful pregnancy is affected by many other factors, such as season, endocrine status or uterine conditions  <cit> . in the present work, healthy ewe lambs were reared under the same conditions to minimize the impact of such factors, although possible unknown individual disorders can not be discarded. the results of the present study showed that ewes with higher prepubertal plasma amh concentrations displayed a higher probability of becoming pregnant at first mating than those with lower plasma amh concentrations. moreover, those ewes which failed to conceive after two consecutive mating opportunities had the lowest prepubertal plasma amh concentrations. as far as we know, this is the first time that a relationship between amh and early fertility has been established in a domestic species. our study reinforces the prognostic value of amh, even when the physiological status is not fully known. both in the human and bovine, amh levels are almost independent of the phase of the ovarian cycle, explaining why a single amh measurement is usually sufficient  <cit> . this could be due to the fact that amh is not involved in feed-back mechanisms of the hypothalamo-pituitary-gonadal axis  <cit> . previous studies in the human have demonstrated a relationship between amh and fertility. very low concentrations of amh are associated with infertility in the case of pre-menopause and premature ovarian failure, and very high amh concentrations with an absence of ovulation in women with polycystic ovarian syndrome. low or undetectable levels of amh is explained by decrease or absence of follicular growth due to depletion of the ovarian reserve of primordial follicles. abnormally high levels of amh are explained by an excess of antral follicles whose growth is blocked prior to ovulation  <cit> . recent results have also evidenced that amh seems to be an excellent marker of ovarian function in girls and adolescents. in this way, elevated serum amh levels have been found in girls with a precocious maturation of the adrenal cortex, suggesting that follicular development has proceeded to a more advanced developmental stage than expected for chronological age  <cit> . it has been demonstrated in adolescent patients with inherited reproductive problems  that their amh concentrations correlate significantly with ovarian function at time of amh measurement, showing an excellent sensitivity and specificity as a screening test of premature ovarian failure. furthermore, it has been suggested that variations in amh concentrations during childhood may theoretically predict the duration of any given girl’s reproductive lifespan  <cit> , as amh seems to reflect the continuous decline of the follicle pool with age  <cit> .

in the case of ewe lambs, the observed amh values would be rather a reflection of the beginning of follicular growth in prepubertal animals, showing an ovarian activity quantitatively different between animals of the same age. it is possible that ewe lambs in our study with the highest ovarian activity at  <dig>  months were also the most precocious in terms of early puberty, resulting in the improved fertility observed when testing fertility of different ewes at the same age. the lambs with the earliest follicular development would be fertile at an early age. all these findings highlight the importance of individual differences in chronological follicular development and in the follicular reserve as being responsible for future reproductive life.

in sheep, recent in vitro studies have demonstrated that prepubertal oocytes isolated from ovaries with a high number of follicles larger than 2 mm are more competent for in vitro development, presenting a higher cleavage rate, developmental kinetics and cell number at the blastocyst stage  <cit> . as it has been established that the granulosa cells of large preantral and small antral healthy follicles produce the highest amh amounts in rat  <cit>  and cow  <cit> , prepubertal ewe lambs with higher plasma amh concentrations are supposed to have a higher number of healthy follicles in these stages, suggesting that the quality of the oocytes and embryos coming from these ewes may be higher. although further studies are needed to confirm this hypothesis, it could partially explain the increased fertility at first mating of ewe lambs with the higher concentrations in plasma amh during their prepubertal phase.

concerning the ability of amh to be used as a screening test to select the most precocious ewes in terms of fertility at first mating, in the present study the auc value for amh  was very close to  <dig> , the limit value to classify tests as "moderately accurate" according to an arbitrary guideline. this guideline distinguishes between non-informative , less accurate , moderately accurate , highly accurate  and perfect tests   <cit> . the values obtained by cross-validation methods were somewhat lower and would correspond to a “less accurate” test. this is not strange as it its well known that the establishment and maintenance of pregnancy depends upon several genetic and environmental factors. previous reports in the human have shown that while high amh levels prior to the initiation of ivf treatments is a good predictor of the ovarian response, it has not proven to be as predictive of successful pregnancy. this indicates that factors other than the quantitative aspects of ovarian reserve may influence the fate of pregnancy  <cit> . nevertheless, although not being highly accurate, we have shown that fertility of replacement ewes at first mating can be increased up to about  <dig> percentage points by using plasma amh concentration as a screening test. it remains to be assessed at which age and weight the diagnostic test based on the measurement of amh concentrations on ewe lambs is the most efficient for accurate prediction. concerning fertility at the second mating and fertility after two consecutive service periods, we have shown that the differences between ewes with amh concentration above and below the cutoff point are also significant and of great practical importance . this would indicate that amh could also be a predictor of fertility in adulthood, but this needs further confirmation.

CONCLUSIONS
in conclusion, a single amh measurement in the plasma of prepubertal ewe lambs may be useful to select, in a very early age, the replacement ewes with a high predicted fertility at first mating.

