BACKGROUND
myo-inositol is an essential component in the biosynthesis of an array of derivatives ranging from simple inositol phosphates to complex membrane-associated products with important cellular functions. it can be isomerized and  methylated to form a variety of species-specific epimers and methyl ethers. a number of these, including ins, have been noted to accumulate mostly in osmotically challenged plants and have since been recognized as osmoprotectant metabolites  <cit> .

ins is also central to the biosynthesis of a number of antinutritional components such as sucrose galactosides  and inositol polyphosphates such as pha . the synthesis of pha predominates in developing seeds, and constitutes the major storage form of seed phosphorus. both ins and its bound phosphates are released by hydrolysis upon germination.

the antinutritional properties of pha reside in its strong binding affinity for positively charged species such as essential minerals  and proteins, significantly lowering their bioavailability to humans and animals. as a consequence, the presence of high levels of pha in canola seed hinders the full exploitation of the pure meal and underrates its potential as a major crop worldwide.

in contrast, pha has been accredited as an effective antioxidant with antitumor properties and risk reduction of certain types of cancer  <cit> . besides decreasing uncontrolled cellular proliferation, pha is also thought to cause differentiation of malignant cells resulting in reversion to the normal phenotype  <cit> . further, pha has been shown to play a critical role in many cellular events such as signaling  <cit> , apoptosis  <cit> , neuroprotection  <cit> , as well as functioning as enzyme cofactor  <cit> . the antioxidant properties of pha have also been shown to inhibit free radical formation and lower lipid peroxidation, making it a very efficient natural food and feed preservative  <cit> . moreover, pha has been shown recently to protect developing seeds against oxidative stress  <cit> . because of the seemingly paradoxical and unique roles of pha, and in view of the agronomic value placed on low phytate-containing seeds and  meals, total elimination of pha was not our intended goal.

phytic acid biosynthesis constitutes a uniquely complex process, consisting of a primary substrate, ins, and a number of interjecting secondary ins polyphosphate substrates from other sources and pathways  <cit> . in the primary pathway, the de novo synthesis of ins involves the oxidative cyclization of glucose 6-phosphate  to l-myo-inositol-1-phosphate  by the action of a single enzyme, l-myo-inositol-1-phosphate synthase . it has been shown that by affecting the production of this enzyme directly or indirectly through mutagenesis in maize  <cit>  and soybean  <cit>  or by genetic engineering methods in rice  <cit> , soybean  <cit>  and canola  <cit>  pha accumulation can be reduced by 20– <dig> % with a concomitant increase in inorganic phosphate . of the various transgenic approaches reported, mips-rnai  <cit>  and mips-cosuppression  <cit>  transgenics yielded the lowest levels of pha in the corresponding mature seeds . however, the rnai approach reportedly has resulted in hindered seed development  <cit> . thus, in view of the fact that ins is a key substrate in the biosynthesis of many essential cell components, we decided to assess the consequences of its metabolic diversion versus its complete elimination through mips down-regulation, and compare the effects associated with each approach. we reasoned that while metabolic diversion of ins may not interfere with its biosynthesis, it could preferably limit its participation in pha production.

the first mips product, l-ins-1-p, appears to be in quasi equilibrium with free ins due to the activity of a two-enzyme system, in which l-myo-inositol-1-phosphate monophosphatase converts l-ins-1-p to free ins, while myo-inositol-1-kinase regenerates it . depending on the rigidity of the requirements for free ins vs. l-ins-1-p in the developing seed, the relative abundance of each substrate is ultimately determined by the differences in the kinetics of the two opposing reactions. we hypothesized that continual exclusion of free ins from this quasi equilibrium by metabolic diversion through methylation, could drive the quasi equilibrium in the direction of free ins. this would subsequently limit the participation of both substrates  in pha biosynthesis. towards this end, we studied the effect of over-expressing the gene encoding imt  from m. crystallinum <cit>  on seed pha accumulation in transgenic b. napus under two different seed-specific promoters, napin and phaseolin  <cit> . we also examined the effect of enhancing the translational context of imt on its gene product accumulation and pha reduction during seed development.

scheme  <dig> metabolic interconversions of phosphorylated myo-inositol and related derivatives in developing b. napus seeds. dashed arrow indicates the newly introduced methylation step. solid lines represent established metabolic pathways. pi-k, phosphatidylinositol kinase; gols, galactinol synthase; mips, myo-inositol phosphate synthase; inspks, myo-inositol kinases; ptdinss, ptdins synthase; ptdins-plc, ptdins-specific phospholipase c; insptase, myo-inositol phosphate phosphatase; insk, myo-inositol kinase; g-6-p, glucose-6-phosphate; dag, diacylglycerol; udp-gal, uridine diphosphate galactose; ptd-cmp, phosphatidylcytosine monophosphate; ptdins, phosphatidylinositol; ptdinsp, phosphatidylinositol monophosphate; pi, inorganic phosphate.

although the m. crystallinum imt  has been used to study the osmoprotective properties of methylated cyclitols in transgenic plants  <cit> , the current investigation is the first example of seed-specific mcimt-mediated metabolic diversion to reduce phytic acid biosynthesis in seed crops through in vivo methylation of ins.

RESULTS
3h-myo-inositol metabolism in developing seeds of b. napus
in vivo labeling of developing b. napus seeds with 3h-myo-inositol, and subsequent fractionation of different cell components  and cell debris revealed the relative incorporation of 3h-myo-inositol in each fraction . the acid-soluble fraction contains free ins, ins monophosphates and ins polyphosphates. the hexane-soluble fraction consists mainly of ins-containing phospholipids. the tfa-soluble fraction and cell debris mainly include tightly bound membrane components such as glycosyl-phosphatidyl inositol  protein anchors  <cit> . between  <dig> and  <dig> dap, most of the label was recovered in the acid soluble fraction, which contains pha. after  <dig> dap, a decrease in the relative content of the acid-soluble 3h-myo-inositol-labeled fraction occurred until at least  <dig> dap. a simultaneous increase in the relative amount of label incorporation appeared in the corresponding hexane-soluble fraction. after  <dig> dap, the relative rates of incorporation in the acid-soluble fraction increased again and remained high until at least  <dig> dap.

phytic acid accumulation in developing seeds of brassica napus
hplc analysis profiles indicate that pha started to accumulate in detectable amounts during very early stages of seed development . its accumulation became more pronounced at  <dig> dap and continued progressively, reaching maximum levels at about  <dig> dap . this time window  is, therefore, important in temporal targeting of molecular strategies for phytic acid reduction in canola seeds. in spite of the fact that ins was shown to be present in both endosperm and seed coat at all stages examined , no phytate accumulation was found in either tissue .

variations in myo-inositol levels during seed development
at early stages of seed development, a steady decline in ins levels occurred from  <dig> dap up to  <dig> dap . these levels continued to decline further at  <dig> dap, reaching their lowest point at  <dig> dap through maturity. the sharp decline in the levels of ins during the period 5– <dig> dap coincided with the initial gradual accumulation of pha  as well as the increase in the levels of the non-polar derivatives . at  <dig> dap the rapid decline in ins levels resumed with a concomitant rise in pha levels  at the expense of the non-polar components .

meanwhile, as the embryo continued to expand through the different stages , the level of ins declined from its highest point in seed coat and endosperm and gradually increased in embryo tissues starting at 15– <dig> dap . at this point the rate of pha biosynthesis in the embryo began to increase . no pha synthesis was observed in either seed coat or endosperm.

generation of transgenic lines of b. napus carrying the myo-inositol methyltransferase gene
transgenic lines were generated from constructs pnimt  and pphimt . in both napin and phaseolin groups of transgenics, 80% of the lines showed reduced levels of pha. three transgenic lines with the highest pha reduction were chosen from each promoter group for subsequent experiments. these were selfed to homozygosity and were shown to be consistently stable in terms of the imt gene integrity and phytate reduction. one line from each group was chosen for further studies, namely n- <dig>  and ph1- <dig> . lines ph2- <dig> and ph3- <dig> originated from two more transformation events and were chosen in the same way. these lines differed from ph1- <dig> in that they harbored changes in the translational context of the imt gene . in all transgenic lines germination rate was 100% for fresh seed, which did not differ from westar controls. additionally, over several generations the imt transgenics did not exhibit changes in seed yield.

sequence column shows dna triplets 5' upstream from the translation initiation codon: line ph1- <dig>  with da nucleotides in positions - <dig> to -3; line ph2- <dig> with dc nucleotides in positions - <dig> and - <dig> and dg nucleotide in position -3; line ph3- <dig> with dc nucleotides in positions - <dig> and - <dig> and da nucleotide in position - <dig> 

imt expression occurs progressively in developing seeds of transgenic b. napus
in both lines of transformants  production of imt was verified by western blot analysis, which also revealed absence of any native equivalents of imt in developing seeds of non-transformed b. napus . although the imt transcript started to appear at  <dig> dap in developing transgenic seeds as exemplified by the phaseolin lines , western-blot analysis showed the corresponding protein to be produced in detectable amounts only after  <dig> dap. the accumulation pattern of both the imt transcript and its corresponding protein were similar in that they increased progressively to  <dig> dap. likewise, the napin-imt line exhibited a similar manner of protein expression at  <dig> dap .

transgenic seeds produce enzymatically active imt and d-ononitol
hplc analysis of mature transgenic seeds revealed the presence and accumulation of a new compound, which co-eluted with authentic d-ononitol standard . the newly introduced imt activity in transgenic lines was further confirmed by the ability of total soluble protein extracts from 40-dap transgenic seeds to convert ins to d-ononitol, in an in vitro imt enzymatic assay . similar extracts from wild-type seeds as well as from transgenic leaves failed to produce this product. in addition, an unidentified compound eluted immediately prior to the ins peak in the transgenic mature seed samples , which was absent in the wild-type samples. this compound did not co-elute with an authentic sample of pinitol.

phytic acid content is reduced and inorganic phosphate content is enhanced in the seeds of transgenic plants
hplc analysis for phytate content in mature napin-imt transgenic seeds showed that a 35% reduction in pha level was achieved. hplc analysis also showed a reduction of 19-29% in pha in mature phaseolin-imt seeds despite the translational context modification . additionally, pi levels increased from  <dig> to 31% which is consistent with earlier observations .

carbohydrate analysis
changes in the carbohydrate species associated with ins metabolism  were observed in mature transgenic seeds. in the three lines examined, the changes were consistent with the competition for available ins among three pathways . such competition appears to have resulted in the reduction of galactinol biosynthesis with consequential downstream effects, which are reflected by increases in galactose and sucrose levels with a concomitant decrease in raffinose level. however, the decrease in raffinose level appears to be accompanied by a proportionate rise in stachyose .

discussion
the relative incorporation of 3h-ins in the different fractions of developing b. napus seeds, presented in figure  <dig>  depicts an image of the dynamics of ins participation in phospholipid and pha biosynthesis at early to mid stages of development. the data suggests the occurrence of horizontal interconversions between 3h-ins and its polar and non-polar phosphorylated variants. evidence of this is seen at  <dig> and  <dig> dap where substantial shifts seem to occur across the hexane- and acid-soluble fractions.

the observed decrease in the relative contents of the acid-soluble fraction in the period 20– <dig> dap reflects the utilization of myo-inositol in the biosynthesis of non-polar compounds . this is supported by the observation that a parallel increase in the relative amounts of label incorporation appeared in the hexane-soluble fraction during the same period. after  <dig> dap, the relative rates of incorporation in the acid-soluble fraction increased again at the expense of the non-polar fraction, reflecting the rapid accumulation of pha during this period . this is likely, since hydrolysis of ins-containing phospholipids is known to lead to increased phytate accumulation in seeds of b. napus  <cit> .

typically, the newly forming seed coat is made up of four layers of cells, the outermost epidermal and palisade cell layers  and parenchyma and endothelial cell layers   <cit> . at  <dig> dap the majority of seed inner space is filled with differentiating integument and a small amount of endosperm. that the majority of ins at 15– <dig> dap is localized in the seed coat of dissected seeds  and that the bulk of the seed at 5– <dig> dap is primarily made up of this tissue may be construed as evidence that the seed coat is the primary site of ins biosynthesis in the b. napus seed. in support of this is the abundant supply of sucrose, which is transported through the phloem, apoplastic region and the seed coat during this early stage  <cit>  and which, through hydrolysis, acts as source of g-6-p, the precursor for ins.

as the embryo expands through its initial globular, heart, torpedo and bent cotyledon stages, the endosperm proportionally shrinks , and ins becomes localized mainly in the embryo and seed coat . that the seed coat is the tissue where ins is most abundant at the early stages of seed development is of special importance since it plays a major role in the biosynthesis of mucilage, other seed coat polysaccharides and sugar acids through its participation in the oxidative pathway  <cit> . pha synthesis started at very early stages  and reached its maximum levels at about  <dig> dap . distribution analysis of pha accumulation between cotyledons and embryo axes revealed that from  <dig> to  <dig> dap more than 80% of pha is accumulated in cotyledons  . at 25– <dig> dap, as the brassica embryo expanded, higher accumulation of the non-polar derivatives  occurred . this period  appears to be marked by a slower decline in ins levels, nearly reaching a plateau , while, in parallel, pha levels continued to rise at a relatively slower rate. after  <dig> dap and through ins appears to have reached a stable level in embryo, and more so in seed coat which could account for its apparent slower decline between  <dig> and  <dig> dap . at this stage the decline in ins levels was accompanied by a concomitant rise in pha levels  at the expense of the non-polar components  as the seed approached desiccation through the onset of rfo biosynthesis  .

since the initial phosphorylation steps of free ins commence either with the reconstitution of l-ins-1-p or through other positional phosphate esters, our strategy was to investigate the effect of competitive metabolic shunt of ins on its phosphorylation and subsequent pha and rfo accumulation in canola seeds. to accomplish this, we have explored the conversion of ins into ononitol , by methylation at the d- <dig> position, through the action of the imt enzyme.

the observed variations in pha reduction levels do not necessarily reflect different imt expression levels since all selected lines displayed almost uniform levels of the imt protein at the time of sampling as shown by western blot analysis . that the recorded ranges of pha reduction appear to be similar with either promoter  suggests one of two possible scenarios: a) a certain threshold may exist at which a steady balance between supply and removal of ins is reached, which confines pha reduction levels within the observed limits; b) the temporal appearance of imt activity under these promoters may not be in synchrony with the highest point of ins accumulation, which is presumably reached in less than  <dig> dap , leading to the early onset of pha synthesis. the latter scenario is likely, since the imt protein was not detected until  <dig> dap in lines ph1- <dig> and ph2- <dig>  in contrast to pha accumulation which is shown to be in progress at 15– <dig> dap . a similar result was obtained when a mips antisense transcript was expressed in transgenic rice driven by the glutelin glub- <dig> promoter  <cit> .

the phaseolin promoter was chosen based on its reported early transcriptional activation in transgenic systems such as tobacco   <cit> . the napin promoter which is native to brassica was chosen with a view to comparing the effect of temporal expression differences of the two promoters on pha accumulation. however, because imt transcription from the phaseolin promoter did not commence as early as in the case of transgenic tobacco, it was not possible to assess such differences. the complex architecture of the phaseolin promoter has been shown to play a major role in spatial regulation of this promoter in transgenic systems  <cit> . further, seed-specific transcriptional regulatory regions in the same promoter have been identified which affect its activation in a temporally dependent manner  <cit> . therefore, it is possible that the phaseolin promoter, when expressed in different systems, could be affected by elements that may impose temporal expression variations. this is suggested by the fact that, in our hands, the transcriptional activation of phaseolin-imt was triggered in canola at a later time point  than in tobacco, indicating that this promoter could be influenced by developmentally regulated programs in a host-specific manner.

attempts at enhancing the imt translation efficiency through the modification of its translational context  <cit>  resulted in somewhat improved translation levels at  <dig> dap under the phaseolin promoter when a da nucleotide was positioned at the - <dig> position and a dc nucleotide at each of positions - <dig> and - <dig> of the initiation codon . translation levels at subsequent stages in the same line also appear to have been relatively enhanced. however, in spite of the protein level enrichment at  <dig> dap in line ph3- <dig>  this did not substantially improve the overall pha reduction, confirming the need for a more temporally and  spatially synchronized imt expression and ins production, as opposed to early enhancement of imt translation. nevertheless, while the apparent compartmentalization of ins in the seed coat may shield it from imt action in the embryo, seed-specific promoters are known to drive gene expression in the inner layer of seed coats and there is active transport of ins from seed coat to embryo  <cit> .

in mutant lines of other crops , the decrease in pha phosphorous in mature seeds is generally accompanied by a parallel, albeit variable, increase in pi  <cit> . however, in some mutant lines , the rise in pi can be accompanied by an accumulation of other ins phosphates p5; insp4; and insp3)  <cit> . this makes the decrease in pha futile in such mutants since these highly phosphorylated ins species retain many of the adverse pha properties. in the present study, although we observed a similar inverse relationship between pha and pi, there was no detectable accumulation of any of the partially phosphorylated ins intermediates such as insp <dig>  4or  <dig>  furthermore, over-expression of imt did not affect the seed viability or the germination efficiency of transgenic canola seeds. in addition, there were no measurable yield penalties .

mature seeds of westar, napin-imt  and phaseolin-imt  transgenic lines were harvested and weighed. each data point represents mean value of five biological replicates ±se .

absence of ononitol in wild-type hplc chromatograms and failure of the wild-type protein extracts to produce ononitol, together with the western analysis results suggest possible absence of native imt-like activity in b. napus.

in mature transgenic seeds, the level of ins was not changed significantly  but presumably during maturation was partitioned among pha, galactinol and ononitol biosyntheses . accordingly, pha formation was decreased in concert with ononitol accumulation. this pathway perturbation  would have lowered the production of galactinol as well, and consequently, rfo accumulation  <cit>  with the notable increase in sucrose levels . curiously, the decrease in raffinose levels was accompanied by an almost proportionate rise in stachyose. since sucrose levels remained high in transgenic seeds, the inverse modulation in the levels of raffinose and stachyose could indicate raffinose as a possible galactosyl donor for the subsequent chain elongation in a raffinose:raffinose galactosyltransfer manner, in which a molecule of raffinose would release its sucrose moiety after each galactosyl-residue transfer to another raffinose molecule   <cit> . this is conceivable in view of the limited availability of galactinol . alternatively, since methylated derivatives of galactinol are known to take part in rfo synthesis in some plants  <cit> , and although not hitherto proven in b. napus, we propose that ononitol, the methylated product of imt, may be utilized to form the corresponding galactosylononitol , which could still participate, in part, in rfo-chain elongation to the higher oligomer, stachyose . since this does not account for the observed increase in sucrose levels, we postulate that both routes may be working concertedly. the differential extent of stachyose and sucrose accumulation  could be indicative of the different kinetics of the two routes .

CONCLUSIONS
early stages of brassica seed development appear to be dominated by reciprocal interconversions of polar ins phosphates and non-polar species. although ins is shown to be produced in significant amounts in the endosperm as well as seed coat during the early stages, no pha accumulation occurs in those tissues. instead, pha accumulation appears to be mainly restricted to the embryo throughout seed development and maturation.

in addition to lowering pha levels in the developing seeds, the competitive methylation of ins resulted in changes in the distribution and accumulation patterns of seed carbohydrates, leading to enhancement of the digestible and metabolizable energy profile of the meal as demonstrated by the higher content of the nutritionally useful sugar, sucrose. while the ratio of raffinose to stachyose was altered, the overall balance of rfo appears to be unaffected. no deleterious effects were encountered as a result of ins methylation in developing brassica seed.

it is evident from this study as well as previous ones that one of the answers to reducing phytate in crop seeds to a level which allows an appreciable beneficial effect on phosphorous and microelements bioavailability without adversely affecting yield and phenotype may be found in a model which combines the additive effects of more than one mechanism acting concertedly with separate independent contributions. such an approach would allow selective inhibition of ins phosphorylation at different steps for optimum phytate reduction. nonetheless, the current strategy, if adopted, could potentially raise the canola market value as well as that of other crops.

