BACKGROUND
as noticed by darwin  <cit> , every derived feature in an organism must have evolved from a pre-existing feature in its ancestors. therefore, the current form and function of organism attributes are determined, to a great extent, by phyletic heritage of past events  <cit> . this equally applies to evolutionary key innovations, which are not designed every time anew, but use available materials, that are themselves a product of millions of years of evolution. this has been firmly established by many studies showing that  novel morphological structures may often appear by deploying ancient genetic regulatory circuits  and  existing genes or morphological structures can be recruited to perform completely new functions  or to explore new approaches to carry out the same task  <cit> . evolution is an integrated and unitary process  <cit> , and effective reuse of previous molecular or morphological structures through natural selection is subjected to historical constraints  <cit> . deciphering how a particular functional mechanism arises in an organism requires framing the question within an evolutionary context through a multidisciplinary approach  <cit>  involving functional, morphological, and phylogenetic analyses that allow determining which morphological structures were involved, their evolutionary origin , and the succession of steps that led to a successful end.

sound production is a key feature in the behavior of different animals such as crickets, frogs, birds or bats  <cit> . calls normally serve as advertising signals to delimit territories or attract mates, and in more sophisticated cases can become a proxy of the mood of the individual  <cit> . thus, it is not surprising that such a critical function has been the subject of intensive selection through evolutionary history, and a wide variety of sound production mechanisms have evolved in different animals. in frogs, diversification of sound production mechanisms is intimately linked to and/or constrained by the evolution of vocal structures, which is necessarily connected to the evolution of the respiratory system. despite the considerable diversity of calls and larynx morphologies among extant frogs, the majority of the species call by moving air from the lungs through the glottis  <cit> . in most frog species, the laryngeal apparatus, which is suspended between the posteromedial processes of the hyoid , is a cartilaginous capsule composed of two arytenoid cartilages , the cricoid cartilage and associated musculature  <cit> .

a remarkable exception to the above-described general sound production and larynx morphological patterns occurs in the family pipidae. the extant members of this family include the south american genus pipa  and the four african genera hymenochirus, silurana, xenopus, and pseudhymenochirus . the family pipidae together with its sister group, the monotypic family rhinophrynidae , form the superfamily pipoidea  <cit> . the origin of pipids dates back at least to the mesozoic  with known fossils from the cretaceous  <cit> . pipids represent a nice example of highly adapted form and function that evolved from an inherited frog bauplan, which is per se highly specialized within amphibians , and restricted to limited variation  <cit> . pipids are the only fully aquatic group of frogs, and their derived morphology and biology are largely a product of adaptations to this lifestyle  <cit> . one of these remarkable adaptations is the pipid sound production  <cit> , with the structure and function of their larynx being radically different from those of other frogs  <cit> . pipids lack vocal cords, and their larynx is a greatly enlarged and  ossified box made up by the cricoid cartilage and the tyrohyals, which do not form part of the larynx in non-pipid frogs. this box encloses the arytenoid cartilages which are modified into two bony rods  <cit> . the sound production mechanism was described in detail for xenopus borealis  <cit> , and it appears to be based on implosion of air into a vacuum formed by rapidly moving disk-like enlargements of the arytenoids. the sound is then amplified by the enlarged voice box that serves as an internal vocal sac  <cit> . sounds thus are produced without moving an air column, and therefore without externally visible movements of the flanks or throat. similar motionless calling was also observed in hymenochirus boettgeri  <cit> , pipa pipa  <cit> , pipa carvalhoi  <cit> , xenopus laevis  <cit> , and most other pipids . however, pseudhymenochirus was stated to produce sounds by a more conventional sound production mechanism based on moving air  <cit> , although this behavior has so far not been documented in detail.

despite their many derived features, in several respects pipids have been more extensively studied than any other group of frogs because xenopus laevis and silurana tropicalis have been used as model organisms in physiology, development, and cell and molecular biology . knowledge on the closest relatives of model organisms is crucial to interpret and understand the evolutionary origin of studied characters and functions, but remarkably the phylogenetic relationships of pipids have not been comprehensively assessed so far. the rather aberrant morphology of pipids was initially considered to be relatively ancestral among frogs, and many of pipid morphological characters were initially assumed to retain plesiomorphic states. however, now pipids are viewed as highly derived frogs  <cit>  with many autapomorphies primarily related to their fully aquatic lifestyle  <cit> . almost all possible alternative phylogenetic relationships among pipid genera have been recovered based on either morphological  <cit>  or molecular  <cit>  data sets, and the position of pipoidea with respect to all other frog lineages remains also equally contentious  <cit> . see additional file  <dig> for a detailed discussion of previously proposed hypotheses.

here, we analyze dna sequences of complete mitochondrial genomes and of nine nuclear genes to produce a robust phylogeny of extant pipoids. we used this phylogenetic framework to gain insights on the evolution of the sound production mechanism in pipids. in this context, we show through behavioral observations that the calling mechanism of pseudhymenochirus clearly involves the movement of an air column, as it occurs in non-pipid ancestors. given the unambiguous derived position of pseudhymenochirus within pipid phylogeny, a reversal to air-driven sound production in this genus is hypothesized. in addition, we provide strong morphological evidence from comparing diverse alizarin-stained frog larynges, which show that larynx structure in pseudhymenochirus has clear pipid affinities. these observations taken together, allow us to suggest that the use of air in the sound production in pseudhymenochirus is an evolutionary novelty that evolved by deploying the typical larynx structures of pipids.

RESULTS
new sequence data
we determined for the first time the complete nucleotide sequence of the light  strand of the mitochondrial  genome of four pipoid frog species: hymenochirus boettgeri , pipa carvalhoi , pseudhymenochirus merlini , and rhinophrynus dorsalis . the mt genome of xenopus laevis was the first ever determined for an amphibian  <cit>  and contained numerous minor sequencing errors probably due to technical constraints at that time. we therefore sequenced anew the full mitochondrial genome of this model species as well . like most metazoans  <cit> , all five pipoid mt genomes encoded for two rrnas,  <dig> trnas and  <dig> protein-coding genes, and conformed to the consensus gene order for vertebrates  <cit> . all trnas could be folded into the typical cloverleaf secondary structure with the known exception of trns-. the putative origin of replication of the l-strand  was located between the trnn and trnc genes, and had the potential to fold into a stem-loop secondary structure. three conserved sequence blocks  were identified in the 3' end of the mitochondrial control region in all pipoid species. notably, our sequence of rhinophrynus  differs from a previously determined sequence  by a high uncorrected pairwise divergence of  <dig> %, suggesting the existence of an unrecognized species in this monotypic genus and family.

newly generated sequences of partial nuclear genes were deposited in genbank under accesion numbers hm998927-hm <dig>  hm998953-hm <dig> and hq260710-hq <dig>  files containing the alignments of both the mitochondrial and nuclear datasets can be accessed in the dryad digital repository under doi: <dig> /dryad. <dig> 

phylogenetic relationships
maximum likelihood and bayesian inference methods of phylogenetic reconstruction recovered fully congruent tree topologies for mitochondrial, nuclear, and combined datasets, respectively, with differences only in branch lengths and levels of support . five major clades were recovered within anura : amphicoela , discoglossoidea, pipoidea, pelobatoidea and neobatrachia. non-neobatrachian frogs were recovered as successively branching lineages, with discoglossoidea branching off after amphicoela, followed by pipoidea and pelobatoidea. these relationships received high support values in the analysis of mitochondrial genomes and nuclear genes, and maximum support in the combined analysis . alternative phylogenetic placements of the pipoidea were significantly rejected by the au test .

results of approximately unbiased  tests based on the combined dataset of mitochondrial and nuclear dna sequences. p-values < <dig>   indicate that the data allow rejection of the respective alternative hypothesis.

within the pipoidea, all data sets and phylogenetic analyses supported rhinophrynus as the sister taxon of monophyletic pipidae, pipa as sister group to all other extant pipid genera, and sister-group relationships between xenopus and silurana, and between hymenochirus and pseudhymenochirus. alternative hypotheses could be significantly rejected except for a basal placement of the xenopus/silurana clade . in single-gene analyses of nuclear data, pipa was recovered as sister group to all other extant pipid genera by bdnf, pomc, cxcr- <dig>  slc8a <dig> and slc8a <dig>  whereas rag <dig> and rag <dig> recovered the xenopus/silurana clade or the hymenochirus/pseudhymenochirus clade in such position, respectively .

mechanism of sound production in pseudhymenochirus and other pipidae
in contrast to previous non-documented observations  <cit> , we provide compelling behavioral data on pseudhymenochirus merlini showing that this species, while calling, moves a column of atmospheric air from the lungs through the glottis . we conclude that this movement of air almost certainly is causal for sound production in this species. unlike all other extant pipid genera, all of which show a motionless calling, vocalizations in pseudhymenochirus are clearly associated with intermittent constrictions of the posterior flanks and extension of the throat . the observed sequence of movements further suggests that sounds are produced during expiration, i.e., movement of the air from the lungs . moreover, males produce release calls, showing also regular contractions of flanks and extension of throat.

we complemented behavioral observations with morphological comparative analyses of the larynx structures of alizarin red-alcian blue stained specimens of different pipid genera and a discoglossoid. our results confirm previous works  <cit>  that larynges of pipids are highly enlarged and ossified, in contrast to those of the rest of frogs. the larynx of xenopus, is a highly ossified box made up by the thyrohyals, arytenoids, and cricoid cartilages, which are greatly expanded posteriorly. in hymenochirus and pseudhymenochirus, the larynges show conspicuous and ossified thyrohyals that enclose the smaller arytenoid rods . both genera additionally share an elongate shape of lungs that reach the inguinal region and are tightly attached to the body wall . however, there are two conspicuous differences between these two taxa:  pseudhymenochirus has ossified alary processes of the hyoid plate which form rods very similar to the thyrohyals   <cit> , and  cartilage and calcified structures around the larynx are more extended and form an overall more compact laryngeal "box" structure in hymenochirus, with calcified strutures lateral to the thyrohyals and extensive cartilage visible in the glottis area . because all our cleared-and-stained preparations were made from adult specimens that had been sacrificed immediately previous to the clearing and staining procedure, we can exclude that preservation artefacts have caused these differences. therefore, the larynx of pseudhymenochirus seems to be more flexible, and this, somehow may allow the air to move through it.

parsimony optimization of ancestral character states of sound production mechanism on the recovered hypothesis of pipid phylogenetic relationships, and on the only not significantly rejected alternative phylogenetic hypothesis  supported homoplasy of the air-driven call in pseudhymenochirus. because pipid sound production appears to be linked to the adaptation to aquatic environment  <cit>  and character states in fossil taxa are unknown, we assume its single origin in the ancestor of pipidae and a subsequent reversal in pseudhymenochirus, i.e., two transformations. the alternative hypothesis would require assuming independent origin of the implosion mechanism in pipa, xenopus + silurana, and hymenochirus, and thus three transformations. bayesmultistate reconstructed the ancestral pipid character state as using the implosion mechanism, with a ml probability > <dig>  .

discussion
phylogenetic relationships of and within pipoidea
our results provided strong support for  the placement of monophyletic pipoids as the third most basal clade among extant anurans and  the monophyly of pipidae. these results are concordant among all data and methods of phylogenetic inference, and in agreement with previous molecular  <cit>  and morphological  <cit>  studies. within pipidae, our results supported the monophyly of dactylethrines  as in other molecular studies  <cit>  and recent morphological studies  <cit> , and significantly rejected the previously proposed paraphyletic basal arrangement of xenopus and silurana  <cit> . the recovered basal position of pipa, and the sister group relationship of dactylethrines and hymenochirines  agrees with previously published molecular studies  <cit>  but contests recent morphological analyses  <cit>  that supported a pipinae clade   <cit>  with up to six osteological characters . the alternative hypothesis of a pipinae clade could not be rejected by our molecular data . if our preferred hypothesis of pipid relationships is correct, homoplasy of the above mentioned six characters needs to be assumed. polarization of these characters is complicated by the fact that all extant pipids are aquatic whereas their unambiguous extant sister group, rhinophrynus, is a terrestrial species with specialized burrowing habits. future morphological studies should assess additional external characters, tadpole morphology, and soft anatomy in the search for possible synapomorphies of the four african genera, such as the keratinization of the first three toes, which is more strongly expressed in the african taxa  <cit> .

despite the apparent contradiction to morphological data, the congruence between mitochondrial data and the various nuclear genes , and the strong support for pipa as sister to all other extant pipids make our conclusions considerably robust. from a biogeographic point of view our hypothesis suggests that the basal split among extant pipids might have separated an african lineage  from a south american lineage  and is consistent with the american distribution of rhinophrynidae as sister group of the pipidae  <cit> . this indicates the need of re-evaluating also the phylogeny of fossil taxa, given the apparent biogeographic anomaly that the south american pipa based on morphological data are nested within a clade of purely african fossil taxa, and the african silurana/xenopus within a clade of exclusively south american fossil taxa  <cit> .

evolution of sound production in pipidae
our behavioral observations suggest that sound production in pseudhymenochirus is produced by air movement from the lungs to the throat. this is unique among pipids, which generally produce motionless clicking sounds by implosions related to the derived box-like structure of the larynx  <cit> , and in fact more similar to the typical mechanism found in non-pipid frogs. the sound production mechanism of pipids has been thoroughly studied in xenopus borealis  <cit>  and given the resemblance of calls and motionless calling behavior in other members of the family  <cit> , it is assumed to be the general system in pipids. in x. borealis, the characteristic clicking sound was proved to be produced by the simultaneous action of bipennate muscles that separate the discs of ossified arytenoid rods  <cit> . yager suggested that the sound is produced by the implosion of air when the two arytenoid discs separate, given that no clicking sound was emitted when this space was filled with liquid  <cit> . similarly, the implosion mechanism is not air-driven, because call spectra remained unchanged after frogs were foreced to breathe helium  <cit> .

with regards to morphological analyses, our results are fully congruent with previous detailed anatomical descriptions in which the larynges of pipids are enlarged boxes formed by more or less ossified cartilages  <cit> . despite the apparent diversity in larynx morphology both among pipids and among frogs, the embryological origin of involved cartilages have been traced back to the larval hyobranchial apparatus  <cit> , leaving little doubt of their homology within amphibians  <cit> . the larynx of hymenochirus is an enlarged box with ossified cartilages, more similar to that of xenopus and silurana than to other non-pipid anurans , thus reinforcing a similar sound production system to that of x. borealis. in pipa, although the larynx structure slightly differs from that of xenopus  <cit>  a similar sound production has also been suggested  <cit> . the larynx of pseudhymenochirus is particularly similar to that of hymenochirus and shows the typical ossified cartilages of other pipids  <cit> . therefore, we could undoubtedly assert that the larynx in pseudhymenochirus evolved from a typical pipid condition, but the overall structure seems to be more flexible, and this could somehow permit a movement of air that is used to vocalize, as suggested by our behavioral observations. however, whether vocal cords are present in pseudhymenochirus  or whether other strucutres are responsible for sound production requieres specific examination. other hypotheses may also be plausible, and further detailed functional studies  are needed in order to determine the exact mechanism through which sound is produced, as well as the precise function of involved structures. overall, our molecular and morphological data leave neither doubt of the nested phylogenetic position of pseudhymenochirus within pipidae, nor of the clear pipid nature of its larynx. while the source used for sound production unexpectedly appear to reverse to the ancestral non-pipid condition , associated anatomy evolved from a typical pipid-like larynx that likely imposed constraints to natural selection. altogether, we suggest that the air-driven sound production in pseudhymenochirus most probably represents a novel evolutionary combination and it is a remarkable example of complex anatomical modifications related to a functional shift of enormous influence in frog behavior and life history.

the selective forces for these changes are unknown, but the movements of the body flanks during the call in pseudhymenochirus obviously produce water waves that might provide information about the size of the calling male to females, detected by their lateral line system. water surface waves can play an important role in the advertisement behavior of several basal anurans  <cit> . compared to hymenochirus, sexually active pseudhymenochirus males have morphologically less distinct postaxillary glands , which are used in chemical communication during the breading season in hymenochirus  <cit> . therefore, flank movements in pseudhymenochirus could serve as additional visual and mechanical signals, which might reinforce the acoustic signals to attract females and impress conspecific males.

CONCLUSIONS
our study exemplifies that understanding the evolutionary process underlying an innovation, here the air-driven call in pseudhymenochirus, can only be achieved through an integrative comparative approach. in this particular case, behavioral observations prompted for detailed anatomical analyses, and comparative data were placed within a robust phylogenetic framework based on molecular data. further insights on the nature of this evolutionary innovation could be gained through ontogenetic studies that disentangle how morphological constraints imposed by the rather stiff larynx box of pipids are overcome to allow the reversal to the ancestral air-driven vocalization in pseudhymenochirus. the result of this study provides yet another example of how natural selection generates complex morphologies and functions by tinkering with previously available structures  <cit> , and further reinforces the important roles of historical contingency and constraints in canalizing potential solutions to a given evolutionary problem  <cit> .

