BACKGROUND
gene expression studies using either oligonucleotides or spotted cdna microarray platforms are based mainly on data generated in single or dual-channel analysis. while industrially manufactured oligonucleotide arrays  have optimized protocols that perform well on both single and dual-channel microarray experimental designs, custom made spotted cdna or oligonucleotide microarrays have been mainly employed in two-channel designs  <cit> . single-channel  experiments probe one rna sample per hybridization, whereas dual-channel  experiments generate spot signal intensity values from two different rna samples, each labeled with one of two cyanine dyes , followed by simultaneous hybridization. after subtraction of background signal, absolute intensity values, derived from each channel, are often used to calculate expression ratios for subsequent analysis. the ratio of the signal intensities obtained from the two channels is a relative measure of gene expression of the corresponding gene probe. ratiometric data analysis minimizes various sources of variation related to the construction and hybridization of the microarrays, thus providing the highest level of precision in the comparison of gene expression profiles from two different rna samples  <cit> .

while direct hybridization of two experimental rna samples in the same slide is highly desirable, indirect comparison through the co-hybridization of a test sample together with a common reference standard is the most used experimental design  <cit> . relating each experimental sample to a common reference standard facilitates the comparison of ratios across datasets  <cit> . several types of reference samples based on commercial universal reference rna  <cit> , genomic dna  <cit>  or pcr products representing the collection of cdna clones printed on the chip  <cit>  have been proposed, but no single universal reference standard is widely adopted, seriously impeding cross comparisons between different studies. the composition and properties of the selected reference sample must be addressed properly, because it raises issues concerning the experimental design, the goal of the study and the long term comparability of the data. for example, a problem associated to the use of a reference rna in tumor profiling studies is the requirement of a large amount of high-quality reference sample to allow comparison across multiple datasets  <cit> . pooling of equal amounts of rna from test tumor samples is impractical in prospective studies, because samples collected after the construction of the pool would not be represented, precluding adequate comparison of recently collected samples. cell lines may in principle be an unlimited source of a reference rna. indeed several tumor profiling studies have employed such a method  <cit> . however, the biological variability inherent to cells cultivated in different batches requires that all rna used to generate the reference pool be prepared prior to the beginning of the hybridizations. as an alternative to reference-based designs, theoretical and experimental work have shown that other types of two-channel designs, namely loop-designs, may produce precise estimates of differential gene expression compared to a design based on a common rna reference  <cit> . however, dobbin and simon  <cit>  have demonstrated that for experiments aiming to discover clusters within a collection of samples , a common goal of cancer profiling studies, the reference design is more robust than the loop design. according to these authors, variable quality of individual arrays may have a greater impact on cluster analysis when a loop design is used. this consideration is particularly significant in studies using in-house spotted-cdna microarrays, in which uneven quality between slides of different batches may limit the loop approach.

in this study we designed a set of experiments to evaluate the precision and accuracy of gene expression ratios derived from two-color microarray hybridizations using each of three tumor tissue rna samples and two different external references:  a pooled tumor rna sample  that was labeled in parallel with the test tissue sample; and  a 27-mer reference oligonucleotide  complementary to every feature of the array which was labeled by chemically coupling of a fluorescent nucleotide. the refoligo method was originally proposed by dudley et al. to control intensity ratios of gene expression studies in yeast  <cit> , a system with much lower gene expression complexity. here, ratios derived from the direct pair-wise hybridizations of human tissue samples were taken as the gold-standard against which ratios derived from reconstructed measurements were compared. these external-reference based ratios were also compared to ratios reconstructed from one-color measurements. the results are discussed based on the strengths and weaknesses of each of the three indirect experimental designs.

RESULTS
experimental design
rna isolated from three types of human tumor tissues  was used to generate fluorescent targets for microarray hybridizations. finding differentially expressed genes among different cancer tissues and cell lines and identifying gene expression signatures for each of them is a frequent task in the study of human gene expression using microarrays  <cit> . in addition, comparative gene expression profiling among tumors derived from different organs are revealing common gene signatures with highly significant correlation to clinical behavior of the cancer  <cit> . tissue-derived fluorescent targets were co-hybridized with each of two different types of external references; in one set of experiments, a fixed amount of a 27-mer 5'-end cy3-labeled synthetic oligonucleotide  was co-hybridized with cy5-labeled cdna targets derived from rna of each tissue . in parallel, cy5-labeled cdna targets derived from each tissue were co-hybridized to cy3-labeled targets from a reference rna pool  . refpool was assembled from equimolar amounts of rna isolated from each of the three tumor tissues. two replicate hybridizations were performed for each tissue, using either refoligo or refpool as an external reference . in turn, each replicate slide had two replicate cdna arrays spotted on them, thus generating four intensity measurements for each experiment. in addition, rna aliquots from each tissue were labeled with either cy <dig> or cy <dig> and hybridized directly to each other. a replicate hybridization with dye-reversal was performed for each pair of tissues , again generating four intensity measurements. gene expression log-ratios between each pair of tissues were reconstructed using either refoligo or refpool reference values and compared to ratios obtained from direct hybridizations, which we considered herein as the gold-standard. to evaluate the effect of the external references, we compared refoligo and refpool ratios to ratios reconstructed from single-channel measurements . one-color ratios were calculated directly from intensity measurements of cy5-labeled targets from the tissue samples that were co-hybridized in refoligo experiments. it has been proposed that intensity measurements obtained from spotted oligonucleotide arrays are not affected by co-hybridized targets  <cit> . nonetheless, we opted to obtaining one-color intensity measurement from refoligo hybridizations, instead of from refpool, to ensure that cy <dig> intensity values would not be affected by targets labeled with cy <dig> that would compete for the same probe sequence in the array.

a detailed description of data normalization, filtering and averaging of replicates is described in the methods section. intensity ratios for kidney vs. breast comparison are depicted in figure  <dig> as ma-plots. it can be seen that ratios resulting from all three reconstructed methods, i.e. refoligo, refpool and one-color analyses, are more dispersed than those from the direct comparison. similar results were obtained for the other two tissue comparisons . correlation of log-ratios between the two forward and two reverse labeled replicates for each direct comparison was determined, and a high degree of correlation was observed . this result suggests that there is no significant residual bias associated with the use of two different fluorophores  in the direct comparisons that might have precluded the use of only cy5-labeled tissue samples for indirect comparisons, where we always labeled the reference with cy <dig>  nonetheless, we can not rule out the possibility that the use of a dye-swap design in the direct hybridizations may have caused some compression in the direct ratios as compared to the reconstructed ones. all spots detected only in one channel  were excluded from further analyses. total number of valid gene expression ratios is shown in table  <dig>  when an intensity-based filter cutoff of  <dig> standard deviations  above local background was applied, a comparable fraction of ratios  were selected in each reconstructed method, whereas in direct hybridizations only  <dig> % of the ratios were selected . on average, arrays hybridized with cy5-labeled targets derived from individual tissues showed lower non-specific background and produced a slightly larger fraction of valid intensity measurements when compared to cy3-labeled targets derived from the same rna samples . this would explain the lower fraction of valid ratios in the direct comparisons, where a number of transcripts having an expression level near detection cutoff in one tissue would eliminate those genes from the analysis when labeled with cy <dig>  on the other hand, when cy3-labeled tissue-derived targets were used as reference in the refpool comparisons, this effect would not prevail in all situations because the abundance of low-expression messages could be compensated by its eventual higher expression in one of the other two tissues represented in the three-tissue pool. the homogeneous hybridization to all probes in the array obtained with the synthetic reference oligonucleotide would have a similar compensatory effect in the refoligo analyses.

total number of gene expression ratios calculated from all spots  or spots  <dig> standard deviations  above the average slide background are shown. percentages of ratios above  <dig> sd are shown in parenthesis.

performance among indirect hybridization methods
to estimate the precision of refoligo and refpool in reconstructing ratios obtained in direct hybridizations we calculated the coefficient of variation  for intra- slide replicates . we found that when all ratios are used, the average cv of ratios reconstructed from indirect hybridizations are comparable  and ~2-fold higher than that obtained in direct hybridizations . this result is in line with the data from dudley and colleagues , which showed that the average cv of replicate ratios reconstructed from a reference oligonucleotide is about twice that for direct ratios  <cit> . ratios reconstructed from one-color measurements showed cv values comparable to reference designs . when we applied intensity filters to select only spots  <dig> or  <dig> sd above the local slide background, we observed a consistent decrease in the average cv for both direct and reconstructed ratios . while cvs from direct ratios decreased up to  <dig> %, cvs from reconstructed ratios decreased approximately  <dig> % . average cv for inter-slide replicates was also comparable for all reconstructed ratios . noteworthy, we observed no difference between the averages of intra- and inter-slide cvs . as all hybridizations were performed using slides from the same batch and were executed in parallel, we think that this may explain the similar values of cv among intra- and inter-slide replicates. the high correlations of raw intensities that we observed between intra-  or inter-slide spot replicates  across all tissue comparisons support this notion. taken together, these results indicate that the precision of all indirect measurements are comparable and that one-color measurements are sufficient to reconstruct ratios as precise as those obtained from external references. precision of reconstructed ratios was also evaluated in terms of the average variance of all valid expression ratios measured across the range of expression intensities . while all indirect measurements showed similar profiles, it is apparent that variances of reconstructed ratios are higher than that observed for direct ratios, particularly in the low intensity range . we also observed that variances from one-color ratios show a similar profile of variation as that obtained from refoligo and refpool .

the accuracy of indirect methods was estimated by correlation analysis between direct ratios and reconstructed ratios. representative scatter plots between direct and reconstructed ratios are shown in figure  <dig>  pearson's correlation among different tissue comparisons ranged from  <dig>  to  <dig>  and  <dig>  to  <dig>  for log-ratios reconstructed from refoligo and refpool, respectively . a similar range of pearson correlation values was obtained for log-ratios from one-color measurements . all pearson correlations were statistically significant . very similar results were obtained by using non-parametric spearman's rank-correlation . this result indicates that the refoligo approach produces expression measurements as accurate as those obtained with a common rna reference. it also provides evidence that gene expression ratios as accurate as those obtained from reference-based designs can be reconstructed from one-color measurements collected from different slides.

only ratios from spots with intensity values  <dig> sd above the average slide background were used to calculate pearson's correlations or spearman's rank-correlations. the number of intensity values used in each correlation analysis is shown . all pearson correlation values were statistically significant .

precision of indirect hybridization methods to reconstruct direct measurements
the ability of each indirect method to identify the same set of genes found in the direct comparisons was evaluated. genes differentially expressed in the direct hybridizations between each pair of tumor tissues were selected using  <dig> % credibility intervals for differential expression  <cit> , and were taken as the standard gene set . concordance and discordance among gene sets identified by direct and reconstructed ratios were represented as venn diagrams . on average, a similar fraction of concordant genes, i.e., genes that were also identified in the correspondent direct hybridization, was identified as differentially expressed by each indirect method . it is noteworthy that all three indirect methods detected a small fraction  of the standard set of differentially expressed genes. also, refoligo, refpool and one-color identified similar fractions of false-positive genes, i.e. genes present in reconstructed ratios but not in the standard set . to document whether the high rate of false positives in the refoligo analysis was due to conditions inherent to our system or is a general feature of the refoligo method, we estimated the number of false positives using data produced by dudley et al. . as it was not possible to estimate credibility intervals based on self-self ratios, in this case we used a 2-fold change threshold to select genes differentially expressed between yeast cells grown either in glucose or galactose. using this criterion, we found that approximately  <dig> % of the genes identified as differentially expressed by ratios reconstructed from a reference oligonucleotide in that work were false-positives . the high number of false-positives identified by reconstructed ratios may, in part, be explained by the limited number of technical replicates tested in the present work. we speculate that the inclusion of more technical replicates, or even biological replicates, may contribute to decrease the number of false-positive genes. in spite of the limitations pointed above, spotted cdna microarray analysis is a powerful tool to identify candidate genes in comparative gene expression studies in cancer. validation of differential expression by independent methods such as quantitative rt-pcr will remain as a necessary further step to confirm them as true tumor-associated molecular markers.

CONCLUSIONS
data presented here show that refoligo is a reliable alternative to a rna pool in reference-based hybridization experiments when studying organisms with a complex transcriptome such as humans. the implication of our results is that the unlimited availability of an inexpensive , chemically synthesized reference oligonucleotide makes its use very convenient in large-scale projects where the availability of an rna pool is usually restrictive. the refoligo method enables an efficient and flexible experimental design because one may relate expression measurements to a common reference  or, alternatively, use intensity values only   <cit> . as the refoligo is complementary to every array element, fluorescent signal derived from bound refoligo can be used to assess spot quality and facilitates array griddling by image processing software. we speculate that refoligo will improve comparison of data obtained from different batches of spotted arrays, by correcting for small variations in spot morphology and in the amount of spotted dna across batches. moreover, signal intensities of bound reference oligonucleotide molecules correlate well with the amount of cdna probes present in each spot  <cit> , suggesting that expression ratios reconstructed from refoligo may accurately reflect the absolute abundance of each transcript present in the rna population  <cit> .

another important conclusion of our study is that use of one-color ratios does not compromise precision more than other currently used methods based on indirect measurements. this observation is in line with recent evidence showing that gene classifiers based on intensity measurements may outperform ratio-based classifiers  <cit> . intra- and inter-slide expression intensity values obtained with one-color correlates well and reveal acceptable number of false positives as compared to reference-based methods. given that direct measurements in datasets containing large number of individual samples  is impractical, one-color based analysis allows direct comparison of measurements across all samples, with a considerable reduction in costs since it eliminates the requirement of labeling a reference sample

