BACKGROUND
dna extraction from plant tissues, unlike dna isolation from mammalian tissues, remains difficult due to the presence of a rigid cell wall surrounding the plant cells. currently used methods inevitably require a laborious mechanical grinding step, necessary to disrupt the cell wall for the release of dna. the field of plant molecular biology is therefore at a disadvantage, especially when an automated high-throughput system for the isolation of pcr-ready genomic dna is required in population genetics, species identification, biodiversity investigation, selection screening, food control and plant biotechnology. qiagen gmbh has developed a 96-well grinding method , but it requires a special mixer mill, a centrifugation step and consequently is not fully automatable.

large scale automatable dna mini-prep facilities were recently offered by several companies for animal tissues . however, because of their cell wall, the automation of the isolation of dna from plants needs improvements. whereas animal tissues need only a lysis buffer containing detergents and proteinase k to release their dna, plant tissues need in addition a mixture of carbohydrase enzymes able to digest the cell wall. enzymatic digestion of the cell wall of leaf tissues is routinely used for the production of protoplasts but this approach was never adapted for routine isolation of dna from plant tissue.

we describe here a new method for the lysis of plant tissues using a powerful cocktail of enzymes isolated from trichoderma longibrachiatum, which digests the cell walls in order to liquefy the tissue without the need of grinding. the enzymatically released dna is then isolated with commercially available magnetic beads.

RESULTS
leaf disks from  <dig> different species were digested by  <dig> μl of the enzymatic cocktail in  <dig> μl of digestion buffer. thirty μl of liquid containing cell debris were drawn up and released dna was isolated using dynabeads® dna direct™ universal kit . fig. 1a shows an agarose gel of 25% of the dna isolated . most dna are high-yield and of high-molecular weight. the amount of lambda dna/hind iii loaded into the gel was  <dig> ng . the  <dig> kb band thus represented approximately  <dig> ng of dna. the amount of plant genomic dna obtained was variable from species to species. for some of them  the amount of loaded dna was equal to or higher than  <dig> ng. as only 25% of the isolated dna were loaded into the agarose gel, it can be estimated that the method permits the isolation of approximately  <dig> to  <dig> ng of genomic dna from a leaf disk, depending on the species.

in the experiment described above, species on which the method was previously tested were selected. in order to empirically examine to what extent the method works on different species, simultaneous extraction of  <dig> randomly chosen species was carried out in a microtitration plate  using the wizard® magnetic  <dig> plant system kit  to isolate the released dna . one fourth of the isolated dna was loaded into the gel. in approximately 75% of the species, genomic dna was visible. several dna extracts show partial degradation. no dna is visible for gladiolus palustris, viburnum farreri, weigela sp, prunus padus, ribes petraeum, betula sp, sorbaria sorbifolia, pelargonium sp, saintpaulia magungensis.

in experiments described above, the cell wall digestion was done overnight for convenience. in order to follow the release of dna at different times of enzymatic digestion, three  <dig> mm leaf disks from dry leaves of ilex aquifolium were digested for  <dig>  to  <dig> hours and the released dna was isolated with the wizard® magnetic  <dig> plant system kit . fig.  <dig> shows that some dna is already released at  <dig>  h and that  <dig> to  <dig> hours are sufficient to release most of the dna from this species. a short digestion time  is sufficient for soft leaves such as arabidopsis, begonia, brassica, beta, alium, nicotiana, triticum, piper ...etc. however, incubation times need to be increased for fragaria, ribes, oryza, soya, zea ...etc. thus, although  <dig> to  <dig> hours are generally enough, the incubation time for a given species is not foreseeable and the appropriate length of digestion has to be determined experimentally before undertaking large-scale dna isolations.

the method is highly reproducible. fig.  <dig> shows  <dig> dna isolated from dry leaf disks of aster amellus and ilex aquifolium and from seeds of allium porum , using the wizard® magnetic  <dig> plant system kit . fig. 5a shows a comparison of the amount of dna isolated from ilex aquifolium by a ctab-based extraction method  and by the enzymatic method described here  using the wizard® magnetic  <dig> plant system. in both cases the amount of loaded dna is one fifth of the dna corresponding to a leaf disk of approximately  <dig> mg . the amount of isolated dna is similar for both methods.

as indicated by fig. 5b, lambda dna/hind iii does not show degradation during incubation with the enzymatic mix, nor in the presence of an overnight digesting leaf disk of ilex at 50°c. this indicates that the digestion mix does not contain active dnase in the condition used for digestion, and that in the case of ilex endogenous plant dnase are inactivated by the digestion mix.

fig.  <dig> also shows pcr amplification of a plastid sequence , a multi-copy nuclear sequence  and a single-copy nuclear sequence  from  <dig> μl of dna isolated by the enzymatic method from ilex aquifolium, aster amellus and solanum tuberosum. the primers have been designed for the genus ilex. thus the few negative pcr in other species probably result from primer mismatch and not from polymerase inhibition. rapd amplifications are also shown .

the enzymatic cocktail is produced from trichoderma longibrachiatum fermentation and could be contaminated with its dna. moreover, in the case of a long overnight enzymatic digestion, there is a risk of contamination from bacteria or fungi covering the surface of plant tissues. to examine if such contamination could be a problem, fungi and bacteria specific pcr markers were tested on dna extracted from  a digestion mix alone, or  a digestion mix "contaminated" with a ilex aquifolium leaf disk removed after  <dig> min and further incubated overnight at 50°c, or  a mix digesting a ilex aquifolium leaf disk overnight at 50°c . no fungus  or bacterial template could be detected. instead, ilex aquifolium templates are detected. indeed, the its pcr product found in the digestion mix "contaminated" with a ilex aquifolium leaf disk removed after  <dig> min and further incubated overnight at 50°c  has the same size as its of ilex . further sequencing demonstrated that this pcr product was an its sequence of ilex and not of trichoderma . similarly, the prokaryotic 16s rdna sequence obtained from the mix digesting an ilex aquifolium leaf disk overnight at 50°c  represented the plastid  16s rdna of ilex , and not a bacterial sequence.

discussion
to the best of our knowledge, only a few non-grinding methods for isolation of dna from plant tissue have been proposed, but only low amounts of dna are generally obtained. jhingan  <cit>  followed by williams and ronald  <cit>  proposed a chemical method using potassium ethyl xanthogenate that damages the cell wall, subsequently disrupts cells and releases the dna. the method involves many steps and the amount of dna released is generally ten times lower than traditional methods  <cit>  and than our enzymatic method. a non-grinding method is proposed by sigma . it is not based on enzymatic digestion of the cell wall and the leaf tissue usually does not appear to be degraded after the treatment with the lysis buffer. the dna extract is extremely crude, of low dna content and often contains pcr inhibitors. consequently, a 10-fold dilution of the extract is necessary to dilute inhibitors and the template concentration is at the limit of detection. another method is based on the squashing of plant tissues on a nylon membrane  <cit>  and subsequent elution of the little amount of dna bound to the membrane for pcr amplification. an adaptation of this method is commercialized by whatman . in conclusion, the advantage of our enzymatic non-grinding method of dna extraction compared with the above-described methods is that a large amount of high-quality dna is isolated and that it is fully automatable.

in a paper on the comparative analysis of different dna extraction protocols from plant tissues, csaikl et al.  <cit>  wrote that "the problem of dna extraction is still an important issue in the field of plant molecular biology" and that "a chemical tissue disruption method as used in mammalian cells might be the method of choice". plant dna purification is time-consuming and laborious. it is considered as the "bottleneck" of basic and applied research  <cit> . thus there is a need for a quick, easy and automated method of plant dna isolation. the method that we present here exactly fits this expectation.

for a few species  the method is not effective, but simple modifications of the protocol  is expected to resolve the problem in the future. as the chemistry of plant tissues  is highly variable depending of species, it is not surprising that variable results are obtained. it was exactly the same situation with traditional dna extraction methods where "recalcitrant" species needed further adaptations  <cit> . there are two situations in which the described protocol does not work . in the first case, the leaf disk of some species is not digested by the enzymatic cocktail. this is because some particular chemical compounds inhibit the enzymatic cocktail. quercus represents such a case and high level of polyphenols  is suspected. modifications of the digestion buffer by the addition of polyvinyl pyrrolidone , or polyvinyl polypyrrolidone  or polyethylene glycol  in order to neutralize polyphenolic compounds could greatly improve the method for "recalcitrant" species. in the second case, the leaf disk is perfectly digested but dna is not released or, most probably, is highly degraded. this could be due to the release of endogenous recalcitrant nucleases or oxidative polyphenols during the digestion. in other cases  different results can be obtained according the season of leaf harvesting, as it can be expected because of the modification of the chemical composition of the cell wall during the year  <cit> . to deal with species-dependent variability, it is obviously necessary to determine the optimal digestion conditions for each plant sample. in fact, the duration of incubation is not a problem because the protocol is entirely automatable from solid leaf disks to the pcr-ready dna. even if, in some case, it could be longer than mechanical grinding in reaction tube or plate, any human intervention is needed.

CONCLUSIONS
in summary, the protocol is simple and reliable, does not require grinding, centrifuging, or the use of hazardous chemicals. a large number of samples can be processed simultaneously, and full automation of the protocol is possible with existing workstations. many different species were successfully tested. the method can be adapted to each species by modification of the digestion buffer, of the amount of the enzymatic cocktail added during the digestion or of the digestion time.

the method is perfectly adapted to situations when high-throughput isolation of pcr-ready genomic dna is required. moreover, because of the high-yield and high-molecular weight dna reliably obtained, sensitive pcr-based techniques could be applied: aflp , rapd , ssr .

