BACKGROUND
anopheles gambiae, the main vector of the human malaria parasite plasmodium falciparum in subsaharan africa, is the most medically relevant insect in the world. together these two organisms are responsible annually for more than a million of deaths in africa, mostly young children. this epidemic is worsening  <cit> , prompting the search for innovative strategies towards effective and efficient malaria control. one approach aims to disrupt parasite development in the mosquito vector and thus alleviate malaria transmission intensity  <cit> . this strategy requires clear understanding of the intimate interactions between parasite and vector, and of the mechanisms that regulate the interaction. large scale gene expression profiling in a. gambiae has revealed that the insect's innate immune system is stimulated following infection by plasmodium parasites  <cit> , highlighting this system as a primary candidate for interventions to control the infection. extensive studies identified potentially relevant mechanisms of innate immune response, including a balance between positive and negative mosquito factors towards the parasite  <cit> . genetic variation underlies the susceptibility of a. gambiae to plasmodium infection: refractory mosquito strains have been selected  <cit>  and qtls identified for susceptibility/refractoriness to the model parasite, p. cynomolgi  <cit> . however, to date the mechanism involved and the underlying genetic basis remain unknown  <cit> . some studies conducted in field conditions with wild mosquito and parasite populations further demonstrated genetic variability in the mosquito's susceptibility to p. falciparum infection and identified putatively involved genes  <cit> ; their contribution to the phenotype and relevance in natura still remain to be assessed fully.

the availability of the a. gambiae genome sequence  <cit>  has opened new perspectives for exploratory genetic studies in this species. the activities and evolution of its immune system are now being studied intensively, and could provide insights into the past and present patterns of interaction with the pathogen. initial studies revealed selective constraints of diverse nature acting on some immunity genes  <cit> . the current pattern of malaria transmission is relatively recent , but has exerted strong selective pressure on human populations that led to the selection of resistance alleles, some of which are strongly deleterious . signatures of selection were found on most genes implicated in p. falciparum resistance in humans  <cit>  and conversely, population studies on p. falciparum have detected selection sweeps on its genome  <cit> . it is rational to expect that p. falciparum has also exerted selective pressure on a. gambiae. if so, evolutionary genetics of the immune system in natural a. gambiae populations should pinpoint resistance or susceptibility genes based on their peculiar molecular makeup.

single nucleotide polymorphisms  are the commonest mode of genetic variation in vertebrates and invertebrates  <cit> . as such, snps rapidly became the preferred and most useful molecular markers for association studies, high resolution linkage mapping and population genetics studies  <cit> . in coding regions, synonymous snps  that do not result in amino-acid change are likely neutral markers for population genetic studies. in contrast, non synonymous snps  alter protein structure and could be retained by natural selection. the search for snps in a. gambiae immunity genes is an initial step towards genetic dissection of vector competence in the wild  <cit> .

here, we report coding region snps in a representative set of genes from different families associated with putative innate immune functions in a. gambiae  <cit> . genes chosen randomly across the genome were included for comparison with the immunity data, such that the genome-wide effects of demographic history may be distinguished from gene-specific effects of selection. the study was carried out on natural populations of a. gambiae s.s.  and its sibling species, a. arabiensis, collected from field sites in cameroon .

RESULTS
we studied  <dig> immune related genes, representing innate immunity gene families and functions throughout the genome  <cit> . additionally,  <dig> non-immune related genes randomly chosen along the genome were included in the study. the relative proportion of genes involved in the different stages of immune response  <cit>  and their chromosomal location are shown in figure  <dig>  target genes are listed in tables , with their ensembl gene ids, accession numbers in the embl database, their putative role in the immune response , primer sequences, gdna or cdna nature of the template, chromosomal location, length of the fragment analyzed, and the number of alleles sequenced.

sequence polymorphism
we analyzed a total of  <dig> , <dig> nucleotides across  <dig> coding fragments of an average length of  <dig> base pairs. nucleotide diversity indices and results of the tests for selection within populations are given in additional files  <dig> and  <dig>  a total of  <dig>  snps were detected in our dataset:  <dig>  were observed in immune related genes and  <dig>  in non immune related genes, respectively. correspondingly,  <dig>  and  <dig>  snps were newly identified polymorphisms . we also detected  <dig> indels, always as a multiple of  <dig> bases preserving the open reading frame . in the populations we studied,  <dig>  of the  <dig> snps previously reported in ensembl were detected . nucleotide diversity along the chromosomes is presented figure  <dig>  including immune related genes and control genes. mean nucleotide diversity  across all genes varied significantly between species and populations : it was higher in the a. gambiae s form  than in either the m form  or in a. arabiensis . within each species, however, no statistically significant differences in mean nucleotide diversity was detected between immune related and non immune related genes, nor between different functional class within immune related genes . similarly, nucleotide diversity was evenly spread on the four autosomal arms in the three populations. however, even after correction for lower effective population size on the x chromosome by multiplying estimates by 4/ <dig> , significantly lower genetic diversity  was observed on the x chromosome in each population . noticeably however, the gene tep <dig> on the third chromosome showed much higher genetic diversity than all the other genes we investigated .

species divergence and population differentiation
pairwise estimates of genetic differentiation  between all population pairs are given on figure  <dig>  together with their statistical significance, for each of the  <dig> genes. similar levels of genetic differentiation were detected by immune related and non immune related genes, as well as between different functional classes within immune related genes . hence, data from all categories of genes were pooled for further analyses. average fst estimates between the m and s molecular forms of a. gambiae was similar across all  <dig> chromosomes , with an overall fst =  <dig>  . allelic frequencies differed among the incipient species but only one ssnp found in a non-immune related gene in section 5d on the x chromosome  segregated between the m and s forms. mean genetic divergence between a. arabiensis and either the m or s form were similar , and were significantly higher than between the two molecular forms . between a. arabiensis and the m or s form,  <dig> and  <dig> snps, respectively were fixed and mean genetic differentiation estimates were significantly higher on the x chromosome .

tests of selection in immune related and non-immune related genes
the tajima d statistic was computed for each gene in all populations . at equilibrium between random genetic drift and mutation, the expected value of d for neutral markers is close to zero. this statistic detected only few genes with significant departure from neutrality, reflecting locus-specific selection rather than the effect of demographic instability. noteworthy, tep <dig> showed a highly significant positive value of d in a. arabiensis . this departure from neutrality was due to the coexistence, at high frequency in this population, of two highly diverged alleles: the previously described and widespread tep1r and tep1s  <cit>  were observed at a relative frequency of  <dig> % and  <dig> %, respectively, in a. arabiensis. in a. gambiae, tep1s was the most frequent allele and tep1r was found at low frequency .

the z test of selection revealed a very high proportion of genes that are under selection across populations: only  <dig> genes among the immune related genes  and one among the non immune related genes  showed the ratio of ssnps/nssnps expected under the hypothesis of neutrality. all other genes are strongly deficient in non-synonymous changes, suggesting prevalence of purifying selection. at the population level, the test was less often significant, most likely reflecting the lack of statistical power when sequences are not sufficiently polymorphic  <cit> .

for each pair of populations, ka/ks ratios are shown in additional files  <dig> and  <dig> for immune and non immune related genes, respectively. ka/ks ratios are expected to equal  <dig> if the genes under scrutiny behave neutrally. in most case, however, and for both immune and non immune related genes, the ka/ks ratios were much lower than  <dig>  such a pattern implies that a mutation changing the encoded amino acid sequence is much less likely to be different between two species than one which is silent. this is consistent with the results of the z test of selection and suggests that purifying selection is a major force driving the evolution of both immune and non immune related genes in all populations.

lack of fixed mutations precluded the implementation of the mcdonald-kreitman test between a. gambiae molecular forms. for the comparison of a. arabiensis with the two a. gambiae molecular forms, the test was computed across groups of genes in order to encompass a sufficient number of fixed variations for building the contingency tables. however, combining data from different genes for macdonald-kreitman tests has established drawbacks which can lead to spurious cases of positive selection  <cit> , thus significant tests need to be carefully interpreted. table  <dig> shows the total numbers of replacement and silent polymorphisms that are shared or fixed between pairs of species, across immunity and non immunity related genes. for the latter group, the test revealed adequacy with neutral expectations . deviations from neutrality in immune related genes were at the limit of the significance threshold for both species pairs  leading to inconclusive results as a reflection of limited statistical power in our dataset.

snps were counted for the groups of genes  within species  or between species . the probability  is calculated using a 2-tailed fisher's exact test.

discussion
this study provides the most extensive set of data on molecular polymorphisms in immune and non immune related genes in a. gambiae and a. arabiensis. we observed a high level of nucleotide diversity  in coding regions within members of the a. gambiae complex. this is approximately ten fold higher than the level of nucleotide diversity observed in coding regions of the human genome  <cit>  but is comparable to the estimates reported from drosophila or in previous studies on anopheles  <cit> . nucleotide diversity is a product of both mutation rate and effective population size. mutation rates were shown to be similar in humans and drosophila  <cit> , so the ten fold difference in average nucleotide diversity between species was attributed to the approximately ten fold larger long term effective population size in drosophila than in humans   <cit> . the effective population size of a. gambiae is estimated at several hundred thousand  <cit> , which falls within the range of drosophila estimates and might explain similarities in levels of genetic diversity in both species. we also observed a slightly reduced diversity in a. arabiensis compared to a. gambiae and in the m form of a. gambiae compared to the s form. reduced genetic diversity in a. arabiensis was already observed previously  <cit> , but colonization and further maintenance of a. arabiensis for several generations in an insectary might have added to this trend through increased genetic drift. alternatively, long term effective population sizes differences might be expected between these species, in light of their distinct bionomics and distribution across africa  <cit> .

patterns of genetic diversity can be influenced by differences in recombination rate across the genome, with a higher genetic diversity and a faster evolution rate expected in high recombination regions  <cit> . our results must therefore be interpreted taking into account this potential heterogeneity along the a. gambiae genome. the known factors influencing recombination rate in a. gambiae are the chromosomal inversions and the proximity to centromeres and telomeres  <cit> . the distribution of immune related genes on the genome did not show any aggregation in particular regions , therefore we did not expect that the diversity pattern observed in immune related genes would be a consequence of heterogeneity of recombination rates along the genome. however, considering genes position on the genome sheds light on some evolutionary processes in a. gambiae. paracentric chromosomal inversions are very abundant in the a. gambiae complex. more than  <dig> polymorphic inversions have been detected in natural populations  <cit> . ten inversions are fixed in the different species of the complex and can be used to differentiate individual specimens. several lines of evidence suggest that these chromosomal arrangements are incidental to ecotypic adaptation and may be directly involved in the past and current speciation processes occurring within this species complex, mainly because recombination suppression between alternative chromosomal arrangements might protect arrays of co-adapted genes  <cit> . mathematical models for inversion-based local adaptation and/or speciation predict lower genetic diversity within species in the chromosomal region involved in speciation, and higher divergence between species  <cit> . in agreement with these models, we found evidence for reduced variability and higher genetic divergence between species on the x-chromosome. indeed, a. arabiensis and a. gambiae are differentiated by a fixed chromosomal arrangement  that inverts a large part of the x chromosome  <cit> . reduced effective population size for the x chromosome is not sufficient to explain the observed pattern which is therefore in agreement with previous studies demonstrating a "large × effect" on differentiation between these sibling species  <cit> . the "large × effect" hypothesis assumes the existence of speciation genes on the x chromosome responsible for ecological and/or behavioral adaptations that affect interspecific mating and/or hybrid fitness.

no x chromosome inversions, detectable at the cytogenetic level, distinguish the m and s forms of a. gambiae. moreover, our samples were collected from an area of south cameroon where a. gambiae m and s are known to be homosequential for the standard karyotype on all autosomes  <cit> . accordingly, levels of genetic differentiation  were generally much lower between the m and s forms of a. gambiae than they were between these populations and a. arabiensis, and only occasionally did reach statistical significance. however, consistent with recent evidence for increased differentiation due to reduced recombination in the centromeric region of the x chromosome of a. gambiae  <cit> , the only fixed snp we observed between m and s maps to the proximal region of the x chromosome , a region that is considered as a "speciation island" between the m and s forms of a. gambiae  <cit> . except for the x chromosome, we observed comparable genetic diversity across the entire genome. we did not detect any centromere or telomere effect, but a higher density of genetic markers would be necessary to draw firm conclusions about reduced diversity in these regions. the constant distribution of genetic diversity on autosomal chromosomes observed in the present study is in contrast with results of the a. gambiae genome project, where a highly variable distribution was observed  <cit> . the genome sequencing project utilized the pest strain that was established from a mix of several natural populations of the m and s forms of a. gambiae, maintained under insectary conditions for several years and exposed to bottlenecks and selections  <cit> . it is likely that the uneven distribution of diversity in the pest strain resulted from maintenance in the insectary, and that diversity in natural populations is more evenly distributed. it must be kept in mind, however that the present study focuses on populations from only one location for each species and might reflect only a portion of the natural genetic diversity of the species. moreover, cameroon might be an area where the m and s forms of a. gambiae have achieved one of the highest level of genetic differentiation observable throughout the species range, as was first described by wondji et al.  <cit>  using microsatellite data and further expanded by turner et al. <cit> , using sequence data. overall, our estimates of fst between species/molecular forms are in strong agreement with those of wondji et al.  <cit>  and turner et al.  <cit> , who detected one of the highest and most significant level of genetic differentiation between the m and s forms of a. gambiae observable throughout the species range.

tests for departure from neutrality are based on the assumption of mutation-migration-drift equilibrium. however, evidence for recent population expansion and radiation has been found in both a. gambiae and a. arabiensis  <cit> . unstable demographic history can produce patterns of genetic variation indistinguishable from those of selection  <cit> . however, demographic history affects similarly the entire genome, while selection is locus-specific. for example, rapid population expansion is expected to result in highly negative tajima d values, as a consequence of the rapid increase in number of polymorphic sites , and excess of low frequency alleles that have little effect on π  <cit> . this pattern was not observed in our dataset, where most computed tajima d values were negative but not statistically significant. the z test of selection and ka/ks ratios demonstrated a deficit of non synonymous mutations in most of the genes . the influence of population size changes on tests based on synonymous and non synonymous variations appears to be weak, even if not fully understood  <cit> . therefore, it is most likely that the deficit of non synonymous mutations is due to generalized purifying selection acting on a. gambiae orfs, probably reflecting functional constraints on the encoded proteins.

in drosophila, several immunity genes revealed directional selection  <cit>  and a broad comparison of immune system and non immunity genes supported the hypothesis that pathogens exert a selective pressure on the immune system  <cit> . evidence for directional selection driving evolution of the immune system in drosophila was consistent with the "arms race" model of co-evolution  <cit> . in this model, the pathogen constantly evolves to escape the host's immune response and, in turn, the hosts' immune system evolves to better control infections. such dynamic iterative interactions would promote rapid evolution in the genes involved in pathogen-host interactions with rapid rise in frequency of selectively advantageous alleles and high turn-over between alleles leaving insufficient time for the accumulation of neutral polymorphism  <cit> . in contrast with data in drosophila, our results did not detect a pattern of directional selection in innate immunity genes of a. gambiae. although it is likely that different evolutionary forces are at play in these organisms, our inconclusive results probably reflect the limited statistical power of our dataset. indeed, evidence for a higher rate of evolution in immune related genes compared to housekeeping genes in drosophila was generated through a powerful sequence dataset and the results of the tests of selection was right below the 5% statistical significance thresholds  <cit> . in our data, the statistical power was limited by the small number of fixed mutations detected between species, pointing towards the necessity of using a more distant outgroup than a. arabiensis for evolutionary studies in a. gambiae  <cit> . suitable outgroup species should diverge sufficiently to allow powerful selection tests without reaching mutation saturation. there is evidence that members of the a. gambiae complex are so closely related to each other that their low level of divergence would limit the statistical power of any conventional test of selection. moreover, genetic introgression between well established species within the complex further overshadows their phylogenetic relationships and reduces divergence time  <cit> . in contrast, species of the pyretophorus series other than a. gambiae complex members appeared too divergent to represent appropriate outgroups  <cit> . the identification of a suitable outgroup for comprehensive and powerful evolutionary studies in the an. gambiae complex is still pending but it is likely that ongoing whole-genome sequencing efforts and increased interest in this burgeoning field will soon provide appropriate candidate species and allow revision of previously inconclusive inferences.

in a. gambiae as well as in drosophila, the level of genetic diversity appeared to be similar between immune related genes and control genes and between functional categories of genes involved in immunity. balancing selection does not drive the evolution of the immune system . this is contrasting with the pattern of selection observed in vertebrates, in which genes involved in defense mechanisms are under balancing selection in addition to directional selection. in vertebrates, the system of recognition of acquired immunity requires a large diversity of major histocompatibility complex genes to bind large diversity of antigens  <cit> . as such, the pattern of variability in a. gambiae and drosophila immune systems is consistent with the recognition of relatively few motifs conserved across broad ranges of pathogens. however, the recent discovery of hypervariable immunoglobulin domain-encoding genes, dscam, capable of producing pathogen-specific splice  <cit>  opens new insights into recognition system in insects suggesting specific recognition of a spectrum of pathogens. future investigations of molecular evolution will determine the selective forces at play on such genes and will help understanding their role in pathogen recognition.

one of the immune-related genes, tep <dig>  showed a unique pattern of variation. it displayed the highest level of genetic diversity among the genes we investigated and a significant positive value of the tajima d statistic suggesting maintenance of divergent alleles. a previous study  <cit>  revealed two highly differentiated tep <dig> alleles that were initially mistaken as distinct genes, in the first version of the genome assembly. crosses between laboratory strains showed mendelian inheritance of these allelic forms, tep1s and tep1r, which are associated with two a. gambiae strains susceptible and refractory to p. berghei, respectively  <cit> ; it was hypothesized that the alternative alleles are causally related to these phenotypes. the diversity we observed in tep <dig> can be the result of balancing selection and would be reminiscent of selection for diversity in acquired immunity. however, gene conversion between different genes in the tep family might result in similar patterns of diversity and further investigation is needed to disentangle these hypotheses. nonetheless, our results emphasize the importance of the tep1s and tep1r alleles, and demonstrate these to segregate in natural populations. however, their role in determining the susceptibility of a. gambiae to plasmodium infection remains to be established, as their segregation in laboratory strains could be due to increased genetic drift at the onset and throughout the colonization process.

CONCLUSIONS
through the sequencing of  <dig> fragments of genes in a. gambiae, we identified  <dig>  snps that are relevant markers for future phenotype-association studies. the pattern of genetic variability showed little evidence for maintenance of protein variation by balancing selection in a. gambiae immune system. it revealed strong purifying selection as the main force driving evolution of the a. gambiae genome, probably as a result of functional constraints for protein integrity and activity. tep <dig> showed a unique pattern of genetic diversity that could be the consequence of balancing selection or gene conversion.

