BACKGROUND
bacillus anthracis is a highly invasive, exceptionally virulent pathogen of mammals, with humans as accidental hosts  <cit> . b. anthracis possesses two virulence plasmids, pxo <dig> and pxo <dig>  that encode for a tripartite secreted toxin and a poly-d-glutamic acid capsule, respectively  <cit> . the toxins can cause death or produce serious edema in infected individuals  <cit> . despite many years of research, chromosomal loci have received little attention; however, a chromosomally-encoded cytotoxin, anthrolysin o, has been recently reported  <cit> .

arginase hydrolyzes l-arginine to l-ornithine and urea. this enzyme is found in both eubacteria and eucaryotes. however, relatively few eubacterial arginases have been characterized; most characterized arginases are from animals and yeasts  <cit> . we recently characterized an arginase  from the gastric pathogen, helicobacter pylori  <cit> , discovering a number of interesting and unique properties among the arginase superfamily. when we began this current study, the closest homolog of the h. pylori arginase  was that from b. anthracis . arginase activity from h. pylori has recently been measured using a highly sensitive and quantitative assay that can determine enzyme activity from extracts, viable cells or the purified enzyme  <cit> . the rocf gene from h. pylori has been cloned into e. coli dh5α and confers arginase activity to e. coli , suggesting that the rocf gene alone is sufficient to confer arginase activity  <cit> .

l-arginine is used by macrophages to produce nitric oxide and other downstream reactive nitrogen species  <cit> . the production of nitric oxide by activated host macrophages is an effective antimicrobial agent and serves as an initial innate defense mechanism against pathogens  <cit> . interestingly, the h. pylori arginase inhibits host nitric oxide production, allowing for survival of the organism when co-cultured with activated macrophages  <cit> . a similar situation likely occurs with the b. anthracis enzyme  <cit> . additionally, h. pylori arginase decreases t lymphocyte proliferation and cd3ζ expression  <cit> , arguing for the importance of this enzyme in multiple facets of host-pathogen interactions.

in addition to roles in pathogenesis, it is speculated that arginases have evolved to regulate the levels of arginine and ornithine within the cell  <cit> . regulation of these amino acids is pivotal in protein synthesis, polyamine and nitric oxide production, and other cellular processes  <cit> . for example in h. pylori, expression of a second copy of the arginase gene, rocf, does not double the arginase activity, suggesting the bacterium has mechanisms to limit hydrolysis of the essential amino acid, arginine  <cit> .

in organisms having a complete urea cycle, arginase is the final enzyme of the cycle; however, arginase is not found in most eubacteria  <cit> . in h. pylori, the urea is further hydrolyzed into carbon dioxide and ammonia via the enzyme urease  <cit> . most eubacteria that contain an arginase also have the entire urea cycle. examples include h. pylori and b. subtilis  <cit> . however, several arginase-containing bacteria apparently lack a complete urea cycle. such organisms include b. licheniformis  <cit>  and b. anthracis. this suggests that arginase in these latter bacteria has evolved a unique physiologic role in the cell. several biochemical properties of the b. anthracis arginase had been preliminarily described  <cit> . purified b. anthracis arginase had to be preactivated with  <dig> μm mn2+  and heat   for activity to be measured using a urea detection method  <cit> . indeed, nearly all arginases require some type of heat activation step in the presence of manganese for catalytic activity  <cit> . for b. anthracis arginase, manganese was previously considered the most efficient cation activator and stabilizer, allowing the mn2+-preactivated enzyme to maintain stability and activity even after exposure to 50–60°c for one hour  <cit> . additionally, the enzyme showed optimal catalytic activity between ph  <dig>  and  <dig>   <cit> , a finding consistent will all arginases  <cit> , except the h. pylori enzyme   <cit> .

activity of the purified b. anthracis arginase decreased significantly after dialysis and lyophilization; if the manganese-preactivated enzyme was treated with other divalent cations, a large decrease in arginase catalytic activity occurred  <cit> . collectively, these earlier data suggested that the metal cofactor involved in b. anthracis arginase activity was manganese  <cit> , with nickel and cobalt having no role or an inhibitory role. the earlier data also indicated that heat-activation was absolutely required for catalytic activity. identification of the gene responsible for b. anthracis arginase was not previously reported.

while the toxin components produced by b. anthracis have been the primary focus of research, there is limited research on the organism's other genes and gene products. in this study, we sought to characterize in depth the chromosomally-encoded b. anthracis arginase using a variety of conditions not previously examined, using a sensitive enzyme assay. we also established an e. coli model for the b. anthracis arginase and determined whether arginase could be detected and characterized from viable organisms. we provide evidence that the enzyme has novel features not previously recognized. for example, the b. anthracis arginase displayed optimal activity with nickel in extracts and manganese in viable cells, but surprisingly did not absolutely require either heat activation or the addition of exogenous metal to detect arginase activity. the b. anthracis arginase gene could complement an h. pylori arginase mutant, conferring b. anthracis arginase-like properties to h. pylori.

RESULTS
characterization of arginase-containing extracts of b. anthracis 7702
many holes remain in our knowledge of the chromosomally-encoded arginase from b. anthracis. also, no two eubacterial arginases have ever been directly compared for their properties under identical conditions. we therefore sought to investigate the b. anthracis arginase in much more detail and compared it to the h. pylori arginase. extracts from b. anthracis  <dig> assayed with manganese  or cobalt  displayed arginase activity at both ph  <dig>  and  <dig> ; however, when assayed in the presence of nickel  at ph  <dig> , the activity was up to 500-fold higher than with mn2+ or co2+ . this is in striking contrast to what was reported previously for this enzyme, in which ni2+ inhibited activity  <cit> .

b. anthracis arginase activity was determined at various concentrations of nickel, manganese, or cobalt. far lower concentrations of nickel were needed to obtain abundant arginase activity, than when cobalt or manganese were used . micromolar nickel activated arginase >2-fold more than the optimal level of manganese  and >100-fold higher than the optimal level of cobalt . optimal concentrations for the three metals were as follows: nickel, ≥  <dig> μm; manganese, ≥  <dig>  mm; and cobalt  <dig> mm . since all three metals caused near optimal arginase activity at  <dig> mm, this concentration was used for most subsequent experiments.

heat activation is required for all previously characterized arginases  <cit> , presumably to allow partial unfolding of the enzyme and incorporation of the metal cofactor. in a previous study, b. anthracis arginase activity decreased in samples exposed to heat, if the enzyme had not been already pre-activated with manganese  <cit> . in contrast with this earlier finding, we observed that b. anthracis arginase activity surprisingly increased about 10-fold following treatment with heat  at ph  <dig>  in the absence of metal versus no heat . however, in the presence of various metals, heat treatment did not affect arginase activity at either ph  <dig>  or  <dig> , when compared to samples that were not heat-treated . under all conditions, nickel conferred that highest arginase catalytic activity.

comparative characteristics of the h. pylori and b. anthracis arginases
since the h. pylori and b. anthracis arginases share low amino acid similarity , we questioned whether the properties of these two enzymes were similar or distinct, when assayed under identical conditions. h. pylori and b. anthracis arginase activities expressed in e. coli dh5α were first compared . e. coli  had optimal arginase activity at both ph  <dig>  and  <dig>  with nickel, with lower activity in the presence of cobalt or manganese . at ph  <dig> , e. coli  showed better activity with cobalt than with manganese  . at ph  <dig> , the optimal activating metal was nickel for e. coli , but higher arginase activity occurred when assayed with manganese rather than cobalt. with e. coli , optimal arginase activity was with cobalt   at either ph  <dig>  or  <dig> .

arginase activity of e. coli  was approximately 10-fold higher at ph  <dig>  than at  <dig>  in the presence of manganese . while e. coli  displayed optimal activity with cobalt when assayed at different phs, e. coli  had optimal activity with nickel at different phs. as previously reported  <cit> , the h. pylori arginase in the e. coli model  displayed optimal catalysis with cobalt at ph  <dig> .

in addition, enzyme activities from native organisms were compared after growth under identical conditions . while the b. anthracis enzyme had greater activity with nickel than without metal , the enzyme still surprisingly retained activity even in the absence of metal . at ph  <dig>  arginase activity in b. anthracis extracts was up to 1000-fold higher than in h. pylori extracts depending on the metal present and the ph of assay . even when assayed under sub-optimal conditions , the b. anthracis arginase was still more activity than the h. pylori enzyme . the only condition in which the h. pylori arginase was as active as the b. anthracis enzyme was when the enzymes were assayed at ph  <dig>  in cobalt . the results suggest that the e. coli models nearly completely mimic the data obtained from native organisms.

comparison of arginase activity between e. coli dh5α pbs-barocf and b. anthracis 7702
to strengthen the validity of the e. coli arginase model, we directly compared the arginase activities between e. coli  versus b. anthracis under identical conditions. under most assay conditions, the arginase expressed in e. coli versus b. anthracis showed similar trends in that highest arginase activity occurred at ph  <dig> with nickel . however, arginase activity in e. coli  was 5–15-fold higher than in b. anthracis under most conditions, probably due to increased gene dosage from the high-copy-number plasmid. the only case in which b. anthracis arginase activity was not significantly lower than arginase expressed in the e. coli model was when the extracts were assayed without metal. the second most optimal metal shifted from manganese at ph  <dig>  to cobalt at ph  <dig> , especially in the e. coli model . in addition, there was substantial activity without heat treatment or without addition of exogenous metal .

metal dose-dependency of b. anthracis arginase activity using viable cells
the b. anthracis arginase characteristics in live cells was examined to better ascertain whether the in vitro biochemical results would hold true in viable cells. previously, we showed that e. coli  increases its arginase activity when grown with increasing concentrations of metal  <cit> . here, we determined whether arginase could be detected in viable cells of b. anthracis or in e. coli , and if so, what metal was ideal for catalytic activity. in both viable cell models, arginase activity was detectable . at ph  <dig>  with e. coli , growing the cells in the presence of manganese  increased arginase activity of viable cells ; cobalt and nickel had no significant effect. at ph  <dig> , there was evidence of a slight dose-dependent increase with cobalt, nickel, or manganese , with manganese showing the greatest effect.

these experiments were also conducted in b. anthracis. remarkably, arginase activity increased when the bacteria were grown with exceptionally low manganese concentrations . even at the highest level of cobalt or nickel that can be used without adversely affecting growth , cobalt or nickel had no effect on arginase activity .

disruption of the b. anthracis rocf in pbs-barocf abolishes arginase activity in e. coli
above, it was demonstrated that b. anthracis rocf confers arginase activity to e. coli, suggesting that rocf is necessary and sufficient to confer arginase activity to e. coli. further proof was obtained by disrupting the rocf gene in pbs-barocf and transforming the resultant plasmid, pbs-barocf::kan, into e. coli to yield two transformants. one transformant had the kanamycin cassette in the forward  orientation with respect to rocf, while the other had the cassette in the reverse  orientation. e. coli carrying either clone had no detectable arginase activity , in contrast with pbs-barocf  . e. coli carrying the insert-free vector control, pbs, had  <dig>  ±  <dig>  u of background activity under these conditions.

characteristics of purified b. anthracis rocf
to determine whether the experimental results with b. anthracis and the e. coli model also hold true for the purified protein, we constructed an e. coli strain carrying the b. anthracis rocf gene translationally-fused to a his <dig> tag at the n-terminus . previous results indicated that the six histidine tag did not interfere with arginase activity  <cit> . the b. anthracis his6-barocf protein was purified to >95% homogeneity . purified his6-barocf had a km for arginine of  <dig> mm and a vmax of  <dig> pmol/sec at ph  <dig>  in the presence of  <dig> mm nickel.

when purified his6-barocf samples were assayed in the presence of nickel, the activity was up to 100-fold higher than with manganese or cobalt , similar to the findings in b. anthracis extracts . little to no arginase activity occurred in the presence of other divalent cations. additionally, the metal preference shifted from ni > co > mn at ph  <dig>  to ni > mn > co at ph  <dig> , as was observed in the e. coli model .

in a previous study, b. anthracis arginase activity decreased in samples exposed to heat , if the enzyme had not been pre-activated with manganese  <cit> . we determined that in the presence of cobalt, heat activation did not adversely affect arginase activity at ph  <dig>  or  <dig> , when compared to samples that were not heat-treated . remarkably, heat treatment dramatically increased arginase activity in the presence of nickel at either ph  <dig>  or  <dig> . as observed in b. anthracis extracts and in extracts using the e. coli model, optimal catalytic activity was observed when the purified enzyme was assayed in the presence of nickel , rather than manganese or cobalt.

catalytic activity of purified b. anthracis arginase was determined at various concentrations of nickel, manganese, or cobalt . nickel showed an increase in activity at a much lower concentration when compared to manganese or cobalt, confirming the results found in extract samples from the native organism and in e. coli expressing the b. anthracis arginase. micromolar nickel concentrations activated arginase >2-fold more than the optimal level of manganese , similar to evidence from extract samples. additionally, optimal concentrations for the three metals were: nickel, ≥  <dig>  mm; manganese, ≥  <dig> mm; and cobalt,  <dig> mm . at these optimal concentrations of metal, nickel conferred eight times more arginase activity than either manganese or cobalt.

complementation of the h. pylori arginase mutant with the b. anthracis rocf gene
since we were unsuccessful in several attempts to disrupt the rocf gene in b. anthracis, we instead transformed the b. anthracis rocf gene into an h. pylori rocf mutant devoid of arginase activity. this was achieved using the suicide plasmid complementation system developed previously  <cit> , but with an improved vector backbone, plsu <dig> . expression of the b. anthracis rocf gene was driven off the strong h. pylori urease promoter. transformation of the  <dig> rocf mutant with the empty vector control was previously shown not to complement arginase activity, as expected  <cit> . h. pylori complemented clones 4a and 4b acquired arginase activity that exhibited b. anthracis properties, namely, optimal arginase activity at ph  <dig> with nickel , but the overall activity was substantially lower than what is observed for native b. anthracis.

discussion
in this study arginase from b. anthracis was investigated under a variety of variables using six different models: i) extracts from b. anthracis; ii) extracts from e. coli ; iii) viable cells of b. anthracis; iv) viable cells of e. coli ; v) purified b. anthracis rocf ; and vi) extracts from the h. pylori rocf complemented with b. anthracis rocf. in nearly every case, all models lead to the same conclusions. these conclusions are: i) b. anthracis arginase displays highest catalytic activity with nickel as the metal cofactor, when extracts or the purified protein is examined; ii) b. anthracis arginase is active without heat activation and without addition of metals, although cobalt, manganese, and nickel all improve activity; iii) the enzyme has much higher activity at ph  <dig>  than at ph  <dig> ; iv) a viable cell arginase assay was developed in both b. anthracis and in an e. coli model and the characteristics of the enzyme mostly overlapped in the two models; v) viable cells exhibit far greater arginase activity when grown with manganese than with nickel or cobalt; vi) the b. anthracis arginase displays up to 1000-fold more specific activity than the h. pylori enzyme, depending on the conditions; vii) the b. anthracis rocf gene complements an h. pylori rocf mutant and confers b. anthracis-like arginase properties; and viii) the b. anthracis arginase gene is necessary and sufficient to confer arginase activity to e. coli.

most bacteria that possess arginase have a complete urea cycle for eliminating excess nitrogen as urea. in striking contrast, b. anthracis contains arginase, but lacks the other enzymes of the urea cycle  <cit> . the role of arginase in b. anthracis pathogenesis and cellular physiology is only recently becoming understood  <cit> , but our knowledge is far from complete. this current study uncovered novel characteristics about the enzyme as expressed in e. coli and in b. anthracis, and therefore lays important groundwork for future experiments in these areas. for the first time, it is demonstrated that the rocf gene from b. anthracis is the gene responsible for arginase activity, since e. coli containing b. anthracis rocf possessed arginase activity, while a kanamycin insertion into rocf abolished arginase activity. thus, rocf was necessary and sufficient to confer arginase activity to e. coli. these results do not, however, rule out the possibility that b. anthracis contains genes that influence arginase expression or activity. indeed, the b. anthracis genome contains a homologue of rocr, a positive transcriptional activator of the arginase-containing operon in b. subtilis  <cit> .

based on previous studies using the purified b. anthracis arginase  <cit> , it was expected that the enzyme would be most active with manganese as its metal cofactor. in contrast, we identified nickel as the optimum metal cofactor for arginase activity in b. anthracis extracts, with purified his6-barocf, and with extracts from e. coli . peak b. anthracis arginase activity was reached with much lower nickel concentrations than with manganese or cobalt. this suggests that in a cell-free system, the arginase has highest activity with nickel. the reason for the differences between our studies and those published previously  <cit>  may be the use of an improved enzyme assay, coupled with our ability to assay the enzyme in multiple model systems that were unavailable  <dig> years ago. to our knowledge, this is the first arginase to have optimal activity with nickel. however, it is recognized that the actual metal found in vivo in b. anthracis native arginase is critical to study in the near future by inductively coupled plasma-mass spectrometry analysis. such work cannot be accomplished with the current purified protein due to presence of the his <dig> tag and use of a nickel-containing column to purify the protein.

b. anthracis arginase was active with cobalt, manganese, and nickel. therefore, depending on the ph and growth conditions, b. anthracis arginase can promiscuously utilize various metals to achieve catalytic activity. this metal promiscuity may allow the arginase to utilize the metal that is most readily available under a given environmental situation or in vivo condition encountered by b. anthracis. the only other reported bacterial arginase that has good activity with multiple metals is b. caldovelox   <cit> , which has an arginase that is active with manganese, cobalt, cadmium and nickel. however, the b. caldovelox arginase protein , which is 73% identical to b. anthracis rocf, has optimal activity with manganese  <cit> .

ni2+ > mn2+ > co2+ , ni2+ > co2+ > mn2+ 
whole cells:
a underlined region denotes amino acids most likely involved in metal binding.

in viable cells we showed that arginase activity can be directly assayed from e. coli expressing b. anthracis rocf or in native b. anthracis. this implies that the substrate, l-arginine, was transported into the cells, and was converted to urea and l-ornithine; the latter was measured in this study. viable b. anthracis cells have up to ten-fold higher arginase activity with manganese than with cobalt or nickel . this finding seemingly contradicts our earlier finding that the b. anthracis arginase in cell-free systems has highest activity with nickel. two possible interpretations of this discrepancy are that i) b. anthracis arginase actually uses manganese rather than nickel in vivo and ii) b. anthracis arginase uses nickel, manganese or cobalt, depending on the situation. since viable b. anthracis displayed a remarkable increase in arginase activity when the organisms were grown with extremely low levels of manganese , we propose that b. anthracis expresses a very high affinity and specificity manganese transporter under our experimental conditions; this transporter would not be expected to transport nickel or cobalt, since addition of these metals did not increase b. anthracis arginase activity in viable cells . it is speculated that such a transporter would be able to scavenge manganese from sites expected to be very low in manganese concentrations, such as would exist in vivo. additional experiments are warranted to directly determine the metal cofactor found in the b. anthracis arginase active site.

the heat-activation step, which involves heating arginase at 50–60°c in the presence of metal, is required to obtain arginase activity in h. pylori and many other previously characterized arginases  <cit> . previous studies have shown that heat-activation decreases b. anthracis arginase activity if manganese is absent  <cit> ; we observed this with the purified protein as well. in contrast, we found that heating purified arginase in the presence of nickel dramatically improves activity over that of arginase that had not been heat-activated . this result suggests that arginase may fold in a more ideal conformation with heat treatment in the presence of nickel than with cobalt or manganese, raising the possibility that nickel is the physiologic metal cofactor used by b. anthracis arginase. despite these observations, however, substantial b. anthracis arginase activity still remains without heat-activation , unlike the case for most previously characterized arginases. moreover, b. anthracis arginase has substantial activity without exogenously added metal , suggesting that sufficient levels of the residual metal cofactor may already be tightly bound to the enzyme's active site. this raises the possibility that the metal cofactor is more tightly bound to b. anthracis rocf than it is in other arginases. all of the other arginase have been proposed to have at least one of the two metal ions loosely bound to the active site  <cit> .

we demonstrated that the h. pylori rocf mutant devoid of arginase activity could regain arginase activity with b. anthracis-like properties when the rocf mutant was complemented with the b. anthracis rocf gene , suggesting that the b. anthracis rocf protein itself harbors at least some of the properties that allow it to have optimal activity with nickel. however, the b. anthracis rocf gene did not fully restore arginase activity to h. pylori even though a strongly active h. pylori urease promoter was used. this lack of full restoration may be due to codon usage differences between h. pylori and b. anthracis or to species-specific proteins that affect arginase activity. for example, h. pylori may have an arginase metal-delivering chaperone that does not recognize the b. anthracis enzyme. it is also possible that h. pylori has mechanisms to prevent arginase activity from becoming too high, which could lead to arginine starvation, since it was previously shown that wild type h. pylori carrying two copies of the arginase gene only have 25% more arginase activity than the wild type strain with a single copy  <cit> . arginine is an essential amino acid for h. pylori but not b. anthracis. b. anthracis can therefore have much higher arginase activity without starving itself for arginine, since b. anthracis can synthesize more arginine intracellularly.

CONCLUSIONS
the h. pylori arginase displays unique ph  and metal  optima within the arginase superfamily. from the results of this study, the b. anthracis arginase likely displays a unique metal  optimum in the arginase superfamily and can potentially use multiple metals  to achieve catalytic activity suitable for its niche. characteristic differences in arginases of b. anthracis versus h. pylori may reflect distinct in vivo niches occupied by these organisms. this study provides the foundation for further examination of the role of arginase in b. anthracis pathogenesis and cellular physiology.

