BACKGROUND
johne’s disease, a chronic disease caused by infection with mycobacterium avium subsp. paratuberculosis , costs the us dairy industry $ <dig> to $ <dig> million annually due to increased cow replacement costs and reduction in milk production  <cit>  and also decreased fertility in high-shedding animals  <cit> . the control of johne’s disease requires good herd management practices, such as preventing fecal contamination of feed and water and testing replacement cattle for map. good management procedures focus on reducing transmission and the introduction of map into the herd  <cit> . because map infected cows may not show clinical signs during their productive lifetime  <cit> , it is important to test many cows in a herd to properly assess map infection prevalence.

a simple, quick test that provides an estimate of herd-level map prevalence would allow herd managers to respond by changing their management strategies, thus improving their probability of eliminating and preventing map infection in the long term. map surveillance and monitoring has been proposed as an ideal testing strategy to ensure that infection pressures are low while keeping the cost of testing low  <cit> . herd-level map-prevalence testing often involves pooled fecal samples used for culture or pcr. however pooled sample strategies are still time-consuming because individual cows or environmental areas must be sampled  <cit> .

the magnitude of an elisa test result for map antibodies in the milk of individual cows has been reported to be related to the likelihood of an animal testing positive on a fecal culture for map  <cit> . collins et al.  <cit>  also reported that the level of map shedding, considered a measure of the stage of infection, was directly related to the ability of an individual milk elisa test to detect an infected animal. the parachek commercial elisa tests have been found to have a high specificity and a sensitivity ranging from  <dig> to 67% on individual milk samples  <cit> . when used on bulk tank milk, the pourquier elisa test had a sensitivity of 57%  <cit> . additionally, van weering et al.  <cit>  demonstrated that certified map-negative herds had a low sample/positive  ratio on bulk milk pourquier elisa tests and they showed that the likelihood of a herd having a map-infected animal increased with increasing bulk milk elisa s/p ratio. finally, bulk milk elisa tests have been shown to perform similarly to serum elisa tests at the herd level, with a sensitivity of  <dig> to 83%, when fecal culture is used as a reference  <cit> . the sensitivity can be improved by using modified protocols  <cit> . together, these published results on bulk milk and individual cow milk provide a logical validation for the use of bulk milk elisa corrected optical density  as a continuous outcome value to scale the risk of map infection in the lactating herd.

determining associations between management factors and bulk milk elisa values will provide a simple, efficient method for farms to respond to herd map infections by changing their management practices or understanding risks associated with certain management practices. however, few studies have used bulk milk elisa to identify herd-level risk factors for increased map prevalence, while studies relating individual animal fecal or serum test results to management practices are more common .

the objective of this study, therefore, is to relate bulk tank milk elisa optical density with potential risk factors for map prevalence in  <dig> farms. our aim was to determine if particular management practices and herd characteristics are associated with increased bulk milk elisa values.

RESULTS
the median herd size was  <dig> for organic farms and  <dig> for conventional farms included in the multivariate model. herd size ranged from  <dig> to  <dig> on the organic farms and  <dig> to  <dig> on the conventional farms. organic farms produced an average of  <dig>  lbs of milk per cow per year whereas conventional farms in the model produced an average of  <dig>  lbs per cow annually. all  <dig> of the organic farms grazed their cattle whereas  <dig> conventional herds grazed and  <dig> conventional farms did not graze. all of the non-grazing farms allowed heifers to graze pasture.

the corrected od, for all herds, ranged from - <dig>  to  <dig>  with a mean of - <dig>  and a standard deviation of  <dig> . the range was - <dig>  to  <dig>  for herds included in the multivariate model. the mean of the included herds was - <dig>  and the standard deviation was  <dig> . there were two farms that had a corrected od greater than  <dig>  and these were excluded from the multivariate model due to missing data.

all of the variables initially included in the multivariate model are summarized in table  <dig>  the stepwise order of removal from the final regression model was as follows: written plan for johne’s disease , parity , calving area , jersey herd , spreading manure , source of drinking water , open farm , sine seasonality , average yield , heifer and cow contact on pasture , johne’s program , and calf housing . the variables remaining in the final multivariate model are summarized in table  <dig> 

linear regression model on mycobacterium avium subsp. paratuberculosis elisa optical density from bulk tank milk samples of  <dig> farms. multivariate model was built by backwards stepwise elimination and started with all variables listed in table  <dig> 

the final multivariate model residuals were approximately normal with a slight skew to the right. however, it may be expected that the proc glm procedure still produces valid results when the assumption of error normality is mildly violated  <cit> .

none of the included study design variables that were forced into the models were significant in the final multivariate model . the cosine seasonality curve was very significant . it demonstrated a peak in od during the summer months and a trough during the winter months. the regression coefficient of - <dig>  indicates the maximum drop in winter of the corrected od and the maximum increase of + <dig>  in summer. the seasonality is most evident in the farms sampled in late  <dig> through  <dig> . seasonal calving farms and non-grazing farms were well distributed across the sampling time frame . there were  <dig> farms in the final multivariate model that indicated they used seasonal calving practices. of these  <dig> farms,  <dig> responded that they tried to calve in the spring,  <dig> tried to calve in the summer,  <dig> in the fall and  <dig> in the winter. seasonal farms did not necessarily calve over just one season, and all farms with fall or winter calving also had at least one additional calving season. the bulk milk elisa value of seasonal calving farms differed with season of sampling, with a maximum value in the spring and continually decreasing to a minimum in the winter .

the procedure for managing map-positive cows was the only other significant variable in the multivariate model. compared to farms that had never observed clinical johne’s disease, farms that kept map-positive cows had a significant increase of  <dig>  in their bulk milk od . farms that culled map-positive cows also had significant increases in bulk milk elisa value when compared to farms without a history of johne’s disease but those that culled the cow immediately had a much smaller increase  than those that culled the cow after a period of delay, such as after her next calving . the final multivariate model explained 40% of the variation in bulk tank elisa od.

discussion
bulk milk could have a high concentration of map antibodies because a dairy herd has a high prevalence of map infected cows or because a few infected cows produce large quantities of map antibodies. variation in milk map antibody concentration within groups of fecal-positive and groups of fecal-negative cows has been observed due to a small number of cows producing a high level of antibodies and changes in antibody production within individual cows over time  <cit> . a study by van weering et al.  <cit>  showed that a 100-fold dilution of a positive individual milk elisa sample may still result in a positive elisa result, indicating that a few positive cows may impact the bulk milk elisa result. given the relatively small herd sizes in our study, it is clear that a few cows producing high concentrations of antibodies may influence bulk milk elisa titers. the precise impact of a single elisa positive cow would depend on the herd size, milk production, and the difference between the individual milk antibody concentration of a particular cow and the average antibody concentration of the rest of the herd. therefore, some farms may have higher elisa values than average because they have higher than average map infection rates or because they have some cows producing high concentrations of map antibodies. careful comparison of individual cow milk elisa tests and cow milk production level to a bulk tank test would be required to differentiate between farms that have several infected, average antibody-producing cows, and those that have a limited number of animals with high antibody titers.

in our model, the location of a farm  was not significantly associated with corrected od. however, other studies have found that herds in the midwest are more likely to be positive for johne’s disease  <cit>  and observe clinical signs of johne’s disease in their herd  <cit> . herd size, another study design variable, despite not being significantly associated with elisa results in this study has previously been found to be positively associated with herd infection status, with larger herds having a greater risk  <cit> . additionally, wells and wagner  <cit>  observed a positive association between group housing for calves and the herd infection status whereas our model did not find a significant association between types of calf housing and elisa result. spreading manure on forage fields  <cit>  and open water sources  <cit>  have also been shown to be associated with a higher risk of map infection, but were not significantly associated with corrected od in our model. finally, other studies have demonstrated an increased risk of johne’s disease with high parity and jersey breed cows  <cit> , although those variables did not remain in our multivariate model.

the significant seasonal effect, with map antibodies highest in the summer and lowest in the winter , represents a change in antibody secretion into bulk milk across the seasons. seasonal calving could account for this periodic change in antibodies because milk antibodies are, on average, greatest at the beginning and end of lactation  <cit> . a farm that uses seasonal calving would see a herd-level increase in bulk milk antibodies, including antibodies against map, during or shortly after the calving season when most of their cows are just starting to lactate. this could result in high optical densities from the detection of map-specific and non-specific antibodies. the bulk milk elisa value of seasonal calving farms, the majority of which indicated that they attempt to calve their cows in the spring, was greatest during the spring. this supports a days-in-milk dependent change in antibody secretion as a potential explanation for the seasonal trend in map antibodies in milk . thus, seasonal calving could explain some of the seasonal variation but not all since only  <dig> of the  <dig> farms in the multivariate model used seasonal calving and non-seasonal calving farms still show a seasonal trend in od . the seasonal variation also exists in non-grazing conventional farms , suggesting that the seasonal variation in map antibodies is not limited to grazing farms, which may have inherent seasonality in their calvings due to seasonal nutritional differences regardless of planned seasonal calving practices. additionally, the seasonality variable remains significant  after removing all grazing farms from the final multivariate model.

another possible explanation for the seasonal change in antibodies is a seasonal fluctuation in map load. it is unlikely that map prevalence changes seasonally on any given farm but the map load in the environment or in the cows could potentially change with the seasons. a previous study found a higher prevalence of map-positive carcasses, as determined by ileum and lymph node cultures and pcr, in the spring than in other seasons  <cit> . additionally, an increase in viable map isolated from retail milk in the summer has been shown  <cit> . humoral responses are known to occur in subclinical map infections, which results in activated b cells producing antibodies  <cit> . it has previously been suggested that map exposure can trigger antibody production in infection-resistant adult cattle, possibly resulting in an increased map elisa titer  <cit> . thus it is possible that the increase in map load of individual animals during the spring and summer could result in an increased humoral immune response in herdmates and therefore increase antibody levels in milk.

if bulk milk map elisa is used as an indicator of map infection, it needs to be corrected for the seasonal changes in map milk antibodies. consistently sampling during only one season may need to be recommended in order to compare elisa results across time at one farm or among farms. our results would need to be confirmed by similar studies to make such recommendations with more confidence.

both culling and keeping cows known to be map-infected are associated with an increase in bulk milk elisa value compared to herds without a history of clinical johne’s disease, which suggests that farms with protocols for map-positive cows in place are more likely infected with map and possibly have a higher map prevalence. the larger increase in bulk milk od associated with keeping map-positive cows or culling them after calving compared to the small increase in od associated with culling map-positive cows immediately was not statistically significant . however, it has previously been suggested that culling cows immediately is the best method for controlling map antibodies in bulk milk. lu et al.  <cit>  demonstrated the importance of culling positive animals immediately after detection in order to control map transmission. map-positive cows that are kept in the herd for any period of time could increase the bulk milk map antibody titer by producing map antibodies in their milk and by re-exposing other cows, which may then begin secreting map antibodies into milk. this would be particularly true for cows with a progressive course of disease, in which antibodies rise rapidly as the cow progresses from moderate to heavy fecal shedding  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
in summary, increased map antibody concentrations in bulk milk were associated with season of sampling and the protocols that were used on the farm for managing map-positive cows. the association between the season of sampling and map antibody concentration could be the result of seasonal variations in map in cows and in the environment, and could be related to seasonal calving practices. this seasonal change in map antibodies in bulk milk will need to be considered when using bulk milk elisa as a map surveillance tool. the significance of protocols to manage map-positive cows pointed towards the importance of culling known map-positive cows immediately.

