BACKGROUND
with an age of 9– <dig> million years, lake tanganyika is the oldest of the three east african great lakes and harbors the morphologically, behaviorally and ecologically most diverse cichlid species flock, whose ancestors colonized the swampy and shallow ecosystem of the emerging lake shortly after its formation  <cit> . the  <dig> or more cichlid species of lake tanganyika have been grouped into a number of mostly endemic tribes, among which the tribe lamprologini  <cit>  is the most species-rich with > <dig> species. the lamprologini are the only substrate-breeding endemics in lake tanganyika; nearly all of the remaining species are maternal or biparental mouthbrooders. several of the lamprologini developed a distinctive life style, in that they live and breed in empty shells of the gastropod species neothauma tanganyicense, and sometimes pila ovata, paramelania spp. and lavigeria spp.  <cit> . shell-breeding represents a highly successful evolutionary strategy, and although the behavior arose multiple times during the radiation of the lamprologines  <cit> , most shell-breeding species are members of the "ossified group", a monophyletic group of  <dig> species characterized by a sesamoid bone within the labial filament  <cit> . the "ossified group" includes both the smallest  and the largest lamprologine ; in shell-breeding species, either both sexes are sufficiently small to fit in gastropod-shells, or the sexes display extreme size dimorphism with dwarf females and males too large to enter the shells  <cit> .

most shell-breeding species utilize shell-beds aggregated by wave action or individual shells scattered on the lake floor, but males of one species – lamprologus callipterus – collect and pile shells to nests  <cit> . some of these shells may already be inhabited by another shell breeder, which thus gets transferred into the l. callipterus nest. additionally, shell-breeders often colonize these nests actively, such that shell nests and natural shell aggregations often house a densely packed multi-species community of individuals living and breeding in closest vicinity . given that large males spawn openly over the mouth of their mate's shell, this concentration of breeding pairs of different species sets the stage for accidental hybridization and hybridization associated with the employment of alternative reproductive strategies  <cit> .

in order to obtain a better understanding of the evolution and pathways of diversification of shell-breeding lamprologine cichlids, we aimed to reconstruct the phylogeny of the "ossified group" of lamprologines by means of sequences of the entire mitochondrial nadh dehydrogenase subunit  <dig> gene  and a set of aflp markers, and investigate the role of past and ongoing hybridization in the diversification of this group of fishes. morphological data were incorporated in the analyses to infer hybridization partners.

RESULTS
hybrid speciation reticulates the phylogeny of the "ossified group" of lamprologines
reticulate evolution became first apparent in phylogenetic reconstructions based on  <dig> bp of the mitochondrial nd <dig> gene. the phylogeny of the ossified-group lamprologines  is largely congruent with previous reconstructions based on different taxon sampling  <cit> , subdividing the "ossified group" into  <dig> –  <dig> clades depending on the tree-building algorithm used. a linearized tree analysis suggests that the majority of clades arose at a divergence level of about 7% , which corresponds to major cladogenesis events in other lake tanganyika cichlid lineages  <cit>  and platythelphusid crabs  <cit> . their diversification may thus have been induced by the same environmental factor, most likely by a substantial drop of the lake level during a period of aridification in eastern africa about  <dig>  to  <dig> million years ago  <cit> .

despite the strength of the phylogenetic signal and the high resolution of reconstructed species relationships, the mtdna phylogeny contains several groupings in striking conflict with morphological, ecological and behavioral similarities. remarkably, all inconsistencies involve gastropod shell breeders. the first pair of eco-morphologically and behaviorally highly similar species resolved in different clades on the mitochondrial tree is neolamprologus similis and n. multifasciatus . males and females of both species are sufficiently small to enter gastropod shells – n. multifasciatus is the smallest tanganyikan cichlid known to date - and both species are facultative shell-breeders, which arrange their nests by excavating sand craters around small accumulations of empty shells and live in family groups. the second group of morphologically and behaviorally similar species separated in the mitochondrial phylogeny includes lamprologus ocellatus, l. meleagris, l. speciosus and n. wauthioni. these species are sexually monomorphic , small-bodied obligatory shell-breeders with a maximum size of about  <dig> cm that prefer areas with low densities of empty gastropod shells. in each species, the males defend territories and hold harems of two to five females for whom they bury shells in a way that only the opening of the shell remains accessible to a resident female  <cit> . l. meleagris occurs sympatrically with n. wauthioni in the north, and with l. speciosus in the south of its distribution range. despite their morphological and behavioral similarity, each of these four species clusters with different, eco-morphologically very dissimilar, species . although contrasting with phenotypic data, the mitochondrial tree topology receives high bootstrap support, and a monophyletic clade of l. speciosus, l. meleagris, l. ocellatus and n. wauthioni requires at least  <dig> additional steps in a mp phylogeny . forcing n. similis and n. multifasciatus into a monophyletic clade did not significantly increase tree length , but bootstrap support for the non-sister group relationship between n. multifasciatus and n. similis was high.

note: in all species males grow slightly larger than females, but there are only five species – lamprologus callipterus, lamprologus lemairii, lamprologus ornatipinnis, neolamprologus calliurus, neolamprologus fasciatus – exhibiting extreme sexual size dimorphism with males growing to at least the double size of females.

mg, maternal guarding; bg, biparental guarding.

+, species is not included in this study.

*, lepidiolamprologus attenuatus is too large to enter empty gastropod-shells. thus, this species occasionally deposits its eggs on the outside of the shell; after hatching fry is transferred into the shell.

information on the species listed is based on .

in contrast, species relationships inferred from a set of  <dig> polymorphic aflp markers were consistent with predictions based on phenotypic trait similarities, as each of the two groups of eco-morphologically similar species was resolved as a monophyletic clade . disparate mitochondrial and nuclear reconstructions were also obtained for the phylogenetic position of another shell-breeding species: neolamprologus fasciatus clustered with l. callipterus and n. wauthioni in the mtdna-phylogeny, but was placed ancestral to n. multifasciatus and n. similis by aflp analyses. a constrained mitochondrial tree congruent with the nuclear placement of n. fasciatus would require significantly more evolutionary steps under both parsimony and likelihood criteria . although the current data allow only limited inference of the phylogenetic history of n. fasciatus, we can definitely rule out a close affinity to the genus altolamprologus, which has been suggested due to superficial morphological similarities  <cit> .

ancient hybridization and ancient incomplete lineage sorting are alternative explanations for the observed discrepancy between the mitochondrial phylogeny and relationships predicted by nuclear markers, phenotypes and behavior. mismatches among gene trees can result from the differential assortment of ancestral polymorphisms, when intervals between successive branching events are too short for lineage sorting to be completed within each branch prior to the next split  <cit> . this phenomenon occurs, for example, when taxa speciate rapidly during adaptive radiation, and has been repeatedly reported from the cichlid species flocks in the east african great lakes  <cit> . in the mitochondrial phylogeny of the shell-breeding lamprologini, the taxa affected by inconsistent mitochondrial and nuclear tree topologies  have their most recent common ancestor near or at the base of the tree. long interior branches and bootstrap support for many interior nodes in the mitochondrial phylogeny do not indicate a rapid burst of cladogenesis, such that there may be no major effect of ancient incomplete lineage sorting on the phylogenetic reconstruction.

nuclear loci coalesce more slowly  <cit> , and are therefore subjected to lineage sorting incongruence over longer periods. the combination of multiple independent loci, as implemented by the aflp technique, is expected to overcome the problem of idiosyncratic lineage sorting at individual loci  <cit> . additionally, the species relationships suggested by our aflp data are supported by phenotypic and behavioral similarities, which makes it unlikely that the aflp clades result from stochastic lineage sorting rather than reflecting actual relationships.

we contend that the incongruence between the mitochondrial phylogeny and multiple nuclear markers, phenotypes and behavior is best explained by ancient introgressive hybridization events. furthermore, it is possible that hybridization was directly associated with the speciation of l. meleagris, n. wauthioni, l. speciosus, and n. multifasciatus , and perhaps also n. fasciatus. species status according to the biological species concept  <cit>  of the presumed hybrid taxa is supported by sympatric occurrences of l. meleagris with l. speciosus in the south and n. wauthioni in the north of its distribution range, and the lake-wide, continuous distribution of n. fasciatus.

although published mitochondrial phylogenies of the mouthbrooding tribes encompass representative species samples [ <cit> , and unpublished data), striking incongruencies with behavioral, ecological and morphological data were detected only in the tribes tropheini  <cit>  and eretmodini  <cit> . in the tropheine genus petrochromis, the incongruence was explained by parallel evolution of distinct eco-morphotypes  <cit> , whereas disparate mitochondrial placements of color morphs and species in the tropheine genus tropheus  <cit>  and in the tribe eretmodini  <cit>  were attributed to introgressive hybridization after secondary admixis. in contrast, diversifying hybridization has been proposed in studies of the substrate breeding lamprologini, including a role of introgressive hybridization in the speciation of neolamprologus marunguensis  <cit>  and of lepidiolamprologus nkambae, a non-shell-breeding member of the "ossified group" of lamprologines  <cit> . our results with the shell-breeding lamprologines provide a further example of potential evolutionary consequences of introgressive hybridization in another guild of lamprologine cichlids.

in two instances, species were resolved non-monophyletically. altolamprologus calvus was paraphyletic in relation to a. compressiceps in the aflp tree, and lepidiolamprologus sp. "meeli-boulengeri" was paraphyletic with respect to l. meeli in the aflp tree, while the two taxa were placed in different clades by the mitochondrial sequences. the taxonomy of these species is not well resolved, in that populations with intermediate phenotypes and phenotypic divergence across geographic distances have not yet been adequately addressed . the here identified incongruence between the phylogenetic and current taxonomic resolution must not be dismissed as a possible consequence of persistent ancestral polymorphism in the genetic data, but pinpoints a need for more detailed taxonomic and molecular genetic work on these taxa.

ongoing hybridization among "ossified group" lamprologines
evidence for past hybridization affecting the evolutionary history of the "ossified group" of lamprologines obviously raises the question whether there is also evidence for ongoing hybridization among shell-breeding cichlids. indeed, within a small area of suitable habitat containing several l. callipterus nests in southern lake tanganyika , we collected four specimens that could not be identified to species level but were clearly lamprologine cichlids. although lamprologines hybridize readily in captivity, this is the first proof of viable natural hybrids in lake tanganyika. mitochondrial sequences determined that the mothers of the hybrids were members of the n. brevis/n. calliurus – clade . hybrid phenotypes and data from six microsatellite loci suggested that two of the hybrids were sired by l. callipterus and the other two by n. fasciatus . morphological similarity indices , and a principal component analysis of morphometric and meristic measurements  further supported the phenotypically and genetically inferred identity of the parental species. furthermore, territorial males of the two putative paternal species l. callipterus and n. fasciatus are too large to enter empty shells , and release their sperm over the entrance of their mate's shell to fertilize her eggs. dispersion of sperm into adjacent shells by water currents and wave action can bypass prezygotic isolation between species sharing a shell-bed, and result in trans-specific fertilization and hybridization, when post-zygotic isolation is incomplete.

within the lamprologines, the inferred hybridization partners are only distantly related, as the split between the mitochondrial lineages including n. brevis/calliurus and the lineage containing l. callipterus and n. fasciatus is estimated as  <dig>   –  <dig>   million years before presence  based on a molecular clock for the nd <dig> gene of cichlid fish  <cit> . the two n. fasciatus hybrids and one of the l. callipterus hybrids shared a mitochondrial haplotype, whereas a different haplotype was detected in the second l. callipterus hybrid . hence, the four hybrid individuals represent at least three independent hybridization events between the genetically and morphologically highly divergent species, suggesting that hybridization among shell-breeding species is not uncommon. introgressive hybridization is commonly associated with loss of diversity through extinction or homogenization of species  <cit> , and the maintenance of species integrity in the face of hybridization suggests that introgression between lamprologine species is constrained by low hybrid fitness. accidental hybridization among shell-breeders is independent of prezygotic species barriers and unresponsive to reinforcement of pre-mating isolation, such that hybridization rates may not decrease over long divergence times despite possible costs through reduced hybrid fitness.

CONCLUSIONS
compared to plants  <cit> , the role of hybridization in speciation and diversification in animals has been demonstrated in only a few examples  <cit>  including several cichlid species  <cit> . our study suggests that shell-breeding lamprologine cichlids experience considerable rates of hybridization without suffering significant erosion of phenotypic diversity. the fixation of introgressed mitochondrial haplotypes reticulated the evolution of this group. although our data do not provide direct proof of speciation by hybridization, they are consistent with the hypothesis that hybridization might have contributed to the diversification of gastropod shell-breeding cichlids. the high degree of morphological differentiation among lamprologine species entails elevated levels of functional diversity and a strong potential for transgressive segregation in hybrid populations, a condition that allows for the occasional emergence of a successful novel trait combination  <cit> . stabilization of a recombinant population requires reproductive isolation from the parental species, which has been shown to ensue from ecological separation from both parent species in several cases of hybrid speciation  <cit> . during the evolutionary history of lake tanganyika cichlids, periodical habitat changes associated with lake level fluctuations may have occasionally promoted the stabilization of hybrid populations by providing novel ecological niches, and by precipitating displacements and splits of populations  <cit> , such that geographic separation may have added to or even substituted for ecologically mediated isolation.

