BACKGROUND
molecular oxygen freely diffuses across bacterial membranes and can give rise to damaging reactive oxygen species  such as superoxide radicals , hydrogen peroxide , and hydroxyl radicals . these highly reactive molecules lead to a variety of harmful effects within the bacterial cell, including inactivation of fe-s-containing proteins and damage to dna and to lipids, in some bacteria. for aerobic microorganisms the presence of these toxic species is by nature unavoidable and they have therefore evolved a variety of protective enzymes to preemptively detoxify ros.

the enteric bacteria have been intensively studied for their response to ros . in contrast, leptospires lack a number of the enzymes used by enteric bacteria to combat oxidative damage  <cit>  and are also more susceptible to h2o2-mediated killing than other microorganisms  <cit> . nascimento and colleagues speculated that the bat proteins of l. interrogans might partially compensate for the shortage of oxidative stress proteins by providing an additional line of defense against oxidative damage  <cit> .

the bat proteins were first identified by tang and co-workers in a transposon mutagenesis screen of the anaerobe bacteroides fragilis <cit> . the transposon inserted into the fourth of five contiguous open reading frames and resulted in reduced levels of aerotolerance and pathogenicity. the genes were designated bat, for bacteriodes aerotolerance genes, and were shown to comprise an operon. the mutant phenotype could be partially complemented by the addition of reducing agents and the bat proteins were proposed to directly reduce oxidatively-damaged proteins in the periplasm or, alternatively, to help create a reduced environment in the periplasm by exporting reducing power equivalents. interestingly, anaerobic growth did not restore the growth rate to that of wild-type and the addition of reducing agents also increased growth of the wild-type strain, although not as dramatically as it did for the mutant.

recently, two bat homologs in francisella tularensis were inactivated and the bat mutants were shown to have a reduced ability to replicate in macrophage cells and were also attenuated for virulence in a mouse model  <cit> . the specific function of the bat proteins, however, was not determined in f. tularensis. genome sequences have identified homologs in a wide variety of other prokaryotes, including all families that comprise the phylum spirochaetes . although conserved in all branches of the spirochaetes, the number and combination of bat homologs vary by species. however, the function of the bat proteins in spirochetes or in any other species has not been elucidated.

although pathogenic leptospires also contain bat homologs and are more resistant to peroxide exposure than the saprophyte l. biflexa <cit> , the pathogenic spp. are notoriously recalcitrant to targeted allelic exchange. since l. biflexa is more amenable to genetic manipulation than pathogenic species, it serves as a model organism for genetic studies in leptospires. therefore, we used l. biflexa to investigate the function of the bat proteins and to better understand the response of leptospires to oxidative stress. here, we report the engineered deletion of the three contiguous l. biflexa bat genes and characterization of the mutant phenotype and oxidative stress response.

RESULTS
the bat genes are distributed throughout the spirochaetes and encode conserved protein motifs
homologs of the bat genes are present in each family of the spirochaetes , although not in all species. in contrast to the  <dig> genes present in b. fragilis, l. biflexa contains  <dig> bat genes and the pathogenic leptospires contain  <dig>  <cit> . however, the batb and batc genes are fused in l. biflexa, which does not appear to be the case for the pathogenic species, and explains the discrepancy in gene number. fusions of bat coding regions also appear to have occurred in borrelia burgdorferi and spirochaeta thermophila  and were also reported for f. tularensis type a strain schu s <dig>  <cit> .

analysis of bata and batb sequences identified motifs predicted to mediate protein-protein interactions, . the presence of these motifs suggest that bat proteins may interact with each other to form a large protein complex. all three proteins are predicted to contain multiple trans-membrane helices, also predicted for the b. fragilis homologs, and batd possesses a predicted signal sequence for export, suggesting that these proteins may associate with either the inner or outer membrane of l. biflexa.


deletion of bat genes
the l. biflexa bat genes are located within a contiguous stretch of  <dig> genes on chromosome ii that are transcriptionally oriented in the same direction . two different mutations were engineered using allelic replacement with the kanamycin-resistance cassette to delete either bata alone or batabd together; flanking genes were left intact. three mutant clones from each transformation were shown to have lost the corresponding bat loci by southern blot analysis of genomic dna . pcr analysis also confirmed the presence of the antibiotic-resistance gene  and flanking genes, but bat loci were absent, as expected . a single transformant of each type was randomly chosen for further characterization.


transcript analyses indicate independent promoters in the bat gene cluster
transcript levels of bat genes and other orfs were assessed by qrt-pcr with rna from wild-type , Δbata and Δbatabd strains cultured in vitro . transcript from the bat genes is present in the wt strain but undetectable in the Δbatabd mutant, as expected. in the Δbata mutant strain, only the bata transcript is undetectable, but transcripts from the downstream orfs, including batb and batd, were detected. although the arrangement of the  <dig> genes suggest they may be co-transcribed in an operon, the deletion of the bat genes does not eliminate transcript from the downstream orfs and we hypothesize that each gene has an independent promoter. interestingly, even orfs immediately downstream of the deleted genes had observable levels of transcript, even though their promoter regions were most likely located in the deleted sequences. however, the levels of transcript from the downstream genes were significantly lower in the mutant strains compared to transcript levels in the wt: htpg transcript levels were  <dig> -fold lower in the Δbatabd strain, and batb transcript levels were >12-fold lower in the Δbata mutant.

morphology and growth rate of bat mutants are equivalent to wild-type
the signal sequence of batd suggests a periplasmic or membrane-associated location for at least one member of this protein family. we therefore examined whether the absence of bat proteins affected cellular shape or structure. l. biflexa morphology was assessed by scanning and transmission electron microscopy, including negative stains and freeze-substitution fixation to retain a more native state of the cells. as shown in representative images in figure 4a, no morphological or ultrastructural differences were observed between the wt and mutant strains by any of these analyses.

growth rates of wt, Δbata, and Δbatabd strains were compared during in vitro cultivation in emjh liquid medium and also for colony formation on solid emjh medium. no significant differences in growth rate were observed when cultured in liquid medium, regardless of whether the cultures were aerated or static . colony morphology and rate of formation were similar among all strains .

as the mutant strains did not display an obvious growth defect compared to wt, we assessed the growth dynamics of both parent and mutant when cultured together in the same medium . wt and Δbat-abd strains were co-inoculated into the same cultures  and assessed daily to determine if population ratios changed over time. as shown in figure 4c, relative proportions of each strain did not change significantly over time and this was statistically confirmed by two-way analysis of variance  with the bonferroni post-test. therefore, the bat proteins do not significantly affect l. biflexa growth, either in pure culture or when the mutant is mixed with an equal density of wt cells.

deletion of bat genes does not alter tolerance to oxidative stress
previous researchers speculated that bat proteins might provide a mechanism for coping with oxidative stress  <cit> . therefore, we compared the resistance of wt and Δbatabd strains to various concentrations of hydrogen peroxide and a more stable organic peroxide , and to superoxide. we utilized the Δbat-abd mutant in this comparison as we hypothesized that it would have a similar or greater phenotype than the single gene deletion in the Δbata strain. both the wt and the Δbatabd strain exhibited comparable levels of susceptibi-lity to all ros tested, with greater than 90% killing when exposed to  <dig> μm concentrations of h2o <dig>  but resistant to  <dig> μm . similarly, when l. biflexa strains were exposed to paraquat, a redox-cycling compound that generates superoxide, wt and mutant strains displayed similar susceptibility to paraquat concentrations .

l. biflexa lacks an inducible stress response to ros 
bacteria such as e. coli and salmonella typhimurium exhibit an inducible response to oxidative agents  <cit> . when activated by exposure to sublethal levels of oxidizing agents, this stress response allows some bacteria to induce enzymes that allow the cell to survive otherwise lethal levels of oxidants. as the bat proteins did not aid in resistance to oxidative stress, we next tested whether their function may relate to sensing oxidizing agents and inducing a specific stress response in leptospira. mid-to-late log phase cultures were incubated in sublethal concentrations of either h2o <dig>  or paraquat  to potentially induce an oxidative stress response. cultures were then subjected to various concentrations of ros that included normally lethal levels, further incubated, and viable bacteria enumerated . surprisingly, both pretreated and untreated cells were sensitive to similar concentrations of ros, indicating that l. biflexa does not exhibit an inducible response to either h2o <dig> or superoxide. the Δbatabd mutant strain was likewise treated but did not show any differences from the wt with either pretreatment .

differential proteomic analysis of wt and mutant strains detected changes in htpg levels among membrane-associated proteins
differential in-gel electrophoresis  of wt versus Δbatabd mutant protein samples was used to identify changes in protein levels between strains . protein samples were separated into membrane-associated and soluble fractions. no differences were observed in the soluble fractions  but in the membrane-associated comparison, a single protein was observed to vary between samples . the region encompassing the protein was excised from the gel, trypsin-digested and identified by mass spectrometry as htpg , which is encoded by the gene immediately downstream of batd . the htpg protein appeared as several closely migrating spots, with the main mass of protein indicated in figure  <dig>  protein levels were higher in the wt compared to the Δbatabd strain, and differences for each spot ranged from  <dig> -fold for the minor spot to greater than 4-fold higher for the main protein spot. this difference in htpg protein levels approximately corresponds to the difference observed in transcript levels by qrt-pcr between wt and Δbatabd strains . the bat proteins were not identified by this approach. bat protein levels may be relatively low and the fold change between mutant and wt may not be significant enough to be detected by the conditions tested here. for example, transcript levels of htpg in the wt strain are more than 10-fold higher than any of the bat transcripts .

discussion
bat homologs are present in all families of the spirochaetales , despite the vast evolutionary divergence noted in this order  <cit> . the retention of these proteins suggests they confer an evolutionary advantage to spirochetes, even though the environment and life cycle of these bacteria are incredibly diverse, ranging from free-living aerobic saprophytes  and anaerobic thermophiles  to mammalian pathogens . l. borgpetersenii, purportedly undergoing genome reduction, retains the same number and order of bat genes as l. interrogans <cit> , again suggesting the bat proteins provide an important function that prevents their elimination even in a decaying genome. one spirochete appears to be an exception to this theory – the obligate human pathogen and syphilis agent, treponema pallidum, in which we were unable to identify any bat homologs.

in addition to the wide-spread distribution of the bat proteins in the spirochaetales, moxr and htpg are also encoded in many spirochete genomes . the moxr chaperone is postulated to coordinate the metal ion into the bat proteins midas domain   <cit> . in the sequenced leptospira genomes, moxr and htpg are located in the same contiguous gene cluster as the bats   <cit> . however, dieppedale et al. inactivated moxr in f. tularensis and their proteomic comparisons of wild-type to the moxr mutant did not identify changes in bat protein levels  <cit> . htpg is a homolog of the eukaryotic heat shock protein hsp <dig>  but its function in bacteria is unclear and it has been reported to have different roles in different prokaryotes  <cit> . the arrangement of the  <dig> tandem orfs in this cluster suggest they potentially form a large operon, but qrt-pcr analyses detected transcript from the orfs downstream of the deleted bat genes. the presence of transcript from the downstream orfs, regardless of the orientation of the inserted kanamycin-resistance cassette, implies that these genes can be independently transcribed . these data do not rule out the possibility of an additional promoter that drives expression of all  <dig> genes in an operon, but do support independent promoters for the genes downstream of the deleted regions.

somewhat surprisingly, transcript from genes immediately following the deletion site had detectable levels of transcript, although these levels were significantly lower than wt levels. specifically, transcript of batb was detected in the Δbata strain, even though the endogenous promoter is likely to be located in the deleted bata gene. however, batb transcript levels are over 10-fold lower in the Δbata strain compared to wild-type, suggesting that the kanamycin-resistance cassette upstream of batb may provide a weak, fortuitous promoter sequence. a similar result was also observed for htpg transcript in the Δbat-abd strain; presumably, the htpg promoter would be located in the deleted region. the borrelial flgb promoter used to drive kan expression in the deletion of batabd is oriented in the same transcriptional direction as the endogenous genes  and read-through may account for the htpg transcript detected, albeit at a lower level than the endogenous promoter would produce.

the presence of a signal sequence, transmembrane helices and motifs for protein-protein interactions, also conserved in the bat proteins of leptospira , led tang et al. to propose that the bat proteins of b. fragilis formed a complex in the periplasm  <cit> . despite their putative cellular location, growth rate and morphology of l. biflexa were unaffected by the loss of these proteins . nor could we demonstrate a protective role for the bat proteins in coping with oxidative stress, as initially proposed for b. fragilis and subsequently hypothesized for other spirochetes  <cit> . the wild-type and Δbatabd mutant were equally susceptible to oxidative challenge by both peroxides and the superoxide generator paraquat , indicating that the bat proteins do not contribute to l. biflexa’s limited ability to cope with oxidative damage. however, the lack of an observable phenotype for the bat mutants may relate to in vitro growth where the transcript levels for these genes is quite low relative to flab or htpg transcript levels . it is conceivable that bat expression may increase under specific in vivo conditions of which we are unaware. various microarray studies, however, did not detect any significant changes in bat transcript levels in pathogenic leptospires when in vitro conditions were altered to mimic in vivo environments  <cit> .

we also examined the potential contribution of the bat proteins to sensing ros and inducing an oxidative stress response in l. biflexa. enteric bacteria such as e. coli and salmonella typhimurium have well-characterized oxidative stress responses that can be induced by the addition of sublethal levels of peroxide  <cit>  or superoxide  <cit> . however, pretreatment of exponentially growing l. biflexa cultures with either  <dig> μm h2o <dig> or  <dig>  μm paraquat failed to confer a higher level of resistance to ros when subsequently challenged with lethal levels . therefore, it appears that l. biflexa does not have the same capability as enteric bacteria of inducing an oxidative stress response, at least under the conditions tested. l. biflexa lacks homologs for the two main regulators of the oxidative stress response in enteric bacteria , in support of this conclusion. however, leptospira spp. do possess a perr homolog , a negative regulator of peroxide defense first characterized in gram positive bacteria . lo et al. reported a perr transposon mutant of l. interrogans that resulted in an 8-fold increase in resistance to hydrogen peroxide over the wild-type  <cit> . however, microarray data of this mutant did not report any significant changes in bat transcript, suggesting that these genes may not be under the regulatory control of perr. it is still possible that the bat proteins are involved in sensing ros, but the cellular response they may direct remains enigmatic.

surprisingly, even wild-type l. biflexa is highly susceptible to oxidative stress compared to b. burgdorferi   <cit>  or e. coli <cit> . the relative susceptibility of l. biflexa to oxidative damage may be due to the absence of some proteins capable of detoxifying ros or repairing damaged proteins. for example, l. biflexa does not have recognizable homologs of glutathione reductase, thioredoxin  <dig>  ferric reductase, and others. however, l. biflexa does possess both superoxide dismutase  and katg , two enzymes widely conserved among aerobic organisms for defense against ros. sod catalyzes the reduction of o2− to h2o <dig> and o <dig>  hydrogen peroxide is itself an oxidant that freely diffuses across membranes and can give rise to the highly reactive hydroxyl radical. therefore, aerobic cells require a mechanism for detoxifying h2o <dig>  catalase or peroxidase enzymes usually fulfill this cellular function and a gene encoding katg, which can have either activity, has been identified in the l. biflexa genome . since catalase activity has not been detected in l. biflexa strains but peroxidase activity has  <cit> , it seems likely that katg is a peroxidase and provides a mechanism by which l. biflexa detoxifies h2o <dig>  albeit not very effectively. l. biflexa also possesses alkyl hydroperoxide reductase homologs  that may also detoxify h2o <dig>  superoxide dismutase may play an essential role in l. biflexa’s defense against oxidative stress, as we were unable to inactivate the sod gene, either by allelic exchange or by transposon mutagenesis .

finally, we employed a proteomic comparison of wild-type and mutant spirochetes to identify l. biflexa proteins whose expression may be altered due to the loss of the bat proteins. two-dimensional differential gel electrophoresis of protein lysates from the wild-type and the Δbatabd strain identified htpg as the sole protein in the Δbatabd strain that had significantly reduced levels compared to the wild-type . altered levels of htpg were detected in the membrane-associated protein fraction, but not the soluble fraction , although htpg does not have any recognizable signal or lipidation sequences. however, lo et al. also reported that htpg associated with the membrane fraction in their analyses of temperature effects on protein levels in l. interrogans <cit> . in our analysis, htpg was downregulated approximately 4-fold in the Δbatabd mutant relative to the wt, and this decrease corresponded to the  <dig> -fold decrease in htpg transcript levels observed by qrt-pcr , discussed above. although htpg protein is lower in the mutant, this variation did not produce a phenotype in the conditions tested here.

CONCLUSIONS
l. biflexa has a relatively small repertoire of enzymes for defense against ros, and it may depend on the activities of sod and katg to survive oxidative assault. during in vitro growth, bat transcript levels are relatively low and deletion of the bat loci did not detectably alter morphology, growth rate, or the ability to survive oxidative stress. despite the proposed role for the bat proteins in directly combating oxidative damage in spirochetes, the data presented here do not support this. although we cannot exclude a role for the bat proteins in sensing oxidative stress in l. biflexa, perhaps as a signaling complex in the periplasm, bat function remains elusive.

