BACKGROUND
essential genes, as a minimal gene subset in organisms, are required for survival, development, or fertility  <cit> . therefore, the prediction and identification of such genes is not only interesting but also of theoretical and practical significance. enhanced knowledge of essential genes promotes an understanding of the primary structure of the complex gene regulatory network in a cell  <cit>  and helps elucidate the relationship between genotype and phenotype  <cit> , identify human diseases  <cit> , discover potential drug targets in novel pathogens  <cit> , and re-engineer microorganisms  <cit> .

two types of approaches are mainly used to predict and identify essential genes: experimental laboratory techniques and computational techniques. the former is randomly or systematically used to inactivate potential essential genes, and gene essentiality could be determined based on the living situation of the organism. general gene disruption strategies include single gene knockouts  <cit> , conditional knockouts  <cit> , rna interference  <cit> , and transposon mutagenesis  <cit> . unfortunately, experimental techniques have significant drawbacks, such as long durations and high costs. in addition, the spectrum of gene essentiality varies under different growth conditions  <cit> .

computational techniques have become popular over the past years for several reasons. first, known essential genes from dozens of microorganisms provide instructional and training materials. second, the available genome sequences obtained by high-throughput sequencing provide unprecedented opportunities for investigating the minimal subset of genes in various organisms. finally and most importantly, the development of bioinformatics tools improves our capability for exploring essential genes.

several prediction models have been developed in silico to identify essential genes. among these models, the simplest one is prediction of essential genes based on the known essentiality of homologous genes  <cit> . although these prediction models show high confidence levels, they still have two limitations: first, the conserved orthologs between species only account for a small portion of the genome  <cit>  and, second, the orthologs, especially in distantly related species, often show variations in gene regulations and functions  <cit> , which lead to potential diversity in gene essentiality. to circumvent these limitations, feature-based models have been constructed to distinguish essential genes from non-essential ones based on common or similar features among essential genes  <cit> .

in previous models, feature selection was often based on significant correlations between gene essentiality and gene features or the significant distribution difference between essential and non-essential genes  <cit> . a common disadvantage of such selection method, however, is that feature–feature interactions and strong correlations among features are ignored  <cit> . moreover, because of evolutionary divergence among species, the linkages between features and gene essentiality might have changed. for example, arguments on whether or not younger genes are less likely to be essential than older genes  <cit>  or whether or not duplicate genes are less likely to be essential than singletons  <cit> , demonstrate that gene essentiality associations with origin time and number of duplications are diverse among different species.

aside from feature selection, machine learning algorithms have also been introduced into feature-based classification models to identify essential genes in many studies, such as naïve bayes  <cit> , decision tree  <cit> , and support vector machine   <cit> .

in the present study, we first collected  <dig> features  that were widely used in previous models, and demonstrated that the predictions exhibit at least two problems:  strong correlations among gene features and  different and even contrasting associations of gene features with gene essentiality among different species. we then presented a novel approach, the feature-based weighted naïve bayes model , which can address multicollinearity impacts among gene features and feature divergence between species. in the proposed model, prior information was collected to determine the weight of each feature by logistic regression and genetic algorithm  <cit> . afterward, essential genes in target organisms were predicted using a weighted naïve bayes  classifier  <cit> . we applied fwm to reciprocally predict essential genes between and within  <dig> species and compared its performance with those of other models including svm, naïve bayes model , and logistic regression model . results showed that fwm can significantly improve the accuracy and robustness of essential gene prediction. finally, using stepwise discriminate analysis , we demonstrated why fwm outperforms these other classifiers.

RESULTS
relationship of gene features and gene essentiality
selecting features associated with gene essentiality is fundamental to predict essential genes in feature-based models. however, because of the correlations between features, some features may actually share no or very few linkages with gene essentiality. moreover, although feature linkages with gene essentiality exist, these linkages in different species are diverse or have contrasting effects.

to illustrate the possible consequences of different features in essential gene prediction, we investigate the linkages between gene essentiality and gene features in the saccharomyces cerevisiae  and escherichia coli  genomes, using the stepwise regression model  combined with forward selection  <cit> . at the beginning of the experiment, no features are considered in the model. a feature that mostly improves the model is added, and this process is repeated until all features are included in the model. the first column of table  <dig> shows the results of the sequential addition of features into the srm. among the  <dig> features , the feature dc is the most important factor that explains the variation  of gene essentiality. some close neighboring features  show statistical significance in terms of both correlations and true effects  with gene essentiality in the model. the last selected features  also show statistical significance in linkage with gene essentiality; however, their true effects are detected without statistical significance . this result may be explained by the fact that cc is highly correlated with dc , and dc has been selected as the first feature in the model that has diminished the effects of cc. one reason that may explain the lack of significant true effects exerted by cai and me is that both features have significant correlations with dc  and cc . another explanation is that some essential genes show low expression levels. for example, the genes whose products are located in nuclear part  are overrepresented among the essential genes with lower expression levels. in addition, some transcription factors and centromere-associated proteins are only required in small amounts; however, these substances may be expressed constitutively and indispensably  <cit> . a similar pattern is observed during eco analysis; however, compared with the sce genome , the same features  often show distinct effects on gene essentiality in the srm . most features in sce contribute much less to gene essentiality than those in eco. the genes in sce are thus postulated to have more complicated and diverse functions than those in eco, and the essentiality of these genes must be explained by a larger variety of features, which is expectedly in agreement with that eukaryotes are more complex than prokaryotes.
sce 
 and 
eco 


1
2
3
4
5
note: the features from top to bottom in column  <dig> are shown in accordance with the sequence in which they are added to the srm. data for gene essentiality in sce and eco originate from the relative growth rates of single-gene deletion yeast strains in nutrition-rich ypd medium  <cit>  and e. coli chromosome  database profiling  <cit> , respectively. pearson correlations <dig> between gene essentiality and features are shown with a corresponding p-value <dig>  true effect <dig> refers to the standardized regression coefficient in the model and it is presented with a related p-value <dig>  r square <dig> represents the ratio of the variance predicted by the srm and the variance for gene essentiality.

if excessive features that contributed less to the model were selected, the process would inevitably lead to a complex and inefficient regression model. besides, the same feature can result in different or opposite effects in different species, . therefore, selection of improper or excessive features may lead to redundancy and decrease the accuracy of the essential gene prediction model. these effects contradict the original goal of the essentiality analysis. in the current study, to overcome the deficiency in essential gene prediction, we developed a new method called fwm.

fwm construction
among the various classification methods, the naïve bayes classifier  <cit>  is a simple, fast, and efficient algorithm. thus, naïve bayes classifiers are widely used in identifying essential genes, disease genes, and housekeeping genes  <cit> . in the current study, we developed another method called fwm  that effectively addresses the effects of multicollinearity among gene features in nbm and overcomes the disadvantages of training and prediction sets with equal global feature score .

the basic fwm formula in the present study is described below . for one gene g
i
 with a feature vector x
i
, the probability of the gene belonging to the class e  is:

  pgi∈e|xi=11+e−si⋅w 

where w is the weight vector indicating the extent of contribution of the features to gene essentiality and s
i
 is the feature score vector corresponding to logarithmic likelihood ratio: si=logpxi|gi∈epxi|gi∈e¯.

the key fwm procedure is the evaluation of s
i
 and w. for s
i
 calculation, our selected features are divided into continuous type  and non-continuous type ; we then employ kernel density estimation  <cit>  and bayes estimation to calculate the s
i
 of these two types of features .

to evaluate w, we need a w that can reflect the true contribution of the features in the target species. therefore, we first determine some prior information based on a known essential gene set, which is preferably from the target species or a species that is closely related to the target species. note that we define the known essential gene set as the training-prediction set used as a dependent variable to help evaluate w. if we cannot obtain any prior information, the training set is also used as an alternative training-prediction set to calculate w. according to formula , we obtain si×w=logpgi∈e|xi1−pgi∈e|xi. we then imitate the estimation of logistic regression coefficients to calculate w. to obtain high essential gene prediction accuracy, we estimate the parameter w = argmax{auc} using genetic algorithm. here, pp represents the posterior probability vector calculated by formula , ge represents the true gene essentiality determined from the training-prediction set, and the auc  score is calculated from pp and ge. finally, we calculate the posterior probability of the genes in species  <dig>  based on the wnb method again using formula .

fwm accuracy, stability, and adaptability
because fwm is developed from nbm, we first compared the predictive performances of fwm and nbm within and between species. two eukaryotic species ) that have well-characterized essential genes were used as either training sets or testing sets .

to investigate the accuracy and stability of fwm, 20% of the sce genes were randomly selected as both the training set and the training-prediction set to help calculate w; the rest of the genes were used as the testing set. fwm and nbm were then used to predict and calculate auc scores, respectively. the simulation was replicated  <dig>  times , and two corresponding auc distributions were obtained . similarly, 50% and 80% of the genes in sce were respectively randomly selected and simulated with  <dig>  replications to obtain the auc distributions . by comparing the auc distributions obtained by fwm and nbm, we found that the mean values from fwm were significantly higher than from nbm . this finding demonstrates that the results within species predicted by fwm are more accurate than those predicted by nbm. similar results were obtained in spo .

to assess the adaptability of fwm between different species, we adopted the strategy to predict essential genes in spo based on training dataset from sce. first, 20%, 50%, and 80% of the spo genes were randomly selected as training-prediction sets , and the corresponding weight vector w was obtained. we then predicted the remaining set of spo genes using w and the training set from sce. finally, we obtained the auc distributions with  <dig>  replicated simulations. the results were shown in figures 2b , 2d , and 2f . a similar analysis was performed in the prediction from spo to sce . consistent with the results of prediction within species, fwm showed better performance than nbm for predictions between species. in addition, while obtaining an accurate vector w, fwm easily reaches a saturation point when some prior information is supplied.

comparison of fwm with lrm, nbm, and svm
we applied fwm to  <dig> species  to illustrate:  the validity of fwm predictions of essential genes in diverse species and  the advantages of fwm over other methods. the genes in the  <dig> species were taken in turns to use as training and testing sets. the process yielded a 21 ×  <dig> auc matrix represented as m = , i,j =  <dig>   <dig> …,  <dig>  where m
ij
 indicates the auc score obtained with ith species as training set and jth species as testing set.

the accuracy of fwm prediction was compared with three other classifiers: lrm, nbm, and svm. each of these classifiers yielded a 21 ×  <dig> matrix with a total of  <dig> auc scores  independently. afterward, we sorted the auc scores of variable m
ij
 produced by the four approaches .  <dig> %  auc scores produced by fwm were ranked in first tier  and only one was located in the fourth tier . evidently, fwm significantly outperformed the other three methods . by the way, the performance of svm was slightly but not significantly better than that of nbm . although the performance of lrm was the worst among the four approaches studied, this model showed strong overfitting, which can lead to better performance during cross-validation within species than nbm and svm. anyhow, our method is substantially superior to lrm, nbm, and svm for predicting essential genes.

why does our approach perform better prediction effects?
to explain why fwm outperforms the other classifiers, we employed sda combined with forward selection  <cit>  to investigate auc variations; fwm and nbm were used as discriminate models. during the repeating selection process, the features that could improve auc score the most in the classifiers were selected one by one, until all of the features were included in the model. four microbes with well-characterized essential genes were used in our analysis , including two bacteria ) and two fungi . the labels on the x-axis from left to right in figure  <dig> indicated the order of the features selected into the model one by one. during analysis, the following features showed the best performance: cc in sce–eco, neh in eco–ssa and ssa–spo, and dot in spo–sce. the best performance of cc demonstrated that essential genes tend to play topologically more important roles in protein interaction networks than non-essential genes. sce and eco had more complete and available interaction data than the other organisms; thus, cc neither performs the best among the three other predictions. the best performance of neh showed that orthologous gene essentiality is conserved across organisms. dot had the best performance in spo–sce prediction because, relative to that in bacteria, gene essentiality is more conserved through the function of protein domains or domain combinations rather than through the conservation of the entire genes in fungi  <cit> .

although the feature go has a better effect than other features in the prediction , most genes with known go annotations have only been recorded in well-studied model species but have not been investigated in the non–model organisms. thus, selecting go as the feature to predict essential genes in a non–model or a new sequenced organism is inappropriate. values close to the x-axis  indicate the singular prediction effect of the corresponding feature. except for the first feature, the selection order of other features into the prediction model was based on the diminished effect from the previous selected features. for example, in the prediction from spo to sce, the auc score generated by a single ns feature is  <dig> , which ranks third among all of the features; but this feature was selected as the seventh feature in sda because of the partial replacement of ns effects by previously selected features.

fwm performed better than nbm in all cases. the prediction accuracy reached a saturation point when some key features were selected into the model. the nbm classifier substantially reduced the prediction accuracy at the end of prediction, whereas fwm provided redundant features with small weights to avoid such a problem  and showed slow changes in prediction accuracy with addition of features.

in figure  <dig>  we compared receiver operating characteristic  curves generated by fwm and nbm in four microbes. fwm consistently showed a significant higher true positive rate  and a significantly lower false positive rate than nbm in all four predictions, except for the location of roc curves at approximately  <dig> or  <dig> in the x-axis. the increases in auc based on fwm relative to nbm in sce–eco, eco–ssa, ssa–spo, and spo–sce are  <dig> ,  <dig> ,  <dig> , and  <dig> , respectively. auc score also indicated the average tpr in all threshold values  <cit> ; thus, our fwm could improve prediction accuracy at least from 2% to 9%. in general, fwm provides a more effective way of integrating features associated with gene essentiality, and overcomes the impact of multicollinearity among features. therefore, fwm presents the advantages of increased adaptability and reliability for essential gene prediction.

CONCLUSIONS
selecting features associated with gene essentiality is necessary to identify essential genes through machine learning approaches. however, current studies often neglect the phenomenon of multicollinearity among these features, and the same feature may result in different and even contrasting effects among species. selecting such features makes the prediction model cumbersome, does not improve prediction precision, but contrarily, may decrease the accuracy of essential gene prediction. in other words, selecting more features does not mean better prediction results.

to address these problems, we built fwm by improving the naïve bayes classifier. this new model assigns a corresponding weight for each feature based on its real contribution to the model, and importantly, this weight can be changed depending on the specific target organisms. fwm is able to effectively alleviate the effects of both multicollinearity among features and the complex relationship between features and gene essentiality in different organisms. in summary, fwm is able to improve predictive accuracy compared with other methods .

xu et al.  <cit>  revealed that essential genes are associated with only three basic categories of essential functions or processes in organisms: cell envelope maintenance, energy production, and genetic information processing. nevertheless, the genes engaged in essential functions may yield a conditional essential gene during evolution  <cit> . others may be compensated by a duplicate or buffered by some new metabolic network flux reorganization that results in the transformation of essentiality in the original reaction or path. besides, because of changes in the external environment or evolution from lower to higher organisms, many new essential functions and metabolic processes can emerge. thus, gene essentiality constantly changes over time and more efforts are needed to completely understand the minimal requirements for cellular life. in the current study, we presented a theoretical frame and a practical strategy to predict mass genome-wide essential genes. our method reduced the burden of systematic understanding of the minimal requirements for cellular life and can help identify potential drug targets in novel pathogens.

