BACKGROUND
prenylation is a lipid posttranslational modification  of proteins at cysteine residues in the c-terminal region  <cit> . the specific sequence environment recognized by prenyltransferases consists either of the caax box for farnesyltransferase  and geranylgeranyltransferase  <dig>  or c-terminal cysteines of rab gtpases in the case of geranylgeranyltransferase  <dig> . in all instances, the cysteine-containing region must be preceded on the n-terminal side by approximately  <dig> residues providing a generally polar, flexible, so called linker segment without inherent conformational preferences  <cit> . the anchor can be of farnesyl  or of geranylgeranyl  type  <cit> . targeting to cellular membranes  <cit>  and mediation of protein-protein interactions  <cit>  are well documented biological functions associated with these lipid anchors.

members of the ras family of gtpases are of particular medical interest, as their mutational hyperactivation as well as mutations of proteins lying upstream in their signaling pathways are associated with various cancers  <cit> . several other caax proteins from the rho family of gtpases  <cit>  and rap1a  <cit>  are involved in tumorigenesis as well. since their lipid modifications are essential for their biological function  <cit> , inhibitors of prenyltransferases , especially of ftase  <cit>  attracted the interest of pharmaceutical research as anti-cancer drugs. two such compounds made it to phase iii trials  <cit> . furthermore, there is evidence that inhibitors of prenylation may be useful in the treatment of other diseases such as infestation with protozoa  <cit> .

however, we are far from understanding the physiological consequences of inhibiting ftase or ggtase <dig> in cells since the lists of the respective substrates are essentially not known. only a few dozen proteins, including several fungal lipopeptide pheromons  <cit>   as well as mammalian proteins of the ras superfamily of small gtpases  <cit> , the trimeric g proteins  <cit>  and the nuclear lamins of type a  <cit>  and b  <cit> , have been experimentally identified and verified as substrates of specific prenyltransferases yet. given the critical role of the prenyl anchor for biological function , it is of growing interest to analyze the prenylation status of so far uninvestigated proteins and to enlarge the list of proven prenylated proteins. a recently developed sophisticated in silico method  <cit>  generates a high number of predicted protein candidates for prenylation and, especially for twilight zone predictions, efficient methods for experimental verification of prenylation are necessary.

the standard literature method for in vitro or in vivo analysis of selected candidates involves transcription/translation of a cloned construct and protein prenylation in the presence of 3h-labeled lipid anchor precursors followed by autoradiography/fluorography  <cit> . necessary controls involve mutations of the c-terminal cysteine expected to be modified, prenyltransferase inhibitor applications and/or exposition to precursors of alternative prenyl anchors during the prenylation reaction. however, the reportedly long exposure times  contradict the need for several repetitions of the experiment. optimization of protein expression and incubation conditions is typically not avoidable. in our own experience, many attempts with the standard technology ended up without reportable result; i.e., the signals in initial experiments were often below the detection limit. scientific literature research showed that rarely a lab has studied the prenylation status of more than a single target, apparently as a consequence of the tenacious methodology.

the problem of long exposure times for 3h-autoradiography has prompted us to study a variety of chromatographic and scintillation methods for developing a faster and more sensitive test system. we found a solution using a tlc linear analyzer for testing the prenylation of selected protein targets. n-terminally gst-tagged proteins were in vitro transcribed/translated and incubated with 3h-labeled anchor precursors. such a quick in vitro screen might also be useful for finding proteins that deserve the effort for detailed in vivo studies. a similar approach can be used in vivo, if ha-tagged target proteins are expressed in cell culture supplemented by radioactive prenyl anchor precursors. this new approach on the detection of weak 3h-signals is expected also to be helpful for monitoring posttranslational modifications with similar 3h-labeled anchors such as myristoyl or palmitoyl.

RESULTS
optimization of experimental parameters and analysis of the prenylation behaviour of the protein rap2a
the proposed new procedure starts with a pcr-amplification of the gst-rap2a open reading frame  followed by in vitro transcription and translation using rabbit reticulocyte lysate in the presence of a 3h-labeled isoprenoid donor. the gst-tagged target protein is purified utilizing glutathione sepharose 4b beads and concentrated by precipitation with acetone. the sample is subjected to sds-page gel electrophoresis and transferred to a nitrocellulose membrane by electroblotting. detection of incorporated radioactive label is performed by scanning with the tlc analyzer . afterwards, the amount of target protein is evaluated by western blotting with an anti-gst-antibody on the same membrane.

experiments with wildtype gst-rap2a fusion protein and mevalonic acid were performed using various reaction times and amounts of radioactive label. the optimal conditions we found were 20– <dig> μci mevalonic acid and at least four hours reaction time, which is in agreement with previous studies  <cit> .

experiments with  <dig> μci mevalonic acid,  <dig> μci farnesylpyrophosphate  and  <dig> μci geranylgeranylpyrophosphate  allowed affirmation of prenylation of rap2a and identification of the preferred isoprenoid attached to rap2a as a farnesyl-group. however, geranylgeranylation did also occur under the given conditions, but with much lower efficiency . the respective peak area for fpp incorporation is about  <dig> times the one for ggpp integration. the mutated version  was used as a negative control reaction to rule out unspecific attachment and to confirm the location of the modification.

all results obtained with our new method were consistent with previously reported data on rap2a  <cit> , demonstrating the functionality of the assay. it should be noted that the time consumption of the scanning procedure  is markedly reduced compared with autoradiography . to allow direct comparison of methods, a film has been exposed with the same western membrane used for detection with the tlc-scanner after application of en3hance spray from perkinelmer for one and for three weeks at -80°c. an exposure of three weeks was necessary to get a distinct signal from all bands, which had given a strong signal with the scanner. however, it wasn't sufficient to detect the low amount of ggpp incorporated . if the expression of the target protein is lower than that of rap2a, the autoradiography can require months of exposure time.

to determine the enzyme prenylating rap2a, we performed the same assay with and without inhibitors of prenyltransferases. the signal yielded by incorporation of fpp was reduced to background level upon addition of  <dig> μm of the ftase inhibitor fti- <dig>  in addition, the already weak signal of ggpp-incorporation was diminished to background level by fti, while application of a ggtase inhibitor  left a small peak . these data suggest that rap2a is recognized only by ftase, but the enzyme can also transfer a geranylgeranyl-group, albeit with drastically reduced efficiency  as suggested before on the basis of peptide substrate exposure to ftase  <cit> .

analysis of the in vitro prenylation of rasd <dig>  v-ki-ras <dig> and rhoa63l with the tlc scanning method
these three candidates have been selected to show the ability of our new technique to detect alternative prenylation modes. rasd <dig>  is suggested to be a farnesylation target but only due to indirect evidence  <cit> . whereas k-ras homologues such as v-ki-ras <dig>  are thought to be modified both by ftase and ggtase <dig>  <cit> , the rhoa protein  is primarily a ggtase <dig> target  <cit> .

the same in vitro assay was performed on all three targets. because of lower translation efficiency, the reaction mix had to be upscaled by a factor of  <dig> for rasd <dig> and rhoa63l and a factor of  <dig> for k-ras4b compared with the recipe used for rap2a. for rasd <dig> and rhoa63l, we used  <dig> μci of mevalonic acid and  <dig> μci of fpp/ggpp. in the case of v-ki-ras <dig>  we applied  <dig> and  <dig> μci respectively. the results for rasd <dig> were similar to rap2a with significant incorporation of a product of mevalonic acid as well as fpp, while ggpp yielded only a ca.  <dig> times weaker signal . thus, we have shown with direct arguments that rasd <dig> is indeed a target for farnesylation  <cit> .

on the contrary, while also showing preference for fpp, incorporation of ggpp into v-ki-ras <dig> in the absence of fpp is only 2– <dig> times lower . these results provide strong evidence for the hypothesis of alternative prenylation while inhibiting ftase. rhoa yielded strong signals for the reactions with mevalonic acid and ggpp . the efficiency of fpp attachment is lower than that with ggpp by a factor of  <dig>  since the amount of protein detected in the western blot under condition of fpp addition  is considerably larger than in the case of exposition to ggpp , we suggest that ggpp is indeed the preferred substrate. this is in accordance with the literature that rhoa is geranylgeranylated  <cit>  and k-ras can be modified by both isoprenoids  <cit> .

electrophoretic mobility shifts of in vivo prenylated proteins
the simplest in vivo test for prenylation is performed with comparative electrophoretic shift analysis of non-prenylated and prenylated protein forms. the differential shift is typically not caused by the prenyl anchor attachment itself but rather by the in vivo post-prenylation processing steps such as subsequent palmitoylation, proteolytic cleavage of the c-terminal tripeptide of the caax box or c-terminal methylation. these mobility shifts are generally small and not easily detectable for all proteins due to their differential post-prenylation processing and possible variable degradation of the prenylated and non-prenylated forms.

clear electrophoretic mobility shifts have been observed for rap2a providing an indirect argument for its farnesylation . in the case of the wild-type protein, we see two bands corresponding to the non-farnesylated  and farnesylated  forms . as a result of application of lovastatin , the fast band representing the farnesylated rap2a disappears . this effect can be reversed by application of growing amounts of exogenous fpp.

in vivo subcellular localization of n-terminally gfp-tagged constructs
to confirm the biological relevance of the results from our in vitro assays, we analyzed the subcellular localization in hela cells of the same proteins as n-terminal gfp-fusion constructs. we tested the wildtype forms, the variants with a mutation at the prenylation site and the wildtype forms together with fti and ggti . fluorescence microscopic views of rap2a and rasd <dig> expression showed definite membrane localization for the wildtype protein without and with ggti. the mutant proteins and the wildtype proteins treated with fti mislocalized and accumulated in the nucleus. a gfp-fusion protein of rhoa63l, which has been shown to be a primary geranylgeranylation target and which has been previously used for localization studies  <cit> , was used to demonstrate the functionality of the ggti treatment. membrane localization is observed for wildtype protein without and with fti, nuclear mislocalization is found for the mutant and wildtype protein with ggti. these observations agree with the results from the in vitro prenylation assay.

a) gfp-rap2a, gfp-rasd <dig> and gfp-v-ki-ras <dig> are membrane-localized with  or without  ggti- <dig> treatment. mutation of the cys in the caax box  or treatment with fti- <dig>  cause mislocalization and accumulation of the fusion proteins in the nucleus.   

b) gfp-rhoa is membrane localized with  or without  fti- <dig> treatment. mutation of the cys in the caax box  or treatment with ggti- <dig>  cause mislocalization and accumulation of rhoa in the nucleus.   

further, we investigated the subcellular localization of the gfp-v-ki-ras <dig> fusion protein in hela cells. as shown in figure  <dig> , fluorescence microscopy clearly revealed that the fusion protein was co-localized with cellular membranes. a gfp fusion construct harboring a cys to ala mutation within the caax box predominantly accumulated in the nucleus . when using specific inhibitors of farnesylation  or of geranylgeranylation , we surprisingly found that v-ki-ras <dig> was present mainly in the nucleus with fti- <dig> , whereas ggti- <dig> did not show any affect on the localization of the fusion protein .

in the literature, k-ras4a and k-ras4b have been reported to be predominantly farnesylated in vivo. in the presence of potent ftis, both proteins were alternatively prenylated by geranylgeranyltransferase- <dig> in the human colon carcinoma cell line dld- <dig> and cos cells  <cit> . respectively, k-ras4a and k-ras4b were found to be associated with the membrane fraction independent of the kind of prenylation in cos cells. for complete inhibition of k-ras4b prenylation, a combination for fti- <dig> and ggti- <dig> was required as examined in five different human carcinoma cell lines from pancreatic, pulmonary, and bladder origins  <cit> . the differing results can be due to differences in cell lines, ras substrates or gfp-v-ki-ras <dig> overexpression. in the latter case, the ratio of prenylpyrophosphate to substrate protein is skewed. indeed, at high expression levels, gfp-v-ki-ras <dig> was always found predominantly in the nucleus, independent of the presence of ftis, ggtis or the cys-to-ala mutation within the c-terminal caax box. in support of our interpretation, rilling et al.  <cit>  reported that protein prenylation in chinese hamster ovary cells can vary as a function of the extracellular mevalonate concentration. fortunately, only for v-ki-ras <dig>  we found the localization studies to be technically tricky, fragile and the results difficult to reproduce. whereas cells were sensitive for overexpression of wildtype gfp-v-ki-ras <dig> resulting in low transfection efficiency and, consequently, the number of transfected cells was low, no similar difficulties could be observed for gfp-vi-k-ras <dig> mutant c185a or any of the other gfp-fusion constructs of rasd <dig>  rap2a or rhoa.

analysis of the in vivo prenylation of rap2a with the tlc scanning method
it would be desirable to test whether the tlc scanning method is applicable also for the investigation of protein targets exposed to metabolic labelling with radioactive precursors in vivo and purified with immunoprecipitation from cell culture, sds-page gel electrophoresis and western transfer. since we expected the translation efficiency to be critical for the success of the experiment, we selected rap2a as test target . indeed, it was possible to clearly show incorporation of radioactive fpp into rap2a overexpressed in hela cells and recovered by immunoprecipitation with anti-ha-antibodies  and the absence of the anchor in the c180a mutant treated identically . it is especially notable that the amount of purified protein can be evaluated with an anti-ha-antibody on the same western blot that was used previously for tlc-scanning similarly to the in vitro protocol with the anti-gst-antibody.

attempts to detect the prenylation status of rap2a with hplc-based purification methods
we have also attempted the proof of prenylation with chromatographic methods. in one of these variants, we utilized coupled in vitro transcription/translation and prenylation. but labelling with 3h-marked isoprenoids was replaced by usage of methionine during translation, while the added isoprenoid was not radioactively marked. purification via gst-beads was performed in analogy to the method described above but, after precipitation with acetone, the protein was resuspended in a denaturation buffer containing  <dig> mm tris-hcl ph  <dig>  as well as  <dig> mm dithiothreitol  and  <dig> m urea. after denaturation, the solution was diluted by addition of  <dig> volumes  <dig> mm nh4hco <dig>  following digestion with trypsin, the peptides were separated using a c <dig> column in reverse phase hplc. radioactivity was detected by scintillation counting of the collected fractions after the uv signal was recorded. since the c-terminal peptide of rap2a contains a methionine residue, a radioactive signal should be found at a retention time characteristic for farnesylated peptides, while it should be absent for the c180a mutant, because the non-prenylated peptide would elute much earlier. although the expected behavior was observed in singular experiments, we have not been able to select experimental conditions for the reproducible detection of prenylated peptides .

discussion
the critical step in classical prenylation assays is the detection of the radioactive anchor with autoradiography/fluorography. unfortunately, the sensitivity of this approach is weak since the 3h-labeled anchors emit low-energy radiation and the amount of purified protein with attached anchor is typically very low before expression and modification conditions have been optimized individually for the specific target. the necessary exposure time is a priori unknown and varies widely depending on the target even after optimization of experimental conditions. several experimenters reported long exposure times of up to several weeks . to confirm the efficiency of our protocol, we did a comparison of our detection method to a western membrane treated with perkin elmer "en3hance-spray", which is the membrane equivalent to a gel soaked in "amplify" scintillation liquid, and found weak signals after one week and distinct signals only after three weeks . tlc scanning is an efficient alternative to autoradiography/fluorography.

even having a negative outcome after  <dig> months exposure does not clarify whether the protein investigated cannot be prenylated or whether the amount of protein after purification is simply too low, for example due to unspecific adsorption to test tubes promoted by the prenyl anchor. it should be noted that the issue is not resolved with a methionine-based control of translation in a parallel experiment. however, this problem is circumvented by another advantage of the present protocol. it has the possibility to evaluate the amount of protein directly from the western blot that has been used for tlc scanning. if a band is detected with low intensity of anti-gst- or anti-ha-antibody binding, this indicates that the expression of the target protein must be up-scaled.

filter binding assays  provide another quick alternative to autoradiography. the information from such a test is limited since there is no size resolution of the protein mixture and no possibility to directly evaluate the amount of target protein. furthermore, free radioactive anchors will non-specifically adsorb to the filter material or proteins resulting in high background signals.

to our knowledge, the current method is the first one utilizing a tlc-scanner for the analysis of putative targets of ptases on western blot membranes. compared to autoradiography/fluorography, this approach reduces the detection time from several weeks/months to  <dig> minutes per lane, resulting in an overall time effort for the whole experiment of about three days, given that the cdna of the gst-  fusion protein is already available. additionally, this assay detects incorporated 3h-label and translation efficiency of the same reaction, rendering control reactions with methionine redundant and reducing variability of results caused by pipetting inaccuracies. in conclusion, the tlc scanning method is more sensitive and offers a more reliable way of quantification of any covalently linked 3h-labeled posttranslational modifications in much less time compared with autoradiography. especially, when conditions for in vitro or in vivo protein expression and incubation still need to be set up or optimized, this method dramatically enhances chances of generating successfully generating reproducible results in reasonable time since the experimental cycle is considerably shortened.

the use of a gst-tag  provides a way of removing free radioactive label as well as separation from highly abundant proteins from the rabbit reticulocyte  or cell culture lysate , resulting in lower background signal. in addition for proteins with lower translation efficiency than rap2a, it offers the opportunity to use bigger reaction volumes or larger cell cultures and load the whole yield on a gel without exceeding its capacity. furthermore, it provides the opportunity to use the same primers and antibodies for all investigated proteins, making the adaptation of the assay to screening with higher throughput only a small step.

we have shown that the results obtained with our tlc scanning method are in line with those from parallel experiments testing electrophoretic mobility shifts  or subcellular localization changes  due to prenyl anchor attachment. it should be emphasized that the latter two methods are indirect and leave room for alternative interpretations whereas our assays based on tlc scanning provide a much stronger argument. it unequivocally shows anchor incorporation into the target protein directly in vitro as well as in vivo.

unfortunately, we were not able to find any conditions, which reproducibly allowed detection of the prenylated peptide with hplc-based purification methods after proteolytic digest. most of the times, there was no visible difference between wildtype and mutant rap2a in uv-signals as well as radioactivity measurements, except the fact that the total peptide content was significantly  higher for the mutant protein. these findings suggest that, in contrast to the non-prenylated protein, a considerable amount of prenylated protein is lost by unspecific adsorption to the walls of the eppendorf tubes, vials, tubes and microwell plates used for the reaction and following processing steps. this is in agreement with our observation from the western blots of the tlc scanning method , which in almost all cases showed much higher protein content for the non-prenylatable mutant proteins. additionally, we derived much better results when performing reaction and purification steps the same day, storing the samples in sds-page sample buffer at -20°c over night. storage of the protein in the reaction mix or in pbs without detergent resulted in decreased radioactive signals. from these observations, we suggest that there would be even higher losses of the prenylated peptide after digestion, since the properties of the shorter polypeptide are much more dominated by the hydrophobic isoprenoid group, leaving only undetectable amounts of labeled prenylated peptide in solution.

these problems show that the chromatographic method might not be applicable for the small amounts of protein yielded by in vitro transcription/translation. there might be the possibility to overcome most of the troubles by simply increasing the amount of target protein. results obtained with rap2a expressed in hela-cells, purified by immunoprecipitation and digested with trypsin showed significant discrepancy between the uv-signals of wildtype and mutant protein . one peak with a retention time close to the one of fpp had a peak area ~ <dig> times larger for wildtype protein, while all other peaks were nearly identical. based upon these promising preliminary experiments, future work may find a mass spectrometry-coupled hplc-based approach useful for in vivo prenylation analysis.

we think that the mechanistic role of the prenyl anchor for the biological function of the proteins studied in this work still requires additional research. for the convenience of the reader, we summarize the current state of knowledge with respect to the molecular and cellular functions of the investigated protein targets for prenylation in the following four paragraphs. apparently, rap2a, rasd <dig>  k-ras and rhoa need the prenyl anchor to get translocated into the right signaling context by membrane association. rap <dig> has been shown to promote integrin activation  <cit>  and to directly bind to the actin cytoskeleton of platelets  <cit> . rap2a is regulated by the same gefs and gaps as rap <dig>  but with much lower efficiency for the gaps. this results in a high ratio of gtp-bound protein. rap <dig> may be a slow molecular switch with functions similar to rap <dig>  but while the latter transduces strong, transient signals, rap2a could determine the basal level. thus, rap <dig> would be required in the initial step of cell adhesion, which is then maintained by rap <dig> signaling  <cit> .

rasd2/rhes  is expressed predominately in the striatum  <cit>  but also in thyroid glands and pancreas β-cells  <cit> . it is involved in selected stritial functions, mainly locomotor activity and motor coordination  <cit> . unlike the ras proteins, rasd <dig> does not activate the erk-pathway, but it binds and activates phosphoinositide 3-kinase . additionally, rasd <dig> impairs activation of camp/pka pathway by thyroid stimulating hormone , as well as by activated β2-adrenergic receptor, suggesting a regulating function upstream of activation of the respective heterotrimeric g-protein complex. the mechanism of action implies uncoupling of the receptor from its downstream target  <cit> .

the ras proteins have been reported to be involved in many signaling pathways, regulation cell differentiation and proliferation as well as cell shape and motility, to mention only the most important. ras proteins are gtpases that function as molecular switches, being active in gtp-bound state and inactive when gdp-bound. the different ras proteins show high homology to each other and collaborate in a complex network, making it hard to distinguish whether their functions are provided by all of them or are unique for a certain type of ras protein. nevertheless, there is some experimental data indicating specific functions of k-ras4b in cell-cell and cell-matrix contacts as well as in apoptosis  <cit> . these presumptions are supported by the fact that k-ras4b has a different strategy for membrane association than h-ras, n-ras and k-ras4a, with a polylysine stretch in the hypervariable region instead of cysteine residues as palmitoylation sites. this comes along with localization of k-ras4b to different microenvironments of membranes and also a trafficking pathway different from the other ras proteins  <cit> .

in humans, there are three highly homologous isoforms of rho gtpases, called rhoa, b and c  <cit> . similar to the ras proteins, their activities are highly overlapping, explaining why reported functions are hardly ever assigned to a certain family member. regulation of the actin cytoskeleton, particularly the formation of stress fibers, was the first reported function of rho. further investigations have revealed roles in the regulation of cell polarity, gene transcription, g <dig> cell cycle progression, microtubule dynamics and vesicular transport pathways  <cit> . thus, it seems that rho proteins play a major role in vital cell functions such as morphogenesis, chemotaxis, axonal guidance and cell cycle progression  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
savings in time for experimentation and the higher sensitivity for detecting 3h-labeled lipid anchors recommend the tlc-scanning method with gst-tagged or ha-tagged target proteins as the method of choice for analyzing their prenylation capabilities in vitro and in vivo and, possibly, also for studying the myristoyl and palmitoyl posttranslational modifications.

