BACKGROUND
bacterial plasmids are extrachromosomal, non-essential dna elements, which can replicate autonomously  <cit> . most plasmids are smaller than bacterial chromosomes and some plasmids have the capacity to move between different host species, leading to intra- and inter-specific gene transfer  <cit> .

the co-existence of the plasmid and the bacterial chromosome in the same cell raises interesting questions. probably the best studied is how plasmids persist in natural populations. it has been proposed that plasmids are parasites  <cit>  or mutualists  <cit> , conferring a selective advantage to their host. eberhard  <cit>  suggested that plasmids carry genes, which are only required under certain rare circumstances. when needed they can be transferred to other cells, but when not required only a small number of cells carry the plasmid. according to this view plasmids are a kind of 'lending library' that deliver genes when required.

while the above mentioned hypotheses do not require crosstalk between plasmid and the host chromosome, some studies using experimental evolution showed that the host chromosome and the plasmid co-evolve to reduce the cost of f-plasmid carriage  <cit> . nevertheless, the extent of crosstalk between host chromosome and plasmids is not known.

in this study, we compare the gene expression pattern of the e. coli chromosome in the presence and absence of the conjugative f-plasmid to understand how the presence of the plasmid affects gene expression of the chromosome. using two different e. coli strains, we find dramatic differences in the expression of host genes, indicating a highly genotype specific crosstalk between plasmid and chromosome.

RESULTS
 <dig> genes are represented on the affymetrix chip ,  <dig> of these were expressed in at least one of the four different genotypes . our experimental set-up was designed to disentangle the contribution of genetic background of the host from changes in gene expression induced by f-plasmid.

we distinguish four groups of genes: "bacterial genotype effect only" , "f-plasmid effect only" , "bacterial and f-plasmid additive effects" , and "bacterial/f-plasmid interaction effect" genes .

a) bacterial genotype effect only
we identified a total of  <dig> genes with a host-specific gene expression independent of the presence of the f-plasmid . after accounting for genes located in the same operon we identified  <dig> unique "regulatory units" .  <dig> regulatory units were up-regulated in dh5α and  <dig> regulatory units were up-regulated in mg <dig>  interestingly, the host-specific genes in the two strains fell into functionally different classes. all  <dig> amino acid synthesis regulatory units with host-specific gene expression were up-regulated  in mg <dig> . genes affecting nucleotide biosynthesis, carbon utilization and fatty acid synthesis were also up-regulated  in mg <dig>  the opposite pattern was found for flagellum and chemotaxis genetic regulatory units, which were strongly up-regulated in dh5α . similarly, regulatory units with prophage- or transposon-related functions were more highly expressed in dh5α.

b) f-plasmid effect only
an "f-plasmid effect only" gene is a gene that is expressed in response to the presence of the f-plasmid but without having any strain-specific effects. as expected, all  <dig> f-plasmid encoded genes that were represented on our microarray were strongly expressed in f-plasmid containing cells, but not expressed  in f-plasmid free cells. nine out of these  <dig> f-plasmid encoded genes were "f-plasmid effect only" genes  while one f-plasmid encoded gene showed an interaction effect with the host genotype . all "f-plasmid effect only" genes show an increase in expression level in the presence of the f-plasmid. the difference in expression level of f-plasmid encoded proteins between f-plasmid free cells  and f-plasmid containing cells was on average 40-fold with a maximum change in expression level of the trad gene of 140-fold.

there are seven genes encoded on the bacterial chromosome that were at least two-fold differentially expressed in cells with and without f-plasmid. on average these are up-regulated by ~ <dig> -fold.

c) bacterial and f-plasmid additive effects
we identified six genes which had different expression levels in the two hosts and which also had an effect induced by the presence of the f-plasmid, but without any interaction effect . in contrast to "f-plasmid effect only" genes, an equal number of genes are up-regulated and down-regulated in the presence of the f-plasmid  . furthermore, there was no net change in expression intensity .

d) bacterial/f-plasmid interaction effect
genes falling into this category show either a significant effect of the f-plasmid in only one host, or have disproportional effects across the two hosts. in total,  <dig> interaction genes  were identified.  <dig> genes  had a significant difference in expression levels between mg <dig> and mg1655f but not between dh5α and dh5αf.  <dig> genes  with a host-specific f-effect were detected in dh5α but not in mg <dig>   <dig> genes  showed an f-effect in opposite direction in the two hosts . one gene ) was up-regulated in the presence of the f-plasmid in both genetic backgrounds but the magnitude of change was twice as strong in mg <dig> than in dh5α. similar to genes with "bacterial genotype effect only" or "f-plasmid effect only", interaction genes were also equally likely to be up- or down-regulated in the presence of the f-plasmid  and no net change in expression intensity was noted .

in contrast to the "bacterial genotype effect only" genes, a functional classification of the "bacterial/f-plasmid interaction effect" genes provided no clear pattern . among the genes with a host-specific response to the f-plasmid we found genes with functions in chaperoning and carbon utilization.

discussion
in our experiments  <dig> genes  located on the e. coli chromosome show significant differences in gene expression.  <dig>  of these  <dig> genes differed in expression between the two e. coli genotypes dh5α and mg <dig> and this difference was not affected by the presence of the f-plasmid. based on the significance level of  <dig>  used in our study, only  <dig> genes would be expected to show 'significant' differences by chance alone. in our study, however, we observed significantly more differently expressed genes than expected by chance , confirming a significant biological effect. note that the binomial test is conservative, as we involved an additional filtering step to include only genes with at least 2-fold expression difference . further support for the reliability of our expression analysis is provided by the recovery of the well-known difference between both strains in the activity of the lac operon, which is inactive in dh5α . this high number of strain specific differences in gene expression pattern is consistent with previous reports that also found large differences among e. coli strains  <cit> .

about half of the strain-specifically expressed genes were not detectably expressed in the other strain . we did not perform genomic hybridization to test the hypothesis that some of the changes in expression level are due to the absence of the respective gene, as the arrays had been constructed based on the sequence of the strain mg <dig>  as we also found genes expressed in dh5α but not in mg <dig> we consider that gene deletions are not a major factor shaping the difference in gene expression between the two strains. this is supported by some recent work showing that gene content is very similar among related bacterial strains  of mg1655's orf's  <cit> ). nevertheless, even when only genes expressed in both strains were considered , a statistically significant excess of differentially expressed genes  could be detected .

of the  <dig> chromosomal genes that were affected by the presence of the f-plasmid we found less than 12%  with purely additive effects across strains. the majority of genes showed a significant interaction between strain and plasmid in their expression. hence, despite the fact that we used an f-plasmid with an identical genotype in our experiments, most of the genes showed a response to the presence of the f-plasmid that depended on the genotype of the host chromosome. the abundance of significant interaction effects between strain and plasmid gene expression implies that epistasis  is generally common. by contrast, of the  <dig> f-plasmid encoded genes that were represented on the chip, nine showed additive effects and were not significantly influenced by the host genotype. even though the number of f-plasmid encoded genes is small, this difference is statistically highly significant , implying large differences between f-plasmid encoded and chromosomal genes. this result is not affected by the significance level used for the identification of significant genes . the almost complete absence of interaction effects for f-plasmid encoded genes is not unexpected, as these genes are essential for the f-plasmid associated phenotype . thus, the f-plasmid, which could easily move among cells  <cit> , requires a set of genes that remains functional in the genetic background of different host cells.

CONCLUSIONS
our results of a strong host genotype dependent crosstalk could potentially have important evolutionary implications. as the same plasmid results in a contrasting gene expression in different host genotypes, the cost of carriage is likely to depend on both the host genotype and the environment. hence, it is conceivable that this host genotype specific crosstalk also results in fitness differences, i.e. the cost of carriage may vary among host genotypes. more host genotypes, in particular more diverged ones, need to be analyzed in a range of environments to determine if the epistatic interactions observed in our study could contribute to the maintenance of f-plasmids in natural populations.

