BACKGROUND
infection by ascaris lumbricoides  is one of the most prevalent helminthic diseases, affecting about  <dig>  billion people worldwide. the immune response to this nematode has as hallmarks the induction of anti-ascaris ige/igg antibodies and a strong th2-driven inflammation
 <cit> . specific antibodies to ascaris have been associated to parasite resistance
 <cit>  and both the immunoglobulin repertoire as well as the strength of the antibody responses are genetically regulated
 <cit> . in mice, the production of ige to the ascaris resistance marker aba- <dig> is hla restricted
 <cit> . in humans, two linkage scans identified a qtl  on chromosome 13q <dig>  associated with the susceptibility to a. lumbricoides <cit> . this region harbors the gene tnfsf13b  encoding for the cytokine b-cell activating factor, baff. the wild type allele of an intronic polymorphism in this gene  was found associated with higher igg levels against ascaris while the mutant allele was associated with less ige to aba- <dig> in asthmatics patients
 <cit>  suggesting a role of tnfsf13b in the antibody response to ascaris.

baff , is a member of the tumor necrosis factor ligand superfamily of cytokines and is a major regulator of b cell activation, proliferation, differentiation, survival and immunoglobulin class-switching
 <cit> . it is mainly expressed in innate immune cells such as neutrophils, macrophages and dendritic cells
 <cit>  but is also produced by non-hematopoietic cells
 <cit> . this molecule may exist as cell surface-bound or soluble forms, the latter secreted after a furin cleavage
 <cit> . soluble baff interacts with three receptors: taci , bcma  and baff-r , the latter expressed on peripheral b cells
 <cit> . in vitro experiments have demonstrated the critical role of baff on the production of iga and igg antibodies and the synergic effect with il- <dig> on the transcription of ige
 <cit> . in these processes the baff-r also plays an important role
 <cit> .

changes in baff levels are detectable in plasma during different immune related conditions
 <cit> . in addition, there is evidence that upon nematode infection, resistant animals have increased levels of baff. in cattle naturally exposed to ostertagia, cooperia and nematodirus the parasite-resistant animals had increased baff mrna levels in the mesenteric lymph nodes
 <cit> . high baff mrna expression have been also detected in the spleen and liver of red grouse infected with trichostrongylus tenuis <cit> . further studies in protozoan infections found that baff might be associated to variations in the strength of specific antibodies; for instance, administration of an antibody blocking baff signaling in mice infected with trypanosoma cruzi induced a significant reduction of serum specific-igm to the parasite
 <cit> . besides, there is evidence that plasmodium parasites can modulate the baff pathway in the host, compromising protective antibody memory
 <cit> . although these investigations suggest that tnfsf13b may be a candidate gene underlying phenotypic variation in response to parasite infections, few have been done in humans. there are no studies evaluating the role of baff on the strength of ascaris specific antibody production or total ige in humans naturally exposed to this parasite. since it has been observed that asthmatics have a higher antibody response to nematodes
 <cit> , these individuals are an interesting group for analyzing these traits. the aims of this study were  to investigate the relationship between baff and specific antibody levels to ascaris,  to evaluate the relationship between baff and total ige and specific ige to non-parasitic allergens in asthmatic patients and non-asthmatic controls and  to evaluate the relationship between baff levels and the cell-surface expression of its receptor  on cd19+ b cells.

RESULTS
baff and the antibody response to ascaris
the demographical characteristics and antibody responses of the studied population are presented in table 
 <dig>  in the entire dataset , baff values in plasma were non-normally distributed with median  <dig>  pg/ml  figure 
1a. there were no differences in soluble baff levels according to age, gender or disease status. ige to ascaris was higher in asthmatic patients while igg to ascaris was higher in controls and total serum ige was higher in asthmatics .

sd: standard deviation.

amedian .

bmann-whitney u test.

cmeasured in pbmcs .

dindependent samples t-test.

edata available only for  <dig> asthmatics.

the relationship between levels of soluble baff and antibodies to ascaris was first evaluated using bivariate correlations stratified by healthy and asthmatics. because soluble baff and the specific ige levels to ascaris were non-normally distributed, the non-parametric spearman test was used. we found a significant inverse correlation between soluble baff and specific ige to ascaris  in the group of healthy individuals . a similar tendency was observed when comparing soluble baff levels between subjects with positive ige sensitization to ascaris  and those non-sensitized : soluble baff was lower in ascaris sensitized  than in non-sensitized , figure 
1b.

considering that parasite loads are over-dispersed within populations
 <cit>  and that individuals at the extreme of the distribution might carry biological traits influencing parasite susceptibility, we analyzed the relationship between soluble baff and the strength of the antibody response by stratifying the participants according their antibody levels, above 75th percentile  and below 75th percentile , figure 
1c . we found that those with high specific ige levels to the ascaris extract  had less concentrations of soluble baff in plasma  than those with ige levels <75th percentile , figure 
1c. this association remained significant in the linear regression model using the square-root transformed soluble baff levels, and after adjustment by age, gender and disease status . to explore if this relationship was reflected at the gene expression level, we analyzed a sub-group of subjects  with mrna data in peripheral blood mononuclear cells , but we found no association between the relative expression of baff mrna and specific ige levels to ascaris .

besides, there was no significant correlation between soluble baff levels and igg levels to ascaris using non-parametric tests. since igg levels were normally distributed, we tested a more powerful parametric test  using square-root-transformed soluble baff levels, with similar results. interestingly, there was a significant inverse correlation between baff mrna levels and igg to ascaris , figure 
2a. this relationship was also observed when the comparison was done according to the strength of the antibody response: individuals with specific igg levels to ascaris >75th percentile had lower baff <dig> mrna levels  than those < 75th percentile , figure 
2b.

the relationship between baff and serum antibody levels has been extensively analyzed in the context of autoimmune diseases, where increased levels of soluble baff have been associated with increased titers of auto-antibodies of the igg isotype
 <cit> . however, the effects of baff on specific antibody levels may differ depending on the context, for instance, inverse relationships between baff mrna levels and the risk of developing donor-specific antibodies have been observed after transplantation
 <cit> . to our knowledge this is the first study suggesting a relationship between circulating baff levels and the human antibody response to a nematode. in contrast to what is generally observed in autoimmune diseases and some parasitic infections, we found an inverse association between soluble baff and the strength of the antibody response to ascaris. the fact that the same tendency was observed both at protein and mrna level is highly suggestive that it represents a biological phenomenon. the mechanisms underlying this relationship are unknown.

the mean difference in soluble baff levels between subjects with high specific ige to ascaris and the rest of the population was  <dig> pg/ml. the biological significance of this finding need to be further investigated but there are several studies suggesting that it could be relevant. it has been shown that most of the systemic baff is bound to receptors on b cell surfaces and that baff binding capacity on follicular b cells is nearly saturated under steady-state conditions in vivo
 <cit> . in this scenery a small change in circulating baff concentrations may affect the baff balance in lymphoid tissues and impair the survival of high-affinity b cells clones in the germinal center. in addition, it is known that for some cytokines the biological impact is in the order of few pg/ml; for example, concentrations of ifnγ between healthy and malaria infected children differ in  <dig>  pg/ml, and this small change correlated with soluble baff levels and concentration of antibodies
 <cit> . moreover, differences in cytokine levels upon stimulation of pbmcs with phytohemagglutinin or ascaris were small but the impact on antibody production was remarkable
 <cit> . differences in levels of pro-inflammatory cytokines between healthy individuals and patients with autoimmune conditions have been also described in this range
 <cit> .

previous studies showed that tnfsf13b gene is a qtl for ascaris susceptibility
 <cit> , harboring genetic variants associated with ige response to ascaris and worm burden
 <cit> . now we have data suggesting that, in addition to genetic evidence, there is a relationship between the antibody responses to ascaris and baff at the protein and mrna level; although a causal relationship between them has yet to be demonstrated. our findings seem to be more related to genetic mechanisms because first, there is previous evidence suggesting that polymorphisms around tnfsf13b may influence the antibody responses and second, we also found an association between the igg responses and the level of mrna expression. it is also pertinent to consider that a. lumbricoides can modify baff levels during infection, as has been reported for malaria parasite in acutely infected children
 <cit> . however, in our study it is not possible to assess a direct effect of the parasite on baff production because it was designed to evaluate the antibody responses to ascaris and not the acute infection. besides, we should keep in mind that low baff levels and high antibody responses might be independent consequences of the ascaris infection without any causal relationship. indeed, il- <dig> has shown to down-regulate the expression of baff in vitro <cit> . it is known that ascaris infections of low intensity are associated with a th <dig> immune response rich in il- <dig> and in this population this could be an additional factor introducing variability in baff levels.

soluble baff, total ige, specific ige and asthma
the relationship between baff and total plasma ige is still controversial
 <cit> . in this study we found no association between soluble baff and total ige when analyzed as continuous variables. total ige values were transformed to a categorical variable based on the 75th percentile in non-asthmatic controls and asthmatic patients as a cut-off to define high total ige levels but there were no significant differences . in addition, baff mrna levels were not associated with total ige. our findings are in agreement with previous studies showing no relationship between baff levels and total ige
 <cit> . regarding specific ige to non-parasite/environmental allergens, we found that baff levels were not related to specific ige to d. pteronyssinus and b. tropicalis, the main sensitizers in this population. there are contradictory published results around this point: it has been reported a significant increase in baff levels after allergen exposure in the bronchoalveolar lavage fluid of allergic patients
 <cit>  but no relationship was found between soluble baff and specific ige reactivity to fungal allergens
 <cit> . our results support previous findings detecting association between baff variants and specific ige to ascaris but not to mites
 <cit> . some studies have suggested a relationship between baff and asthma in humans
 <cit> . however, in agreement with lei et al. <cit> , we found no differences in baff between asthmatic patients and controls neither at protein nor at the mrna levels . it is worth mentioning that our results refer to circulating form of the cytokine and its expression in peripheral blood leukocytes. although several covariates might influence baff synthesis, the levels we found in healthy controls were comparable to those observed in other populations
 <cit> .

baff mrna levels inversely correlate with the cell surface expression of baff receptor  on b cells
since there were previous reports showing an inverse relationship between baff and baff receptor
 <cit> , the expression of membrane-bound baff and baff-r was evaluated on pbmcs . we did not detect cell surface expression of baff in gated cd14+ cells , lymphocytes or gated cd19+ cells ; and, as previously described
 <cit> , the baff-r was highly expressed in peripheral b cells but not in monocytes . similar findings were obtained when cell-surface expression of baff and baff-r were analyzed in sorted monocytes  and b cells  from six non-asthmatic controls. as expected
 <cit>  we found that plasmablasts , switched-memory b cells, mature naïve b cells and transitional b cells expressed baff receptor . the relationship between the cell-surface expression of baff-receptor  on cd19+ b cells  with the soluble baff levels and the baff mrna levels in pbmcs was evaluated in the subgroup of  <dig> individuals with flow cytometry data. these observations had a normal distribution in this dataset and therefore parametric tests  were used . we found a significant inverse correlation between baff <dig> mrna and the cell surface expression of baff-r in cd19+ b cells , figure 
5a. this finding was independent of age, gender, disease status and the proportion of monocytes in the sample as tested in a linear regression model. however, no correlation was found with baff <dig> mrna levels . regarding protein levels, we found an inverse correlation between soluble baff levels and the cell surface expression of baff-r in cd19+ b cells  figure 
5b. these observations were significant after adjustment by age, gender, disease status and the proportion of monocytes in the sample. the inverse relation between soluble baff levels and the cell surface expression of baff-r has been previously reported in mice and patients with deficiency of baff-r
 <cit> , patients with systemic lupus erythematous and sjogren’s syndrome
 <cit>  hyper-ige syndrome
 <cit>  and acute malaria
 <cit> . in this model, the  <dig> % of the variance in baff-r expression can be explained by the soluble baff levels. in the context of immune responses to ascaris, it remains to be elucidated how this baff/baff-r axis is related to the synthesis of specific antibody levels.

the relationship between circulating soluble baff levels and baff mrna levels in blood mononuclear cells
another question to be addressed was the relationship between soluble baff and baff mrna levels, and whether those can serve as proxies for mechanisms contributing to the variation in specific antibody levels. immune responses to antigens including helminths take place in lymphoid tissues and in infiltrated organs. there, baff is produced by many cells including lymphoid tissue stroma cells and resident monocytes
 <cit> . levels of circulating soluble baff has shown to correlate with local baff activity at the germinal center
 <cit> . in this study we found a significant positive correlation , between the mrna levels for baff <dig>  and baff <dig> , however, soluble baff levels were only significantly correlated to baff <dig> mrna levels  and not to baff <dig> mrna . from the transcripts to soluble baff there are several steps: as a type ii transmembrane protein of  <dig> amino acids  in the plasma membrane, baff is cleaved by furine proteases in its n-terminal end  and released in the circulation. there it forms homotrimers of  <dig> aa amenable to be detected by elisa; homotrimers can also form other assemblies of less abundance 
 <cit> . there is another isoform expressed at low levels and called ∆baff , that can form heteromultimers with baff  and negatively regulate the secretion of the latter
 <cit> . the relation between soluble baff levels and baff <dig> mrna levels could be explained because this transcript contains exon  <dig>  which is informative for both baff and ∆baff. more studies are needed to elucidate if differential expression of baff isoforms contribute to the strength of specific antibody levels.

CONCLUSIONS
our findings show that soluble baff levels are lower in subjects with high specific ige to ascaris, suggesting that this cytokine plays a role in the strength of the antibody responses to this nematode and supporting previous molecular genetics studies. interestingly, soluble baff levels are not related with total ige or ige sensitization to house dust mites, also in agreement with our previous findings. in addition, we found no differences in baff levels between asthmatic patients and controls. as mrna, baff was expressed in mononuclear cells but, as a protein it was not detected in cell-surface including monocytes and b cells. the potential mechanistic link between lower levels of baff and the strength of the specific antibodies to ascaris might be related with the inverse relationship between baff levels and the baff-r expression on b cells, a receptor that was present at the cell surface in all developmental stages of peripheral b cells including switched memory and plasmablasts. the role of baff on the susceptibility to ascaris infection and its clinical implications deserve further confirmatory and mechanistic studies in larger cohorts.

