BACKGROUND
the formation of the vascular system is essential for nutrient and waste transport in the growing embryo. in mice, the developing vasculature initially forms in intraembryonic and extraembryonic regions. in the extraembryonic yolk sac at approximately e <dig> - <dig> , angioblasts are formed from the differentiation of mesodermal cells. these angioblasts differentiate into endothelial cells, elaborate cell contacts, and lumenize into simple tubes; resulting in the formation of a capillary plexus network  <cit> . the simple plexus of the yolk sac is remodeled and refined after e <dig>  to form the larger diameter vessels. during this process, extensive movements of endothelial cells within the plexus occur through a process termed intussusceptive arborization  <cit> , reallocating cells from the capillaries to larger vessels, to assemble a more complex vasculature network  <cit> . this process forms the vitelline arteriole and venule, which participate in the contiguous blood flow with the embryonic vasculature, concomitant with the initiation of flow after e <dig> . although likely context dependent, vessel remodeling also occurs in the adult, during wound healing, reproductive cycling, and tumor progression  <cit> . more work needs to be done to define the shared and distinct regulatory paths that control vascular differentiation in the various sites of development and in the adult.

both vasculogenic and angiogenic processes are highly regulative, and under the control of a number of signaling pathways, including the vascular endothelial growth factor  pathway, the notch pathway, and the transforming growth factor-β  pathway, among others  <cit> . notch signaling is an evolutionary conserved pathway and a determinant of cell fate  <cit> . four notch receptors  exist in mice and human along with five ligands   <cit> . the notch receptors are activated upon ligand binding, which initiates the proteolysis of its intracellular domain . the n-icd translocates to the nucleus where it interacts with a family of dna-binding proteins, termed recombination signal-binding protein for immunoglobulin kappa j region , forming a transcriptional activator complex at the regulatory elements of target genes, thereby directing changes in gene expression transcription  <cit> .

much work has been done to define the roles of the notch signaling pathway during vascular differentiation. notch <dig>  notch <dig>  dll <dig>  jagged <dig>  and jagged <dig> are all expressed in the arterial endothelium of vertebrates, notch <dig> being solely expressed in the endothelia of mouse embryos  <cit> . mutations in these genes lead to defects in the vasculature, many of which are embryonic lethal. mutant mice lacking notch <dig> do not survive post e <dig>  and harbor defects in vascular remodeling in the embryo, yolk sac, and placenta  <cit> . deletion of notch <dig> has no visible effect and embryos are viable; however, notch1-/-notch4-/- double mutants have more severe vascular phenotypes than the notch1-/- and are embryonic lethal at e <dig>   <cit> . expression of an activated form of notch <dig> or notch <dig> also leads to vascular defects similar to those seen in the notch1-/- and notch1-/-notch4-/- mice, as well as embryonic lethality at ~e <dig>  <cit> .

although notch clearly plays important roles in the formation of the early embryonic vasculature, very little is known about the nature of the downstream targets in vivo, and how changes in notch activity elicit the observed morphological processes. in vitro analysis has indicated novel notch targets, including receptors of the vegf family, vegfr- <dig>  and vegfr- <dig>   <cit> . given that several signaling cascades are required for the morphological differentiation of the embryonic vasculature, it is likely that these pathways interact during vascular development.

to better define the activity of notch signaling in vascular differentiation, a detailed morphological and molecular analysis was performed using developmental models in which the notch signaling pathway is altered. a gain-of-function notch <dig> transgenic model showed that expanded notch <dig> signaling in the early vasculature results in defects in embryo growth, defective differentiation during remodeling of the yolk sac vasculature, altered patterns of gene expression, and ultimately embryonic lethality. these phenotypes were compared to embryos lacking notch signaling in the endothelia, via a tissue-specific loss of rbpj function. embryos lacking endothelial rbpj exhibited distinct growth, vascular, and gene expression defects compared to the notch <dig> gain-of-function model. gene expression analysis in the yolk sacs of these models demonstrated altered patterns of expression of a distinct subset of notch targets. additionally, several secreted ligands, including the tgf-β ligand tgfβ <dig> and the vegf ligands vegfc and placenta growth factor , were altered in these models, suggesting a role for an altered vegf signaling pathway in the observed phenotypes of these models. our data suggest a model in which notch signaling in the endothelia is critical for elaborating a specialized local environment of the developing arterial vasculature, by influencing the expression of secreted factors, which may be important in autocrine or paracrine signaling to direct further morphological differentiation of the vasculature during remodeling.

RESULTS
conditional transgenesis to modulate notch signaling in the early endothelia
to further understand the functions of notch signaling in early vascular development, genetic models were employed to modulate notch activity in the embryonic endothelia. these models employ endothelial-specific cre-mediated recombination in vivo. to activate and expand notch <dig> signaling in the endothelia, a transgenic line rosanotch  <cit>  was used, which harbors a notch  <dig> intracellular domain  cdna downstream of a floxed stop fragment targeted to the rosa <dig> locus. removal of the stop cassette through loxp-mediated recombination, via an endothelial cre expressing transgene, results in expression of n1icd in endothelial cells . to delete notch signaling in the early endothelia, a mouse line was used which harbors a conditional allele of rbpj   <cit> . crossing these mice to endothelial-specific cre transgenic mice results in the deletion of exons  <dig> and  <dig>  which encode the dna binding domain of rbpj, abrogating the activity of rbpj only in endothelial cells . the conditional deletion would be predicted to disrupt both notch <dig> and notch <dig> signaling, which have known redundant functions in early embryonic vascular differentiation  <cit> . ablation of rbpj in the endothelia was used to assure a complete disruption of notch signaling in the developing vasculature.

tie2-cre  <cit>  or flk1-cre  <cit>  transgenic mice were crossed to either rosanotch or rbpjf mice. each of these transgenes expresses the cre recombinase gene and direct expression principally to the vascular endothelium. identical phenotypes were observed when the flk1-cre and tie2-cre transgenic lines were crossed to the rosanotch and rbpjf models . previous work has demonstrated that these cre expressing transgenes exhibit restricted endothelial expression of cre recombinase activity to the endothelial and hematopoietic lineages  <cit> . the early embryonic expression and recombinase activity of the tie2-cre and flk1-cre transgenes was confirmed by crossing these transgenes to a conditional lacz reporter  <cit> . both transgenes showed specific expression within the early endothelial and hematopoietic lineages at e <dig>  .

regulated notch signaling is essential for the growth and development of the early embryo
to activate notch <dig> signaling throughout the embryonic endothelia, female mice heterozygous for the rosanotch transgene were crossed with male mice hemizygous for the tie2-cre transgene, and the resulting embryos were analyzed. at e <dig>  the ec-n1icd mice were morphologically normal and identical to the wild type siblings, with open neural folds and vascularized allantois characteristic of this time point . compared to stage-matched wild type embryos at e <dig> , ec-n1icd embryos exhibited an enlarged heart and a reduction in overall size . growth defects were much more pronounced at e <dig>  , and no viable embryos were observed after e <dig> .

to ablate notch signaling in the embryo, tie2-cre mice were used in a two-generation cross to generate tie2-cre; rbpjf/f embryos , which lack rbpj binding activity in the endothelia. the ec-rbpj-ko embryos displayed severe growth retardation defects at e <dig>  similar to those observed in the ec-n1icd embryos . the morphological analyses of the gain-of-function and loss-of-function embryos were consistent with other models  <cit>  and confirmed that the appropriate notch signaling in the endothelia of the early embryo is critical for proper growth and development of the embryo.

vascular defects in ec-n1icd and ec-rbpj-ko embryos
a detailed comparison of the vasculature was performed to define the vascular defects in the embryonic and extraembryonic vasculature of ec-n1icd and ec-rbpj-ko embryos. at e <dig> , no overt defects were observed in the developing vasculature of either the ec-n1icd or ec-rbpj-ko. in particular, the vascular plexus of the ec-n1icd yolk sac, visualized by histochemical staining of endothelial cells with an antibody to pecam <dig> , appeared unaffected when compared to stage-matched wild type embryos . the most severe defects were seen in the yolk sac of the developing embryo beginning at approximately e <dig> . gross morphological examination of the vasculature of the yolk sac by whole mount light microscopy showed that at e <dig>  the ec-n1icd yolk sac was the same size as the stage-matched wild type control; however these embryos lacked large diameter vessels , indicating a failure in appropriate blood vessel remodeling occurring at this time point  <cit> . the ec-n1icd yolk sac vessels did contain blood cells, although the blood tended to pool near the proximal end of the yolk sac adjacent to the chorioallantoic plate . ec-rbpj-ko embryos also lacked vascular remodeling in the yolk sac, failing to form the large vitelline blood vessels  <cit>  .

immunofluorescence of pecam <dig> stained e <dig>  yolk sac revealed the failure of this remodeling in both the ec-n1icd and ec-rbpj-ko embryos in greater detail. in the ec-n1icd embryos, no distinction between large caliber vessels and capillaries was observed ; instead, the vasculature consisted of vessels with an enlarged surface area with greatly decreased avascular inter-vessel space compared to wild type controls, as assessed by lack of pecam <dig> expression . in contrast to the ec-n1icd vessel defects, the ec-rbpj-ko embryos exhibited a qualitatively different vessel phenotype in the yolk sac. although ec-rbpj-ko embryos also exhibited a lack of vascular remodeling, the yolk sac of these embryos displayed numerous small avascular intervessel spaces . these results indicated that the yolk sac vasculature of the ec-rbpj-ko embryos failed to form the large vitelline blood vessels, reminiscent of the simple vascular plexus seen at e <dig> .

histological sectioning of yolk sac tissue was performed to visualize the vessels in cross-section via pecam <dig> immunochemistry and hematoxylin and eosin staining. in the wild type yolk sac a distribution of large and small caliber vessels were present and were filled with blood cells; in striking contrast, the ec-n1icd yolk sac contained primarily large caliber lumenized vessels that contained blood cells . both wild type and ec-n1icd embryos had a range of yolk sac vessel diameter. however, in wild type yolk sac a majority of the vessels measured consisted of small capillaries, while in the ec-n1icd yolk sac a larger proportion of vessels consisted of a larger cross-sectional area. in ec-n1icd yolk sac, approximately 36% of vessels measured had an area of  <dig> μm <dig> or greater, while in wild type yolk sac only 5% measured this size . this enlarged vessel phenotype in response to notch activation was observed in other sites of vessel differentiation in the developing embryo. the dorsal aortae  of ec-n1icd embryos were approximately twice the cross-sectional area of wild type embryos . the embryo-derived vasculature of the placenta of ec-n1icd embryos did invade into the labyrinth layer of the placenta , but exhibited greatly enlarged vessel diameter . the ec-rbpj-ko embryos exhibited a decrease in vessel diameter, including the da, and arteriovenous malformations  <cit> . ec-rbpj-ko embryonic-derived vasculature of the placenta was also reduced in size and did not invade the labyrinth layer of the placenta . immunostaining of e <dig>  wild type and ec-n1icd embryos using anti-sma, indicated that the dorsal aortae of wild type are surrounded by smooth muscle cells, while the ec-n1icd did not recruit any sma-positive cells to the dorsal aorta  <cit>  .

the morphological analyses of the models of altered notch signaling were consistent with previous analysis of notch function in the vasculature  <cit> . these results point to multiple roles for notch signaling in the formation of both the intra- and extraembryonic vasculature, including the remodeling of the yolk sac vasculature, the regulation of vessel diameter, and the invasion of the fetal vasculature into the labyrinth layer of the placenta.

identification of notch regulated genes in ec-n1icd yolk sac and ec-rbpj-ko yolk sac
gene expression defects in the notch models were examined to determine potential molecular mechanisms of how altered notch disrupts vascular differentiation, through altered expression of putative notch targets. rna from yolk sacs of e <dig>  wild type, ec-n1icd and ec-rbpj-ko embryos  was isolated for gene expression analysis via microarray and semiquantitative rt-pcr. whole genome microarray identified a large number of gene expression defects in these notch models, many of which were confirmed with rt-pcr . to identify putative notch targets, genes were categorized on the altered response in the gain-of-function and loss-of-function models . only a relatively small set of genes displayed upregulation in the ec-n1icd model and downregulation in the ec-rbpj-ko model, which would be suggestive of genes that are positively regulated by the notch1-rbpj axis. interestingly, no genes were identified as being downregulated in the ec-n1icd model and upregulated in ec-rbpj-ko .

the members of the hairy/enhancer of split-related  family are well described notch targets, many of which are directly regulated by notch <dig> signaling via its binding to rbpj  <cit>  to regulatory regions of these loci. the microarray datasets revealed that in yolk sacs of ec-n1icd embryos, both hey <dig> and heyl were highly induced, and expression of these genes was reduced in the ec-rbpj-ko; these results were confirmed by semi-quantitative rt-pcr . expression of hey <dig> and heyl was increased  <dig> -fold and  <dig> -fold in the ec-n1icd model respectively, and decreased to 35% and 46% of wild type levels in the ec-rbpj-ko yolk sac tissue, respectively. interestingly, the expression of other hes family members, such as hes <dig> and hes <dig> was not affected in these notch models , consistent with a context-dependent regulation of notch targets  <cit> ; i.e. notch signaling invokes distinct downstream targets depending on both the cell type and the local environment.

the expression of the endogenous notch ligands and receptors was also examined in detail. previous work has suggested a potential autoregulatory loop for notch signaling in the control of ligands and receptors  <cit> . although expression of the notch family receptors was not altered in either the ec-n1icd or ec-rbpj-ko yolk sacs, the notch ligands delta-like  <dig>  and jagged  <dig>  showed higher expression in ec-n1icd  with little or no change in expression in ec-rbpj-ko yolk sac. these findings point to specific notch pathway targets in the extraembryonic yolk sac vasculature.

notch-rbpj signaling regulates vascular expression of key signaling molecules
given the defects in vessel diameter and remodeling in response to altered notch activity, we wished to focus gene expression analysis on secreted factors. genes encoding several known and putative secreted factors were differentially expressed in the notch models . expression defects of a subset of these genes were confirmed via rt-pcr, with a focus on genes with putative roles in vascular differentiation and that display coordinate defects in expression in the ec-n1icd and ec-rbpj-ko models. although the expression of some vegf family members was not significantly different in yolk sac, the microarray datasets indicated that expression of the vegf family members vegfc, encoding vegf-c, and pgf, encoding placenta growth factor , were both increased in ec-n1icd and vegfc was decreased in ec-rbpj-ko . rt-pcr confirmed that vegfc was upregulated  <dig> -fold in the ec-n1icd and decreased to 8% in the ec-rbpj-ko compared to control yolk sac tissue; pgf was upregulated  <dig> -fold in the ec-n1icd and decreased to 74% in the ec-rbpj-ko compared to control yolk sac tissue. the secreted cytokine tgfb <dig> also exhibited increased expression in the yolk sacs of ec-n1icd yolk sac tissue  and decreased expression in ec-rbpj-ko  .

given that the n1icd was activated specifically in the endothelia in this transgenic model, we wished to confirm that the gene expression defects in this model are confined to the endothelial lineage, to determine if the gene expression defects are intrinsic to the endothelium, or are associated with another cell type within the yolk sac. to these ends, gene expression of notch regulated genes was examined in endothelial cells purified via flow cytometry. via fluorescent activated cell sorting , pecam <dig> + cells were isolated from dissociated yolk sacs of e <dig>  wild type or ec-n1icd embryos  and rna was isolated from the purified cells for gene expression analysis via real time pcr. to confirm the enrichment of sorted endothelial cells within the pecam1+ population, expression of lineage markers were compared between rna from purified pecam1+ cells and from whole unsorted wild type yolk sac tissue. endothelial specific genes such as cdh <dig>  and pecam <dig> exhibited significant enrichment in pecam1+ cells . in contrast, the levels of the primitive visceral endodermal marker rhox <dig>   <cit>  were reduced to 10% in the sorted cells compared to whole wild type yolk sac tissue , demonstrating a substantial reduction of visceral endoderm cells in the purified endothelial cells. these findings demonstrate a specific enrichment of yolk sac endothelial cells via flow sorting.

the notch-responsive genes identified in the previous analysis of whole yolk sac tissues were then examined in the sorted yolk sac endothelial cells. the endothelial marker, pecam <dig> exhibited statistically equivalent expression between the ec-n1cd and wild type sorted cells, similar to that seen in whole yolk sac tissues . however, expression of hey <dig> and heyl was increased  <dig> -fold and  <dig> -fold in the ec-n1icd sorted endothelial cells respectively. similarly, the vegf family members vegfc and pgf were upregulated  <dig> -fold and  <dig> -fold, respectively in sorted ec-n1icd endothelial cells compared to wild type, while tgfb <dig> was increased  <dig> -fold . these results demonstrate that the expression of these genes is upregulated specifically in the endothelial lineages in ec-n1icd yolk sac. taken together, the gene expression defects demonstrate that notch-rbpj signaling acts to regulate many key genes specifically in the endothelia of the developing yolk sac. the misexpression of some of these factors may contribute to the vascular differentiation defects seen in the transgenic models.

putative notch regulated genes contain potential rbpj binding sites in the upstream regulatory region
the in vivo studies have identified a number of putative notch regulated genes in the developing vasculature. many of these genes are known notch targets, including hey <dig> and heyl, with known rbpj binding sites within regulatory elements  <cit> . these studies however also identified altered expression of several genes, including vegfc, tgfb <dig>  and pgf, for which their regulation by notch signaling has not previously been described. bioinformatic tools were used to determine if these genes are potentially direct targets of notch signaling through rbpj. several rbpj binding sites, with a core consensus binding sequence gtgggaa  <cit> , have been previously identified in known notch targets such as the hes family members  <cit> . the bioinformatic tool, ecr browser  <cit> , was used to determine if canonical rbpj binding sites were observed in the promoter proximal regions of loci encoding the secreted factors, vegfc, pgf, and tgfb <dig>  the mouse, human, and rat genomic sequences of each of the target genes were aligned and examined for the rbpj conserved transcription factor binding sites  within the evolutionary conserved regions  upstream and downstream of the start site. in each of the genes a gtgggaa consensus sequence was found, indicating a potential rbpj site . in the vegfc locus, an rbpj binding site is apparent approximately  <dig> kb upstream of the start site, while the pgf locus harbors an rbpj binding site  <dig> kb upstream and one  <dig> kb downstream of the transcriptional start site. rbpj sites were observed at approximately  <dig> kb and  <dig> kb upstream of the start site of the tgfb <dig> locus. the putative notch binding sites in each gene suggests that these genes may be direct targets of notch signaling.

discussion
numerous studies have indicated critical roles for notch signaling in the proper formation and maintenance of the early vascular system in the mouse. however, the mechanisms by which notch signaling regulates such diverse aspects of endothelial differentiation in its various contexts are active areas of research. our analysis details the morphological and molecular defects associated with altered notch signaling in vivo, with a focus on the extraembryonic vasculature of the yolk sac. this work has characterized distinct morphological defects in the early embryonic and extraembryonic vasculature associated with loss or gain of notch activity. substantial gene expression differences in these models point to putative notch target genes, and suggest potential mechanisms by which notch signaling directs endothelial cell differentiation.

morphological analysis of both ec-n1icd and ec-rbpj-ko models confirmed that the regulation of notch signaling is critical in the formation of the intra- and extraembryonic vasculature of the developing embryo. detailed examination of the yolk sac vasculature, dorsal aortae, and fetal vasculature of the placenta revealed an enlarged vessel phenotype in the ec-n1icd, remarkably apparent within the yolk sac, in which the plexus is converted to a mass of large diameter vessels . in contrast, small caliber non-remodeled vessels are present in the ec-rbpj-ko yolk sac model . other notch models have demonstrated malformations in vessel diameter resulting from altered notch activity, including other models of activated notch in vivo  <cit> . notch <dig> deficient mice  <cit> , mice lacking rbpj in the endothelia, and dll4+/- embryos  <cit>  each exhibit collapsed dorsal aortae and a lack of vascular remodeling. in contrast, embryos overexpressing either dll <dig>  <cit>  or notch <dig>  <cit>  have enlarged dorsal aortae. data indicated that the enlargement of the dorsal aortae in mice overexpressing dll <dig> was due not to a proliferation of endothelial cells, but to the improper migration of these cells  <cit> . these data point to an important role for notch signaling to regulate vessel diameter.

given that notch signaling is associated with arterial identity  <cit> , this function of notch signaling to control vessel size may represent an aspect of notch function in the definition of the arteriole. the mechanisms of how notch and other signaling pathways control vessel size in the various regions of the developing embryo are not well defined, and are likely context dependent. some models suggest that directional cell division is important to dictate whether endothelial cell proliferation within a patent vessel results in an increase in luminal diameter  <cit> . other models suggest the recruitment of endothelial or angioblast cells into existing vessels as an important mechanism to increase vessel diameter  <cit> . the remodeling process of the yolk sac makes extensive use of reallocation of cells during remodeling , suggesting complex roles for notch signaling in controlling endothelial cell behavior during remodeling.

the yolk sac vasculature represents a genetically tractable model to study endothelial differentiation, and the work presented here has made extensive analysis of this tissue. endothelial differentiation within the yolk sac is initiated as groups of cells from the proximally situated extraembryonic mesoderm condense into blood islands by approximately embryonic day  <dig> , which subsequently migrate toward the distal region of the yolk sac. the peripheral cells will differentiate to the endothelial cells lining the vasculature, whereas the inner cells become blood cells. the endothelial cells expand and fuse to form the vascular plexus, which is contiguous with the embryonic vasculature at the onset of blood flow  <cit> . the capillaries are then remodeled into the hierarchical vascular network of vitelline artery, capillaries, and vitelline vein. observations of vessel remodeling in the yolk sac, particularly in the chick embryo, suggest that the formation of large diameter vessels is from pre-existing capillary-derived endothelial cells. this process involves the collapse of some capillary microvessels, and the endothelial cells from the capillary are then recruited into the nascent vessels to result in a larger diameter vessel . this mode of remodeling resembles the process of intussusceptive arborization, which has been suggested to be an efficient and rapid mode of angiogenesis in a variety of sites  <cit> . although notch signaling does play a significant role in sprouting angiogenesis  <cit>  in many other contexts, the remodeling of the yolk sac in the early embryo may not utilize a sprouting angiogenesis method. instead, this early vascular remodeling is a rather distinct vascular mechanism that is not entirely clear and remains to be studied in detail.

based on this model of endothelial remodeling within the yolk sac plexus, the defects in vessel diameter and the remodeling failure in the notch models used in this study indicate a possible defect in the reallocation of endothelial cells from capillaries into arterioles, suggesting that notch plays a significant role in this migration. the phenotype observed in the ec-n1icd yolk sac vasculature is possibly due to increased mobilization and disorganized recruitment of capillary-derived endothelial cells, resulting in a field of enlarged vessels. conversely the failure of the yolk sac remodeling in the ec-rbpj-ko model is due to the abrogation of endothelial cell migration to form the larger caliber vessels. live imaging of the behavior of endothelial yolk sac cells in the notch models used in this study will be required to elaborate this model.

a detailed understanding of the downstream effectors of notch signaling during vascular differentiation in vivo, particularly within the extraembryonic tissues, has been lacking. the molecular analysis of the notch models presented here identified a variety of gene expression defects associated with altered notch activity. both the gain- and loss-of-function in vivo models suggest misregulation of a number of genes. data indicated that two of the notch family ligands, dll <dig> and jag <dig> were upregulated in ec-n1icd yolk sac, indicating a possible positive feedback loop for notch signaling to direct expression of its ligands. there is some precedence for a positive regulatory loop in which notch regulates the expression of ligands, including jag <dig> in nih 3t <dig> cells  <cit>  and dll <dig> in glioma cells  <cit> .

importantly, the gene expression analysis also identified a number of secreted factors whose expression within the endothelia is altered in the notch models. these data suggest that the notch signaling pathway regulates a number of secreted factors important in endothelial differentiation such as, pgf, vegfc, and tgfb <dig>  either directly or indirectly. targeted deletions of select tgf-β signaling components in mice result in the improper formation of the yolk sac vasculature, indicating the importance for tgf-β signaling in the formation of the early vascular system  <cit> . vegf signaling has critical early roles in the formation of the blood vessels in the early embryo  <cit> . vegf has also been shown to act as an upstream component of notch in the signaling cascade directing the differentiation of the zebrafish vasculature  <cit> . plgf has known roles in pathological angiogenesis  <cit> , and may act as a vegf agonist by countering the effects of the vegfa antagonist flt <dig>  in addition to the essential functions of vegfc in the developmental origin of the lymphatic system  <cit> , there is conflicting data to suggest it plays a broader role in angiogenesis. although this factor has known angiogenic activities in certain assays  <cit> , no vascular defects have been reported in mice lacking vegfc  <cit> . the expression of vegfc within the yolk sac however suggests a potential non-lymphatic function for this factor in this tissue. a putative role for vegfc in angiogenesis may involve the modulation of its receptors, kdr  and flt <dig> , both of which play a critical role in early angiogenesis.

notch signaling is essential for vessel remodeling, as our data shows that notch regulates the expression of a variety of secreted factors. notch signaling may play potential nonautonomous roles in the remodeling of the yolk sac capillary plexus . notch signaling is important for the regulation of select signaling molecules, including members of the vegf family and tgf-β family, which would emanate from the developing arteriole where activity of notch signaling is highest. these molecules then act in a paracrine and autocrine manner to elaborate the local arterial microenvironment about notch expressing cells, which may potentially influence adjacent capillary endothelial cells, smooth muscle or mural cells, and hematopoietic cells. indeed, nonautonomous functions for notch signaling in the endothelium have been suggested, including attenuating proliferation of smooth muscle cells  <cit> . testing of the nonautonomous functions of notch signaling in the vasculature will require determining the roles of notch-regulated secreted factors in vivo. these experiments may include the use of conditional transgenics and knockouts of these factors in the endothelia, and determining remodeling and endothelial differentiation defects in these models.

yolk sac vessel remodeling occurs after the initiation of blood flow, which initiates at approximately e <dig>  in the mouse  <cit> , and this flow is essential for the remodeling process. it is formally possible that the enlarged luminal diameter of the dorsal aorta in the notch gain-of-function model could give rise to a secondary failure of yolk sac remodeling solely due to reduced flow and associated shear stress. however, the vessel architecture reported in mouse models with remodelling defects solely due to altered blood flow  <cit>  display very different phenotypes from those observed in the n1icd model. this comparison suggests that the remodeling defects and some of the associated gene expression defects in the yolk sac in this notch <dig> gain-of-function model are not secondary to embryonic vessel defects or defects in blood flow. the cellular and subsequent molecular response to the shear stress associated with blood flow is not completely understood, but may involve a complex cell surface signalling molecules including kdr, pecam <dig>  and ve-cadherin  <cit> . shear stress thus initiates a molecular cascade in endothelial cells to direct further morphological changes to direct remodeling. an important question is what is the link between blood flow and notch signaling, both of which are essential for vessel remodeling. during remodeling, an arteriole rudiment is first observed at the site of yolk sac vasculature contact with the omphalomesentric artery. early dll <dig> expression is observed at this arteriole rudiment within the yolk sac  <cit> , indicating it is likely the notch ligand that initiates notch activity within this restricted region of the yolk sac vasculature. it remains to be seen the extent to which fluid dynamics control the expression of notch signalling components and the subsequent remodeling process.

CONCLUSIONS
the transcriptional network controlled by notch signaling during extraembryonic endothelial differentiation is largely unknown. the present data demonstrate a role for notch signaling in the regulation of a number of key genes in the embryonic vasculature of the yolk sac, including a variety of secreted factors important for endothelial differentiation. these downstream targets suggest a mechanism for notch regulation of vessel diameter size during the remodeling process in the yolk sac vasculature. further work on the in vivo models will help to further define the relationship between the transcriptional networks regulated by notch to direct endothelial differentiation, and the role of these notch downstream targets in endothelial migration and vascular remodeling. the understanding of these interactions and processes will aid in the development of treatments affecting vascular differentiation, including heart disease and tumor progression.

