BACKGROUND
since the first opsin sequence was described thirty years ago  <cit>  more than  <dig> opsin sequences have been published  <cit> . opsins of different types are expressed in multiple tissues, indicating that opsin-dependent photosensitivity is not restricted to the eyes or the central nervous system   <cit> . the traditional view has been that, unlike in vertebrates where ciliary opsins  are responsible for vision, rhabdomeric opsins  are the main opsins responsible for vision in protostomes . however, an increasing number of c-opsins are now being detected in protostomes; c-opsins are expressed in the brain of annelids and honeybees  <cit> , and it was recently shown that brachiopod larvae express a c-opsin homologue and have photoreceptive cells in the cerebral ciliary type eye spots  <cit> . within the arthropods, molecular biology has mainly been focused on just a few model species such as drosophila melanogaster, tribolium castaneum and parhyale hawaiensis, but there are plans to sequence thousands of arthropod genomes  <cit> . as additional genomes and transcriptomes are sequenced, and the eyes of additional animal groups are investigated, additional c-opsins are likely to be found. the opsin repertoire in arthropods appears to be highly divergent; the number of opsins detected varies from just three, e.g. in spiders  <cit>  to  <dig> in the recently sequenced genome of daphnia pulex <cit> . however, this variability may be due to differences in sampling methods . in order to study the evolution of arthropod opsins and infer the gene composition of the ancestral arthropod, it is necessary to compare arthropods to more basal groups such as onychophorans and tardigrades. the latest phylogenetic analyses place onychophorans as a sister group to euarthropods  <cit> . onychophorans have a pair of small eyes situated at the base of the antenna  <cit> . recently, the sequence of one r-opsin homologue, named onychopsin, as well as phototactic behaviour were described in onychophorans  <cit>  but no c-opsin was found. the documented presence of c-opsins in some arthropods such as the honeybee and the water flea , as well as in the lophotrochozoan representatives of annelids and brachiopods  <cit> , suggests a loss in the onychophoran lineage. however, in onychophorans, the presence of a rudimentary cilium in the photoreceptive cells has been described  <cit> , indicating instead that a c-opsin may be present in the onychophoran eye as well. to our knowledge there has been no report of cilia in the photoreceptive cells of cerebral eyes in euarthropods. it has been proposed that phototransduction were originally based on c-opsins, and that the ciliary phototransduction pathway evolved before the split of cnidarian and bilaterian animals  <cit> . vision or photodetection by r-opsins and their associated signalling pathway, evolved later in protostomes, taking over the visual phototransduction  <cit> . in chelicerates several visual opsins have been described but so far no c-opsin  <cit> . tardigrades are regarded as a sister group to onychophorans and euarthropods  <cit> . a study of the ultra-structure of tardigrade photoreceptive cells revealed both rhabdomeric and ciliary structures  <cit> , however no opsin sequences of tardigrades are known today.

arthropsins are a new set of r-opsins discovered in the sequenced genome of d. pulex <cit> . the function and localisation of arthropsin transcripts are unknown and there has been no report of their presence in other arthropods.

given that onychophorans are regarded as a sister group to euarthropods and that there is some support for placing chelicerates as basal within euarthropods  <cit> , we decided to search for additional opsin homologues in the australian onychophoran species euperipatoides kanangrensis  and in the central american wandering spider cupiennius salei , in order to shed some light on the evolution of arthropod opsins. by analysing sequences from a mixed tissue transcriptome of e. kanangrensis and transcriptomes specific for retina, cns and mixed embryonic stages of c. salei, we discovered multiple novel opsins in both species. a c-opsin homologue was found in both species. using rt-pcr on rna isolated from the eye and brain of e. kanangrensis and by analysing transcriptomes as well as rt-pcr of c. salei, we detected these transcripts in both the eye and brain of e. kanangrensis and in the brain but not in the eyes of c. salei. we identified an r-opsin that is a putative arthropsin and, in both the spider and the onychophoran, was expressed in the cns but not the eyes. in addition, we found a peropsin homologue in the spider but not in the onychophoran transcriptome. peropsin, which was recently placed within the clade of group  <dig> opsins  <cit> , has been described in several vertebrates, amphioxus and in the jumping spider hasarius adansoni <cit>  and is thought to function as a photoisomerase in chordates  <cit> . based on these findings, we suggest that the last common ancestor of onychophorans and arthropods had at least four types of opsins: one visual r-opsin; one c-opsin that might have had a function in the eye; one r-opsin that is not expressed in the eyes and is related to the arthropsins of d. pulex; and a peropsin that was lost in the onychophoran lineage.

RESULTS
orthology of the genes
we found three opsin-like genes in the transcriptome of the onychophoran species e. kanangrensis that we have designated as: ek onychopsin, ek c-opsin and ek arthropsin. ek onychopsin shows 98% identity on the nucleotide level  to the recently published sequence of a closely related species e. rowellii <cit> , hence its designation as an onychopsin. ek c-opsin groups with other c-opsins and forms, together with cs c-opsin, a sister group to other arthropod c-opsins  in our phylogenetic analysis . ek c-opsin also contains c-opsin-specific amino acid residues . the ek arthropsin clearly groups with r-opsins, as a sister group to daphnia pulex and c. salei arthropsins  and contain r-opsin-specific amino acid residues .

we found six opsin-like genes in the c. salei transcriptomes of mixed retinas, mixed embryonic tissues and cns. three of these are known visual opsins  and are described elsewhere  <cit> . we designated the remaining opsins as: cs peropsin, cs c-opsin and cs arthropsin. together with another spider  peropsin, cs peropsin forms a sister group to vertebrate peropsins . the cs c-opsin groups with other c-opsins . the cs arthropsin groups with other r-opsins and forms a group with d. pulex arthropsins . all the described opsin-like genes in e. kanangrensis and c. salei are  <dig> transmembrane proteins that contain a retinal binding lysine residue in transmembrane region vii and a putative counter ion glutamatic acid residue in the area between transmembrane region iv and v   <cit> . in all presented opsins, the corresponding position of the presumed vertebrate counter ion residue in transmembrane region iii is a tyrosine instead of a glutamatic acid residue like in vertebrates  <cit>  . in an alignment of a subset of the sequences  used for the phylogenetic analysis, the c-opsins have conserved amino acid residues distinct from the r-opsins. specifically conserved in the c-opsins are the amino acid residues directly downstream of transmembrane domain vii and near transmembrane domain vi. those residues have been suggested as being important for g protein interaction  <cit> .

orthologous sequences in other arthropods
in order to find orthologous sequences for cs arthropsin and cs peropsin we searched the published genomes of the chelicerates ixodes scapularis and metaseiulus occidentalis; the insects anopheles gambiae, apis mellifera and tribolium castaneum; and the centipede strigamia maritima. we could not find any sequences similar to cs-arthropsin or daphnia pulex arthropsins. we did not find any opsin homologue in the genome of the centipede s. maritima. we used the above listed genomes plus the genome of the crustacean daphnia pulex to search for sequences similar to cs-peropsin. we found two short fragments in the tick i. scapularis and two sequences in the tick m. occidentalis that include the start methionine as well as all  <dig> transmembrane regions, but no matching sequences were found in the other euarthropod species. the two short fragments,  <dig> and  <dig> amino acids in length, found in the tick i. scapularis could indicate incomplete annotation or that they are pseudogenes. the two peropsin-like sequences in the other tick m. occidentalis show ca. 30% amino acid sequence identity to cs-peropsin. the sequences of m. occidentalis were, according to the ncbi database, automatically annotated as peropsin-like sequences .

localisation of spider opsin transcripts
c. salei peropsin was detected in all of the transcriptomes . since the retina transcriptome was made from pooled retinas of all eye types we performed reverse transcription pcr  using rna from dissected retinas of each eye type as well as rna isolated from cns. c. salei peropsin transcripts were detected in the cns as well as in the secondary eyes , but not in the primary eyes  . c. salei c-opsin and arthropsin were detected in the transcriptomes of the cns only.

localisation of onychophoran opsin and onychophoran retinal rod sensitive cyclic gmp phosphodiesterase transcripts
the transcriptome of e. kanangrensis was made from mixed tissue. in order to localise the transcripts of onychophoran opsins we performed rt-pcr using rna from dissected eyes and brains. e. kanangrensis onychopsin and c-opsin were detected in both eye and brain samples but e. kanangrensis arthropsin only in brains . in order to assess the possibility of a ciliary phototransduction chain in the onychophoran eye we screened for cgmp pde in the e. kanangrensis transcriptome and found a sequence that matched other retinal rod sensitive cyclic gmp phosphodiesterases in the ncbi database . the rt-pcr reaction for e. kanangrensis-cgmp pde using either eye or brain cdna as a template gave a product in both cases .

discussion
visual opsin evolution
the onychophoran photoreceptor cells contain microvillar membrane extensions and only a rudimentary cilia and are therefore categorised as rhabdomeric  <cit> . the rhabdomeric photoreceptor cells and the expression of an r-opsin  in the eye suggest that the e. kanangrensis onychopsin is the opsin responsible for vision in the onychophorans as previously suggested  <cit> . hence, we use the term visual opsin in order to distinguish it from opsins with non-visual functions as concluded by expression in tissues other than the eye. it is likely that the e. kanangrensis c-opsin has a light-driven function other than vision in the onychophoran eye, perhaps a modulating function. however, great caution should be taken in making speculations regarding the opsin responsible for image formation in e. kanangrensis since we lack detailed expression data at the cellular level. our results are compatible with the view put forward by hering and co-workers , that one ancestral visual opsin in arthropods was duplicated in euarthropods. it is also likely that losses have occurred; in a search for opsins in the available genome of the eye-less centipede strigamia maritima we failed to find any opsin homologue.

ciliary opsins
it has been suggested that the photoreceptors evolved from dermal cells that contained both a cilium and microvilli   <cit> . photoreceptors of both the ciliary and microvillar type have been found in annelids  <cit> , molluscs  <cit>  and tardigrades  <cit> . the onychophoran photoreceptor cells have microvillar membrane enlargements but the cells also contain rudimentary cilia  <cit> . there are also reports of ciliary photoreceptors in the organ of bellonci, an organ attached to the eye stalk and suggested to have photoreceptive functions, of the crustacean shrimp paratya rasmaniensis <cit> . the cerebral photorecepors of the brachiopod terebratella transversa are of the ciliary type and the associated opsin was classified as a c-opsin by phylogenetic analysis  <cit> . however, to our knowledge, cerebral eyes with ciliary components have not been observed in euarthropods. a recent ultrastructural investigation of a pycnogonid, a basal euchelicerate or euarthropod, reported rhabdomeric structures in the photoreceptors  <cit> . our investigation is the first report of the expression of an opsin of the ciliary type in the eyes of an onychophoran. cilia are present in the embryonic ectoderm and in the hypocerebral organ of e. kanangrensis <cit> . however, these cilia disappear in the adult, and only a few rudimentary cilia can be detected in the adult hypocerebral organ. the hypocerebral organ of onychophorans is a paired structure ventral to the brain. its function is unknown, but a glandular role has been suggested  <cit> . the hypocerebral organ invaginates from the neuroectoderm and contains microvillar extensions in addition to cilia. the presence of ciliary structures in the rhabdomeric eyes and ciliary as well as rhabdomeric opsins in the eye of the onychophoran e. kanangrensis supports the suggestion by salvini-plawen  that photoreceptors evolved from dermal photosensitive cells that possessed both types of opsins and cellular enlargement structures. currently, the c-opsins of euarthropoda have only been described for the bee apis mellifera <cit> , the water flea daphnia pulex <cit> , the mosquito aedes aegypti <cit>  and the monarch butterfly danaus plexippus <cit> . in addition, a c-opsin sequence for the beetle tribolium castaneum has been deposited in ncbi databases but it is likely that, as more arthropod genomes are annotated, additional c-opsin sequences will be described. in the honey bee the ciliary type of opsin is termed pteropsin and is expressed in a small number of cells in the protocerebrum  <cit> . there is no data on the expression pattern in d. pulex and a. aegypti. in c. salei we could only detect the c-opsin in the transcriptome of the adult cns. the absence of c-opsin expression in the transcriptome of the mixed embryonic stages implies that its function is restricted to hatched spiders. there is no report of any ciliary structure in the eyes of c. salei <cit> . it thus appears that both ciliary structures and c-opsin expression were lost in the spider eyes, while onychophorans retain a rudimentary cilium in their photoreceptors and express c-opsin in the eye. tardigrades appear to have photoreceptors of the mixed type  <cit>  although the function of its ciliary extensions in light detection are doubted by the author of that investigation. however, in our view, the ancestral gene complement underlying arthropod photosensitivity was a photoreceptor of the mixed type that has gradually been lost in the lineage toward euarthropoda and onychophora, and completely lost in euarthropods, given that the most recent view of arthropod phylogeny  <cit>  holds true.

brain specific r-opsins or arthropsins
the non-visual spider and onychophoran r-opsins found in this study group with d. pulex arthropsins. the d. pulex arthropsins were recently described in the publication of the d. pulex genome  <cit> . their expression patterns and functions are unknown  <cit> . we searched the published genomes of other arthropods, but could not find any similar opsin sequences. however, with many more arthropod genomes being sequenced, it is possible that arthropsins will be discovered in additional arthropod taxa in the future. the arthropsins of both spider and onychophoran were expressed in cns tissue but not in the eyes, suggesting that they are not involved in vision but likely some other light driven effect, since they both contain a lysine at the retinal binding site in transmembrane region  <dig> 

peropsins
peropsins are members of the group  <dig> opsins. they were first described in the human retina  <cit>  and experiments on a peropsin homologue in amphioxus indicate that it might be a photoisomerase  <cit> . in arthropods, peropsin has so far only been described in a spider  <cit> , however, the very weak branch support values between spider and vertebrate peropsins in our investigation indicates that spider peropsins are very distant from vertebrate sequences . peropsin expression was absent in the c. salei am eyes and we did not find any peropsin homologue in the e. kanangrensis transcriptome. in the jumping spider h. adansoni, peropsin was detected by in situ hybridisation in the am eye  but in an area outside of the photoreceptor region  <cit> . the expression of peropsins outside of the photoreceptor region in h. adansoni indicates that the peropsin does not function as a photoisomerase. we await the more precise localisation of cs peropsin in the secondary eyes of c. salei by in situ hybridisation before discussing its potential role in the vision of the secondary eyes. nevertheless, differences in morphology and function between the primary eyes and the secondary eyes of c. salei have been characterized  <cit> , and hence, differences on the molecular level are to be expected. despite repeated rt-pcr on c. salei retina cdna we were unable to amplify any peropsin product from the am eyes.

CONCLUSIONS
in this investigation we have found three opsins in e. kanangrensis: one presumed visual opsin expressed in both the eye and brain; one c-opsin expressed in both the eye and brain; and one r-opsin expressed in brain but not in the eye. an earlier investigation of five onychophoran species only recovered one onychopsin sequence from each species  <cit> . one explanation for not finding any of the other opsins is that they have been lost in those species, another is that the transcripts are rare and the transcriptome sequencing depth insufficient to recover them. additionally, different methods of transcriptome sequencing and assembly may produce different results. in c. salei we found, in addition to three visual opsins discussed elsewhere, three presumably non-visual opsins: one peropsin expressed in the secondary eyes and in the brain; one c-opsin expressed in the brain but not in the eyes; and an r-opsin, designated as arthropsin, expressed in the brain but not in the eyes. the c. salei and e. kanangrensis c-opsins are homologous to c-opsins of other arthropods like the multiple pteropsins in d. pulex and the pteropsin described in a. mellifera. the c. salei peropsin has homologues in vertebrates as well as in some euarthropods and it is therefore likely that this gene has been lost in the lineage to onychophorans. when additional arthropod genomes and transcriptomes are sequenced it is possible that peropsins as well as arthropsins will be described in the different euarthropod groups, e.g. crustaceans and pycnogonids for which the genome sequence representation is either limited  or completely lacking . however, in the recently sequenced genome of the eye-less centipede strigamia maritima we did not find any opsin sequence at all, neither visual nor non-visual, indicating that in s. maritima the need for light induced stimuli involving opsins has been lost. incidentally, we also did not find any sequences homologous to cryptochrome; cryptochrome is a light sensitive protein involved in circadian rhythm in several species as well as involved in light responses in plants  <cit> . we postulate that the original set of arthropod opsins was composed of at least four opsin-like genes: one visual opsin; one peropsin; one arthropsin; and one c-opsin. this opsin set then underwent reduction in some lineages, with an extreme example being the complete loss of opsins in the centipede strigamia maritima, and expansion in other lineages, such as that resulting in  <dig> opsins in the crustacean d. pulex .

