BACKGROUND
vibrio parahaemolyticus is a major causative agent of gastroenteritis, and is often associated with the consumption of raw or undercooked shellfish. in addition to gastroenteritis, this organism causes clinical manifestations such as wound infections and septicemia  <cit> . most clinical isolates of v. parahaemolyticus exhibit β-type hemolysis on a special blood agar medium, whereas environmental isolates do not. this hemolysis is called the kanagawa phenomenon  and is considered to be a reliable marker for detection and identification of pathogenic strains  <cit> . it has been reported that thermostable direct hemolysin  specifically contributes to the kp  <cit> . previous studies have shown that tdh shows several biological activities such as hemolysis, cell cytotoxicity and enterotoxicity  <cit> . furthermore, molecular epidemiological studies have indicated that the tdh gene is strongly associated with clinical strains  <cit> . therefore, tdh is thought to be an important virulence factor in v. parahaemolyticus. although the genetic structures of the tdh gene and its neighboring regions are known, there is little information as to how tdh gene expression is controlled by other factors in this organism.

the hfq gene is conserved in a wide range of bacteria, but hfq varies in the number of amino acids between different bacteria  <cit> . hfq is a global regulator that modulates the stability and translation of mrnas. it is thought that hfq acts as an rna chaperone by mediating interactions between many small regulatory rnas and their mrna targets  <cit> . it has been shown that hfq regulates the expression of many genes, including the genes encoding for stationary-phase sigma factor  and outer membrane protein a   <cit> . it has also been shown that hfq contributes to pathogenicity in bacteria such as brucella abortus, listeria monocytogenes, pseudomonas aeruginosa, salmonella typhimurium, v. cholerae, and yersinia enterocolitica  <cit> . although hfq is associated with bacterial virulence, it is not clear whether hfq is associated with pathogenicity in v. parahaemolyticus.

in this study, we have attempted to elucidate the correlation between hfq and v. parahaemolyticus pathogenicity, particularly with regard to the important virulence factor tdh, using an hfq gene-deletion mutant.

RESULTS
effect of hfq on growth of v. parahaemolyticus
the complete genome of v. parahaemolyticus strain rimd <dig> has been sequenced, and the hfq gene is located on chromosome  <dig>   <cit> . the gene structures neighboring hfq in v. parahaemolyticus are identical to those of v. cholerae and escherichia coli   <cit> , and the hfq amino acid sequence of v. parahaemolyticus is highly conserved with that of v. cholerae .

previous studies showed that defects in the hfq gene decreased the growth rates of e. coli and p. aeruginosa, but not of s. typhimurium and v. cholerae  <cit> . in lb medium supplemented with 3% nacl, Δhfq, a derivative of the v. parahaemolyticus strain rimd <dig> with an in-frame deletion of  <dig> of the  <dig> amino acid residues of hfq, showed a reduced growth rate as compared with that of the parental strain . this indicates that hfq has an effect on the growth of v. parahaemolyticus.

hemolytic activity of secreted protein from Δhfq
hfq regulates the bacterial pathogenicity that is mediated by alterations in virulence gene expression  <cit> . therefore, we investigated the hemolytic activity of the Δhfq strain by determining the level of tdh in culture supernatants, because tdh is thought to be important for v. parahaemolyticus pathogenicity. in the following experiments, we evaluated all of the strains under the same growth phase conditions. the relative hemolytic activity in the culture supernatant of the Δhfq strain was significantly higher than that of the parental strain. we introduced phfq, which harbors the hfq gene, into Δhfq and showed that the relative hemolytic activity in the culture supernatant of phfq/Δhfq was lower than that of Δhfq. the hemolytic activity in the culture supernatant of psn1/Δhfq, in which an empty vector was introduced into Δhfq, was almost the same as that of Δhfq . these results suggest that hfq is associated with the production of tdh in v. parahaemolyticus.

hfq is involved in the expression of tdh
we next investigated the level of tdh by western blotting, and found that the expression of tdh was increased at mid-log growth phase  as compared with the parental strain . the amount of tdh in the Δhfq strain at stationary growth phase was also higher than that of the parent strain . the elevation in tdh production was fully reversed by trans-complementation with the hfq gene in phfq/Δhfq . these results suggest that tdh production is specifically associated with hfq. we also examined the mrna levels of the tdh gene at mid-log growth phase using quantitative real-time rt-pcr. the amount of tdh mrna in the Δhfq strain was significantly higher than in the parent strain . these results suggest that the elevation of hemolytic activity in the Δhfq strain is due to activation of tdh gene transcription.

transcriptional levels of the tdh genes in Δhfq
previous studies showed that while two tdh genes  are located on chromosome  <dig> of strain rimd <dig>  in this strain tdh production was attributed only to tdha  <cit> . although we found that tdh was elevated significantly at both the transcriptional and translational levels in the Δhfq strain, quantitative real-time rt-pcr and western blotting using anti-tdh antibody cannot distinguish between the two tdh genes, since their nucleotide sequences are very similar . to solve this problem, transcriptional fusions of tdha and tdhs to the lacz reporter gene  were constructed and were monitored in Δhfq or in the isogenic parental strains. in the parental strain, the relative activity of the tdha-lacz fusion gene was much higher than the tdhs-lacz fusion gene . this result is consistent with previous reports  <cit> . interestingly, the relative activity of the tdha-lacz fusion gene in the Δhfq strain was significantly elevated when compared with the parental strain, whereas there was no difference in the activity of the tdhs-lacz fusion gene between the parental and Δhfq strains . these results indicate that the elevation of tdh mrna levels in the Δhfq strain is due to tdha gene transcription.

acmr, chloramphenicol resistance

hfq regulates the expression of other virulence-associated genes
recently, it has been shown that type iii secretion systems  in v. parahaemolyticus are also important for the pathogenicity of this organism  <cit> . to evaluate whether hfq can regulate the expression of ttss genes as well as tdh, we investigated the expression of three genes , which encode ttss effector proteins  <cit> , at the transcriptional and translational levels in the Δhfq strain. vp <dig>  which is secreted via ttss <dig>  showed elevated gene expression in the Δhfq strain. the expression of vopc and vopt, which are secreted via ttss <dig>  was also increased in the Δhfq strain . these results indicate that the transcription of some genes encoding ttss effector proteins is regulated in an hfq-dependent manner.

discussion
hfq plays a role as a major post-transcriptional regulator in numerous bacterial pathways  <cit> . previous studies have shown that hfq affects the virulence of various pathogenic bacteria  <cit> . in this study, we have demonstrated that hfq plays a critical role in the expression of tdh . this indicates that hfq is involved in the virulence of v. parahaemolyticus just as in other pathogenic bacteria, because tdh is considered to be an important virulence factor in v. parahaemolyticus  <cit> . the modulation of bacterial pathogenicity by hfq has been associated with small non-coding rnas  <cit> . it has been shown that deletion of the hfq gene in p. aeruginosa affects the expression of virulence genes by changing the stability of a small non-coding rna  <cit> . recently, lenz et al. have speculated that small non-coding rnas exist in the v. parahaemolyticus genome  <cit> . although there is little information regarding small non-coding rnas in v. parahaemolyticus, we speculate that one or more small non-coding rnas interacting with tdh may regulate virulence gene expression levels.

the production of tdh is reportedly affected by environmental factors such as ph, temperature, and chemicals  <cit> , but little is known about the modulation of expression of the tdh gene by internal factors in v. parahaemolyticus. in this study, we showed that hfq in v. parahaemolyticus was important for the expression of the tdh gene and that the transcription of the tdha gene rather than the tdhs gene was regulated by hfq . this result indicates that the expression of the tdh gene is under the control of hfq. lin et al. have reported that toxr in v. parahaemolyticus is associated with the production of tdh  <cit> . we investigated the transcriptional activity of toxr in the Δhfq strain under our experimental conditions, but could not find any differences between the Δhfq and wild type strains . this suggests that the regulation of tdh gene expression by hfq is toxr-independent. we are currently examining how hfq regulates the expression of tdh.

proteome and microarray analyses in various bacteria have shown that hfq controls the expression of various genes  <cit> . thus, hfq is considered to be a global regulator of gene expression including genes encoding virulence factors. in this study, we confirmed that hfq also regulates the expression of at least three effector proteins of ttsss, namely vp <dig>  vopc and vopt, in v. parahaemolyticus . it has been shown that ttsss and these three effector proteins contribute to pathogenicity in v. parahaemolyticus  <cit> . although ttsss in pathogenic e. coli and salmonella are involved in the regulatory mechanisms for the expression of ttss-related genes  <cit> , this is not yet clear in v. parahaemolyticus. moreover, it seems likely that other novel effector proteins will be found that contribute to the pathogenicity of v. parahaemolyticus  <cit> . our results suggest that hfq may be important for the pathogenicity of v. parahaemolyticus. experiments are currently underway to analyze the mechanisms by which hfq governs the expression of virulence genes in v. parahaemolyticus.

CONCLUSIONS
we have confirmed that the expression of tdh in v. parahaemolyticus is closely associated with the transcriptional activity of tdha. hfq regulates the transcriptional activity of tdha and the expression of tdh in v. parahaemolyticus. we predict that hfq may be a global regulator of pathogenicity in v. parahaemolyticus.

