BACKGROUND
targeted collation of contact data typically only represent a small subset of the true population, and if these data are biased this may lead to misinterpretation of recorded contact structures  <cit> . consequently, heterogeneities in population contact structure can be poorly characterised. the importance of such contact heterogeneities for infectious disease transmission have been highlighted through the development of social network models in humans  <cit>  and movement network models in livestock  <cit> . in great britain , the application of network analysis to livestock movements has been uniquely informed by a well-defined temporally explicit cattle tracing system  database  <cit> . however, even in this case there is some evidence of potential bias in cattle movement patterns arising through missing or incorrect movement records at the level of the type of enterprise  <cit> . such systematic errors, arising from data collection procedures and inaccuracies in reported information, may lead to biases in the quantification of network properties. bias identification is therefore an important step in ensuring model validity.

mathematical models of avian influenza  in great britain  have been largely informed by the poultry network database , providing poultry network information for a subset of the industry, and the great britain poultry register  which provides more representative demographic information. although the pnd does not reflect temporally explicit movements on-to and off-of farms, shared industry associations have been used to infer potential contacts between farms and have informed stochastic simulation and exploratory models  <cit> . for example, all farms that are associated with a particular slaughterhouse are assumed potentially epidemiologically linked to one another. in the absence of epidemic data, and therefore without the ability to validate predictive models for ai control in gb, mathematical models are a valuable tool for exploring the connectivity of the poultry industry. these epidemiological models have investigated the efficacy of current control measures for ai in gb and have identified particular scenarios that could result in a large outbreak  <cit> .

the pnd was collated in  <dig> by the veterinary laboratories agency . this was designed to establish farms that share industry associations such as through catching companies , slaughterhouses  or through being part of a larger integrated company . from this, an estimate of between-farm association frequency  can be made at a farm-level, which can be used to inform logistical considerations during a disease outbreak prior to the implementation of movement restrictions  <cit> . these between-farm associations inferred from the pnd have been used as a proxy for between-farm "contacts" as they are considered to represent potential routes of between-farm spread of infection through personnel, shared equipment and vehicles  <cit> .

epidemiological evidence from previous outbreaks of ai indicate the role of indirect transmission via fomites, for example through shared equipment, the reuse of disposable egg-trays, the movement of vehicles , the management practices of integrated companies, contaminated bird-carrying crates during slaughterhouse-related farm visits and through the clothing, shoes and hands of farm visitors  <cit> . such mechanisms of transmission via fomites are also identified as sources of possible risk through catching company personnel and vehicles associated with slaughterhouse-related farm visits  <cit> .

whilst this evidence is largely circumstantial, arising from epidemiological investigations, it is considered likely that ai will share the same mechanisms for between-farm transmission as other pathogens similarly transmitted via the faecal-oral route  <cit> , such as salmonella, campylobacter and those associated with coccidiosis  <cit> . fomites have been implicated in poultry flock infections caused by these pathogens and represent possible mechanisms of between-farm transmission; for example, during slaughterhouse-related farm visits via equipment such as bird-carrying crates and pallets, the wheels of forklift trucks and slaughterhouse vehicles, the boots of drivers' and catchers', as well as via staff and equipment shared between different farm premises  <cit> . evidence from previous outbreaks also suggests that spatial spread, possibly via airborne mechanisms, may also play an important role between farms within close proximity  <cit> . however, this mechanism is considered to be relatively less important for gb compared with countries such as the netherlands  <cit> , which has regions of greater poultry farm density.

as a result of the targeted sampling of known shs and ccs, missing data inherently biases the pnd towards large poultry premises. therefore the pnd cannot be considered representative of the entire gb poultry industry and was never intended to be so . it has been shown that even when individuals are sampled at random, this process may not result in a random representation of their contacts, and consequently overall network properties  <cit> . missing data within the pnd are inherently non-random, and therefore systematic differences in the types of farms sampled compared to those unsampled may further exacerbate the misrepresentation of network properties, and the identification of high risk sectors of the poultry industry. the validity of generalising pnd informed network properties to a national-scale is potentially reduced by missing farms. therefore, establishing the likely characteristics of these missing farms, based on the known properties of those that are well-characterised, is an important step to inform future data collection exercises. it is only through a more representative characterisation of the poultry industry that contact heterogeneities can be usefully applied to predictive models of poultry disease control.

to our knowledge, the appropriateness of using inferred industry contacts from the pnd for informing predictive ai models in gb has not been considered in the published literature. in particular, the potential implications of targeted sampling procedures for predictive modelling of ai control have yet to be quantified. potential biases in inferred poultry network properties may have important consequences for government preparedness of resource distribution during an outbreak; the extent of between-farm spread may depend on how rapid and where the movement restrictions that inhibit this risk are implemented. as the human health, animal welfare and economic consequences of a large ai outbreak could potentially be catastrophic  <cit> , government and industry preparedness for such an event is vital.

our aim was to identify geographical areas with biases in the farm contact structure by extrapolating network data informed by the pnd to the gbpr, which is more demographically representative of gb poultry farms but without the detailed information on between-farm associations via the poultry industry. this database was established by the british department for environment, food and rural affairs  in december  <dig>  and it is mandatory for all commercial farms holding more than  <dig> birds to record their farm-related details  <cit> .

specifically, our objectives were to:  determine statistical associations between farm-level factors and network informed between-farm association frequency, using multivariable logistic regression;  extrapolate the fitted statistical models to each farm recorded in the gbpr, obtaining predicted probabilities for categorical between-farm association frequency;  compare the regional-level  distribution of pnd-informed between-farm association frequencies with estimates following extrapolation to the gbpr.

RESULTS
the poultry industry network
the pnd, with between-farm associations assumed to arise through shared industry contacts, was highly connected: most farms were potentially associated with almost all other farms, mostly through slaughterhouses  and catching companies  . this is consistent with previous work using the pnd which reports that, when all types of industry contacts are combined, the giant component of the network  includes the majority of premises  <cit> . the largest sh is important for connecting smaller clusters of farms that are themselves connected to each other through shs .

assessing the introduction of bias following data reduction
the univariable odds ratios , computed both before and after the exclusion of farm records with missing predictor variable data , did not suggest that any significant biases would be introduced to either the scenario  <dig> or  <dig> analyses . therefore the reduced dataset was used for the multivariable statistical modelling.

aor = odds ratio; bs.e. = standard error of the odds ratio; c >25% change in odds ratio but direction of association and significance is comparable; dsingle variable for which there is >25% change in odds ratio and no change in direction of association, but significance is altered; el = large, s = small.

aor = odds ratio; bs.e. = standard error of the odds ratio; c >25% change in odds ratio but direction of association and significance is comparable; dl = large, s = small.

scenario 1: predictors of large between-farm association frequency
equation  <dig> shows the form of the logistic model used to identify predictors of a large between-farm association frequency . the logit function represents a nonlinear transformation of the probability that farm i has a laf, pr, β0is the average log-odds of a laf for farms within the baseline predictor variable categories, β <dig>  β <dig> ... β <dig> are average log-ors for each predictor variable , β <dig> β <dig> and β <dig> are the log-ors for farms in the baseline categories for interacting variables.

afollowing categorisation of original numeric variables

b original categorisation for variables indicating the farm management type

cgeographical regions of england

house count/
indoor/
*see table 3

  logit pr =β0+β1hblsi+β2hbsli+β3hblli+β4ifnni+β5ifnyi+β6ifyyi+β7integratedi+β8easti+β9scotlandi+β10walesi+β11westi+β12ifnni*integratedi+β13ifnyi*integratedi+β14ifyyi*integratedi 

management type and poultry house count were found to be significantly associated with between-farm association frequency ; farms keeping only free-range birds were more likely , and farms with a large poultry house count were less likely  to be assigned laf. there was also evidence of association with geographical location; farms located in the west of england were less likely than farms located in the north of england to be assigned laf . the effect of management type was found to differ depending on the integration status of the farm; free-range integrated farms were significantly less likely than free-range non-integrated farms to be assigned laf and vice versa . there was no evidence of a poor fit to the data based on an assessment of the model residuals or model predictive ability .

asee tables  <dig> and  <dig> for definitions; bor = odds ratio; cci = confidence interval of the or; daverage odds in the baseline predictor groups; ereference-level category; for for farms in the baseline category of the other interacting variable; results significant at 5% error level are indicated in bold.

scenario 2: predictors of medium between-farm association frequency
equation  <dig> shows the form of the logistic model used to identify predictors of a medium between-farm association frequency . the logit function represents a nonlinear transformation of the probability that farm i has a maf, pr, β0is the average log-odds of a maf for farms within the baseline predictor variable categories and β <dig>  β <dig> ... β <dig> are average log-ors for each predictor variable .

  logit pr =β0+β1hblsi+β2hbsli+β3hblli+β4integratedi+β5easti+β6scotlandi+β7walesi+β8westi 

in contrast to scenario  <dig> analyses, bird count rather than poultry house count was a significant predictor of between-farm association frequency . farms with a large bird count were significantly more likely to be assigned maf . similarly to scenario  <dig> analyses, integrated companies were significantly less likely than non-integrated companies to be assigned maf . geographic location was also found to be important; farms located in scotland, wales and the west of england were significantly less likely than farms located in the north of england to be assigned maf . there was no evidence of a poor fit to the data based on an assessment of the model residuals or model predictive ability .

asee tables  <dig> and  <dig> for definitions; bor = odds ratio; cci = confidence interval of the or; daverage odds in the baseline predictor groups; ereference-level category; results significant at 5% error level are indicated in bold.

comparative analysis of geographical variation
comparing the pnd with the gbpr, the geographical distribution of sampling coverage and capacity was noticeably different . it is possible that this misrepresentation of farms within the pnd has lead to systematic error  in the inherent description of the network. indeed, following the extrapolation of between-farm association frequency to the gbpr, substantial differences were found when compared to the observations from the pnd. comparing both datasets, the probabilities obtained were significantly different for all regions ; the values inferred from the pnd do not overlap the 95% confidence intervals  generated for the estimates obtained using the gbpr data .

comparing the regions within great britain, geographical variation in the predicted probabilities extrapolated to the gbpr data was observed; neighbouring regions were found to be typically more similar to each other. for example, three regional clusters were observed:  the north west, north east, yorkshire, east midlands and eastern regions of england,  greater london and the south east of england, and  the west midlands and south west of england . scotland and wales on the other hand appear distinct; their large between-farm association frequency propensity is different to the other regions , whilst they appear more similar in terms of their medium between-farm association frequency probabilities . furthermore, the width of the cis generated using the gbpr demonstrates our confidence in these estimates and whether their likely range is comparable between regions. prioritising regions based on the rank order of our confidence in the estimated probabilities  reveals differences across the between-farm association frequency categories .

aregions ranked in order of priority based on confidence in predicted probabilities of large  or medium  between-farm association frequency , and small  between-farm association frequency .

bthe 95% confidence interval range  for predicted probabilities of large , medium , and small , between-farm association frequencies.

discussion
geographical bias in network data
the targeted sampling strategies employed in the collation of network data for epidemiological use may be inherently biased in terms of demographic representation. our results demonstrate how such demographic information may also result in a biased representation of the network properties. using an example of the british poultry industry network comprised of farms, slaughterhouses , catching companies  and integrated companies , we show how risk-based collation of the pnd has potentially led to misrepresentation of between-farm connectivity. these findings also have importance for other poultry diseases also transmitted via fomites, such as salmonella, campylobacter and those associated with coccidiosis  <cit> . our results have particular implications for highly pathogenic ai  in gb, as predictive and exploratory models have been informed by the network structure provided by the pnd  <cit> .

although the pnd was considered a priori to be inherently biased in terms of its representation of farm characteristics, bias in the network characteristics had not previously been explored. our results show how the geographical distribution of between-farm association frequency, as inferred from the pnd, significantly differed following extrapolation of this network data to the gbpr . the purpose of this extrapolation process was not to accurately predict farm-level connectivity for farms recorded in the gbpr, and assumes the statistical association between the farm-level predictors and between-farm association frequency is true. extrapolating this network information was a method by which to test the pnd network associations making use of the more representative distribution of farm-level factors provided by the gbpr.

our analyses have demonstrated heterogeneities in the demographic profile between the datasets, highlighting types of farms and regions of gb where network data should be expanded. the confidence intervals for probabilities of between-farm association frequencies, estimated for the gbpr data, reflect the accuracy of these estimates . we recommend further sampling should be carried out within regions where we have relatively poor confidence in our estimates, in particular prioritising regions for which we have the smallest confidence in large between-farm association frequency probabilities .

methodological considerations
using multivariable logistic regression we have identified statistically significant  associations between farm-level factors and between-farm association frequency using the pnd. we found that small , non-integrated, free-range farms were more likely to have a large between-farm association frequency. although our aim here was not to directly determine the impact of network biases on disease transmission predictions, drawing valid conclusions from analyses of contact heterogeneity requires consideration of systematic errors in sampled network data. the analyses here did not directly allow for such inference as between-farm association frequencies do not necessarily correlate with ai exposure frequencies. for example, although we found that free-range farms may have a greater overall between-farm association frequency, we would expect them to have fewer farm visits on a daily basis due to their typically longer production cycles and smaller bird throughput.

nevertheless, the chance of a farm becoming exposed to ai virus during a slaughterhouse-related farm visit will depend in part on the number of farms visited by a single sh vehicle and catching team within a single day. we believe that it can be reasonably hypothesised that premises associated with larger shs , such as the free-range farms in our analyses, may have a greater risk of infection from other associated farms. this is because of the likely greater number of farm clients visited in one day by the vehicles of these larger shs  . in the case of cc movements, an analysis of temporally explicit catching-related movement data suggests they may be relatively less important than sh vehicles for ai transmission, as only one farm was visited by a catching team within a single-day for 84% of the recorded farm visits; however, up to seven visits within a day was possible  <cit> , and this result could be limited by the representation of only one cc.

one source of missing data within the pnd results from non-reporting of information by at least one farmer across all data fields . although methods for imputing such missing values for the purpose of statistical regression analyses exist  <cit> , such measures would likely add to the uncertainty in our extrapolated outputs and so were considered inappropriate for the purpose of the analysis here. in any case, it was determined unlikely that such non-reporting resulted in systematic errors in the estimated model coefficients, as no significant differences were identified from a comparison of univariate ors calculated before and after the removal of records with missing data .

existing analyses have used the pnd without consideration to data biases. truscott et al.  used the pnd to derive a negative binomial distribution for the number of contacts. similarly, sharkey et al.  used the pnd to inform the geographical profile and frequency of farm movements, and dent et al.  used the pnd to infer farm associations through shared industry contacts . these studies have thereby potentially misrepresented the extent of network connectivity through the under-representation of smaller farms. through better characterisation of these misrepresented sectors of the poultry industry, the use of poultry network data for informing predictive models of ai control can be more reliably assessed.

epidemiological implications
our results suggest that free-range farms may have more extensive implications for ai control measures than previously anticipated. free-range farms could be targeted both to minimise the risk of introduction through contact with wild birds, such as through targeted surveillance  <cit> , and - via improved biosecurity measures - to minimise the risk of onward spread through sh vehicle movements. furthermore, free-range farms may have comparatively different logistical considerations in terms of the extent of contact tracing due to their potential wide range of associations. these implications for disease control measures, to minimise between-farm spread via fomites during farm visits, are applicable to the period prior to the detection and notification of an outbreak to the authorities  <cit> . once notification has occurred, the risk of between-farm spread will be limited to how rapid and where control measures are implemented, as well as to poultry farm density if airborne mechanisms of spread are important  <cit> . whether the observed demographic bias in network connectivity does indeed correspond to infection risk will be the focus of future work incorporating temporally explicit cc movement data.

using the pnd to inform predictive models of ai control may also lead to a misrepresentation of maximum between-farm association frequency at a national-scale. the different implications for regional-level disease control between the datasets highlights the potential difficulties of relying upon data subsets to infer disease control at this scale. when comparing sampling coverage  and capacity  between the datasets alone, scotland, the east and the south east of england appear particularly under-sampled by the pnd . however, significant under-estimation of large between-farm association frequency was found, when informed by the pnd compared with the gbpr, for all regions except the south east and the north west of england . this suggests that the under-sampling of the pnd is not alone predictive of bias in this network data.

we recommend that future data collection should target those farms where additional sampling could improve our confidence in estimated between-farm association frequencies. by ranking regions based on our confidence in these estimates we demonstrate how data collection can be prioritised, in particular in those regions where we have relatively low confidence in large between-farm association frequencies, such as greater london and the north east of england . we also highlight the apparent difference in large between-farm association frequency for scotland and wales, which appear distinct from the other regions despite their relatively narrow confidence intervals . such differences between regions may be useful for informing targeted disease control strategies.

future data collection should also be directed towards the subset of farms within the gbpr which were unclassified in terms of their probability of a large between-farm association frequency . the farm-level predictors of large between-farm association frequency may only reflect the characteristics of farms connected to the large sh in the pnd; it may not be appropriate to generalise and assume that farms with similar characteristics will also be associated with other large shs. as the pnd was deliberately targeted at larger poultry industry premises, the very large sh in the pnd may represent the only one in gb of this size; however, the sampling procedure captured only  <dig> %  of shs approved by the british food standards agency at the time these data were collated . therefore, a better understanding of the activities of unsampled shs is also important.

CONCLUSIONS
we have shown how systematic errors in the demographic characterisation of network data, resulting from targeted sampling procedures, can bias the picture of between-host network connectivity. detailed analyses of potential network bias within the pnd are an important step towards obtaining a more accurate characterisation of the british poultry industry network structure. providing a means of using this network information in a more representative way can help us more reliably infer the role of contact heterogeneities in the spread of poultry diseases. based on the distribution of demographic factors represented by the gbpr, we have demonstrated that between-farm connectivity inferred from the pnd may be biased. the sampling coverage and capacity is not alone indicative of this network bias; estimates of between-farm association frequency differed significantly across all regions of gb following extrapolation to the gbpr. we recommend that regions where we have relatively low confidence in our estimates of large between-farm association probability should be prioritised for future poultry network data collection. a subset of farms unsampled by the pnd, and unclassified in terms of their large between-farm association frequency probability, were identified and we suggest these are also targeted in future data collection exercises. evaluating whether and how the between-farm association frequencies impact on the risk of between-farm transmission will be the focus of future work.

