BACKGROUND
we are in the era of holistic biology. massive amounts of biological data await interpretation. this calls for formal modeling and computational methods. in this paper, we present a method to model the regulatory system which executes a cellular function and can be represented as a biomolecular network. understanding the biomolecular network implementing some cellular function goes beyond the old dogma of "one gene: one function": only through comprehensive system understanding can we predict the impact of genetic variation in the population, design effective disease therapeutics, and evaluate the potential side-effects of therapies. as biomolecular networks grow in size and complexity, the model of a biomolecular network must become more rigorous to keep track of all the components and their interactions. in general this presents the need for computer simulation to manipulate and understand the biomolecular network model. however, a major challenge of modeling the dynamics of a biomolecular network is that conventional methods based on physical and chemical principles  require data that are difficult to accurately and consistently measure using either conventional or high-throughput technologies, which characteristically yield noisy, semi-quantitative, and often relative data.

in this paper, we present a hybrid approach that combines data mining and state-space modeling to build and analyze the biomolecular network of a cellular process. our method consists of two steps. first, a novel scale-free network clustering approach is applied to the large-scale biomolecular network to obtain various sub-networks. second, a state-space model is generated for the sub-networks and simulated to predict their behavior in the cellular context. it integrates the process of obtaining network structure directly with state-space dynamic simulation robust to qualitative  and noisy quantitative  data to iteratively test and refine hypothetical biomolecular networks. in the following, we review some related work in community structure analysis, and biomolecular networking modeling.

community structure analysis
the study of community structure in a network is closely related to the graph partitioning in graph theory and computer science. it has also closely ties with the hierarchical clustering in sociology  <cit> . recent years have witnessed an intensive activity in this field, partly due to the dramatic increase in the scale of networks being studied. because communities are believed to play a central role in the functional properties of complex networks  <cit> , the ability to detect communities in networks could have practical applications. studying the community structure of biological networks is of particular interest and challenging, given the high data volume and the complex nature of interactions. in the context of biological networks, communities might represent structural or functional groupings. they can be synonymous with molecular modules, biochemical pathways, gene clusters, or protein complexes. being able to identify the community structure in a biological network may help us to understand better the structure and dynamics of biological systems. hashimoto and colleagues  <cit>  have developed an approach to growing genetic regulatory networks from seed genes. their work is based on probabilistic boolean networks and sub-networks are constructed in the context of a directed graph using both the coefficient of determination and the boolean function influence among genes. the similar approach is also taken by flake and colleagues  <cit>  to find highly topically related communities in the web based on the self-organization of the network structure and on a maximum flow method. related works also include those that predict co-complex proteins. jansen and colleagues  <cit>  use a procedure integrating different data sources to predict the membership of protein complexes for individual genes based on two assumptions: first, the function of any protein complex depends on the functions of its subunits; and second, all subunits of a protein complex share certain common properties. bader and hogue  <cit>  report a molecular complex detection  clustering algorithm to identify molecular complexes in a large protein interaction network. mcode is based on local network density – a modified measure of the clustering coefficient. bu and colleagues  <cit>  use a spectral analysis method to identify the topological structures such as quasi-cliques and quasi-bipartites in a protein-protein interaction network. these topological structures are found to be biologically relevant functional groups. in our previous work, we developed a spectral-based clustering method using local density and vertex neighborhood to analyze the chromatin network  <cit> . two recent works along this line of research are based on the concept of network modularity introduced by hartwell and colleagues  <cit> . the works by both spirin and mirny  <cit>  and rives and galitski  <cit>  use computational analyses to cluster the yeast ppi network and discover that molecular modules are densely connected with each other but sparsely connected with the rest of the network.

biomolecular networking modeling
a variety of approaches to state models have been implemented for gene and protein networks, including among others, hidden markov models  <cit> , bayesian networks  <cit> , linear networks  <cit> , finite state  <cit> , and probabilistic boolean networks  <cit> . these and other methods are based on either treating biological variables at the crudest resolution  or as absolute physical quantities. boolean networks  <cit>  are computationally simple and do not depend on precise experimental data, and thus they are potentially suitable for handling both the complexity of biological networks and qualitative text-based data. however, boolean models have been proven to lack the resolution needed to accurately model biomolecular interactions  <cit> . in contrast, various differential equation-based models  <cit>  are computationally expensive and sensitive to imprecisely measured parameters . fuzzy logic  <cit>  provides a mathematical framework that is compatible with poorly quantitative yet qualitatively significant data, but it tends to generate so many rules used to describe biological systems  <cit> .

RESULTS
to evaluate the accuracy and feasibility of state-space biomolecular network modeling, we considered the gene network corresponding to a sub-network found using snbuilder proposed in this paper. the sub-network as shown in figure  <dig> involves human genes related to p <dig>  apoptosis, dna damage response, and cell cycle. edges in figure  <dig> are taken to represent potential connections between genes, defining the structure of the gene network. table  <dig> shows the genes that encode the proteins in figure  <dig>  this results in some differences in terminology; for example, ep <dig> encodes the protein p <dig>  also, where aliases for gene names exist, the more common usage is given in table  <dig> 

in this paper, we employ the human cell cycle gene expression data  <cit>  to construct the state-space model of the sub-network shown in figure  <dig>  there are independent data in  <cit>  for five methods of cell cycle synchronization, and out of which two datasets "thy-thy3" and "thy-noc" are complete for the genes in the sub-network we studied. these two datasets are swapped and used as the training dataset and the testing dataset in the two experiments.

as the human cell cycle gene expression data are very noisy, some data preprocessing techniques are applied to the log-ratio gene expression data. firstly a filter is applied to gene expression profiles one by one. at a given time point, the new expression value is the average of three raw values at the immediately previous, current and immediatly behind points. as the mean values and magnitudes for genes and microarrays mainly reflect the experimental procedure  <cit> , then the expression profile of each gene is normalized to have the mean of zero and the standard deviation of one, and then for the expression values on each microarray as so to have the median of zero and the standard deviation of one. such normalizations also make the ppca simple  <cit> .

experiment 1
this experiment treats the thy-thy <dig> as the training dataset and the thy-noc as the testing dataset. figure  <dig> depicts the profile of aic with respect to the number of internal variables in the thy-thy <dig> dataset. using the method presented in the section method, the number of internal variables is determined to be nine. the transformation matrix c is calculated by equation , and further the expression profiles of the internal state variables are calculated and collected in matrix z by formula . control matrix b is determined such that it maximizes the ratio of the squared sum of the elements of cb corresponding to non-zeros in s to that of the elements of cb corresponding to zeros in s. as the human cell cycle gene expression data are collected at the equally spaced time points. the least square method for the linear regression problem is applied to determine the elements of matrix a in model .

to inspect stability, robustness, and periodicity of the inferred gene networks, the eigenvalues of the state transition matrices a are calculated. the eigenvalues of matrix follow as: - <dig> ,  <dig> ,  <dig> ,  <dig>  ±  <dig> i,  <dig>  ±  <dig> i,  <dig>  ±  <dig> i. all eigenvalues except for the last pair of matrix a lie inside the unit circle in the complex plane, and the last pair is very closed to the boundary of the unit circle. this means that the inferred network is almost stable and robust. furthermore, the dominant eigenvalues of the inferred network are pairs of conjugate complex number:  <dig>  ±  <dig> i. accordingly, this implies that the network behaves periodically  <cit> . this result is because the networks are inferred from cell-cycle regulated gene expression data.

experiment 2
alternatively, this experiment treats the thy-noc as the training dataset and the thy-thy <dig> as the testing dataset. figure  <dig> depicts the profile of aic with respect to the number of internal variables in the thy-noc dataset, which indicate that the number of internal variables is eight. using the proposed method in the section method, matrices a, b, and c in model  are determined. similar as in experiment  <dig>  the inferred network is almost stable and robust, and behaves periodically  <cit> .

discussion and 
CONCLUSIONS
in this paper, we present a new method for adaptive modeling of biomolecular networks. the biomolecular network model of cell function comprises gene and protein expression, interaction, and regulation. the method iteratively mines and organizes quantitative and qualitative data to generate scalable hypothetical biomolecular network structures. the dynamics of these computational hypotheses are tested and refined through cycles of simulation of state-space model and laboratory experiments. we use state-space modeling methods previously developed for gene networks as a robust and general representation for heterogeneous quantitative, qualitative, and linguistic biomolecular data. while in the example here only microarray data are presented, the state-space framework of representing biomolecular expression states can be simply extended to protein and metabolite levels. this is a key point, because gene networks are an abstraction representing only one aspect of biomolecular networks, and they must be integrated with protein-protein interaction networks, and metabolite profiling to develop a comprehensive portrait of cellular function.

we present in this paper an efficient approach to growing a community from a given seed protein. it uses topological property of community structure of a network and takes advantage of local optimization in searching for the community comprising of the seed protein. due to the complexity and modularity of biological networks, it is more desirable and computationally feasible to model and simulate a network of smaller size. our approach builds a community of manageable size and scales well to large networks. its usefulness is demonstrated by the experimental results that all the four communities identified reveal strong structural and functional relationships among member proteins. it provides a fast and accurate way to find a community comprising a protein or proteins with known functions or of interest. for those community members that are not known to be part of a protein complex or a functional category, their relationship to other community members may deserve further investigation which in turn may provide new insights.

although we do not explicitly use our approach to the prediction of co-complexed proteins, the results of comparing with the pnr method developed by asthana and colleagues  <cit>  have shown that the communities identified by our approach do include the top ranked candidates of co-complexed proteins. our approach does not consider the quality of data in our downloaded data set. by using the strong sense definition of community  <cit> , we could to some degree reduce the noises. however, to improve the quality of an identified community, we have to take into account the quality of data and that is another part of our future work. one possible way is to use the probabilities assigned to individual protein pairs as used by jasen et al  <cit> , radicchi et al  <cit> , and bader et al  <cit> .

in general, the state-space modeling method allows for inconsistencies and potentially noisy data to be identified and used to generate alternative computational hypotheses for biomolecular networks. the method is tractable and scalable because novel clustering methods are applied to adaptively extract biologically significant sub-networks for simulation and hypothesis testing. state space simulation of hypothetical biomolecular network models is compared with experimental data to select and refine plausible hypotheses. we combine the simulation result with the computationally derived meta-model to identify key genes whose perturbation would generate the data set that could most optimally differentiate between the alternative biomolecular network hypotheses. consequently, by uniting the system identification and simulation components of the modeling procedure into an integrated method, we can develop a cyclical flow from modeling through experiments through updates to the global biological knowledge base. such a flow is designed specifically to respond to the challenges of designing and interpreting high-throughput experiments, which can in the future evolve in concert with modeling and information management.

compared to previous models such as boolean network model  <cit>  and difference/differential equation  <cit> , the proposed model  has the following characteristics. firstly, gene expression profiles are the observation variables rather than the internal state variables. secondly, from a biological angle, the model  can capture the fact that genes may be regulated by internal regulatory factor  <cit> . thirdly, the model  takes the control portion of state-space model into consideration. however, the proposed approach does have some shortcomings, for example, the inherent linearity which can only capture the primary linear components of a biological system which may be nonlinear, and the ignorance to time delays in a biological system resulting, for example, from the time necessary for transcription, translation, and diffusion. these shortcomings will be address in the future work.

