BACKGROUND
in drosophila melanogaster differences in adult reproductive behaviors are specified by the somatic sex determination hierarchy , a multi-branched hierarchy with functions in directing both sexual development and dosage compensation  reviewed in
 <cit> . the branch of the sex hierarchy critical for specifying adult behaviors consists of a pre-mrna splicing cascade that regulates the sex-specific splicing of transcripts from doublesex  and fruitless   reviewed in
 <cit> . fru was initially shown to be important for male courtship behavior based on the phenotypes of mutant males that displayed high levels of male-male courtship behaviors
 <cit> . this was distinct from the phenotypic observations with respect to other mutants that impacted courtship behaviors, in that the phenotype of the fru mutant was specific to courtship behaviors. later, molecular-genetic analyses of fru demonstrated the position of fru in the sex hierarchy, and showed that it was required for all aspects of male courtship behaviors, providing strong evidence that fru is a key regulator of male courtship behavior
 <cit> .

fru is a complex locus that encodes both sex-specific and non-sex-specific proteins through the production of transcripts from at least four different promoters 
 <cit> . transcripts expressed from the fru p <dig> promoter are critical for male courtship behaviors, and are the only fru pre-mrnas that are spliced by the sex hierarchy . fru p <dig> transcripts produce multiple male-specific isoforms  in ~ 2-5% of all central nervous system  neurons and these neurons have been shown to be important for courtship behaviors
 <cit> . fru p <dig> expressing neurons are present in both males and females
 <cit> , but the frum protein isoforms are produced only in males where they contribute to building the potential for male courtship into the nervous system during development
 <cit> . conversely, fru p <dig> transcripts in females are not translated
 <cit> . all fru isoforms are members of a family of conserved proteins that contain a btb  domain and a zinc finger domain . frum isoforms contain an amino-terminal  <dig> amino acid region of unknown function that is not present in fru isoforms common to both sexes. fru p <dig> transcripts are alternatively spliced at their 3′ ends into one of five exons that encode different zinc finger domains, which are predicted dna binding domains 
 <cit> . thus, fru is predicted to encode transcription factors. however, there is no direct evidence of frum transcriptional activities, other than association with known chromatin modifying proteins
 <cit> .

three of the five predicted frum isoforms have been shown to be the predominate isoforms in adult head and central nervous system tissues 
 <cit> . these isoforms display differences in their expression patterns and in their ability to rescue male courtship defects
 <cit> . as a first step to mechanistically understanding how frum isoforms specify the potential for male courtship behaviors, the dna binding specificities of each frum isoform needs to be determined and the sets of genes that are regulated downstream of each frum isoform identified. the identification of genes regulated by each frum isoform will also contribute to our understanding of how fru functions to establish the potential for sex-specific behaviors.

here, we identify genes that are induced or repressed by frum by examining gene expression in adult head tissues where we over-express individual frum isoforms  in fru p1-expressing neurons of either males or females. we show that each isoform has different regulatory activities and that the sex of the fly impacts which genes change expression as a consequence of frum over-expression. similar over-expression conditions were previously used to demonstrate that frum is sufficient, when expressed in female fru p1-expressing neurons, to specify the potential for nearly all aspects of male courtship behavior
 <cit> . we used an in vitro binding site selection technique  to identify the sequence motifs bound by each of three frum isoforms and show that each isoform has different binding specificity [reviewed in
 <cit> . for each gene, the coding sequence and the regulatory region  was examined for the presence of these binding sites. genes containing these binding sites are enriched in the gene sets induced by over-expression of the respective frum isoform in males, and in the genes identified as induced by frum in loss-of-function mutant analyses. additionally, genes induced by frum, are enriched on the x chromosome, whereas those that are repressed by frum are under represented on the x chromosome.

RESULTS
the goal of our study was to identify genes whose expression was modulated  by fru p <dig> in the nervous system. to this end, we carried out a set of parallel experiments in which the gal4/uas system was used to overexpress each of the three best-characterized frum isoforms 
 <cit> , in just the fru p1-expressing neurons
 <cit> . rna-sequencing  analysis was performed on mrna extracted from the heads of such flies to identify differential expression on a genome-wide level, with exon-level resolution. we compared expression in heads in either male or female flies over-expressing one of the frum isoforms, as compared to wild type adult male or female heads, respectively. this allows us to determine if there are differences in individual frum isoform activities and if there are sex-specific factors that function in conjunction with frum. in addition, we examined gene expression differences in males mutant for fru p <dig>  compared to wild type males.

one of the strengths of rna-seq analysis is the ability to detect differences in isoform expression levels. this is because exons are used for estimating expression, and thus the presence and difference in amount of transcript from alternative exon cassettes can be used directly to make inferences about isoforms. we focused on exon level expression and used existing models of transcript isoforms to identify alternative exon structures. next, we tested for differential expression in our comparisons for each exon separately [see materials and methods and
 <cit> , and then used existing gene models to make inferences about differential expression of isoforms.

frum isoforms have different activities
to determine if fruma, frumb and frumc had different effects on gene expression in fru p1-expressing neurons we determined the gene sets that have exons that are both  statistically significantly induced or repressed and  have a ≥ <dig> fold change in expression level when the data from animals overexpressing each frum isoform are compared separately to the data from both cs and berlin males . we found that over-expression of each frum isoform leads to different subsets of genes with exons whose transcription is either induced or repressed. as expected, when we over-express each frum isoform we found that the exon encoding the respective fru dbd is significantly up regulated.

over-expression of fruma, frumb and frumc leads to  <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> genes with higher expression than wild type males, respectively. there were  <dig> genes with higher expression in all three conditions . we found that substantially more genes are up-regulated, than down regulated, relative to wild type expression. over-expression of fruma, frumb and frumc lead to  <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> genes with lower expression than in wild type males, respectively. there are  <dig> genes with lower expression in all three conditions .

frum isoforms have different activities in males as compared to females
using the same criteria as above, we examined the numbers of genes differentially expressed when frum isoforms are over-expressed in female fru p1-expressing neurons as compared to wild type females of cs and berlin strains. the rationale for these comparisons was to determine if there are additional sex-specific differences in fru p1-expressing neurons that might influence frum activities. over-expression of fruma, frumb and frumc in females leads to  <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> genes with higher expression than wild type females, respectively. there are  <dig> genes having higher expression in all three conditions, which included the exon encoding the respective fru dbd . over-expression of fruma, frumb or frumc lead to  <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> genes with lower expression than wild type females, respectively. there are  <dig> genes with lower expression in all three conditions .

these results further demonstrate that each frum isoform has different activities with respect to regulating gene expression. in female fru p1-expressing neurons, more genes are repressed rather than induced when each isoform is expressed. this is in contrast to our observations in males. taken together these findings suggest that the activity of each frum isoform is influenced by the sex in which it is produced. this suggests that there may be other factors that are present in a sex-specific manner in fru p1-expressing neurons to influence frum isoform activities.

next, we determined if there are differences in the sets of genes that are induced or repressed by the over-expression of frum isoforms in males and females. we determined the union of the genes that are induced by any of the three frum isoforms in either males or females . there are  <dig> genes and  <dig> genes induced by any of the three frum isoforms in males and females, respectively. the intersection of the induced genes in males and females is  <dig> genes . we also determined the union of the genes that are repressed by any of the three frum isoforms in either males or females. there are  <dig> genes and  <dig> genes repressed by one of the three frum isoforms in males and females, respectively. the intersection of the repressed genes in males and females is  <dig> genes . the genes induced in both males and females include dsx, gustatory receptor 93a, serotonin receptor 1a, semaphorin-5c . the genes repressed in males and females include genderblind, methuselah-like  <dig> . these genes are those for which over-expression of frum isoforms in fru p1-expressing cells can influence gene expression independent of the sex of the fly.

overall, many more genes are induced by overexpression of each frum isoform in males as compared to females , whereas there is not as large a difference in numbers of genes that are repressed by each isoform in males and females, suggesting that there is a sex-specific factor that functions with frum in males to facilitate gene induction.

fru isoforms have different dna binding specificity
our results demonstrate that frum isoforms have different activities with respect to the gene sets that are induced or repressed in response to their expression. one possibility is that this is through differential dna binding properties of the three isoforms. to address this question, we determined the binding site sequence for frua, frub and fruc dbds using an in vitro selection technique called selex . from this analysis, we found that each of the dbds examined bind different sequence motifs. the consensus motifs identified for the dbds in the frua, frub and fruc proteins are agtaac, gcccttt, and tgttacatca, respectively .

gel shift analysis, using purified gst-fru dbd fusion proteins and the identified binding sites for frua and fruc, demonstrate that they each bind specifically to the sequence identified in the selex experiment, but do not bind to an oligonucleotide  containing a randomized sequence with the same nucleotide content . furthermore, frua and fruc did not bind the oligos containing the motifs identified for fruc and frua, respectively .

when gel shifts were performed using the dbd in the frub protein, high levels of binding to dna sequences that are present in each oligo used in these assays, flanking the selex identified motif, were observed in the gel shift assay . this could be because the frub protein has a poly-glutamine tract, which is not observed in the other binding domains and this facilitates non-specific association with dna in the gel shift assay. to ensure that the correct sequence motif was identified for frub, the full selex technique was performed two independent times and identified nearly the same consensus sequence.

fru dna binding site motifs are significantly enriched in genes that are induced by frum isoforms
next, we determined the frequency of each fru binding site motif on a genome-wide level, in annotated gene regions, including introns and regions 2 kb upstream and downstream from each gene’s annotated start and stop site. we found that genes containing at least one sequence motif for frua dbd are significantly enriched in the sets of genes that are induced downstream of fruma, and similar enrichments were observed for frub and fruc in males, respectively . we do not see a similar enrichment when we examine the genes repressed downstream frua, frub and fruc in males. a very different pattern is observed for genes induced downstream of frua, frub and fruc in females, with only the gene sets induced downstream frua showing enrichment of genes containing at least one frua binding site . these results suggest that the sets of genes that are induced in males by frum over-expression includes genes that may be direct targets of frum, whereas those that are induced in females, or repressed in either males or females by frum over-expression are not as likely to be direct targets.

frua, frub and fruc sites are found in overlapping sets of genes and the presence of a motif for one significantly increases the likelihood of finding a binding site for at least one of the other. this result may explain why there were several genes that were induced by each of the three fru isoforms in both males and females .

fru has many binding sites with  <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> binding sites motifs for each frua, frub and fruc dbd, respectively . additionally, dsx has a large number of binding sites with  <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> binding sites motifs for frua, frub and fruc dbd, respectively , although it should be noted that both fru and dsx are large genes. frum may regulate dsx expression directly, consistent with the overlap observed between dsx and frum in the cns
 <cit> , it may also regulate its own expression. this regulation of both dsx and fru transcript levels by frum isoforms could ensure sufficient dsx and fru expression in neurons important for male courtship behaviors.

genes with roles in neuronal patterning and physiology are enriched among genes regulated by frum isoforms in males and not in females
fru p1-expressing neurons are present in very similar positions and numbers in adult males and females. to gain insight into the processes frum regulates, we examined gene ontology  enrichment of protein domains
 <cit>  and biological processes, molecular functions and cellular processes
 <cit>  for frum regulated genes . for the  <dig>  genes up-regulated by over-expression of any of the frum isoforms in males, there is an enrichment of genes that contain protein domains that function in neuronal patterning and physiology. among the enriched categories for protein domains are immunoglobulin-like fold, pleckstrin homology domain, pdz domain, ion transport domain, epidermal growth factor-like domain, and voltage dependent potassium channel. many proteins with these domains function at the plasma membrane and mediate neuronal projection patterns, form complexes with channels, and make junctions, including synaptic and neuromuscular junctions, which are consistent with functions ascribed to frum isoforms .

among the enriched go terms for those  <dig>  up-regulated genes are those that underlie diverse functions in development of the nervous system and adult physiological functions. the biological process go terms include axon guidance, regulation of response to stimulus, regulation of neuron differentiation and behavior, among many others. the cellular component go terms include synapse, ion channel and neuromuscular junction, among many others .

in contrast, an analysis of the  <dig> genes down-regulated by over-expression of any of the frum isoforms in males revealed an enrichment of genes that contain protein domains that function in lipid and triglyceride metabolism, consistent with previous studies
 <cit>  .

an analysis of the genes induced by overexpression of frum in females identified fewer significantly enriched go biological process categories, as compared to our observations in males. these include response to caffeine, response to purines, and potassium ion transport. the go category male sex differentiation is included, but only contains dsx and fru. nearly all the enriched go biological process categories identified in the genes repressed by frum in females include defense response genes .

genes that are up regulated in response to over-expression of frum isoforms include those that were previously implicated in playing a role in fru p <dig> expressing neurons, including the ecdysone receptor gene ecr and the ecdysone hierarchy gene broad <cit> . several neuronally-expressed genes, not previously known to be regulated by frum isoforms, were identified that play critical roles in axon target recognition and attraction, axon guidance, dendrite guidance axon defasiculation, and sensory perception. these genes include roundabout , dscam , prospero, semaphorin , netrin a and b, fasiclin , notch, cadherin n, gustatory receptor 93a and abnormal chemosensory jump  <dig>  gaba receptor, serotonin receptor, nicotinic acetylcholine receptor alpha 7e, neuroligin  <dig>  foxo, target of rapamycin, cacophony, muscarinic acetylcholine receptor 60c, spinster, and dopamine receptor  <dig>  among many genes.

an analysis of the genes induced in response to the expression of frum isoforms reveals that a large fraction of these genes had previously been shown to have high expression in nervous system tissues. thus of the genes with induced expression in response to frum isoform expression,  <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> genes were previously shown to be significantly highly expressed in the adult brain, larval brain and adult ventral nerve cord, respectively, when compared to flyatlas data using the flymine portal
 <cit> . of the tissues examined in the flyatlas study, these three tissues had the largest overlap of genes with significantly high expression with the genes induced by frum from this study.

comparison of differential gene expression in response to frum over-expression vs. frum loss of function
we have also analyzed gene expression differences in head tissues of fru p <dig> mutant males as compared to wild type males to further confirm our over-expression analysis. over-expression of frum is likely to yield higher fold-differences in gene expression than observed in the loss-of-function mutants, because the absolute difference in fru p <dig> mrna amounts is greater between over-expressor flies and wild type flies than between loss-of-function fru p <dig> flies and wild type flies based on rna-seq data. thus, we identified genes based on significant differences in expression between fru p <dig> mutants and wild type males, but did not require a ≥ <dig> fold change.

based on the loss-of-function analyses, of the  <dig> genes that are induced by frum,  <dig> genes were also induced by at least one of the frum isoforms in the over-expression experiments. if we do not restrict the list of genes to those with ≥ 2-fold induction by overexpression of at least one of the frum isoforms,  <dig> genes were identified as induced by frum in both the loss-of-function and overexpression experiment. of the  <dig> genes that are repressed by frum,  <dig> genes were also repressed by at least one of the frum isoforms in the overexpression experiments . there is a significant association between the lists of genes that we identified as regulated downstream of fru p <dig> in the loss-of-function analyses to those identified in the overexpression analyses .

the genes induced by fru p <dig> in the fru p <dig> loss-of-function analysis have a significant enrichment of genes that contained either the frua, frub or fruc binding sites motif, whereas those that are repressed downstream of fru p <dig> show an enrichment of only the frub binding site motif . taken together, these results further support the idea that genes that are induced downstream of frum isoform are likely direct targets.

genes that are regulated downstream of frum isoforms do not have the expected chromosome distribution
an examination of the chromosomal distribution of the genes with exons that are either induced or repressed downstream of frum isoforms in the male over-expression experiments revealed a significant enrichment and depletion on the x chromosome, respectively. the genes with up-regulated expression downstream of frum isoforms in males are enriched on the x chromosome and the second chromosome . the genes with reduced expression downstream of frum isoforms are significantly depleted from the x chromosome. in addition, if we examine the genes that are induced by frum that were previously shown to be significantly highly expressed in the adult brain, larval brain or adult ventral nerve cord these genes sets are present on the x chromosome at a higher level than expected, based on flyatlas data using the flymine portal
 <cit> . these results suggest that the x chromosome has properties distinct from the autosomes with respect to genes important for the potential for male courtship behaviors.

discussion
in this study we identified hundreds of genes regulated downstream of frum isoform activity. fruma, frumb and frumc have differences in the gene sets induced or repressed when they are over-expressed, demonstrating that each isoform has distinct biochemical activities . consistent with this observation is that each frum isoform has different dna binding specificity . our results suggest that there are sex-specific factors that influence frum isoform activity, as over-expression of fruma, frumb and frumc isoforms in males and females resulted in different genes that are induced and repressed by each isoform . the gene sets identified as induced downstream of frum isoforms in males are enriched with genes with nervous system function, based on go annotations .

additionally, it is worth noting that there may be other possible sources for the differences observed in the gene expression levels in these experiments. first, the frum proteins contain a btb domain that in previous work has been shown to contain a dimerization domain that can mediate homodimeric or heterodimeric interactions. thus, some of the effects we observe could be due to 1) differences in the stoichiometric ratios of frum with each other, and/or 2) differences in the stoichiometric ratios of frum with other potential dimerization partners. however, based on immunofluorescence results we do not observe substantially different levels of over-expression of each isoform, nor is there substantial expression, if any, outside of the normal fru p <dig> expression pattern . second, there is a significant association between the genes that are either induced or repressed when frum is over-expressed, with those genes identified in loss-of-function frum mutant analyses, demonstrating the physiological relevance of the genes identified by over-expression. third, there is significant enrichment of the binding site sequences identified for each isoform within the genes that are induced by each isoform. fourth, while our criteria were stringent , strain differences may account for some of the differences between wild type male and female and frum over-expressor male and female strains, respectively. however, such strain differences are not likely to account for the differences we observe between the frum isoforms, which are in the same genetic background, nor can strain differences account for differences observed across sex. taken together, these results demonstrate that in context of the over-expression experiments each of the three frum isoforms examined has different activities with respect to genes that are induced or repressed in males, with many more genes having induced rather than repressed expression in males.

in previous studies, production of frum in females, by expression of a tra- <dig> rnai transgene in fru p1-expressing neurons, was sufficient to endow females with the potential to perform the first four sub-steps of the male courtship ritual, following, tapping, wing extension and proboscis extension, but not attempted copulation
 <cit> . in contrast, overexpression of fruma or frumc in fru p1-expressing neurons, resulted in flies that displayed only following and tapping reviewed in
 <cit> , suggesting that overexpression of frum in females is not sufficient to endow females with the potential to perform courtship behaviors. the  <dig> genes identified as induced by all three frum isoforms in females will be interesting to examine, with respect to their role in establishing the potential for these early courtship steps. interestingly, one of these genes is ir54a, which encodes a member of a diverse family of ionotropic receptors, some of which are expressed in the adult antenna and underlie chemosensory functions
 <cit> . it is also known that dsxm plays a role in establishing the potential for courtship behaviors
 <cit> , which would not have been present in females in which frum was produced, though dsxm is not present in all fru p1-expressing neruons, so is unlikely to account for all the differences between males and females observed here
 <cit> . our results may further explain why there was not a complete rescue of male courtship behavior. it is clear that the sex of the fly in which frum is produced has an impact on the genes that are induced and repressed. these results suggest that there are additional sex-specific factors that influence frum activity, which may include dsxm. further biochemical characterization of frum protein interactions will be important to understand frum activities.

while fru has been predicted to be a transcription factor based on the observation that fru encodes btb-zinc finger products, no direct transcriptional targets of fru have been identified, leaving this an open question. a recent study has shown that frum associates with a cofactor, bonus, and subsequently associates with two chromatin modifying proteins, hp1a and hdac <dig>  however it was not clear if the association of frum with chromatin was direct
 <cit> . the results presented here demonstrate that frum can bind dna and that three frum isoforms examined have different binding activities. given our observation that the binding sites are significantly enriched in all gene sets identified as induced, but not repressed by frum, suggests that frum may function by binding enhancer dna directly, but acts in an indirect manner to repress gene expression .

in previous studies we and others have show that genes with male-biased expression were enriched on the x chromosome in the adult head
 <cit>  and brain
 <cit> . there was also a significant enrichment of genes with male-biased expression that reside near dosage compensation entry sites
 <cit> . here, we observe significant enrichment of genes that reside on the x chromosome that are induced by frum in males. this observation supports the idea that over evolutionary time there may have been a selection for genes with male-specific functions to reside on the x chromosome and in particular those regulated by frum. perhaps, frum isoforms and their gene targets have evolved to take advantage of the unique properties of the male nucleus. these differences include the dosage compensation complex that is bound to the male x chromosome that leads to less compact chromatin reviewed in
 <cit> , the presence of the y chromosome that affects chromatin architecture throughout the nucleus
 <cit> , or other differences in the chromatin and three-dimensional architecture of the nucleus in males [for example see
 <cit> . it is possible that there are more interconnections in the sex hierarchy model between chromosomal sex, the sex hierarchy branches and sexual development that is downstream of frum than shown in the model .

CONCLUSIONS
the results in this study add to the information regarding frum function with the identification of hundreds of genes regulated by frum, many of which have known roles in nervous system development and physiology. one of the next exciting challenges to our understanding of how complex behaviors are specified at a molecular-genetic level will be to develop tools to interrogate the functions of specific transcript isoforms in a cell-specific manner.

