BACKGROUND
the genetics of genome-wide gene expression has emerged as an important new field with potential to transform our understanding of a broad scope of topics, ranging from basic regulation of transcription to mechanisms of complex human diseases. in most studies of gene expression genetics, genetically diverse individuals are genotyped at genetic markers that characterize most of the common dna variation in the population and are also phenotyped by measuring the abundances of thousands of mrna transcripts  <cit> . these molecular phenotypes are then genetically mapped like any other quantitative trait, revealing quantitative trait loci  where a polymorphism affects a transcript's abundance levels  <cit> . these studies have led to the construction of regulatory networks that are predictive of disease states such as obesity in both mouse and human  <cit> . they have also shown that gene expression qtl  in humans can uncover the mechanisms of action of disease-associated snps previously implicated by genome-wide association studies   <cit> , and have even implicated new snps as additional disease-associated loci  <cit> . at the heart of all eqtl studies is polymorphic gene expression. this can be caused by genetic variants that act in cis or in trans. a major difference between the two classes is that because a cis-acting allele acts only on the chromosomal copy on which it resides, a heterozygous cis-acting polymorphism results in allele-specific effects, such as higher expression of allele a vs allele b, even though both alleles are present in the same nucleus and thus experience the same trans-acting environment  <cit> . in contrast, a heterozygous trans-acting polymorphism cannot lead to allele-specific effects, because it does not differentiate between the two alleles.

most studies of gene expression genetics have classified expression variation within species as due to either cis- or trans-acting factors; this is typically done by genetically mapping variation in expression levels, and inferring that a gene whose expression maps very close to the gene itself is most likely influenced by one or more cis-acting variants  <cit> . cis-acting polymorphisms have been found to be extremely common in all studies published to date, and generally exert much stronger effects on gene expression than do trans-acting polymorphisms. for example, recent studies of human gene expression genetics have inferred between 85-100% of significant eqtls to be cis-acting  <cit> , although our power to detect these two types of events has not been exhaustively compared. trans-acting eqtl may eventually be found to be more prevalent, once larger sample sizes and thus greater power are achieved, and they have also been found to be useful in the context of coexpression networks and causal inference  <cit> .

it has been appreciated for many years--since well before the first studies of genome-wide gene expression genetics--that measuring ase can reveal the presence of heterozygous cis-acting polymorphisms. in fact, ase is a necessary consequence of heterozygous cis-acting polymorphisms. ase can be measured by quantifying the abundance of each allele of a transcribed heterozygous polymorphism  among a gene's transcripts. since the genomic ratio of heterozygous alleles in a diploid is 1: <dig>  any significant deviation from this among mrna transcripts suggests allele-specificity. primarily due to technical limitations, measuring ase has not been widely applied to identify cis-acting polymorphisms. the emergence of high-throughput cdna sequencing  has enabled whole-genome identification of ase and has been applied to mapping imprinted loci  <cit> . in addition, two targeted approaches employing pcr  <cit>  and padlock-capture  <cit>  have shown that up to 25% of genes may be preferentially expressed from one allele and that a significant proportion of these are tissue-specific  <cit> .

although it is assumed that identifying ase by high-throughput sequencing is an alternative to mapping cis-eqtl by microarrays, this has not been shown experimentally. cis-eqtl result in higher expression of one allele over the other in any given sample. this bias consistently favors one parental allele if the causal polymorphism is in linkage disequilibrium  with the transcribed snps used to quantify ase. in this study, we validate cdna sequencing toward identifying regions affected by inheritable cis-acting regulatory variants by demonstrating extensive overlap between ase and cis-eqtl.

RESULTS
mapping cis-eqtl
using a custom agilent murine microarray  <cit> , we profiled  <dig> adipose and islet samples from an f <dig> intercross population constructed from the btbr and c57bl/6j strains on an ob null background , and detected cis-eqtl for expression traits using a standard regression procedure  <cit> . we excluded  <dig>  genes from this analysis in which probes overlapped a known  <cit>  or predicted  btbr/b <dig> snp from our analysis, since these can lead to false-positive cis-eqtl by impacting hybridization kinetics. at lod >  <dig>  we detected  <dig>  and  <dig>  cis-eqtl genes  in adipose and islets respectively which we used as baseline lists for comparison.

mapping ase
we performed nsr-seq  <cit>  on  <dig> pooled adipose and  <dig> pooled islet samples randomly chosen from the f <dig> samples . we also performed nsr-seq on  <dig> pooled liver and  <dig> pooled hypothalamus samples to assess degree of ase conservation across tissues . as described previously  <cit> , we identified ase by taking advantage of sequencing reads that overlap snps, using the base identity to discriminate allelic origin. more than  <dig>  genes were represented by at least  <dig> allele-specific sequencing reads  in islets and adipose , which we empirically found to be a practical minimum for identifying ase. we assessed the probability of ase using the cumulative binomial distribution since it models the expected number of counts of two types, each with a certain probability of occurrence. for example, flips of a fair coin follow the binomial distribution, with probability of  <dig>  for heads or tails in each flip. similarly, allele-specific read counts can be regarded as independent trials, where each allele has some probability of being observed . in order to assess the accuracy of using the binomial expectation to estimate the significance of deviation from random, we analyzed allelic expression of biological replicates from a previous study in which we studied ase by nsr-seq in mouse embryos  <cit> . we found no significant difference in the extent of agreement between allele-specific read counts of two independently generated nsr-seq libraries compared to randomly generated counts from the binomial distribution , indicating that our data can be accurately modeled by this distribution. we also observed good agreement in allelic ratios between these two biological replicates . finally, in agreement with emilsson et al.  <cit>  and zhang et al.  <cit> , in pairwise comparisons of ase across four tissues we observed general agreement in direction of bias toward the same strain, suggesting that cis-acting effects tend to be conserved across tissues/cell-types .

under the null-hypothesis , the ratio of btbr to b <dig> reads reflects the allelic proportions within the rna pool. although the average allelic ratio was 50: <dig>  we used the microarray genotyping information to augment the precision of our analysis by exactly defining the ratio at each locus .  <dig>  adipose and  <dig>  islets genes met our criteria for reliably measuring ase, most notably containing a minimum of  <dig> allele-specific sequencing reads covering at least three snps .  <dig> and  <dig> genes respectively were also detected in cis-eqtl which by itself represents a significant overlap .

ase identified by nsr-seq agrees with cis-eqtl identified by microarrays
we observed a significant overlaps between cis-eqtl genes and ase genes, and the overlap improved with increasing confidence thresholds of each method . we used genetic additive effect to quantify cis-eqtl since it captures the magnitude of the difference in transcriptional abundance across the three possible genotypes at each marker, and all cis-acting eqtl are expected to show additive behavior. in adipose, the ratio of observed to expected  gene overlap exceeds  <dig> at high thresholds . since the overlap is in part dependent on expression , we also assessed agreement on the direction of bias . again, agreement improved with increasing thresholds, frequently exceeding 80% . we observed similar trends in islets with marginally lower levels of enrichment , possibly due to increased variance resulting from fewer expressed genes and fewer genes exhibiting ase .

previous sequencing-based ase studies used f <dig> s  <cit>  where both copies of each allele are always present at exactly equal ratios, thus enabling a simple statistical analysis of ase. our primary goal was validation of the method. using the same samples for identifying both ase and cis-eqtl was thus essential for avoiding inter-sample biases and additional effects induced by the exceptionally high heterozygosity of f <dig> s. nonetheless, we observed strong overlaps in f <dig> s as well , demonstrating that using single samples is sufficient to map regions affected by cis-acting variation and that artificial f <dig> effects are not extensive.

a number of explanations may account for any disagreement on the direction of bias between the nsr-seq and microarray data. most obvious are the technical differences in determining transcriptional abundance: microarrays monitor 3'utr abundance whereas nsr-seq captures the entire transcript. any transcriptional processing effect not reflected in the 3'utr may thus lead to an overall difference, and any 3'utr processing effect will be exaggerated on arrays. furthermore, snps in microarray probe regions may lead to artifactual differences in btbr and b <dig> transcript level measurements, and false-positive snp predictions that artifactually bias sequencing allele counts toward b <dig> . to gain insight into these discrepancies, we sanger-resequenced snps in all genes that disagreed in their direction of bias between the two technologies at high ase and cis-eqtl thresholds in adipose | >  <dig>  |add. eff.| >  <dig> ). strain bias in  <dig> genes could not be sufficiently distinguished by analyzing trace files. of the remaining  <dig> genes,  <dig>  agreed in direction with nsr-seq, of which  <dig>  had no detectable btbr signal, presumably due to a false-positive snp, and  <dig>  agreed with microarray-inferred strain bias . this suggests that measuring ase by high-throughput sequencing may be less susceptible to artifacts than mapping cis-eqtls in an f <dig> population.

ase is widespread and encompasses noncoding rna
since nsr-seq captures all transcripts regardless of polyadenylation state  <cit> , we were able to assess ase across both coding and noncoding regions. in agreement with previous reports  <cit>  we identified extensive ase among coding genes . we also observed higher than expected levels of ase in noncoding genes . in these plots, points falling near zero on the y-axis indicate a lack of allele-specificity. using binomial statistics as described above, we also plotted the 99% confidence intervals as a function of the total number of informative reads per transcript . many genes fall outside of the 99% binomial confidence limits , indicating that allele-specific expression is widespread in these mice.

comparing the complete observed and expected distributions of allele-specificity , we found that  <dig> % of the btbr snps covered by at least  <dig> reads in adipose showed greater allele-specificity than expected, and at 100× coverage, this increased to  <dig> %. in the islet data, allelic bias was even more common:  <dig> % of snps were biased at 10× coverage, and  <dig> % were biased at 100×. at 100× coverage, we can detect  <dig> -fold differences at p =  <dig>  with 50% power ; at 1000× coverage, this drops to  <dig> -fold at p =  <dig>  with 50% power . unfortunately we cannot estimate the total extent of ase, since this strongly depends on the distribution of effect sizes for cis-eqtl . future studies with higher coverage of the transcriptome will be able to address this issue.

antisense transcription occurs more frequently from the same allele vs. independent alleles
widespread antisense transcription in mammals is well documented  <cit> , although a general function for these transcripts has not been established. recently, several groups have identified clustering of short antisense transcripts immediately upstream of transcription start sites   <cit> . in yeast, these short transcripts are immediate targets of the exosome suggesting that they are non-functional derivatives of an intrinsically bidirectional rna polymerase ii  <cit> . the strand-specific nature of our rna amplification protocol allowed us to further explore this by further dissecting antisense transcription by their allelic origin. in order to maximize the number of assayable sites with antisense transcription, we used previously published data from f <dig> b6xcast/ei embryos  <cit> , which have on average >4-fold higher snp density over b6/btbr  <cit> . we have also done these analyses with btbrxb <dig> data and achieved similar, but as expected, weaker trends resulting from lower sensitivity .

allele-specific antisense transcription occurs in two forms: antidirectional, where transcription is restricted to separate alleles and occurs in only one direction from each allele , and allele-specific antisense, where both directions are transcribed from one allele, and little or no transcription occurs on the other . since antidirectional transcripts require independent cis-acting regulation, predominance of these events over allele-specific antisense transcripts would suggest that antisense transcription in general is a functionally regulated process. although we observed both types of events, 65/ <dig> of snps with bidirectional transcription  were biased toward expression from the same allele, versus separate alleles . of seven snps with the strongest antidirectional transcription , four are within introns of phactr <dig>  one is intronic to ptprd, and the final two are located in overlapping antisense utrs . we validated allelically biased bidirectional transcription in all four of these regions by sanger-sequencing . although our power to make conclusive claims is low, we observed a significant correlation between the strand of transcription and allelic bias . this is in agreement with the idea that antisense transcription is in general not an independently regulated process but rather a consequence of coding-gene expression.

identification of allele-specific splicing events
pre-mrna splicing is a highly regulated process that involves interplay among dozens of regulatory factors and rna sequence motifs. the importance of this process is epitomized by estimates attributing 15-50% of human genetic diseases on mutations in splice-site regulatory sequences  <cit> . although these cis-acting effects are widely thought to exist, they are difficult to detect systematically  <cit> . by counting sequencing reads that map over splice junctions and a snp, nsr/rna-seq is uniquely suited to detect these events. this approach is theoretically possible for any reads that are spliced and overlap a snp, but is complicated by differences arising from allele-specific transcription. we controlled for this effect by focusing on snps that overlap alternatively spliced reads, searching for cases where the skipped isoform has an allelically shifted ratio compared to the included isoform . we report  <dig> candidate examples . in most cases the skipped isoform is predicted to disrupt a conserved protein domain, suggesting that even minor allele-specific splicing changes may have dramatic functional effects.

discussion
we found a highly significant overlap in cis-eqtl genes identified by microarray profiling and ase genes identified by nsr-seq. improving overlap with increasing additive qtl effect sizes and/or lbp demonstrates that, as expected, both approaches reliably detect allele-specific expression despite a number of key differences in the technologies. for example, the majority of microarray gene-expression platforms, including the platform used here, rely on 3'-biased amplification protocols and thus position microarray probes near the 3'-end of the gene. with nsr-seq we monitored the entire transcript, including introns, which we previously found to improve sensitivity  <cit>  presumably because most intronic reads correspond to unprocessed pre-mrna or degradation products. any allele-specific events outside the microarray probe region will thus skew the comparison. unknown snps can also cause disagreement: 1) they can lead to artifactual genetic associations if they are within probe regions  <cit> , 2) can bias allelic representation in nsr-seq if located within priming sites, and 3) can lead to a bias towards aligning nsr-seq reads to the reference genome . false-positive snps accounted for 28% of extreme cases where nsr-seq disagreed with microarrays. although this is a substantial overestimate of total effect since selection of these genes was biased toward strong disagreement, it highlights the importance of high-quality snp maps for both methods.

while our results mostly agree with those from more traditional approaches using hundreds of microarrays to measure gene expression among f <dig> mice, there are several distinct advantages of the nsr-seq approach. first, nsr-seq results are not limited by a fixed set of probes, and because of this we were able to find allele-specific instances of splicing and antisense transcription that were invisible to our microarrays. second, identification of cis-eqtl does not depend on arbitrary genomic distance cutoffs with nsr-seq, in contrast to microarray studies which will inevitably misclassify some trans-eqtl as cis, and vice versa. third, the nsr-seq approach can be applied to any outbred diploid or polyploid species, even those for which microarrays are not readily available. finally, nsr-seq can be applied to a single f <dig> individual, with a single sequencing run costing several thousand dollars, as opposed to applying microarrays to each of hundreds of f <dig> individuals, saving a great deal of time and expense . on the other hand, the greatest disadvantage of nsr-seq is its inability to detect trans-eqtl. measuring ase in the context applied here where animals were pooled at the rna level cannot be used to map the genomic region that contains the causal effect. sequencing or microarray profiling many samples will always be required for mapping qtl. a second disadvantage is that in outbred species with short ld blocks , the causal cis-eqtl polymorphism will often not be in ld with any transcribed snps, and in these cases pooling will not reveal ase. third, pooling rna from different individuals could introduce biases. these can be minimized by keeping track of the mass of rna from each individual or by pooling by equal mass. it is also possible that one or a few individuals in the pool have significantly different expression levels and contribute unbiasly to the ase signal. we show that this is very unlikely given our strong agreement on ase in f <dig> biological replicates , but ruling it out for the entire pool would require testing individuals. nevertheless, pooling human samples has already been shown to reveal many cis-eqtl  <cit> . to detect cis-eqtl where the causal polymorphism is not in ld with any transcribed snps, nsr-seq can be performed on individual samples, as long as genotype phasing is known  <cit> . a method able to quickly and efficiently identify cis-eqtl genome-wide will find applications in many areas. the dependence of cis-eqtl on environmental conditions--a subject not previously studied, in large part due to its prohibitive cost--can now be studied efficiently and comprehensively. the method can be applied to hybrids between distinct species  to reveal all cis-acting gene expression differences, and inform us of the importance of cis-regulation in evolution. since the action of positive selection can now be inferred solely from cis-eqtl , selection on gene expression can be measured by nsr/rna-seq in a wide range of species. and finally, cis-acting polymorphisms have been shown to be highly enriched for snps associated with human disease risk in genome-wide association studies, so compiling catalogs of genes affected by cis-eqtl in various tissues, populations, and disease states could be extremely useful for inferring which disease associations are likely due to cis-acting effects on gene expression, and even more importantly, which genes are perturbed by the disease-associated variants .

CONCLUSIONS
validated against expression genetics, cdna sequencing is an effective strategy for identifying allele-specific expression which can be used to map inheritable cis-acting variation. application across multiple samples has potential to yield insight into polygenic phenotypes including complex disease.

