BACKGROUND
multiple spectral classes of cones are found in the visual system of many vertebrates  <cit> . comparison of the outputs of different cone classes enables color vision. multiple cone classes appeared very early in vertebrate evolution, at least  <dig> mya  and perhaps as early as  <dig> mya, prior to the separation of the jawed  and jawless  vertebrate lineages   <cit> . this is based on the presence of five classes of cone-like photoreceptors in the jawless southern hemisphere lamprey, geotria australis <cit> , and three cone classes in the jawed cartilaginous fishes   <cit> . additionally, cone opsins have been suggested to evolve prior to rod opsins  <cit> , indicating that photopic  vision preceded scotopic  vision, and suggesting that these early vertebrates occupied brightly-lit shallow-water environments  <cit> . however, although the evolution of visual pigments has been studied extensively  <cit> , the selective pressures that have driven the evolution of multiple cone classes in the eyes of vertebrates remain largely obscure.

two competing theories have been advanced to explain the evolution of multiple cone classes; both assumed that vision in ancestral vertebrates utilized multiple cone photoreceptor classes, with color vision evolving only later as a byproduct. the ‘contrast theory’ of munz and mcfarland and mcfarland and munz  <cit>  proposed that multiple cone classes evolved in shallow-water fish to maximize the visual contrast between objects and their background. indeed, a single visual pigment  may suffice to maximize the visual contrast between a given object and background. however, the need to maximize contrast between diverse objects and backgrounds of varying brightness and spectral characteristics was suggested to favor the appearance of multiple cone classes. the competing ‘flicker theory’ presented by maximov  <cit>  proposed that multiple cone classes have evolved to allow elimination of the flicker  produced by variation in the refraction of sunlight at the water surface  <cit> . it was argued that subtraction of the output of one cone class from another through antagonistic  neural interactions would filter out the light flicker, yielding a flicker-free representation of the visual scene and enhancing object detection. the flicker theory has received relatively little attention; however, it has remained a competitor of the contrast theory, leaving the forces that have driven the evolution of multiple cone classes an open question.

both the contrast and flicker theories assume the presence of at least two cone classes that differ in spectral tuning. the flicker theory rests on three additional assumptions, one of which is the presence of antagonistic interactions between the output signals of the available cone classes. this assumption receives support from the presence of color-opponent horizontal cells  <cit>  and the concentrically-antagonistic center-surround organization in retinal bipolar  <cit>  and ganglion cells  <cit>  in lower vertebrates. at least some of these color opponent mechanisms were probably present in early vertebrates that are represented today by the jawless lampreys  <cit> . however, two other critical assumptions of the flicker theory have so far not been seriously examined. first, it is assumed that ‘the  fluctuations are colorless, that is, the intensity of light changes synchronously in different parts of the spectrum’  <cit> . consequently, despite the strong fluctuations in light over the entire spectrum, the ratio of light intensities in two different parts of a spectrum would remain constant, and would depend only on the spectral properties of the viewed object. second, the flicker theory assumes that ‘the significant flicker of illumination inherent in the shallow-water environment complicated the visual process in the achromatic case, in particular preventing early detection of enemies’  <cit> . thus, because light flicker would impair object detection, selection would favor removal of light flicker from the processed visual signal. these critical assumptions of the flicker theory have never been tested.

in this report, we evaluated the relative merits of the contrast and flicker theories. we first focused on the two largely untested assumptions of the flicker theory, and then asked whether the predictions of the two theories regarding the spectral tuning of cone pigments are supported by the evidence. we found that the amplitude and temporal frequency of light flicker are wavelength dependent and that the flicker may actually enhance the detection of objects, thus violating critical assumptions of the flicker theory. while this alone does not support the contrast theory, comparison of the contrast and flicker theories by means of chromatic contrast modeling under flickering illumination revealed that the spectral tuning of cone pigments of a focal cichlid species produced a large chromatic contrast between background and the body pattern of fish, and did not allow elimination of temporal fluctuations in the visual signal. this suggests that the visual system of the focal species is tuned as predicted by the contrast theory rather than by the flicker theory .

RESULTS
amplitude and temporal frequency of flicker are wavelength dependent
the first critical assumption of the flicker theory is that ‘the  fluctuations are colorless’  <cit> , that is, the amplitude of the flicker and the distribution of its power across temporal frequencies are similar across the light spectrum. only in this special case would the simple subtraction of outputs of different cone classes through color opponent channels produce a flicker-free visual signal, as posited in the original theory. to study the characteristics of underwater light flicker, we measured at high temporal resolution the downward and sideward irradiance from  <dig> to  <dig> nm at a range of water depths. figure 1a,b illustrates light flicker time series of downward irradiance at  <dig> m depth and light wavelengths of  <dig> and  <dig> nm. to estimate the amplitude of the flicker, we calculated the coefficient of variation  of the time series of downward irradiance at each light wavelength. cv decreased with increasing water depth. however, consistent with past studies  <cit> , cv increased monotonically at all depths toward longer light wavelengths, with long wavelengths  <dig>  to  <dig> times more variable than short wavelengths . to study the temporal frequency of the light flicker, we calculated the power spectrum of the downward irradiance time series at each light wavelength. the power distribution of the flicker across frequencies varied with light wavelength , consistent with a past study  <cit> . additionally, the frequency distribution of flicker varied with water depth, and the dominant frequency of flicker decreased with increasing depth . the wavelength dependence of the power distribution of flicker also varied with water depth, such that the wavelength dependence of the power distribution became weaker with increasing depth . these findings are consistent with variation observed in the wavelength dependence of the power distribution of light flicker across different viewing orientations  <cit> .  light flicker is produced by the focusing and defocusing of sunlight rays refracted at the water surface  <cit> . the wavelength dependence of the amplitude and temporal frequency of the flicker arises largely from variation in the scattering of light across the spectrum. scattering at short wavelengths by molecules and small particles in the atmosphere and water is generally more pronounced than at long wavelengths. this causes short-wavelength light to be more diffused and consequently less affected by the wave-focusing phenomenon than long-wavelength light. therefore, our results demonstrate that the amplitude of the flicker and the distribution of its power across temporal frequencies vary across the light spectrum, violating the flicker theory’s first assumption.

subtraction of cone outputs through opponent channels does not produce a flicker-free visual signal
we examined the effect of the wavelength dependence of light flicker on the output of cones and on the capacity of a simple subtraction of cone outputs to eliminate the flicker from the processed signal. to this end, we calculated the cone output  when viewing an achromatic target  under flickering illumination in a focal species, metriaclima zebra . the cone pigment complement found in adult m. zebra includes the sws <dig> , rh2b , and rh2a  pigments   <cit> . the target viewed was assumed to be illuminated by flickering sideward irradiance at a depth of  <dig> m, and cones were assumed to be adapted to the mean sideward irradiance at the same depth. .

cone output varied considerably over time under flickering illumination, with the variation in cone output  decreasing when moving from sws <dig> , through rh2b , and to rh2a   . the output among the three cones varied because long wavelength pigments such as rh2b and rh2a show broad sensitivity functions, with both the α- and β-absorption bands included in the  <dig> to  <dig> nm spectrum that might be used for vision. by sampling the light flicker across the spectrum, the broad sensitivity functions act to reduce the variation of cone output produced under wavelength-dependent flickering illumination. in contrast, short wavelength pigments such as sws <dig> show narrow sensitivity functions, with only the α-absorption band included in the  <dig> to  <dig> nm spectrum. these narrow sensitivity functions act to increase the variation in cone output.

the configuration of color opponent channels in m. zebra is currently unknown. thus, we modeled three possible opponent channels, that is, sws1-rh2b, sws1-rh2a, and rh2b-rh2a. output of opponent channels subjected to flickering illumination varied over time, showing variation largely comparable to that in the output of cones  . therefore, contrary to the prediction of the flicker theory, simple subtraction of the output of one cone class from that of another through opponent interactions would not produce flicker-free output signal.

certain modifications to the flicker theory would potentially allow the intended generation of flicker-free visual signals. an obvious way to generate a flicker-free visual signal would be to route the cone output through a low pass filter. this would attenuate any high frequency components in the signal, possibly producing flicker-free opponent channel signals. such filtration, however, would inevitably reduce the temporal resolution by which the animal is sampling the environment, compromising the animal’s ability to detecting fast moving and changing stimuli, and reacting to them. furthermore, considering the wavelength dependence of the power distribution of flicker , even the low frequency components that are allowed to pass the filter would differ slightly between different cone classes; that is, even opponent channels that only use the low frequency components would not produce a flicker-free signal. therefore, the use of low pass filtration for generating flicker-free visual signals comes with high cost, and is unlikely to provide a selective advantage.

adjusting the dynamic range of cones would also potentially allow generation of flicker-free opponent channel output. for example, if the dynamic range of cones were to vary such that variation in cone output across the three cone classes was equalized over time, then subtraction of cone output through opponent channels would potentially produce a flicker-free signal. to test this possibility, we artificially adjusted the dynamic range of cones so that the variation over time in cone output was similar for all cone classes and equaled that of the sws <dig> cone that exhibited the largest variation . following the dynamic range adjustment, the variation in opponent channels’ output decreased only slightly, and did not produce flicker-free visual signals  . additionally, such differential adjustment of the dynamic range of cones would reduce the resolution in which the incident color signals  that vary in intensity are being sampled, potentially compromising the discrimination between targets of relatively close spectral reflectance characteristics. we also artificially adjusted the dynamic range of cones such that the variation in cone output over time was similar for all cone classes, but now, equaled to that of the rh2a cone that exhibited the smallest variation . following this second dynamic range adjustment, the variation in opponent channels’ output decreased by an order of magnitude, producing a visual signal that is almost flicker-free  . thus, such a mechanism may theoretically generate a flicker-free output of opponent channels. note however, that such differential adjustment of the dynamic range of cones to span the dynamic range of the cone that shows the narrowest dynamic range would result in failure to sample many incident color signals that fall outside of this narrow dynamic range. this would substantially compromise the detection of targets of various spectral reflectance characteristics, which are illuminated by a range of irradiance levels. therefore, this possibility is also highly unlikely to have a selective advantage.

nevertheless, the implementation of complex antagonistic interactions between cone classes , may potentially allow the intended generation of flicker-free visual signals. however, as our light flicker measurements show, the dominant frequency, the frequency distribution of flicker, and the wavelength dependence of the power distribution of flicker all vary with water depth. this suggests that a fixed, ‘wired’ compensation for the wavelength dependence of flicker would fail when an animal moves in the water column or views objects at different lines of sight; behaviors that are common to many fish. in summary, contrary to the prediction of the flicker theory, simple subtraction of the output of one cone class from that of another through opponent interactions would not produce a flicker-free output signal. moreover, neither fixed low pass filtration nor adjustment of the dynamic range of cones would likely to be favored. thus, although there might be a mechanism by which flicker-free visual signals would be generated under flickering illumination, the likelihood of such a possibility is low, and the likelihood that such a possibility would be favored either by natural or sexual selection is even lower.

temporal frequency of light flicker matches the frequency where maximum contrast sensitivity in fish is attained
a second assumption of the flicker theory is that flicker interferes with object detection. however, by generating periodic changes in the retinal image, flicker may enhance perception  <cit>  and detection of coarse  patterns  <cit> . the flicker is analogous to the flashing of an artificial light, such as a turn signal on a car; it is visually prominent because of the extreme brightness change, and possibly because of an unknown visual alertness system. this enhancement of object appearance would be most efficient if the temporal frequency of the flicker matched the frequency where maximum contrast sensitivity  is attained  <cit> . unfortunately, to date, the complete temporal contrast sensitivity function has been determined for only one fish species, the goldfish   <cit> , while the temporal contrast sensitivity of fish has often been studied through the measurement of the critical fusion frequency , the frequency at which temporally modulated light stimuli appear to fuse and have constant brightness. the temporal contrast sensitivity function varies with the adaptation state of the eye, the mean intensity of the modulated light stimulus, the visual angle subtended by the stimulus beam, and the temperature. nevertheless, it still takes on a rather simple and easily modeled function  <cit> , where fmax typically ranges between 10% and 20% of cff  <cit> . thus, to accommodate comparison between the frequency of wave-induced light flicker and the fmax of various fish species, as a first-order approximation, fmax was estimated as 15% of cff, and then as either 10% or 20% of cff, covering the possible realistic range of relationships between fmax and cff.

we compiled cff data for  <dig> fish species, representing  <dig> genera,  <dig> families, and  <dig> orders, including both bony and cartilaginous fishes. see additional file  <dig> for compilation of cff data and fmax estimates with reference to the light adaptation regime and temperature used during experiments, as well as the habitat and depth distribution of each species. fmax varied with stimulus intensity, light adaptation regime, and temperature. nonetheless, with fmax estimated as 15% of cff, the distribution of fmax values across frequency corresponded well to the power spectrum of the light flicker, being highest at the dominant frequency of the flicker . to support our findings further, we calculated the cumulative power of the flicker across temporal frequencies, which, unlike the dominant frequency of the flicker, is rather robust to variation in surface wave conditions. the median fmax for dim stimuli,  <dig>  hz, matched the frequency below which close to 50% of the cumulative power of flicker was found at  <dig> m depth. the median fmax for bright stimuli,  <dig>  hz, matched the frequency below which between 50% and 90% of the cumulative power of flicker was found at  <dig> m depth . the relative power at high frequencies decreased with increasing depth. yet, the median fmax for both dim and bright stimuli matched the frequency below which 99% of the cumulative power was found at  <dig> m depth, for which the relative power at high frequencies was the lowest . a similar trend was observed when fmax was estimated as either 10% or 20% of cff . therefore, these findings suggest that light flicker may enhance the detection by fish of underwater objects under a range of light intensities and water depths, violating the flicker theory’s second assumption.

note that the correspondence between the fmax of fish and the frequency of flicker might potentially break if the fish species included in the analysis were to change. this is especially important if fmax varied across environmental categories such as habitat type and depth. species were classified based on their habitat type as being either ‘benthic’, ‘benthopelagic’, or ‘pelagic’ species. species were also classified as inhabiting either ‘deep’ , ‘shallow’ , or both deep and shallow  habitats. as for the comparison between fmax and flicker frequency, the analysis included all  <dig> fish species for which fmax data were available for both dim/natural and bright light stimuli  and were obtained under dark adaptation . the percentage of species inhabiting shallow  and shallow-deep  habitats was similar, whereas the percentage of strictly deep-water species was lower . moreover, the percentage of benthopelagic species  was higher than those of either benthic  or pelagic  species . thus, if fmax differs between habitat or depth categories, this may bias the comparison between fmax and flicker frequency. to test this possibility, we examined the effect of water depth and habitat type on the fmax of fish. fmax for bright stimuli differed significantly across habitat types , df =  <dig>  n =  <dig>  p =  <dig> ) . post-hoc analysis revealed that fmax in benthic species was significantly lower than in either benthopelagic  or pelagic  species; fmax in benthopelagic and pelagic species did not differ significantly . moreover, fmax for bright stimuli did not differ significantly across depth categories  . fmax did not differ significantly across depth categories also when fish from the ‘shallow-deep’ depth category were pooled with those from the ‘shallow’ category  or with the ‘deep’ category . therefore, fmax of fish does not vary with habitat depth; however, fmax of benthic species is lower than in the other habitats. consequently, if benthic species, that represent only 17% of the species analyzed, were to be represented better in the analysis, this would shift the distribution  of fmax values toward lower frequencies. interestingly, inspection of figure 3a,b reveals that this would actually improve the correspondence between fmax of fish and the frequency of flicker, further supporting our conclusions regarding a correspondence between the fmax of fish and flicker frequency.

contrast theory versus flicker theory: a comparative analysis
the violation of its two critical assumptions substantially undermines support for the flicker theory as originally formulated. however, this alone does not support the contrast theory. interestingly, considering the wavelength dependence of the light flicker, the two competing theories would predict opposite evolutionary pathways. using multiple cone classes to increase the contrast of objects would have favored cone classes whose peak sensitivities are far apart. by contrast, using multiple cone classes to eliminate the light flicker would have favored cone classes whose peak sensitivities are the closest possible to each other. nonetheless, providing conclusive evidence for the dominance of a given evolutionary pathway would require comparing the specific spectral locations of cone pigments of every fish species to the spectrum of ambient light under various conditions and for various behavioral contexts. such a task is clearly impossible. here instead, we chose to use a case study, a lake malawi cichlid, to assess whether the spectral location of cone pigments has been shaped as predicted by the contrast theory or by the flicker theory, or by both.

for each opponent channel, we calculated responses to a range of naturally occurring body color patterns of fish  and the backgrounds against which the fish might be viewed under flickering illumination. the difference between these responses  is a measure of the chromatic contrast of the particular opponent channel under these specific conditions. the model assigned spectral sensitivities to the cones based on the known characteristics of the cone pigments in this fish. the cichlid metriaclima zebra belongs to the rock-dwelling mbuna clade. in these species, males defend a territory in between rocks and perform elaborate displays to approaching females against the background of a vertical rock. thus, following the contrast theory, the visual system would be designed to ensure large Δc magnitude between the body patterns of males and the background of rocks. however, following the flicker theory, the visual system would be structured to ensure small Δc variation under flickering illumination. the prediction regarding the contrast theory follows from the notion that the spectral location of visual pigments has evolved to maximize the chromatic contrast between the color pattern of males and their background. however, at least another possibility exists. that is, that the spectral location of visual pigments in females has been shaped by natural selection, and that males evolved body color patterns to maximize the chromatic contrast against their background, under those pre-existing visual system characteristics of females   <cit> . the specific selection forces that have driven the spectral diversification of visual pigments in lake malawi cichlids are currently largely unknown  <cit> .

Δc was calculated for two putative types of opponent channels:  a channel that compares the outputs of one single cone and one double cone, and  a channel that compares the outputs of two double cones. lake malawi cichlids typically display three cone pigments , with short-wavelength sensitive pigments  occupying single cones, and longer-wavelength sensitive pigments  occupying double cones  <cit> . accordingly, λmax of modeled pigments in single cones ranged between  <dig> and  <dig> nm , whereas λmax of modeled pigments in double cones ranged between  <dig> and  <dig> nm . for each modeled pigment pair, Δc was calculated for every single combination of fish body pattern  and rock background . thereafter, we determined the pigment pairs that produced the largest Δc magnitude  and the smallest Δc variation  over  <dig> consecutive high-temporal resolution sideward irradiance measurements . the larger the Δc magnitude, the larger are the chances that the chromatic contrast between object and background would exceed threshold . the smaller the Δc variation, the more efficient is the elimination of flicker from the output of opponent channels. this analysis was repeated for the two most extreme water depths examined in this study,  <dig> m and  <dig> m. 

the variation and magnitude of Δc for an opponent channel formed by one single cone and one double cone located at a depth of  <dig> m are plotted for various cone pigment pairs in figure 4a and b, respectively. calculated values are displayed in the white tags on the isovalue contours across the various pigment combinations. values rise from blue to red regions on the plots. figure 4c,d presents findings for the same model channel located at a depth of  <dig> m. results for similar analysis of an opponent pair of double cones are plotted in figure 4e-h. for the opponent channel formed by comparison of one single cone and one double cone, the maxΔcmag pigment pair constituted of pigments with λmax that were far apart , while the minΔcvar pigment pair constituted of pigments with λmax that were closer together . similarly, for the opponent channel formed by comparison of two double cones, the maxΔcmag pigment pair constituted of pigments with λmax that were far apart , while the minΔcvar pigment pairs constituted of two identical pigments with λmax spanning the realistic range for double cones , for both  <dig> and  <dig> m depth . thus, the λmax of the real pigments in m. zebra , and the spectral separation between the pigments, resemble those of the maxΔcmag pigments more than they resemble those of the minΔcvar pigments.

next, we examined quantitatively how the Δc magnitude produced by the actual cone pigments in m. zebra corresponds to the Δc magnitudes produced by the maxΔcmag and minΔcvar pigments. because of the large sample size , slight differences between treatment groups most often resulted in statistically significant differences between groups . we therefore chose to report observed effect size  to allow evaluation of the magnitude of difference between groups. the larger the effect size, the larger is the difference between treatment groups. unless specified differently, p for all comparisons was < <dig> .

for the opponent channel formed by one single cone and one double cone , Δc magnitude differed between the real , minΔcvar , and maxΔcmag  pigment pairs . post-hoc analysis revealed that Δc magnitude for the minΔcvar pigment pair was smaller than for either the real pigment pairs  or the maxΔcmag pigment pair . in contrast, Δc magnitude for the real and maxΔcmag pigment pairs differed only slightly , as did the Δc magnitude for the real pigment pairs . therefore, the Δc magnitude produced by the real and maxΔcmag pigment pairs is largely similar, but considerably larger than the Δc magnitude produced by the minΔcvar pigment pair.

for the opponent channel formed by two double cones , Δc magnitude differed between the real, minΔcvar, and maxΔcmag pigment pairs . post-hoc analysis revealed that Δc magnitude for the minΔcvar pigment pair was smaller than for either the real pigment pair  or the maxΔcmag pigment pair . in contrast, Δc magnitude for the real and maxΔcmag pigment pairs differed less considerably . thus, the Δc magnitude produced by the real pigment pair resembles the Δc magnitude produced by the maxΔcmag pigment pair better than it resembles the Δc magnitude produced by the minΔcvar. therefore, at both  <dig> and  <dig> m depth, the real and maxΔcmag pigment pairs are more effective than the minΔcvar pigment pair in producing large Δc magnitude. these results suggest that the spectral location of pigments in m. zebra is almost optimally tuned to allow the largest possible Δc magnitude between fish pattern and background, as predicted by the contrast theory.

figure 4i-l allows comparison of the Δc variation produced by the real cone pigments in m. zebra with that produced by the maxΔcmag and minΔcvar pigments. for the opponent channel formed by one single cone and one double cone , the flicker-induced variation in Δc differed between the real, minΔcvar, and maxΔcmag pigment pairs . post-hoc analysis revealed that Δc variation for the minΔcvar pigment pair was smaller than for either the real pigment pairs  or the maxΔcmag pigment pair . however, Δc variation for the real and maxΔcmag pigment pairs did not differ significantly at  <dig> m depth , but did differ at  <dig> m depth ; at both  <dig> and  <dig> m depth, Δc variation for the real pigment pairs did not differ significantly .

for the opponent channel formed by two double cones , the flicker-induced variation in Δc differed between the real, minΔcvar, and maxΔcmag pigment pairs . post-hoc analysis revealed that Δc variation for the minΔcvar pigment pair was smaller than for either the real pigment pair  or the maxΔcmag pigment pair . in contrast, Δc variation for the real and maxΔcmag pigment pairs differed less substantially . therefore, the real pigment pairs are often slightly more effective than the maxΔcmag pigment pairs in eliminating the variation in Δc. nevertheless, at both  <dig> and  <dig> m depth, the real and maxΔcmag pigment pairs are considerably less effective than the minΔcvar pigment pairs in eliminating the variation in Δc. these results suggest that the spectral location of pigments in m. zebra is poorly tuned to allow elimination of temporal fluctuations in the visual signal, in contrast to the prediction of the flicker theory.

taken together, three lines of evidence suggest that the spectral location of cone pigments in m. zebra has been shaped as predicted by the contrast theory rather by the flicker theory. these are:  similarity in cone spectral locations between the maxΔcmag pigments and the real pigments in m. zebra,  greater efficiency of the real and maxΔcmag pigment pairs in producing large Δc magnitude as compared to the minΔcvar pigment pair, and  lower efficiency of the real and maxΔcmag pigment pairs in eliminating the variation in Δc, as compared to the minΔcvar pigment pair. thus, the spectral location of pigments in m. zebra is tuned to produce large Δc magnitude between fish pattern and background, and is poorly tuned to allow elimination of temporal fluctuations in the visual signal. that is, the visual system of m. zebra is tuned as predicted by the contrast theory rather than by the flicker theory .

CONCLUSIONS
our results show that the amplitude of the light flicker and the distribution of its power across temporal frequencies vary across the light spectrum, violating the flicker theory’s first assumption. we examined the effect of the wavelength dependence of light flicker on the output of cones and found that, contrary to the prediction of the flicker theory, simple subtraction of the output of one cone class from that of another through opponent interactions would not produce a flicker-free output signal. moreover, neither fixed low pass filtration nor adjustment of dynamic range of cones would likely to be favored. thus, although there might be a mechanism by which flicker-free visual signals would be generated under flickering illumination, the likelihood of such a possibility is low. importantly, even if such generation of a flicker-free visual signal would prove possible, our results show that the temporal frequency of flicker matches the frequency where sensitivity is maximal in a wide range of fish species, suggesting that the flicker may potentially enhance the detection of objects. thus, there appears to be no real need to eliminate the flicker, because, in contrast to the accepted belief and the second assumption of the flicker theory, the flicker can most likely improve the detection of objects rather than degrade it. the violation of its two critical assumptions suggests little support for the flicker theory as originally formulated. while this alone does not support the contrast theory, comparison of the contrast and flicker theories by means of chromatic contrast modeling under flickering illumination revealed that the visual system of our focal species was tuned as predicted by the contrast theory rather than by the flicker theory. this suggests that the main factor that has tuned the spectral locations of cone pigments is the optimization of visual contrast. thus, we propose that the contrast theory, stating that multiple cone classes evolved to maximize the visual contrast between objects and backgrounds, is the most parsimonious at present. this result may have important implications for our understanding of the adaptive significance of the number and spectral tuning of cone pigments and the characteristics of retinal networks in vertebrate visual systems.

