BACKGROUND
the transition from exponential growth to stationary phase is a major event in microbial physiology  <cit> . during the exponential phase of growth, bacterial cells produce metabolites necessary for growth and grow rapidly. once essential nutrients have been depleted, cells switch to stationary phase, stop growing, reorganize their energy metabolism and often start producing a new set of secondary metabolites, including antibiotics  <cit> .

in this study, we have explored the metabolic switch in streptomyces coelicolor, the model organism of the antibiotics producing genus streptomyces. the genome of this soil bacterium has been sequenced and contains about  <dig> genes, one of the largest numbers for any bacterium  <cit> . more than  <dig> clusters coding for the  <dig> known and several predicted antibiotics or related compounds have been identified in the genome  <cit> . to optimize the production of valuable secondary metabolites, understanding the shift from primary to secondary metabolism during the transition phase will play a key role.

we constructed a constraints-based genome-scale stoichiometric model of s. coelicolor metabolism, based on earlier similar models  <cit> , and integrated the model predictions with a large gene expression dataset  <cit> . the constraints-based approach, in particular flux balance analysis, has been shown to be highly predictive of growth phenotypes in many microbial systems  <cit>  and can be used to construct large scale metabolic models based on genome sequences in the absence of kinetic information, making it particularly attractive for less well-studied organisms like s. coelicolor.

predictions from constraint-based models usually hold for steady-state assumptions  <cit> . to enable the incorporation of experimental information from time-series measurements, we extend the approach by applying a dynamically changing input function  and objective function . the predicted flux profiles are then compared to the gene expression profiles of the corresponding enzyme-coding genes to validate the model.

we observe a surprisingly good correlation between predicted fluxes and measured gene expression, indicating both the power of the constraint-based modeling approach and the tight regulation of gene expression in s. coelicolor. a small number of incorrectly predicted fluxes indicate the need for including additional gene regulatory constraints to the model  <cit> , but also allows the sensitive identification of misannotations and putative novel reactions involved in secondary metabolite biosynthesis.

RESULTS
we have reconstructed a genome-scale model of streptomyces coelicolor metabolism with recent updated annotations as discussed in the methods section. our aim was to study the metabolic switch between the primary phase and secondary phase of growth.

initial model validation
to validate our model we first compared predicted growth rates to those reported for glucose limited environments  <cit> . in that work, s. coelicolor had been grown in chemostat culture in a chemically defined medium under various nutrient limitations. as the dilution rate of the chemostat is the same as the specific growth rate at steady state we can compare it directly to the prediction of the in silico model. in our model we used an input function that mimics the glucose limited medium used in these experiments, adopting the observed glucose and oxygen uptake rate as well as carbon dioxide and actinorhodin production rates as initial conditions in the model. we maximized biomass production to predict the optimized in silico specific growth rate and we compared the predicted growth with the observed growth. figure  <dig> and table  <dig> show that observation and prediction are in good agreement, indicating the general validity of our model.

global metabolic switching from primary phase to secondary phase of growth
for a more detailed understanding of the metabolic transition phase, we then modeled flux changes happening during fermentation culture on phosphate limiting medium. for this growth condition we had earlier collected a detailed gene expression time series.

based on the measured nutrient uptake and product formation, we dynamically adapted the objective function and optimized the in silico specific growth rate. the optimum specific growth rate and optimal flux vector for all metabolic reactions were predicted for each time point. figure  <dig> shows the observed normalized depletion of substrate glucose, glutamate and phosphate during growth. at about  <dig> hour, phosphate is depleted, triggering the transition to stationary phase and the production of antibiotics by the bacteria. the corresponding slow-down of growth matches well between prediction and observation.

next we compared the predicted metabolic flux profile of all  <dig> enzyme-coding genes to the corresponding gene expression data from nieselt et al.  <cit> . a histogram of correlation coefficients between predicted flux and observed gene expression is shown in figure  <dig>  the correlation of predicted flux and gene expression level is highly significant, and a large number of genes exhibit very high correlation . this shows not only the global validity that these genes of our model are probably correctly annotated in the model but also illustrates the tight regulation of gene expression level for enzyme-coding genes of s. coelicolor. this is in agreement with the general observation that gene expression is more tightly regulated in unicellular compared to multicellular organisms, for evolutionary reasons, such as the much larger effective population size and stronger energetic constraints in small organisms  <cit> .

a large set of genes does not show correlation . these are mostly genes that do not change expression  along the time course. in these cases of constant expression no correlation information is present in the data, leading to correlation coefficient close to zero. of course, there will also be cases where gene expression levels and flux levels do not correlate for other reasons, for instance due to post-transcriptional and post-translational regulation mechanisms.

strikingly, there is also a small group of strongly anticorrelating genes . these are potentially the most interesting cases; they could indicate wrong annotations of gene function, but also the unexpected presence of regulatory constraints or novel functionalities of genes. to further examine these options, we subdivided all  <dig> observed expression profile into  <dig> clusters, based on unsupervised hierarchical clustering. the number  <dig> was chosen to allow sufficient resolution of different expression pattern. figure  <dig> shows the average expression time course of each of the  <dig> resulting clusters. for instance, the pink and red clusters, which contain many genes involved in secondary metabolite production, switch on upon phosphate depletion. the purple, navy blue and blue clusters mostly include genes involved in central metabolism and anabolic functions and are down-regulated when nutrient resources in the medium are depleted.

when mapping the gene expression clusters onto the genome  it is clear that genes with similar expression dynamics tend to be neighbors along the chromosome. moreover, when also visualizing the correlation between gene expression and predicted flux, one can see the that strong anticorrelated expression is seen almost exclusively for genes in the pink and red clusters, which switched on expression during the transition phase, while the predicted flux for these genes are decreasing along the time course . in contrast, many genes with high positive correlation belong to the purple, navy blue and blue clusters which contain genes of central metabolism, including biosynthesis clusters for arginine, cysteine, glutamate, glutamine, glycine, fatty acid, histidine, homoserine, isoleucine, leucine, lysine, methionine, n-acetyl muramic acid  and n-acetyl glucosamine , as well as sulphate metabolism. expression of the antibiotic gene clusters for actinorhodin and undecylprodigiosin was also highly correlated to the predicted fluxes.

the most strongly anticorrelated genes are listed on the basis of correlation between gene expression and predicted flux . pathway annotations are based on the kegg database without manual curation. most of the genes belong to the pink or red cluster and are upregulated in stationary phase; these represent potential new genes involved in antibiotics biosynthesis. several examples validating this interpretation are discussed in detail in the text.

one large group of anticorrelated genes is the set of  <dig> genes located the middle of the calcium dependent antibiotics  biosynthesis gene cluster   <cit> . sco <dig> and sco <dig> are annotated as 2-dehydro-3-deoxyheptonate aldolase and prephenate dehydrogenase respectively, part of the shikimate pathway . tryptophan is a precursor for cda, and there are four anticorrelated genes  which encode for enzymes trpc <dig>  trpd <dig>  trpg, and trpe <dig>  it seems obvious that these genes are involved in the biosynthesis of tryptophan for cda biosynthesis and not in the production of tryptophan for general primary metabolism. indeed it has been shown that these genes do not complement a deficiency in central tryptophan biosynthesis  <cit> . sco <dig> encodes an acp homolog, and the adjacent genes sco <dig> and sco <dig> along with sco <dig> are proposed to be involved in the biosynthesis of the n-terminal epoxyhexanoyl fatty acid side chain  <cit> . while the direct involvement in cda biosynthesis has not yet been established for all of these genes, the non-complementation as well as the clear anticorrelation in our model analysis point to the existence of strong regulatory constraints on the expression of these genes. such regulatory constraints are not routinely included in flux balance analysis, but can substantially enhance its predictive accuracy  <cit> . our result shows that a lack of regulatory information can be efficiently compensated by the integration of transcriptomics information, which quite specifically highlights this group of genes for further study.

another group of anticorrelating genes is seen in the middle of the undecylprodigiosin biosynthesis gene cluster  <cit> . three genes  in this cluster were automatically annotated in our model as fatty acid biosynthesis genes on the basis of sequence similarity with fatty acid genes . however these three genes are well known to be involved in undecylprodigiosin production under the gene names redr , redq  and redp . this is a clear example of a misannotation that is revealed by the correlation analysis and can easily be fixed in the model.

a third example of strongly anticorrelated genes listed in table  <dig> are three alkaline phosphatases - sco <dig> , sco <dig>  and sco <dig>  - which are assigned in the kegg database  to the folate biosynthesis pathway. their expression pattern, which shows strong induction upon phosphate depletion, is consistent with earlier reports on their control by phor/phop  <cit>  and a potential role in secondary metabolism, but is less easy to reconcile with a putative function in folate biosynthesis, which is based only on sequence homology.

in all three of these cases, the integration of gene expression and model flux predictions highlighted groups of genes involved in antibiotics production. a small set of additional anticorrelated genes  are widely scattered through out the genome . each of them is a potential candidate from model correction and for the identification of new secondary metabolite biosynthesis genes with specifically constrained gene expression patterns.

our biological understanding of s. coelicolor metabolism is further enhanced by a more detailed analysis of the reactions for which the flux balance analysis predicted zero flux. when clustering the measured gene expression profiles for the genes encoding the enzymes of these zero-flux reactions, a substantial number of genes showed consistent changes in gene expression along the time course, suggesting that the corresponding reactions are in fact active . striking examples include a large number of genes for vitamin b <dig>  biosynthesis, a group of ten genes involved in calcium-dependent antibiotic  biosynthesis, and three genes involved in ectoine biosynthesis . each of these cases provides important insights: the first one shows that vitamin b <dig> is likely to be produced by s. coelicolor under the growth conditions of our experiment, even if it is not essential due to the availability of cobalamine-independent enzymes  <cit> . the second one highlights that cda biosynthesis genes are coherently induced in expression during the metabolic switch, similar to undecylprodigiosin and actinorhodin and concordant with the results of the correlation analysis discussed above. this could indicate that this additional antibiotic compound is potentially also produced in phosphate starvation conditions, contrary to previous expectations  <cit> . finally, the case of ectoine biosynthesis genes suggests that this novel osmoprotectant metabolite is produced by s. coelicolor. this has in fact been experimentally confirmed recently  <cit> . in each of these cases, the activity of the pathway was not predicted, based on the biological evidence incorporated in the stoichiometric model and the expected biomass composition, and the comparison of flux balance predictions and gene expression data indicated relevant modifications of our metabolic model. a complete list of genes that have zero predicted flux but show gene expression is included in the supplementary material .

conversely, our model can be used to identify those genes that are predicted to be essential for growth , but show no or very low gene expression. there are  <dig> predicted essential genes in our model, which have a median log gene expression level of  <dig> , compared to  <dig>  for the non-essential genes and  <dig>  for the negative controls. this indicates that on average the essential genes have a 60% higher expression than the non-essential genes. there is only one predicted essential gene with a detected median expression level below  <dig> , compared to  <dig> non-essential genes with such low expression levels. this non-expressed essential gene is panb , a 3-methyl-2-oxobutanoate hydroxymethyltransferase of pantothenate and coenzyme a biosynthesis, which has a maximum log expression signal of only  <dig> . its apparent non-expression can be due to insufficient hybridization of the gene-specific probes on the microarray, but it could also indicate the existence of another isoenzyme or additional metabolic pathways that would make this reaction redundant. in both of these cases, this gene might warrant further detailed study.

the observed good correlation between gene expression and predicted metabolic flux is not necessarily expected; expression levels can show little correlation to protein levels, enzyme activity and metabolic flux for many reasons  <cit> . it could be that the relationship between expression and flux is tighter in prokaryotes like s. coelicolor, than in multicellular eukaryotic model organisms  <cit> . however, we cannot exclude that the group of non-correlated genes contains not only reactions with constant flux, but also reactions with dynamic flux little correlation between gene expression and protein activity or metabolic flux. in a next step, it will be interesting to directly incorporate the gene expression information in the model, providing additional constraints on the maximum flux  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
our study demonstrates the ability of flux balance analysis to not only study classical steady-state conditions but also to predict microbial behaviour in dynamic growth conditions provided that sufficiently detailed measurements of the changing growth conditions  and cellular objective  are available. in combination with detailed gene expression information, these dynamic model predictions can help identifying potential new players in the metabolic switch, including putative new genes for antibiotic synthesis.

