BACKGROUND
gene regulation is underpinned by interactions among regulators, including transcription factors and mirnas and their target genes. the elucidation of gene regulation is important for understanding the behaviour of biological systems and in recent years, network-based approaches have been widely used to uncover the mechanisms of gene regulation  <cit> . the elements involved and the structure of transcriptional regulatory networks reflect the behaviour of complex systems at the system-wide level  <cit> . it is also possible to infer how biological processes or functions change when the regulatory system confronts specific gene mutations, gene knockouts or pharmacological treatments  <cit> .

simple topological properties can directly reflect important cellular functions  <cit> . for example, different types of genes have different topological properties in human biological networks  <cit> , and these properties can help to identify the functions of new genes. genes with certain topological properties were found to have particular importance in the organization of human biological networks. for example, han et al.  <cit>  and taylor et al.  <cit>  found that removal of two classes of hubs could strongly affect the organization of protein interaction networks, while analysis of network dynamics for multiple processes by luscombe et al.  <cit>  revealed large topological changes in regulatory networks. gerstein et al.  <cit>  found that factors at different in-degree or out-degree levels in a regulatory network have different biological functions and bhardwaj et al.  <cit>  showed that factors with different hierarchies in model organism regulatory networks have different properties. specifically, lin et al.  <cit>  revealed that housekeeping  and tissue-specific  proteins have their own structural organization in human protein interaction networks. in addition, tissue-specific genes were twice as likely as housekeeping genes to be drug targets, allowing the identification of tissue ‘signature networks’ that will facilitate the discovery of new therapeutic targets and biomarkers of tissue-targeted diseases  <cit> . mirna studies also showed that functionally distinct classes of mirnas have specific topologies in regulatory networks  <cit> . however, the mechanism by which hk and ts encoded regulators  are organized in gene human regulatory networks and the biological significance of the network properties await elucidation.

a central goal of our study was to classify how regulators are organized to realize gene expression patterns in different cell types and tissues. we have addressed this problem by constructing mirna-tf regulatory networks for seven human tissues, including brain, heart, kidney, liver, ovary, spleen and testis. we have then analysed the regulatory features of these tfs and mirnas through analysis of their topological properties in the regulatory network. we have also classified the regulatory structures of disease-related genes and mirnas in the networks.

we divided tfs into three sets: hk tfs, ts tfs and trivial tfs and mirnas into two sets: ts mirnas and trivial mirnas. we then compared the topological properties of hk/ts tfs with trivial tfs, ts mirnas with trivial mirnas, and hk tfs with ts tfs. in addition, we also determined the topological bias between disease tfs/mirnas and non-disease tfs/mirnas. our study intends to provide a global view of the organization of housekeeping tfs, ts tfs and mirnas in a gene transcriptional regulatory network and to uncover specific properties of disease genes and mirnas in the network. this will further our understanding of mirna and tf regulation and provide clues to identify human disease genes in the network.

RESULTS
we characterized the regulatory patterns of different types of genes by scaling their topological features in tissue regulatory networks. these networks comprise the regulatory interactions between tf, mirna and non-tf genes . the topological features of each gene  were quantified with four centrality measures, i.e. in-degree , out-degree , betweenness  and cluster coefficient   <cit> . we detected the topological features of genes in seven tissue regulatory networks, and investigated the topological biases of the hk and tissue-specific ts genes .

topological bias of ts/hk genes relative to trivial genes
table  <dig> presents the global view of topological differences among hk and ts genes in the seven tissue regulatory networks relative to randomly selected trivial genes from the same network, i.e. non-hk and non-ts genes .

p <  <dig> . cc: cluster coefficient; btwn: betweenness, red five-pointed star: ts mirnas; green five-pointed star: ts tf; green diamond: hk tf.

red five-pointed star indicates that the relative centralities of ts mirnas are significantly higher than those of trivial mirnas in the corresponding tissue. green five-pointed star indicates that the relative centralities of ts tfs are significantly higher than those of trivial tfs in the corresponding tissue; green diamond indicates that the relative centralities of hk tfs are significantly higher than those of trivial tfs in the corresponding tissue. p <  <dig> .

ts mirnas
compared with trivial mirnas, ts mirnas showed significantly higher cluster coefficients in most of the tissues . the cluster coefficient measures the connecting density of neighbours to a gene. the higher it is, the more densely the neighbours are connected. thus, this suggests that ts mirnas are likely to be involved in small, densely connected clusters. furthermore, because neighbouring genes of the ts mirnas have the tendency to connect to each other they are more likely to be tfs, because tfs are the only type of regulator that is capable of connecting with both mirnas and its targets. such deduction is supported by the detection of the number of tfs connecting ts and trivial mirnas . in all seven tissue regulatory networks, the numbers of tfs connecting to ts mirnas was apparently larger than that connecting to trivial mirnas. the local cluster behaviour of ts mirnas and tfs also suggests strong co-regulation of gene expression by ts mirnas and tfs.

interestingly, although the average out-degree of ts mirnas was comparable to that of trivial mirnas , the average global target number of ts mirnas was higher than that of trivial mirnas across all seven tissues. this led to the high target compact rate  of ts mirnas relative to trivial mirnas . the tcr is defined as:

  tcr=<ntarg>/<kout>−1/nmir1−1/nmir 

where < n
targ
 > and < k
out
 > are the average target number and average degree respectively, and n
mir
 is the number of mirnas. tcr equals  <dig> when all the out-degrees converge to the same target, and equals  <dig> when every out-degree directs to different targets . such behaviour  suggests that ts mirnas tend to regulate different sets of targets, whereas the trivial mirnas tend to co-regulate the same set of targets. such distinct regulatory features of ts and trivial mirnas were also observed in the shape of the related graphs. taking the heart as an example, the sub-network composed of ts mirnas and their targets was assembled by several small fans, where the root is the ts mirna and the leaves are the specific targets of the ts mirna . however, the sub-network composed of trivial mirnas and their targets behaved chaotically, with trivial mirnas and their targets mixed together.

ts tfs
in four out of the seven tissues , all four topological parameters  of ts tfs were significantly higher compared with those of the trivial tfs . the high in-/out-degree indicates that ts tfs tend to regulate a large number of targets, and that ts tfs are regulated by a large number of regulators, while the high betweenness values show that ts tfs locate to bridge positions through which many regulatory pathways pass. these two features suggest that ts tfs act as information-transition hubs in either the local or global topology of tissue regulatory networks. the ts tfs receive a large amount of information from the upstream regulators , and then re-distribute the information to a large number of downstream targets . a deficiency of ts tfs would severely disrupt the transition of regulatory information, and lead to dysfunction of associated biological processes. for example, pou3f <dig>  a brain ts tf, has high in-degree, out-degree, betweenness and cluster coefficient values. it regulates  <dig> genes . at the same time it is heavily regulated by  <dig> mirnas. among these  <dig> mirnas, three mutually regulate pou3f <dig>  and also regulate some of the targets of pou3f <dig> . genecards  <cit>  documents the involvement of pou3f <dig> in the neurogenesis pathway and in sids  susceptibility pathways. in neurogenesis, pou3f <dig> is activated by association with other pou gene products and alters the expression of banks of downstream genes that participate in specification of neuronal cell subsets in the brain  <cit> . pou3f <dig> also regulates the transcription of a diverse set of genes in the central nervous system and regulates stem cell state  <cit> . these observations indicate that pou3f <dig> occupies a vital position in the transmission of regulatory signals in a brain regulatory network and plays essential roles in neuronal differentiation by promoting morphogenesis of neuronal cells.

a high cluster coefficient suggests that ts tfs are preferred to regulate/be regulated by regulators in the same way as mirnas, as described above. the difference is that the regulator that is able to interact with a mirna can only be a tf. here, the regulator that interacts with a ts tf could be a mirna as well as a tf. both tfs and mirnas are significantly enriched in the neighbours of ts tfs  across all the tissues. moreover, the number of neighbours that are mirnas is significantly higher compared with that of tfs , suggesting a particularly strong co-regulation of ts tfs and mirnas on gene expression.

significantly high out-degree values for ts tfs were found in the heart and spleen, whereas significantly high betweenness values for ts tfs were observed in the brain and spleen. this may be related to the specific topological features of ts tfs in distinct tissues.

hk tfs
in the majority of tissues , the hk tf cluster coefficients were significantly higher than those of trivial tfs. , suggesting that hk is associated with local, densely connected clusters and that tfs tend to regulate/be regulated by other tfs and mirnas, as described above for ts tfs . specifically, hk tfs show significantly high out-degree values in two tissues, kidney and spleen.

topological bias for ts genes relative to hk genes
we also compared the centrality topology of ts genes and hk genes . because there are no hk mirnas , only the topological bias of ts tfs relative to hk tfs was detected.

p <  <dig> . cc: cluster coefficient; btwn: betweenness, green five-pointed star: ts tf.

green five-pointed star indicates that the relative centralities of ts tfs are significantly higher than those of hk tfs in the corresponding tissue. p <  <dig> .

in kidney and ovary, the out-degree, cluster coefficient and betweenness values of ts tfs were all significantly higher compared with those of hk tfs . the out-degree and betweenness values of ts tfs relative to those of hk tfs could be inferred, because ts tfs showed significantly high out-degree/betweenness values relative to those of trivial tfs, whereas no significant difference was found between the out-degree/betweenness values of hk tfs and trivial tfs for these two tissues . however, ts tfs and hk tfs both showed significantly higher cluster coefficients relative to trivial tfs . thus, a distinct order was determined with ts tfs having the highest cluster coefficients, followed by hk tfs and trivial tfs having the lowest.

there were also some features that were only present in specific tissues . for example, in brain the ts tf in-degree value was higher than that for hk tfs. in addition, high cluster coefficient/betweenness values for ts tfs were observed in the heart and brain.

topological bias of disease genes relative to non-disease genes
numerous disease genes are expressed in all of the seven tissues. in each tissue, the number of disease tfs was comparable to that of non-disease tfs . no tendency of disease tfs to be either ts tfs or hk tfs was found . however, the cluster coefficients of disease tfs were significantly higher compared with those of non-disease tfs , suggesting that disease tfs tend to be involved in small clusters that mainly consist of regulators. in addition to the ts and hk tfs mentioned above, both tfs and mirnas were significantly enriched in disease tf neighbours  across all the tissues. moreover, the number of neighbours that were mirnas was significantly higher than the number that was tfs , suggesting particularly strong co-regulation by disease tfs and mirnas on gene expression. in addition, significantly high out-degree values of disease tfs were specifically found in heart and liver.

p <  <dig> . cc: cluster coefficient; btwn: betweenness, red circle: disease mirna; green circle: disease tf.

red circle indicates that the relative centralities of disease mirnas are significantly higher than those of non-disease mirnas in the corresponding tissue. green circle indicates that the relative centralities of disease tfs are significantly higher than those of non-disease tfs in the corresponding tissue. p <  <dig> .

the disease mirnas constituted more than 80% of mirnas in every tissue . both ts and trivial mirnas could be disease associated. no significant tendency of disease mirnas to be ts mirnas was identified in any of the seven tissues . nevertheless, there were distinct differences in topology between disease mirnas and non-disease mirnas. in all seven tissues, the out-degree values of disease mirnas were significantly higher than that of non-disease mirnas , suggesting that the disease mirnas tend to co-ordinately regulate a large number of targets. moreover, the disease mirnas also showed tissue-specific features in certain tissues. for example, the in-degree values of disease mirnas were relatively higher in brain, kidney, liver and testis, whereas the betweenness values of disease mirnas were high in kidney, liver, ovary and testis.

discussion
tfs or mirnas usually co-regulate with each other to control the expression of several genes. this suggests that the topological properties of regulators could be related with those functions. in the present study, we compared four topological properties of different types of regulator and an interesting pattern in terms of how cells organize their regulatory information emerged.

the relative high tcr values of ts mirnas suggest ts mirnas tend to regulate different sets of targets, whereas trivial mirnas are more likely to co-regulate the same set of targets. we also performed functional enrichment analysis of genes regulated by ts mirnas and trivial mirnas using the david  <cit>  online tools. for example, in brain, the targets of non-ts mirnas were enriched in fundamental biological processes, such as metabolic processes  and transport , and their enriched kegg  pathways were “nucleotide excision repair”  and “citrate cycle” . as well as several fundamental biological processes, the targets of ts mirnas were enriched in tissue specific functions, such as “neuropeptide receptor activity” , “motor neuron axon guidance” , “cell morphogenesis”  and the kegg pathway “axon guidance” . these observations indicate that trivial mirnas mainly regulate genes involved in fundamental cellular functions, while ts mirnas tend to regulate genes with tissue-specific functions. this implies that non-ts mirnas form the core of human transcriptional regulation networks, while tissue-specific mirnas are attached to the core at more peripheral positions of the networks, and form new regulatory modules to execute particular functions in tissue differentiation.

ts tfs tend to exhibit higher in-degree, out-degree, betweenness and cluster coefficient values than trivial tfs in four of the tissues examined. these results mean that ts tfs occupy important locations in the regulatory networks and act as message transmitters in the information flow from upstream activators to downstream effectors. this may help in the understanding of how different tissues achieve specificity. first of all, ts tfs are essential for tissue differentiation; second, ts tfs alone are not enough for tissue differentiation and co-regulation with other regulators is required. this complicated and finely tuned regulatory mechanism can ensure correct cell morphogenesis and tissue differentiation.

hk tfs tend to have neighbours that densely interact with each other, indicating that hk tfs are inclined to form complicated associations with other tfs and mirnas in the expression of genes.

disease regulators also show particular properties in the regulatory networks. although no tendency of disease tfs/disease mirnas to be either ts tfs/ts mirnas or hk tfs/trivial mirnas was found, disease tfs tend to be connected with small clusters and disease mirnas show higher out-degree values than non-disease mirnas. some approaches for identifying disease genes based on topological properties have been shown effective in protein-protein interaction network  <cit> . applying the methods to transcriptional regulatory network may lead new disease genes and mirnas to be found. these topological differences between disease and non-disease regulators may also provide a way to find drug targets for early diagnosis and treatment .

we also calculated characteristic path length, average in-degree, average out-degree, average betweenness and average cluster coefficient for seven tissues . the characteristic path length, average in-degree and average out-degree are similar in brain and testis. the two tissues were found to be clustered together according to a bower-tie structure  <cit>  previously. on the other hand, brain and testis were reported to have similarities in both mrna and mirna expression profiles  <cit> . this consistency between the network status and expression profiles for brain and testis may suggest some correlations between them.

it should be noted that there are some limitations of this study. the target genes of tfs and mirnas in our trns are all come from prediction which may lead to some false positive. in addition, we did not subdivide the tissue to certain cell type when we constructed tissue trn, which may limit the precision of the networks. despite such limitations, the work provides a new sight into the topological properties of hk/ts regulators and disease genes. the results uncovered here are important for understanding the key roles of different types of regulators in normal and disease tissues.

CONCLUSIONS
the study provides an insight into the regulatory patterns of different types of genes in tissue regulatory networks. tissue-specific genes and disease genes have particular topological properties in transcriptional regulatory networks and certain topological properties relate to certain regulatory mechanisms in gene regulation. from the regulatory differences between ts and trivial mirnas, we inferred that trivial mirnas might act at the core of human transcriptional regulation networks to perform basic biological functions, while tissue-specific mirnas might be attached to the core at more peripheral positions, and form new regulatory modules to execute particular functions in tissue differentiation. the higher in-degree, out-degree, cluster coefficient and betweenness values for ts tfs in four tissues indicated that ts tfs act as bridges in gene expression information flow from upstream activators to downstream effectors, which in turn contributes to differentiation of certain tissues. last, disease tfs/mirnas show topological differences to non-disease tfs/mirnas. these differences may provide a way to find new disease genes that are important in the early diagnosis and prevention of disease.

