BACKGROUND
mrnas translation is a fundamental intracellular process which occurs in all living organisms. translation elongation is an iterative stage of translation in which the ribosome scans the mrna sequence and decodes it into a specific protein by adding one amino acid at the time to the growing peptide chain. it has been suggested that the speed by which ribosomes progress along the mrna is affected by different local features of the coding sequence. one determinant of the translation elongation speed is the identity of the codon at the p-site; it has been suggested that the codon decoding rate is influenced by several factors related to the p-site, including: the cellular concentration of the paired trna  <cit> ; the efficiency of the codon-anticodon pairing which occurs non-optimally for wobble base pairing  <cit>  and the efficiency of incorporation of the decoded amino acid into the polypeptide which is mainly poor in the case of proline  <cit> . other coding sequence features thought to slow down ribosomes include: the folding energy of the mrna sequence downstream from the ribosomal p-site  <cit> ; the identity of the trna at the a-site  <cit> ; and the charge of the amino acids in the exit tunnel  <cit> .

the ribosomal exit tunnel  is the site through which nascent peptides leave the ribosome during translation. the non-uniform biochemical characteristics of the tunnel allow it to play an important role in affecting translation rates and protein folding rather than being a passive conduit for the nascent polypeptide. first, the overall electrostatic potential of the ret is negative and varies in magnitude along the tunnel  <cit> ; thus, it was suggested that a nascent peptide that contains charged amino acids may undergo electrostatic interaction with the exit tunnel  <cit> . second, the diameter of the tunnel varies between 10a <dig> and 20a <dig>  <cit> ; thus, the interaction between that nascent peptide and the exit tunnel may also be dictated by geometrical constraints. although the expansion in diameter enables the partial folding of the translated peptide  <cit> , the cramped dimensions of the tunnel prohibit a folding of whole protein domains and only tertiary/secondary structures of small segments are allowed  <cit> .

evidences of ribosome pausing mediated by nascent peptide have been manifested in several studies  <cit> . these studies, however, either conducted a small scale experiment or focused on one organism only.

the development of the ribosome profiling technique has significantly broaden the comprehension of in vivo translation by enabling the detection of the momentary positions of ribosomes along the transcripts at nucleotide resolution  <cit> . during the past few years, the high throughput quantitative data obtained by ribosome profiling experiments has been widely used to study gene translation  <cit> .

specifically, ribosome profiling data was used to show that ribosome stalling is induced in response to the presence of certain amino acid  <cit> . specifically, it has been suggested that positively charged amino acids are implicated in transient ribosomal pauses by interacting with the negatively charged exit tunnel  <cit> . a more recent study of artieri and fraiser  <cit> , on the other hand, emphasized the possibility that the incorporation of proline into the nascent peptide has the major effect on ribosome stalling.

in order to investigate the organism-specific influence of each individual amino acid on substantial ribosome stalling, we performed a large scale analysis based on multiple ribosome profiling datasets of  <dig> organisms including eukaryotes  and bacteria .

RESULTS
ribosome profiling experiments include the following major stages : cells are treated with cycloheximide  to arrest translating ribosomes; then, rna fragments protected by ribosomes from rnases are isolated and processed for high-throughput sequencing, resulting in reads of ribosomes protected footprints. as slowly decoded codons are covered by ribosomes for a larger amount of time, they tend to create higher amount of protected fragments, in comparison to faster decoded codons on the same transcript. finally, using a computational method, the obtained sequenced footprints are mapped to the genome of the analyzed organism creating for each gene a ribosomal footprints read count profile. this profile will be referred here as a rd profile for ribosomal density.

in this work, we aim at understanding whether extreme ribosomal stalling occurs at a specific codon is affected by an interaction between the ret and the amino acids encoded by the codons upstream from the pause . to this end, we use ribo-seq and mrna-seq data to generate normalized profiles of rd/mrna and extract peak positions in each normalized profile . these positions presumably represent the positions along the mrna where ribosomes have been significantly stalled . in the next step, we define for each peak the corresponding upstream stalling region  which is the sequence of amino acids encoded by the codons upstream from the peak. these amino acids occupy the ret while the codon at the peak position is being translated. specifically, since the length of peptide required to fill the tunnel is approximately  <dig> amino acids  <cit> , we have focused on the  <dig> amino acids before each peak .

the folding of the nascent peptide inside the exit tunnel  <cit>  and additional factors may alter the distance of a specific amino acid in the tunnel from the p-site during the translation process  <cit> ; thus, we have decided to use measures that are based on the enrichment of different amino acids in the usr instead of constraining the amino acids to appear at a specific position relative to the p-site.

the organism-specific stalling effect of each amino acid
at the first step, we determined the enrichment of each amino acid in the usrs based on the following test: we calculated the probability to observe the amino acid in the real usrs; then, we calculated the probability to observe the amino acid in randomized ribosome profiling with similar properties as the original data . finally, based on the real and randomized ribosomal profiling data, we calculated a p-value which determines the extent to which each amino acid tends to occupy the ret while a codon at a highly stalled position is being translated . for the bacteria, we performed one additional test  to show that the reported results cannot be explained by the fact that hybridization between the prokaryotic ribosomal rna and sequences that resemble the shine-dalgarno  sequence can also cause pauses  <cit> ; this phenomenon was controlled by filtering peaks that appear downstream from such sequences .

for each dataset, we classified each amino acid in one of three possible classifications based on the output of the randomized usr test: if the test turned out to be significant, the amino acid was classified as 'overrepresented', meaning that the analysis supports the hypothesis that this amino acid tends to appear upstream of peaks more than expected by the null model . if the test turned out to be significant in the opposite direction , the amino acid was classified as 'underrepresented'. in case the test turned out to be insignificant at the  <dig>  level, the amino acid was classified as 'not significant'. the classification of the  <dig> amino acids for each of the analyzed datasets appears in figure  <dig> 

as can be seen in figure  <dig>  our analysis suggests that the amino acids which significantly tend to occupy the exit tunnel when ribosomes stall, are organism -specific.

two remarkable stalling signals were produced by proline  and arginine  in s. cerevisiae, a finding that is well supported by the study of artieri and fraser  <cit> . in addition, our results suggest that proline has also a stalling effect in more organisms including s. pombe, d. melanogaster, h. sapiens , p. falciparum  and c. crescentus . another new prominent stalling effect was observed for lysine  in all datasets of c.elegnas.

the negatively charged glutamic acid  was not found to be significantly stalling in any eukaryotic dataset. moreover, it exhibited a significant signal of non-stalling in  <dig> of the  <dig> eukaryotes. aspartic acid , the second negatively charged amino acid exhibits a stalling signal in specific datasets from  <dig> organisms .

identifying the regions in the exit tunnel that tend to interact with the growing peptide
since the biochemical, geometrical and electrostatic properties of the tunnel varies along its length, specific regions in the tunnel may have higher potential to induce interactions with certain amino acids. in order to identify such regions, we calculated the probability for each amino acid to occupy a specific position along the length of the exit tunnel when the ribosome stalls . the resultant position-specific probabilities for each organism are presented in figure  <dig> 

as can be seen, for most of the amino acids, the positions with the most extreme probabilities tend to be concentrated in the part of the tunnel that is close to the p-site . this might suggest that in most cases this part of the tunnel tends to undergo more interactions with the translated amino acids than other positions in the tunnel. it can also be seen that proline, tends to specifically appear in the ribosomal p-site in  <dig> of the  <dig> organism, in line with previous studies  <cit> .

charged amino acids do not contribute to ribosome stalling in all organisms
earlier studies have suggested that charged amino acids tend to interact with the exit tunnel and thus, contribute to ribosomal stalling  <cit> . our analysis demonstrates that indeed in a few cases, the usrs tend to be enriched with charged amino acids . in order to understand whether the factor for the stalling is specifically the charge or other property of the amino acid, we tested the composite effect of charged amino acids on ribosome stalling. similarly to the tests described in figure  <dig>  the frequency of occurrence of the charged amino acids was compared between real and randomized usrs .

as can be seen in figure  <dig>  enrichment of positively charged amino acids among usrs was observed in  <dig> datasets from  <dig> eukaryotic organisms. enrichment of negatively charged amino acids among usrs was less common and was observed only in  <dig> datasets from  <dig> organisms. on the contrary, in  <dig> organisms the probability to observe negatively charged amino acid before peaks was significantly higher in random ; this may suggest that negatively charged amino acids can prevent the halting of the ribosome. we found no cases of greater enrichment in random for the positively charged amino acids.

discussion
our analysis identified nascent single amino acids that with high confidence contribute to ribosome stalling. the approach taken here to detect these amino acids is based on strict definitions and includes important controls on the analyzed genes such as control for amino acids bias and for possible experimental/protocol biases. in addition, we performed for the first time multi-organismal study of this topic which includes the analysis of both prokaryotes and eukaryotes.

the statistical tests performed here are based on the enrichment of amino acids upstream from the ribosomal p-site, thus, features such as mrna folding strength which tends to slow ribosomes down when it occurs downstream from the p-site cannot trivially explain our results. in addition, previous studies  have suggested that the effect of rare codons on ribosome stalling tends to be less extreme than the effect of the interaction between the ribosomal exit tunnel and the nascent chain; thus, we also believe that the reported results cannot be trivially explained by the use of rare/non-efficient codons .

it is important to mention that currently the biases arise from the ribosome profiling approach and the effect of different protocols are not completely understood  <cit> . much effort was spent here to consider these possible biases by 1) excluding from the analysis the first  <dig> codons which are known to be biased  <cit> ; 2) filter low-coverage profiles; 3) normalizing each profile by its mean coverage to account for coverage differences  <cit>  4) normalizing ribo-seq data by mrna-seq data to account for shared biases between the two fractions  <cit>  5) analyzing many datasets corresponding to a few different experimental conditions; 6) analyzing and comparing nine organisms ; 7) excluding pauses which might have been caused by sd sequences that hybridize with the prokaryotic ribosomal rna  <cit> . taken together, the reported results are based on a very conservative approach.

one of the major conclusions is related to the relation between positively charged amino acids and ribosome stalling. previous studies have suggested that in s. cerevisiae positively charged amino acids play a role in ribosome stalling. our analysis supports this conjecture in s. cerevisiae and also in specific datasets from d. melanogaster and p. falciparum. therefore, our study suggests that the relation between amino acids charge and ribosomal halting is not universal.

in addition, our analysis suggests that not only positively charged amino acids interact with the ret. specifically, we show that negatively charged amino acids tend to halt the ribosome via interactions with the exit tunnel in s. cerevisiae , d. melanogaster  and h. sapiens . since the ret is negatively charged  <cit>  it makes sense that it may undergo interactions with both positively and negatively charged amino acids. furthermore, interestingly our analysis suggests that in some cases the negatively charged amino acids may prevent stalling; this may be related to charge cancellation with possible positively charged amino acids that co-appear in proximity in the exit tunnel.

although we discuss the stalling effect of each amino acid on ribosome stalling, we do not claim that the stalling is manipulated by a specific mechanism. in fact, the explanation regarding the exact type of interaction between these amino acids and the ribosome and the reason they differ across the tree of life is an open question for future studies.

the reported results support the conjecture that the amino acids composition of the nascent peptide affects the ribosomal translation speed and might even cause ribosomal arrest. thus, this finding suggests a complex interaction between the protein co-translational folding, protein amino acid content and ribosomal elongation speed: the translated amino acids affect translation speed which may affect protein folding. thus, we believe that there is a co-evolution among these variables.

the fact that different stalling amino acids were reported for the different analyzed organisms may suggest that the biochemical properties of the exit tunnel vary along the tree of life and/or in different conditions  <cit> . this finding also provides important insights about heterologous gene expression: the expression of the same protein in different organisms may affect its translation rate simply due to the different nature of the interactions between the protein amino acids and the ribosomal exit tunnels in new organisms. this fact can explain why the topic of heterologous gene expression is often very challenging and why synonymous manipulation on the protein alone is not always sufficient for solving problems in this field.

finally, as a future research it would be interesting to generalize the results reported here by estimating the effect of short peptides and sets of amino acids  in the ret on ribosomal halting. for example, since stalling peptides interfere with translation, they are expected to be selected against to improve translational efficiency. thus, it would be interesting to examine the relation between the stalling effect of these peptides and their representation in the proteome. however, this mission is statistically challenging due to the exponential increase in the number of sets of amino acids compositions with more than one amino acid.

CONCLUSIONS
in this work, we performed a multiple ribosome profiling datasets analysis to understand the effect of different amino acid on ribosome stalling. the reported results support a few conjectures: various amino acids interact with the ribosomal exit tunnel; the nature of these interactions is organism/condition specific and the nascent translated peptide tends to have more interactions with the beginning of the exit tunnel .

