BACKGROUND
protein structure evaluation is a key process in protein structure prediction, in association with comparative modeling, fold recognition, structure refinement, and de novo folding. protein design technology also requires structure evaluation methods with sufficient capacity. many different types of potential energy functions have been developed and examined. the formulation of the functions can be roughly grouped under physical-based and knowledge-based approaches  <cit> . physical-based  potential energy functions are mainly used for the simulation of protein folding and dynamics  <cit> , and are also effective for protein design  <cit> . the knowledge-based approach to developing such an evaluation system is also effective and widely used, especially for protein structure prediction and protein design studies  <cit> . the classical approach is the extraction of "pseudo" mean potentials from the distribution of pairwise distances of known protein structures based on the boltzmann law  <cit> . a number of potential constructions and their successful applications have been reported  <cit> . recently, improved accuracy has been facilitated, accompanied with the accumulation of high-resolution protein structure information  <cit> .

the assessment of pairwise distances is implemented in many knowledge-based functions. several variations of atom types are utilized, such as cα and/or cβ atoms  <cit> , the center of mass of the side chain  <cit> , and heavy atom representation for a variety of atom types  <cit> . the functions of other structural features, including hydrogen bonds  <cit> , main-chain dihedral angles  <cit> , and solvation potentials  <cit> , were also reported. a number of functions have been formulated as a combination of the above functional components. the introduction of orientation-dependent components often improves the accuracy of the function. the hydrogen bond is a typical example, and the effectiveness of orientation-dependent potential was reported  <cit> . buchete et al. introduced another type of orientation-dependent potential, using the pairwise interaction of local reference states for respective amino acids  <cit> .

the structure discrimination capacity of the function is frequently estimated on the basis of the ability to correctly identify native or near-native structures from nonnative but plausible "decoy" structures. the "decoys 'r' us" database  <cit>  is a collection of decoy sets, and is commonly used to evaluate functions. the database consists of  <dig> decoy sets, generated by different methods. many other decoy sets, such as the "moulder"  <cit>  or the "rosetta"  <cit> , are also utilized to assess functions. it is commonly understood that the performance of structure evaluation functions tends to depend strongly on the intrinsic properties of decoy generation methods and/or other qualities of decoy sets  <cit> . thus, many reports have assessed functions using multiple decoy sets and/or effective statistical techniques.

the compatibility of the structure-discriminating function for reduced structural representations provides many beneficial effects. for example, the generation and manipulation of model structures can be performed without more complexed structure construction; however, it is difficult to reduce the required structural information without losing the accuracy of the scoring function.

in this article, we report the development of a knowledge-based protein structure-discrimination function. the complexity of the required input structure data for evaluation was limited to the main-chain trace with only three atom coordinates  per respective amino acid residue. to overcome the possible loss of accuracy of decoy discrimination, orientation-dependent potential between two cα-pseudo-cβ vectors was introduced. the parameter training and the subsequent performance test were carried out using the decoy sets from the decoys 'r' us database, in addition to the moulder and the rosetta decoy sets. high accuracy in native or near native structure recognition was observed in the test set. the level of discrimination ability was nearly comparable to other coarse-grained or all-atom-type functions. a detailed description of the development of the function and evaluation of the discrimination ability are provided.

RESULTS
function design
before explaining the results of function development and structure evaluation, the overall design of the function is briefly described. the details of the function formulation can be found in methods. the structure-discriminating function developed in this study consists of six pseudo-energy calculation components. each of the components evaluates the distinctive structural feature of a target protein. the pseudo-energy is calculated based on the boltzmann law  <cit> , with knowledge-based procedures using a precompiled database from a non-redundant set of known structures. the six structural features focused on are as follows: the cα pairwise distance , the relative orientation between two vectors of cα-pseudo-cβ , hydrogen bonding between a main-chain amino hydrogen and a carbonyl oxygen , the main-chain dihedral angles of the combination between ψ at a residue and φ at the next residue , the main-chain ω dihedral angle , and the number of surrounding cα atoms around a cα atom . each atom coordinate is treated separately by twenty amino acid types. the overall function is formulated with the weighted linear combination of the above six pseudo-energy components. as the function was designed to require three main chain atom coordinates  per residue as input data, we refer to the final form of the function as dfmac .

function training with decoy sets
the parameters associated with each component and the weights of respective components are not inherently clarified. in order to search for and determine the parameter values, we used decoy sets.

the parameter values and weights were determined on the basis of the discrimination ability of the native structure from its decoys. the outline of the tuning procedure is as follows:  the probable set of values of the parameters was scanned and determined using arbitrarily collected decoy sets.  the parameters were further tuned using the training decoy set by the cross-validation procedure.  the weights of the respective function components were finally determined using the entire training set. the performance of the tuned function was evaluated using the test decoy set, which was distinctive from the training set. details of the procedure are in methods.

to determine the initial values of the parameters for the following tuning, we used  <dig> decoy sets of 4state_reduced, fisa, fisa_casp <dig>  hg_structal, ig_structal, ig_structal_hires, and lmds from the decoys 'r' us database  <cit> . . thus, bias in the final performance test is considered to be limited.) parameters which decreased the average square values of cα rmsd of the best pseudo-energy structures for respective protein targets in the  <dig> decoy sets were successively selected.

short descriptions of scanned parameters of the components are shown in the order of scanning during the tuning process. the b and c of scan  <dig> are the constants for calculating nexp. sequence separation limit of scan  <dig> and  <dig> are the lower limit of separation between ith and jth residues that was incorporated into the respective databases. the four parameters of scan  <dig> are the range for averaging among adjacent database bins. the sequence separation limit of evaluation of scan  <dig> is the lower limit of separation applied for evaluation, not for database construction. the  <dig> count penalties of scan  <dig>   <dig>   <dig>   <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> are the energy penalty value when no count was recorded in the bin of the compiled database. the radius range of scan  <dig> is the radius of the sphere for surr component calculation. details of the respective parameters are in methods. the values determined by initial scanning before tuning, the list of scanned values during tuning, and the selected values with better cα rmsd are shown. multiple parameters in a single scan indicate the scanning of all combinations among the listed values.

using the probable parameters determined above as the initial parameter set, further tuning was then carried out. the  <dig> targets of the  <dig> decoy sets from the decoys 'r' us database, the moulder decoy set  <cit> , and the all-atom decoy set from rosetta@home , were separated into  <dig> and  <dig> targets and used for testing and training  the function, respectively.  tuning was performed by 10-fold cross validation using the training set. briefly, nine of ten parts of targets were used for parameter training, and then the function was validated with the remaining part of the targets. performance with a distinct parameter set was evaluated by the cα rmsd average of the top structures from  <dig> evaluations with different training and validation combinations. after successive tuning of the parameters, the new parameter set was obtained . finally, the weights of the respective function components were determined on a whole training decoy set with the new parameter set. some of the parameters and weights were changed from the initial values during the above procedure.

a summary of the performance of the tuned function on the training set is shown in table  <dig>  of  <dig> training targets,  <dig>  native and  <dig>  near-native  structures were correctly identified as the best energy structures. the averages of the z-score, correlation coefficient , and fraction enrichment  were sufficiently positive. the performance on decoy structures, without native structures, is critical, because no native or near-native structure is available prior to structure prediction experiments. thus, analyses were also carried out on decoys without native structures. discrimination performance of decoy structures were also positive as indicated by the average values of logpb <dig>  logpb <dig>  and the correlation coefficient  and fraction enrichment  among decoy structures.

summarized values are shown by the respective decoy sets. the numbers of total target proteins evaluated , and correct identification of the native  or near-native   structures are shown. the cα rmsd, z-score, c.c., f.e., rb <dig>  logpb <dig>  rb <dig>  logpb <dig>  c.c.decoy, f.e.decoy are the average of the respective scores of the target proteins evaluated. the definition of each index is described in methods.

decoy discrimination performance test
the performance of the tuned function cannot be evaluated on the training set itself, because versatility is not necessarily assured because of the possibility of over-learning; therefore, the structure discriminating ability of the tuned dfmac was tested on the above test set, containing different targets from the training set. the results are summarized in table  <dig>  and the details are shown in table  <dig>  a large number of native structures of the respective protein targets were correctly identified as the best-energy  structures . correct identification of the native structures was  <dig> out of  <dig> targets , and the identification of near-native structures  was  <dig> . the possible interpretations of failed identification of the remaining  <dig> targets are discussed below. the significantly positive average values of z-score, c.c., and f.e. indicate considerable overall performance. the averages of the respective decoy discrimination scores  were also significantly positive. although the average cα rmsd of top-energy structures was  <dig> , which was a little larger than the average on the training set, the percentage of correctly identified native or near-native structures was similar to the training set. additionally, other indexes were also similar between the training and test sets. thus, a certain degree of versatility was confirmed.

the performance scores for respective pdb ids of the target proteins and their average are shown by individual generation methods. the number of decoy structures and single native structure , the rank of the native structure relative to decoy structures based on the calculated pseudo-energy , and the rest of the scores, described in the methods, are shown.

as for the effectiveness for the individual decoy sets , nonuniformity was observed, as mentioned in the background. the best average z-score was obtained for lattice_ssfit , and the worst for hg_structal . the average z-score values were positive in all decoy sets. the best average c.c. and average f.e. were for moulder , and the worst were for lattice_ssfit . in figure  <dig>  three examples of energy distribution against cα rmsd are shown. the average c.c.decoy of 4state_reduced , hg_structal  and moulder  were relatively high. the worst average c.c.decoy  was obtained for lattice_ssfit. the average f.e.decoy of 4state_reduced  and moulder  were significant, and the worst was for ig_structal_hires .

comparison with other statistical potentials
we compared the performance of the dfmac with  <dig> different state-of-the-art statistical potentials of dope  <cit> , rapdf  <cit> , dfire  <cit> , and pc2ca  <cit> . to exclude possible training biases, the target structures for comparison were restricted to the entries listed in our test set. comparison of the rank of the native structures is shown in table  <dig>  dope, rapdf, and dfire-a use residue-specific heavy atom representations. dfire-b uses the main-chain and cβ atoms. pc2ca uses cα atoms and the side-chain center of mass. dfmac uses main-chain atoms  per residue, while evaluation was carried out with generated pseudo atoms of cβ, main-chain amino hydrogen  and carbonyl oxygen . in regard to the total number of correct identifications out of  <dig> total proteins, dope and dfire-a identified  <dig> native structures, followed by pc2ca , dfmac , rapdf , and dfire-b . from this viewpoint, the performance of dfmac was moderate. dope was also significant according to the averaged rank , followed by dfmac , dfire-b  and dfire-a . rapdf and pc2ca were similar . although the number and the types of targets applied here were limited and biased to a certain degree, dfmac provided at least one better performance indexes against many other functions.

the rank of the native structure identified by respective functions is shown for the targets listed. the results of dfire-a, dfire-b and rapdf were from the literature  <cit> . the results of dope were from  <cit> . the results of pc2ca were from  <cit> . the average rank  and the number of correctly identified native structures  in  <dig> targets are shown.

among the functions dealing with coarse-grained structure representation , pc2ca had the largest number of correct identifications. we thus carried out additional comparison of dfmac with pc2ca to identify the detailed relative performance of dfmac. the performance of dfmac on the targets of the test set, except for moulder and rosetta decoy sets, was compared with pc2ca results reported in the literature  <cit>  . forty  native structures were correctly identified by dfmac from test targets, while pc2ca identified fewer native structures of  <dig> . pc2ca and dfmac had distinctive performances for the respective decoy sets. for example, pc2ca showed better performances with all of the averaged indexes  for the lmds decoy set, while dfmac was better for 4state_reduced, ig_structal and ig_structal_hires. all of the summarized indexes were better with dfmac. although the number and kinds of decoy sets used here were limited in number and compilation of a variety of characteristics, the performance of dfmac could be at least roughly similar to one of the state-of-the-art functions, pc2ca.

only the results for targets listed in our test set are compiled and shown. the number of correctly identified native structures  out of the total targets  is shown by individual generation methods. the averages of cα rmsd, z-score, c.c., and f.e. for the respective decoy sets are also shown. in the "summary" column, the sum of total and correct counts, and the averages of cα rmsd, z-score, c.c., and f.e. over the respective protein targets, are shown. the results of pc2ca  <cit>  were used and the respective score averages were calculated.

contributions of the function components to performance
dfmac consists of six pseudo-energy calculating components. we evaluated the contribution of each component to the structure discrimination ability. the original dfmac function was compared to functions without any of the components on the test set . a significant increase in average cα rmsd without the dabg component, followed by the surr component, was observed, indicating the major contributions of the two components. the deficiency of discrimination ability without these two components was similarly observed for most of the other indexes, supporting the significance of these components. the influence of any one of  <dig> other components was smaller, and most indexes remained similar to the original function; however, the averaged rank of the native structures increased without omda, indicating a certain degree of contribution. when cross validation with tuned parameters was carried out on the training set without any one of the six components, no improvement in average cα rmsd was observed . this result also suggests the requirement of all six components. additionally, the inclusion of hbnd, ppda, and omda components is expected to have discriminative ability for a possible chain modeling application.

the measures are as described in table  <dig>  the average scores over the test set are shown by the omitted component.

discussion
a knowledge-based decoy discriminatory function  was successfully developed. the dfmac function requires the input data of the coordinates of only three main-chain atom types  per each amino-acid residue. the function is formalized as the combination of six pseudo-energy calculating components. each component evaluates a different feature of a protein. the native or near-native structures in various types of decoy sets were recognized with high accuracy. the discrimination ability was nearly comparable to other state-of-the-art coarse-grained or all-atom-type scoring functions.

one notable feature of the function is the simplicity of the required representation of the model structures, consisting of only three main-chain atom coordinates per residue. such input structural data is beneficial for structure modeling. because the side chain conformation need not be scanned, the main chain conformation scan could be facilitated. the scanning of different folds for evaluation of sequence-fold compatibility could also be facilitated. the construction of an all-atom model is possible by assigning side-chain coordinates to a reasonable main-chain model.

the considerable accuracy of the whole function was derived mainly from the dabg component. this component evaluates the relative orientation of the pseudo cβ atom against the associated cα atom between two residues. the recognition of acceptable orientation conversely restricts the degree of freedom of main-chain conformation and side-chain orientation. thus, more accurate fold recognition could be provided than a simple distant dependent function among, for example, cα atoms. the all-atom distant-dependent-type functions would implement similar or more accurate fold recognition, by judging acceptable main-chain/side-chain orientation with multiple distances per residue. although our representation of the structure is far simpler, an alternative structure recognition mechanism would be implemented, at least partially. the effectiveness of orientation-dependent potentials was also shown by buchete et al.  <cit> ; the interaction centers were defined for respective side chains and peptide bonds, and six parameters were used to express a single pairwise interaction. in our case, evaluation was performed with more limited conditions, using only a single point per residue and as few as  <dig> parameters per pairwise interaction between the points; however, the dabg component of dfmac was able to provide considerable discrimination capacity.

compared with the dabg and surr function components, the contributions of  <dig> other components were smaller; however, the dabg component does not evaluate local main-chain conformation within a 2-residue distance. the surr component also does not evaluate local main-chain conformation. thus, hbnd, ppda, and omda components were implemented to recognize the allowed conformation for possible model building experiments, although little pullback of discrimination was observed. additionally, since many decoy structures already had reasonable local conformations, significant contribution of these components might not be observed. improvement of these components to more harmless and versatile ones could help refine the overall function.

nine of the  <dig> test targets failed in native or near-native structure identification. the ids were 1bl <dig>  1dtk, 4pti, 1eh <dig>  2pna, 1bq <dig>  1elw, 1rnb, and 2ci <dig>  many plausible reasons for the failure of  native structure recognition can be found  <cit> . the distorted geometries of 1dtk could harm the scoring of the native structure  <cit> . the presence of other chains in the crystal structure is also a possible reason for the failure  <cit> . the difficulty of 1bl <dig>  which was bound to dna, might also have failed because of the complex structure. the 1rnb is also a complex of protein and small molecules. interaction with the metal ion might also make discrimination harder. the crystal structure of 1bq <dig> contains fe ion. nmr structures are often suggested to be difficult to identify  <cit> . the 1dtk, 1eh <dig>  and 2pna are nmr structures, and a difficulty might arise for that reason. the difficulty with smaller proteins is also frequently discussed. we tested the correlation of protein size and accuracy, and we also found a difficult tendency for smaller polypeptides . the failure of 1dtk , 4pti , 1bq <dig> , and 2ci <dig>  might have resulted. the possible origin of failure of the remaining 1elw top structure was not apparent.

the capacity of dfmac to recognize a correct fold among different folds, which are separated in the structure space, is not apparent. in the rosetta decoy set  <cit> , each target consists of  <dig> refined native structures and the  <dig> lowest scoring models out of ~ <dig>  de novo predicted models among a variety of conformations. evaluation of the test set with dfmac resulted in correct identification of  <dig> %  native and  <dig> %  near-native structures; therefore, the capacity for fold recognition which could support de novo structure prediction might be expected.

the high cα rmsd of the top structures was frequently observed for some decoy sets, such as lmds or rosetta. one of our next challenges is to improve our function to cover these "difficult" decoy sets. the introduction of a high-resolution structure dataset for database construction  <cit>  and the development of an additional all-atom-type evaluation system are possible solutions. additionally, since the function was mainly implemented with pairwise interactions, a frustrated structure, which consists of locally allowed pairwise interactions, might be positively evaluated. based on these considerations, further improvement of the function in decoy or fold discrimination ability is now in progress.

CONCLUSIONS
a novel knowledge-based decoy discrimination function, dfmac, was successfully constructed. despite the simple representation of protein structure models of input data, the discrimination ability was nearly comparable to other coarse-grained and all-atom-type functions. the orientation-dependent pseudo-energy calculating component , in addition to the component for the number of surrounding atoms , was found to be significantly effective for performance of the function. a variety of applications of the function to support activities such as structure prediction is expected.

