BACKGROUND
nematodes constitute one of the largest animal phyla, both in number of species and in number of individuals  <cit> . they occur in terrestrial, freshwater and marine environments as free-living species, as well as parasites of plants and animals in a high variety of ecosystems. a consistent evolutionary framework using molecular data was provided by blaxter et al.  <cit>  and expanded by holterman et al.  <cit> .

nematodes represent an attractive system for evolutionary developmental biology, given that some species can easily be cultured in the laboratory. one such system is the diplogastrid nematode pristionchus pacificus, which has been established as a laboratory model organism and satellite system to the rhabditid nematode caenorhabditis elegans  <cit> . molecular, genetic, and genomic toolkits have been developed and the p. pacificus genome has recently been sequenced  <cit> . a detailed genetic comparison of sex determination, vulva and gonad development reveals how developmental processes changed between p. pacificus and c. elegans  <cit> . such studies can elucidate the mechanisms by which developmental novelty is generated  <cit> .

p. pacificus and c. elegans do not only differ in their development but also in their ecology. the ecological niche occupied by pristionchus shows a close association to beetles, preferentially to members of the scarabaeidae, but also to the colorado potato beetle, a chrysomelid  <cit> . important factors for host recognition appear to be provided by chemical cues emanated from the beetles  <cit> . for example, p. pacificus was frequently obtained from the oriental beetle exomala orientalis in japan and the united states and is the only pristionchus species that is attracted to the oriental beetle sex pheromone -7-tetradecen-2-one in olfactory studies  <cit> .

evolutionary and comparative studies, like the ones mentioned above, require a robust phylogeny. a phylogenetic tree of the genus pristionchus served as a first step in providing such a framework  <cit> . however, a full phylogenetic consideration has to involve higher taxa and has to place the genus pristionchus into i) the family of the diplogastridae and ii) more generally, clade v nematodes. while kiontke et al.  <cit>  convincingly placed the diplogastridae as a monophyletic clade within the family of the rhabditidae, few attempts have been made to provide a molecular phylogeny of the diplogastridae family. ultimately, such studies are necessary to elucidate macroevolutionary traits and patterns  for both, the comparison of taxa within the diplogastridae  and the comparison of pristionchus to c. elegans.

based on morphological characters, the diplogastridae have been revised and reclassified into  <dig> genera by sudhaus and fürst von lieven  <cit> . many of the diplogastrid genera are fully associated with beetles, i.e. they are carried by beetles or live in habitats closely linked to beetle activity. in some other genera, a single species shows a nematode-beetle association. molecular phylogenies involving the deeper level phylogeny of the diplogastridae are limited. to our knowledge, only two attempts have been made by holterman et al. and kiontke et al., who placed four diplogastrid taxa as a monophyletic clade within the family rhabditidae  <cit> .

in order to understand the ecosystems, in which pristionchus evolved and to provide a framework for behavioural and comparative genomics studies we set out to reconstruct robust phylogenetic relationships of beetle-associated diplogastrids. we collected molecular data from  <dig> ribosomal protein genes representing  <dig> diplogastrid genera. in total, we used  <dig> parsimony-informative characters for phylogenetic analyses. our data identify four distinct subclades within the diplogastridae. furthermore, our dataset suggests that the observed patterns of beetle associations is driven by host switching rather than nematode - beetle coevolution.

RESULTS
collection of nematodes
seventeen nematode taxa, representing  <dig> diplogastrid genera, plus one outgroup, rhabditoides inermis, were selected according to whether some, or all of their members, showed direct association with beetles or shared the same habitat   <cit> . whenever possible, established and characterized nematode lines were chosen. for the remaining taxa, host beetles were collected in their respective habitat and nematodes carried by them were isolated as described by herrmann et al.  <cit> . emerging nematodes were assigned to genus level by nomarski microscopy following the keys given by andràssy and sudhaus and fürst von lieven  <cit> . where possible, established strains were kept as growing cultures in the laboratory and as permanent frozen stocks.

1nematodes without strain designation could not be kept in culture.

2lab abbreviations: rs, ralf j. sommer, tübingen; sb, walter sudhaus, berlin; ps, paul sternberg, pasadena.

identification and estimation of relationship of diplogastrid genera by ssu analysis
to obtain a first set of molecular phylogenetic characters a  <dig> kb-fragment of the nuclear ssu was amplified and  <dig>  kb of the sequence at the 5' end was determined as described in mayer et al.  <cit> . the sequences of all diplogastrid samples were aligned together with diplogastrid nuclear ssu sequences from the genbank database  <cit> . rhabditoides inermis served as outgroup. a maximum likelihood tree was constructed using the phylogeny.fr server  <cit> . all species within a genus, i. e. all pristionchus species and both koerneria species, were placed in distinct clusters separated from other genera by long branches . however, internal nodes connecting different genera received only moderate to low support values. thus an extended dataset is required to better resolve the phylogeny. to avoid inferring the genus tree from a single, although in itself possibly robust, gene tree we opted to acquire a dataset of ribosomal protein gene-derived ests representing major parts of the genome.

phylogenetic analyses
single ml gene trees for the  <dig> ribosomal protein genes and the ssu segment were obtained and a consensus tree was generated . internal node topologies in the derived consensus tree were recovered at a low percentage only due to incongruent single gene trees. however, major clades could be distinguished as has already been indicated in the initial ssu-based tree. three major clades were identified. the genera diplogasteroides, pseudodiplogasteroides, diplogastrellus, and rhabditidoides clustered in one group; the second group consisted of mononchoides, neodiplogaster, and tylopharynx and the third group encompassed diplogasteriana, acrostichus, and micoletzkya. individual species of a genus always grouped together. a conspicuous finding in the phylogenetic tree is that both members of the genus koerneria adopted a basal position to the other diplogastrids .

for a combined analysis of all sequenced genes, the single gene alignments of the ribosomal protein and the ssu genes were concatenated to yield a final dataset of  <dig> aligned sequences of  <dig> bp in length. for the analyses,  <dig> sites at gapped positions were excluded. of the remaining  <dig> sites,  <dig> were constant,  <dig> were variable but parsimony-uninformative, and  <dig> were parsimony informative.

mp, nj and ml trees were reconstructed as described  <cit> . figure  <dig> displays the resulting trees rooted by rhabditoides inermis as outgroup. again, conspicuious clustering of  the genera diplogasteroides, pseudodiplogasteroides, diplogastrellus, and rhabditidoides, of  the genera mononchoides, neodiplogaster, and tylopharynx, and of  diplogasteriana and acrostichus was observed. in the nj tree , the first clade, though, also includes oigolaimella. the topological arrangement of these clusters, however, received low statistical support. the position of four genera remained undetermined. these were pristionchus, micoletzkya, oigolaimella, and myctolaimus.

bayesian inference
additional support for the deduced phylogenetic relationship was obtained by bayesian inference. the complete concatenated dataset was evaluated by the mrbayes  <dig> . <dig> software, applying the gtr+i+g substitution model , and by its modification as in the best software, which estimates the joint posterior distribution of gene trees and species   <cit> . both trees showed congruent topologies. strong support by posterior probability values of  <dig>  was given to the clades defined by the mp, nj, and ml procedures. while the phylogenetic position of myctolaimus and oigolaimella still remained elusive in those analyses, bayesian inference clustered the remaining four taxa pristionchus, micoletzkya and diplogasteriana/acrostichus. the posterior probability values, however, were only significant for the diplogasteriana/acrostichus pair. pristionchus appears to be most divergent, next to micoletzkya. acrostichus and diplogasteriana consistently group with high support values in all reconstructed trees. the early divergence of the genus koerneria from other diplogastrids was highly supported. the lack of topological resolution and short branch lengths at internal nodes observed in all tree reconstruction algorithms points to an inherent property of this  datasets, which is caused by rapid ancestral radiations and incomplete assortment of ancestral polymorphisms.

discussion
phylogenetic species tree of the diplogastridae
here we present a first comprehensive molecular phylogeny of beetle-associated diplogastrid nematodes providing a framework for the investigation of nematode-beetle interactions and the interplay of ecological factors and nematode evolution. the diplogastridae include more than  <dig> species of free-living or beetle-associated nematodes, which are grouped in  <dig> genera  <cit> . they are a monophyletic clade placed within the paraphyletic rhabditids  <cit> . the sister group to the diplogastrids is formed by the eurhabditids, which encompass caenorhabditis, oscheius and others  <cit> .

for the purpose of assessing phylogenetic relationships, we choose representative species of the diplogastrid genera for molecular analyses. phylogenetic species trees can be derived from single gene trees if speciation events are well separated in time. in general, however, this premise cannot be assumed and true species trees may differ from gene trees  <cit> . thus, to expand the dataset, multiple genes are needed for a robust phylogenetic reconstruction. phylogenetic species trees from multi-gene data can be inferred in two different ways. they can either be constructed from the consensus of separately generated gene trees or from an alignment of concatenated multiple gene sequences is used to infer the species tree. the latter was shown to perform better in yielding more accurate trees in a test situation  <cit> . here, we applied both procedures, but chose to focus on the concatenation approach since the phylogenetic information content of the single gene sequences was limited.

a molecular phylogeny of beetle-associated diplogastrid nematodes
although the topologies of the phylogenetic trees produced by the different algorithms were not always congruent, four fundamental features can be extracted . firstly, species of the same genus always clustered together, as shown by the genera pristionchus, koerneria, and diplogasteroides, for which two geographically distinct species each were included in the analysis. the two divergent species of koerneria displayed the highest intra-genus distance, whereas pristionchus and diplogasteroides species from europe and north america or japan, respectively, grouped together more closely. this feature is consistent with the morphological separation of the two subclades within koerneria, as already discussed by fürst von lieven  <cit> . secondly, terminal branches were exceedingly long while branches separating internal nodes with low support values were very short or collapsed completely. although most beetle-associated diplogastrid genera were represented in the analyses, increased taxon sampling including non-beetle associated diplogastrids, might resolve some of those internal nodes. overall, however, this indicates rapid initial diversification and speciation events separated by short divergence times in relation to the persistence of the extant taxa. genealogies of individual genes may contribute to misleading species tree topologies if polymorphisms in ancestral populations of high effective population sizes are incompletely sorted during speciation events in close succession  <cit> . the long persistence of the extant genera resulted in accumulation of multiple substitutions in terminal branches. terminal taxa, therefore, can be expected to be rich in homoplasic characters due to parallel sequence evolution or evolutionary convergence. the resulting long-branch attraction effects interfere with the clear resolution of internal nodes. thirdly, several monophyletic clades with high support from bootstrapping or from posterior probabilities became evident from the comparison of various trees. the first clade encompassed diplogasteroides with pseudodiplogasteroides as its putative sister genus, diplogastrellus, and rhabditidoides. the second clade included mononchoides, neodiplogaster and tylopharynx. the third group combined acrostichus and diplogasteriana. the inclusion of micoletzkya and pristionchus in this group occurs with posterior probabilities of ≥  <dig>  and thus remains unresolved. the taxa myctolaimus and oigolaimella could not be linked firmly to any of the above clades. fourthly, the genus koerneria, which was in close relationship to pristionchus in previous studies, assumes a basal position to all diplogastrid nematodes in this molecular analysis  <cit> . this topology is also indicated in the molecular phylogeny of kiontke et al.  <cit> .

comparison of molecular and morphological phylogenies
there is a fairly good agreement between the phylogeny of diplogastridae as proposed by sudhaus and fürst von lieven based on apomorphic morphological characters and the molecular phylogeny presented here  <cit> . this example strongly supports the fact that morphological and molecular phylogenies should - under ideal conditions - result in similar findings. if morphological characters are well chosen and molecular characters are informative and substantial, homoplasy should be reduced, thus resulting in similar phylogenies.

the only major discrepancy in the case of the diplogastridae is the genus diverging first from the stem species of diplogastridae . while in the morphological tree this position is taken by pseudodiplogasteroides, in the molecular tree it is occupied by koerneria. as a consequence, the molecular analysis places pseudodiplogasteroides as the sister taxon to diplogasteroides. the same well-supported clade also unexpectedly harbours the genus diplogastrellus, which appears to be closer to acrostichus in a yet unresolved relationship following sudhaus and fürst von lieven  <cit> . the latter, on the other hand, is the sister taxon to diplogasteriana in the molecular tree.

although positioned distinctively on the molecular phylogenetic tree, pristionchus and koerneria share a number of morphological characters, such as a dimorphism in the buccal cavity, the shape and arrangement of denticles, overall body shape, and a prominent ripping of the cuticle  <cit> . these features could have evolved in two different ways. first, the shared characters may have been present in the stem species followed by subsequent loss in genera other than pristionchus and koerneria. this scenario is, however, unlikely since multiple independent character losses were required. the second, more likely possibility assumes parallel or convergent evolution. given the long terminal branches separating the genera, independent convergent gain of advantageous characters is easily conceivable.

nematode-beetle associations: coevolution or host switching?
is there a correlation between the rapid ancestral diversification of the diplogastrid lineages and their subsequent evolution with the phylogeny of their coleopteran hosts? the beetles appeared around  <dig> million years ago  followed by radiations of suborders  <cit> . the minimum age of the scarabaeoidea and the chrysomeloidea, which are major hosts for diplogastridae, were both estimated to  <dig> mya, whereas their last common ancestor lived more than  <dig> mya  <cit> . dieterich et al. estimated the divergence of the pristionchus pacificus from the eurhabditid genus caenorhabditis to a time range of 280- <dig> mya  <cit> . the ancestral radiations of diplogastridae thus occurred in a time period that overlaps with the diversification of beetles into major lineages. it is therefore conceivable that the initial radiation of the coleoptera had influence on the diversification of diplogastrids by providing new ecological niches, to which the nematodes were adapting. if these interactions persisted for a long time, coevolution of the nematodes with the beetles should have shaped the evolutionary pattern of the diplogastrids and its traces should be detectable in phylogenetic tree topologies. inspecting the monophyletic diplogastrid clades, such as mononchoides, tylopharynx, and neodiplogaster for these features will provide clues to resolve this issue. mononchoides is associated with scarab beetles, curculionids, and silphidae, tylopharynx is associated with scarabs, and neodiplogaster with curculionid, buprestid and cerambycid beetles. likewise, in a second monophyletic group, diplogasteroides and diplogastrellus occur on curculionids and cerambycids, pseudodiplogasteroides on cerambycids, and rhabditidoides on scarabaeidae. following the comprehensive beetle phylogeny provided by hunt et al. the cucujiformia, which encompass cerambycid, and chrysomelid beetles, originated  <dig> mya, well separated from scarabaeoidea  <cit> . thus, members of the same monophyletic diplogastrid clade or even the same genus are associated with beetles of ancient divergence, refuting the possibility of a long-term coevolutionary relationship. together, these data support host switching rather than coevolution as mechanism to explain the observed patterns of diplogastrid - beetle associations.

a case of recent host switching of a european species to an american host is given by pristionchus uniformis  <cit> . pristionchus dauer larvae are generally found on scarab beetles but pristionchus uniformis also infests at high frequencies the colorado potato beetle, a chrysomelid beetle, both in europe and in north america  <cit> . the nematode populations on the two hosts species are genetically undistinguishable indicating recent and repeating events of host changes. the evolution and population genetics are currently under investigation .

phylogeny: a further mark for genome evolution
sequencing the whole genome of an organism results in data that can only be interpreted in the context of a robust phylogenetic framework, including other related taxa. the genome of p. pacificus has recently been sequenced and the analysis of its genetic composition identified homologous nematode-specific genes, but also a remarkable number of features not shared with c. elegans or other available nematode genomes  <cit> . firstly, the p. pacificus genome contains  <dig>  predicted protein-coding genes, a substantial amount of which does not show sequence similarities to other metazoan genes. secondly, the p. pacificus genome contains a massive expansion of genes predicted to be involved in the detoxification of xenobiotics, such as cytochrome p <dig> enzymes and abc transporters. thirdly, a conspicuous set of genes encoding cellulases or glycosylhydrolases is apparent, which has no counterpart in other nematodes but is most similar to corresponding genes in dictyostelium or other microbes. the acquisition of these and several other genes could only be explained by horizontal gene transfer. with phylogenetic information on the taxa involved, as presented here for subclades of the diplogastridae the analyses of horizontal gene transfer events in diplogastrid genomie evolution can be studied in greater detail in the future.

CONCLUSIONS
molecular data from  <dig> diplogastrid beetle-associated genera were collected and used to obtain some robust phylogenetic relationships. the following conclusions can be drawn. firstly, whereas terminal branches of the resulting phylogenetic tree are long, indicating long-term accumulation of substitutions, internal branches, separating four robust clades are short. these are  diplogasteroides, pseudodiplogasteroides, diplogastrellus, and rhabditidoides,  mononchoides, neodiplogaster, and tylopharynx,  acrostichus and diplogasteriana, and  both koerneria subclades. internal nodes could not be resolved with high support, indicating ancient rapid radiation and incomplete gene lineage sorting. secondly, although the diplogastridae-beetle association appears to be ancient, no long-term coevolution is evident. instead, there are indications of frequent host-switching of diplogastrid nematodes. thirdly, the present phylogeny of the diplogastridae provides a framework for further investigations of diplogastrid-beetle associations and the ecological influences shaping their evolution. fourthly, this study is of important interest for a deeper search into the origins of observed horizontal-gene transfer events in nematodes and for the phylogenetic interpretation of diplogastrid genome evolution.

