BACKGROUND
over many decades, a wide variety of in vitro and in vivo screens have been used to identify small molecules with useful activities, such as antibiotics and enzyme inhibitors. however, there is still a need for simple and widely applicable assay systems for characterizing the activity of enzymes against specific small molecules that avoid the necessity of enzyme purification or high level expression. in the work described here, we have developed an in vivo luminescence-based reporter system that can be used to detect and characterize enzymatic activities against the antibiotic, tetracycline . in the future, systems designed on the same principle could be used to investigate enzymes active against a variety of other small molecules.

tc and its derivatives are highly effective broad specificity antibiotics that have been widely used for many decades  <cit> . the ubiquitous utilization of tetracyclines has resulted in the emergence of numerous resistance mechanisms mediated by a variety of proteins including efflux pumps, drug modifying enzymes, and ribosome protection factors  <cit> . the significant negative clinical impact of resistance to tetracyclines has led to intensive efforts to elucidate the mechanisms of this resistance and to develop new tc derivatives that will overcome resistance mechanisms. to this end, much research has focused on enzymes capable of modifying tetracycline derivatives, either as a resistance mechanism or as a step in the tetracycline synthesis process  <cit> . it is hoped that characterization of these enzymes will lead to approaches for combating resistance and creating more potent tetracycline derivatives. although in vitro spectroscopic methods are available to assess some enzymatic modifications of tetracyclines, in vivo assays of these enzymes are quite complicated if the enzyme activity does not confer resistance to the growth inhibitory effect of the antibiotic  <cit> . to aid in characterizing enzymes that modify tetracyclines and in identifying novel enzymes active against tetracyclines, a simple in vivo method to detect these activities would be very useful.

in the work presented here, we describe a system for characterizing tetracycline-modifying enzymes that takes advantage of the tetracycline repressor . many of the genes conferring resistance to tetracyclines are regulated by tetr, which was first isolated and characterized more that  <dig> years ago  <cit> . tetr is homodimeric with each monomer composed of an n-terminal dna-binding domain, and a c-terminal domain that mediates dimerization and binds to tetracyclines  <cit> . in the typical tetr-regulated regulon, tetr binds to two dna operator sites, thereby repressing transcription of its own gene as well as the divergently transcribed teta gene, which encodes an exporter of tetracyclines . binding of tetracyclines to the c-terminal domain of tetr leads to a conformational change in the dna-binding domains, which causes them to lose affinity for dna, relieving repression of the tetr and teta genes. tetr is the founding member of a huge family of transcriptional regulators, which we refer to as the tetr family of transcriptional regulators . tfrs constitute the third most frequently occurring transcriptional regulator family found in bacteria  <cit>  with more than  <dig>  proteins in the non-redundant protein database annotated as members of this group. tfrs have been identified that control the expression of genes conferring resistance to most known antibiotics including tetracycline, chloramphenicol, erythromycin, ampicillin, and streptomycin  <cit> . as well, tfrs are involved in the regulation of many aspects of bacterial physiology in response to various small molecule inducers, including quorum sensing, biofilm formation, morphological differentiation and antibiotic production. all characterized tfrs are homodimers with the same domain structure and general fold as tetr, and most of them function in a manner similar to tetr, mediating transcriptional repression that is relieved only in the presence of their specific small molecule ligand. tfr sequences in bacterial genomes can be reliably identified due to the high level of sequence conservation in their n-terminal dna-binding domains  <cit> ; however, their ligand-binding domains display tremendous diversity commensurate with the broad range of ligands recognized by tfrs.

in a previous study, we designed a tetr-based biosensor that produced luminescence upon addition of tetracycline derivatives  <cit> . the goals of the work described here were to improve the sensitivity of this system and to then exploit it to detect the activities of tetracycline modifying enzymes. to this end, a tetr regulated transcriptional promoter was cloned upstream of the lux operon in such a way that luminescence was elicited at very low concentrations of tc. we then demonstrated that introduction of the tc-modifying enzyme, tetx  <cit> , into this system led to a significant reduction in luminescence due to the activity of the enzyme, which degrades the inducer of tetr. this reporter system could be modified to both identify ligands for tfrs of unknown function, and to detect enzymes active against these ligands. since there are currently at least  <dig> known ligands for tfrs  <cit> , the assay principle described here is applicable to the characterization of a considerable number enzymes active against small molecules.

RESULTS
construction of a sensitive luminescence-based system for the detection of inducing ligands for members of the tetr family of repressors
we previously constructed a lux-based biosensor system to investigate the binding of tetr to its dna binding site , and to measure transcriptional induction elicited by tetracycline  and its derivatives  <cit> . for the work described here, we sought to create a more sensitive tc-responsive system. we placed the luxcdabe gene cluster under the control of a tetr-repressible promoter on a low copy number psc101-derived plasmid  <cit> . this plasmid, named pyrteto, mediated production of a high level of luminescence in e. coli , while a plasmid containing the lux genes with no promoter  produced no detectable luminescence . tetr was then cloned into the same plasmid under the control of the arabinose-inducible pbad promoter to produce pyrtetor . expression of tetr in pyrtetor led to repression of luminescence  caused by the binding of tetr to the teto site in the promoter of the lux genes. repression occurred even in the absence of arabinose, indicating that the small amount of tetr expression from the pbad promoter in the absence of arabinose was sufficient for repression of lux expression, even though tetr expression could not be detected by western blot under these conditions. addition of arabinose only led to a small reduction in luminescence .

to demonstrate the utility of our system for detecting tc and its derivatives, luminescence production from pyrtetor was measured in the presence of varying concentrations of these antibiotics. in these experiments the degree of induction is expressed as an induction ratio, the luminescence generated from pyrtetor divided by that from pyrteto . significant luminescence production was observed at tc concentrations as low as  <dig> ng/ml, which is far below its minimum inhibitory concentration  in e. coli of  <dig> ng/ml   <cit> . anhydrotetracycline , a stronger inducer of tetr  <cit> , also displayed a greater ability to induce tetr in this assay, relieving repression of the lux operon at a concentration of only  <dig>  ng/ml. the addition of  <dig> % arabinose to the system, which greatly increases the intracellular concentration of tetr , led to a requirement for much higher concentrations of tc and atc, as well as the tc analogs doxycycline  and chlorotetracycline , to relieve lux repression . for example, full induction with atc under these conditions required a concentration of  <dig> ng/ml, indicating that minimizing the cellular concentration of tetr increases the sensitivity of the reporter system. concentrations of tc high enough to induce luminescence under conditions of increased tetr expression caused significant inhibition of cell growth . together, these data demonstrate that the pyrtetor system can detect very low concentrations of tc and its derivatives. the reporter system is sensitive to the concentration and chemical properties of inducer molecules, and to the intracellular concentration of tetr.

the detection of tc-modifying enzymatic activity in vivo using the pyrtetor luminescence system
to test the ability of the pyrtetor system for in vivo detection of enzymatic activity against tc, we investigated the tetx enzyme. tetx is an fad-dependent monooxygenase from bacteroides fragilis that has been shown to hydroxylate tc creating an unstable compound that undergoes rapid decomposition  <cit> . to measure the effect of tetx when expressed in pyrtetor-containing cells, we introduced a separate plasmid into these cells that expressed this enzyme . for comparison, we also tested pyrtetor-containing cells co-transformed with a plasmid expressing the d311a mutant of tetx , which is substituted at a highly conserved residue in the fad-binding site and was expected to possess no enzymatic activity . we verified that the pettetx construct produced active tetx and that the d311a mutant was reduced in activity using an in vitro fluorescence based assay for tetx activity . as shown in figure 3a, we measured the luminescence generated by pettetx- and pettetxd-containing cells at varying concentrations of atc, and found that considerably less light was emitted by cells containing the plasmid expressing the wt version of tetx. for example, pettetx-bearing cells required a concentration of ~ <dig> ng/ml atc to generate a level of luminescence similar to that emitted from pettetxd-containing cells at an atc concentration of only  <dig> ng/ml. we surmised that the reduction in luminescence in pettetx-containing cells was the result of tetx-mediated catalysis of atc into an unstable product and/or a product that could no longer bind tetr. thus, the concentration of atc available within the cells to bind tetr was decreased, which led to a greater degree of transcriptional repression of the lux genes by tetr . we found that a similarly large reduction of luminescence was elicited by pettetx when the assay was done under conditions of high tetr expression  even though induction did not occur until a much higher concentration of atc was added . assays performed with dox and cltc indicated that, as expected  <cit> , tetx was also active against these tc derivatives since reduced luminescence was observed in pettetx-containing cells treated with these compounds . it should be noted that the expression levels of wt tetx and tetx-d311a were similar , indicating that the luminescence differences observed above were due to differences in the activity of these enzymes. similar reductions in luminescence were observed when cells were treated with tc .

quantitative analysis of the in vivo tetx assay
our success in detecting the enzymatic activity of tetx in a cell based assay prompted us to determine whether the behavior observed in our assays could be accounted for by the known kinetic parameters of the tetx enzyme. to this end we formulated a series of equations to describe the tetx enzymatic activity within the cell based system in terms that were as simple as possible . the objective of our analysis was to account for the difference between the dose-response curves generated in the presence of tetx as compared to tetxd311a, which we showed above is an inactive enzyme. our equations were predicated on the assumption that once tetracycline is added, the media becomes an infinite drug reservoir. in the absence of tetx, drug molecules enter cells from the media driven by diffusion and rapidly reach an effective steady state concentration, which is referred to as . with tetx present inside the cell, the intracellular concentration of drug is simultaneously increased by the process of diffusion and decreased by the enzymatic activity of tetx. the intracellular drug concentration reaches equilibrium only when the rate of inward diffusion is matched by the rate of enzymatic modification. thus, the final effective concentration of drug within these cells  is a function not only of the extracellular concentration of drug , but also the rate of drug diffusion, the enzymatic activity of tetx, and the time taken after drug addition for the intracellular drug concentration to reach equilibrium .

in our data fitting, the enzymatic activity of tetx on dox and cltc was modeled by entering the known in vitro km and kcat values of tetx for these compounds as fixed parameters  <cit> . the only free parameter in the fitting process was an arbitrary diffusion constant, k that accounted for the diffusion properties of tc derivatives. although parameters for the diffusion of tc into e. coli have been experimentally determined  <cit> , the value of k for our fitting could not be determined a priori because it is not known how the diffusional properties of tc derivatives would change upon modification by tetx or how quickly the modified tc derivatives might degrade within the cell. in fitting the data from each experiment, the data generated for tetxd311a was used as a reference to predict how much luminescence would be generated at a given effective concentration of drug in the absence of enzyme. it can be seen in table  <dig> that we were able to fit the dox and cltc data effectively using the known kinetic parameters of tetx . to fit the curves generated using atc, for which km and kcat values for tetx were not known, we allowed km and kcat to also be free parameters. notably, we were still able to obtain good fits to our data and the parameters returned were similar to those in the other fits. these data suggest that tetx acts on atc with similar kinetic parameters as on dox and cltc. the ability to obtain fits to different experiments with consistent enzyme parameter values supports our conclusion that the behavior of this system is the result of the enzymatic activity of tetx against tc derivatives. the use of the data generated from the pettetxd-containing cells as the reference curve requires that the time taken after drug addition for the intracellular drug concentration to reach equilibrium in pettetx-containing cells  is short enough to not affect luminescence accumulation. with the enzyme parameters from the above data fitting, we were also able to estimate t . as shown in table  <dig>  t was less than  <dig> min in all experiments, which is much shorter than the time at which luminescence was measured .

a fixed parameters were shown in regular fonts and values returned from fitting were shown in bold italic fonts

CONCLUSIONS
in the work described here we have developed a sensitive luminescence-based in vivo assay to detect enzymatic activity against tetracyclines. our assay system is based on the ability of these compounds to induce tetr regulated transcription and the diminution of this induction that occurs when a tc modifying enzyme activity is present within the cell. an important aspect of this system is that it not only detects enzyme activity, but also allows quantitation of this activity. the only requirement is that the tc derivative is modified in a way that lowers its affinity for tetr. of course, our system will fail to detect an enzyme activity if the modification produced does not change the affinity of the tc derivative for tetr. however, due to the sensitivity of our assay system and the use of titrations to detect activity, even a small change in affinity would be detected. in addition, there are a number of tetr mutants with varying reactivities towards different tc derivatives  <cit>  that could be utilized in our assay system to maximize the number of tc modifications that could be detected. finally, there are other tetr-like repressors that are induced by tc derivatives and at least one of these, ttgr of pseudomonas putida  <cit> , binds to tc by a completely different mechanism compared to tetr. by using these different repressors, a wide range of modifications of tetracyclines would likely be detectable. since there is great interest in the identification of enzymes that may modify tetracyclines to produce more potent antibiotics  <cit> , our assay could be useful as a rapid screen to determine the level of activity of a given enzyme against a range of tetracyclines. because of the wide range of ligands bound by tfrs  <cit> , the assay system described here could be adapted to test for enzymatic activities against a huge variety of antibiotics and other small molecules. supporting the general utility of our system, we have constructed reporters analogous to pyrtetor for  <dig> diverse tfrs, and all of these tfrs are able to repress transcription of the lux operon when expressed in e. coli . a reporter similar to the one described here was used to discover new ligands for the actr repressor of s. coelicolor  <cit> . future studies will determine whether enzyme activities for a variety of small molecules will be detectable using these systems. it should be noted that the same principles used to design this tetr-based system could be used for any of the other families of transcriptional regulators that are induced by small molecules.

in general, our tetr-based system or other systems designed in a similar manner present many advantages for investigation of enzymes with activities against small molecules. first, we are able to detect enzyme activity using only nanogram quantities of compound. this feature could be critical in screening for activities against compounds that are available only in small quantities as in the case of compound libraries used for high-throughput screening. the ability to modulate the expression level of the repressor in our system by addition of varying concentrations of arabinose allows the intracellular repressor concentration to be adjusted to a level at which there is just enough present to repress transcription. consequently, addition of only a small amount of inducer is required for derepression of the system. a second advantage of our system is that it provides the potential to investigate enzymatic activities without having to purify the enzymes or know their co-factor requirements. our assay system would be equally capable of measuring the activity of difficult to purify membrane proteins, such as drug efflux pumps. tetr-based reporter systems have been shown to function in a wide range of cell types including mammalian cells  <cit> , thus, enzymatic assays operating by the same principle as ours could be adapted to many cell types. a final advantage of our system is that it could be used to screen for enzymes with activity against a given compound of interest. for this purpose, a library of plasmids expressing candidate enzymes would be transformed into a strain containing a pyr-derivative that responded to the compound of interest. individual colonies could then be screened in a 96-well format for reduced luminescence resulting from expression of an enzyme that modified the tfr-binding molecule. in this way, it will be possible to systematically identify novel enzymes with activities against many important small molecules.

