BACKGROUND
rhodococci are widely spread in many habitats such as soil, fresh water, seawater, and activated sludge wastewater treatment systems . their versatile metabolic activities make them good candidates for environmental bioremediation, and for a number of industrial applications including bio-desulfurization of fossil fuels , production of bio-surfactants  <cit> , and production of acrylic acid  <cit> , just to name a few. specifically, rhodococcus jostii rha <dig>  was isolated from lindane-contaminated soil and is best known for its superior ability to biodegrade polychlorinated biphenyls   <cit> . the genome of rha <dig> has been completely sequenced and annotated  <cit> . it holds one of the largest bacterial genomes sequenced to date with  <dig>  mbp and  <dig>  predicted open reading frames .

to face rapidly changing environmental conditions in its natural habitat, the genome of r. jostii rha <dig> also contains many genes for the metabolism of various storage compounds including polyphosphate , glycogen, wax esters , triacylglycerols , and polyhydroxyalkanoates   <cit> . it was experimentally observed that, under nitrogen-limited  condition on different substrates, r. jostii rha <dig> accumulates these various storage compounds at the same time, but in different proportions  <cit> . it remains unclear how to predict the carbon fluxes to the various storage compounds. figure  <dig> shows simplified possible metabolic pathways for synthesis of these storage compounds from central metabolites. glycogen being a polymer of glucose is synthesized from a metabolite near the beginning of the glycolysis pathway. pha  ) and tag, are derived from acetyl-coa, the metabolic point of entry of acetate. differences in the length of the pathways between substrate  and the storage compound synthesized may suggest differences between metabolic optimality for the different compounds with respect to the mixture of storage compounds accumulated. however, other optimality principles can also be used for the predictions. it should be noted that since acidic methanolysis cleaved the acyl groups in both we and tag  <cit> , the experimental data included fatty acids of both we and tag. predicting tga is also equivalent to predicting we, since the precursors of the tag and we are neutral fatty acids and they are equivalent from a metabolic flux point of view. polyphosphate  was not included in this study because the proportion of phosphorus in the biomass did not vary in the conditions tested.fig.  <dig> simplified possible pathways of storage metabolism in r. jostii rha <dig> for the three main storage compounds: glycogen, pha, and tag. glc-d: alpha-d-glucose, adpglc: adp-glucose, g1p: d-glucose 1-phosphate, g6p: alpha-d-glucose 6-phosphate, g3p: d-glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate, pyr: pyruvate, 2acl: 2-acetolactate, 23dh3mb:  <dig> -dihydroxy-3-methylbutanoate, 3mob: 3-methyl-2-oxobutanoic acid, val-l: l-valine, smms: -methylmalonatesemialdehyde, accoa: acetyl-coa, oaa: oxaloacetate, tca: tricarboxylic acid cycle, succoa: succinyl-coa, mmcoa-r: -methylmalonyl-coa, mmcoa-s: -methylmalonyl-coa, ppcoa: propanoyl-coa, 3kvcoa: 3-ketovaleryl-coa, r3hvcoa: -3-hydroxyvaleryl-coa, phb: poly-β-hydroxybutyrate, phv: poly-3-hydroxyvalerate, pha: poly-β-hydroxyalkanoate, 3hbcoa: -3-hydroxybutanoyl-coa, aacoa: acetoacetyl-coa, ac: acetate, acac: acetoacetate, tag: triacylglycerol, glyc3p: glycerol 3-phosphate, acylacp: acyl-, actacp: acetoacetyl-acp, malacp: malonyl-, acacp: acetyl-



to investigate how to predict the accumulation of storage compounds during nutrient-limited conditions with regard to the consumption of carbon substrate, the genome-scale metabolic network of r. jostii rha <dig>  was reconstructed in silico. for this reconstruction, storage compounds were defined independently of the biomass composition as pseudo-secretory by-products; that is, although storage compounds are not secreted, they are set so that they are secreted by the metabolic model for analysis of the storage metabolism. this model definition allows the study of the variation of storage metabolism.

genome-scale metabolic models are typically underdetermined  because the number of metabolites  are lower than the number of reaction fluxes . consequently, they can be analyzed by means of linear programming to find an optimal metabolic flux profile as defined by a linear objective function . therefore, these objective functions are central to the prediction exercise. in the context of the current study, here are the two main questions we aim to answer.  is there an objective function that enables us to predict the proportions of storage compound and their associated metabolic fluxes observed under n-limited condition?  what are some of the main factors influencing the proportions of the storage compounds accumulated?

several objective functions have been defined and examined in the past to study a large number of metabolic situations  <cit> , here are some examples. for a number of bacterial species, the maximization of the growth rate  was reported to be successful at predicting experimentally observed exponential growth phenotypes . accounting for possible minimization of cellular “effort” in utilizing available energy and external resources, it was found that the minimization of the sum of reaction fluxes  was a good way to predict the outcome of the metabolic network  <cit> , which was interpreted as a maximally efficient use of the available biochemical reactions. finally, for predicting the metabolism of gene-deletion mutants, a successful objective function was to find the reaction flux distribution profiles most similar to the ones of the wild-type growing in the same conditions, an objective function known as minimization of metabolic adjustments   <cit> .

in the current study, maximization of the growth rate  was adopted as the main objective function for the growth of rha <dig> during non-limited growth condition. however, the difficulties arise for the n-limited storage accumulation because the synthesis of new biomass does not occur. thus, novel objective functions needed to be examined, and seven objective functions were evaluated.minimization of the metabolic adjustment between the n-limited and non-limited conditions ,

minimization of the metabolic fluxes   <cit> ,

minimization of atp production rate   <cit> ,

maximization of atp production rate   <cit> ,

minimization of the production rate of redox potential   <cit> ,

maximization of the total storage fluxes in the n-limited condition ,

maximization of the total storage fluxes in conjunction with environmental moma .



when environmental moma was used for which the non-limited and n-limited culture phases interact, the implementation of these objective functions consisted in developing an optimization algorithm by first maximizing the growth rate under non-limited conditions, and then searching the solution space thus delimited using the above mentioned objective functions.

the performance of the objective functions in predicting the accumulation of the mixture of storage compounds on two different carbon sources  under n-limited conditions were compared with our experimental observations using a bayesian approach. finally, 13c-labelling experiments to characterize fluxes during the non-limited growth phase were conducted to determine how much the reaction fluxes during the non-limited growth phases constrained the n-limited metabolic model solution compared to simply measuring the fluxes of storage compounds accumulated during the n-limited culture phase.

RESULTS
features of the rha <dig> metabolic network
the reconstructed in silico metabolic network of r. jostii rha <dig>  contains  <dig>  balanced  compounds,  <dig>  unique reactions, and  <dig>  orfs . totally, it also includes  <dig> extracellular compounds that are associated with  <dig> exchange reactions. through manual curation,  <dig> reactions were added to fill metabolic gaps in the network, which was justified by biochemical literature data from either r. jostii rha <dig> or related species. beside gap fillers, we made a special effort to include a number of xenobiotics degradation pathways  in order to make the model most useful for the research community interested in r. jostii rha <dig>  mono-, di-, tri-, and tetra-chlorobiphenyl were added in imt <dig> metabolic model; reactions a <dig> – a <dig> show all the enzymatic steps that were associated with pcb degradation; the genes involved in degradation of these pcbs were bpha, bphb, bphc, and bphd .table  <dig> properties of the in silico metabolic network of r. jostii rha <dig> 


aopen reading frame



seven storage compounds were defined independently of the biomass composition as extracellular compounds connected to  <dig> fictional transport reactions to study the variation of storage compound accumulation namely: glycogen, α,α-trehalose, phb, phv, tag, we, and the non-carbon-based polyp. as these compounds were observed experimentally or detailed genomic investigation revealed the presence of specific genes  <cit> , pathways for the synthesis and the degradation of these compounds were included in the biochemical model. biomass composition of r. jostii rha <dig> is detailed in additional file  <dig>  all reactions and metabolites involved in the genome-scale metabolic model of r. jostii rha <dig> are detailed in additional file  <dig>  and unique reactions and metabolites involved in the genome-scale metabolic model of r. jostii rha <dig> are detailed in additional file  <dig>  a specific property of the imt <dig> model is the higher frequency nad, nadh, and oxygen in reactions than the energy-associated metabolites, which is different than with most published bacterial genome-scale metabolic models. this is because of the large number of oxygenase and oxidoreductase reactions involved in xenobiotics degradation pathways and included in the current imt <dig> model.

experimentally measured conversion rates
the conversion rates of various storage compounds when glucose and acetate were used as the sole carbon and energy sources during non-limited and n-limited conditions were experimentally measured. initial ammonium concentrations in the n-limited cultures were adjusted such that the n-source was  <dig> times lower than that in the non-limited cultures; the nitrogen sources in the n-limited cultures were exhausted at a time equivalent to the mid-exponential phase of the non-limited cultures. oxygen uptake rate  time profiles of rha <dig> in culture media containing glucose or acetate and either non-limiting or limiting concentrations of ammonium demonstrated a clear change in the respiration behaviour of the culture when the nitrogen source was exhausted . samples to determine the composition of the non-limited cultures were obtained at the middle and the end of the exponential phase, while the composition of the n-limited cultures was based on samples obtained immediately before the ammonium was completely consumed and late stationary phase at which the respiration rate became very low .fig.  <dig> the oxygen uptake rate time profile of rha <dig> growth on a glucose and b acetate in the non- and n-limited culture conditions. three samples were collected at the middle and end of the exponential growth phase in the non-limited condition and at the late stationary phase in the n-limited condition



microbial activities in the non-limited and n-limited cultures were determined by monitoring the concentrations of several compounds over time: substrate , nh4+, po43−, glycogen, phb, tag. additionally, the consumption rate of o <dig> was also monitored over time. using these data, conversion rates were calculated. considering the elemental and cod balances, the conversion rates were reconciled  and their statistical consistency checked   <cit> . the measured conversion rates and the results of the reconciliation procedure are presented in additional file  <dig>  in these experiments, r. jostii rha <dig> consumed acetate faster than glucose, and the specific substrate uptake rate during the n-limited phase was less than 14 % of the one in the non-limited phase . during the n-limited phase, the glucose culture stored 58 % of the substrate cod consumed, with 74 % of it being stored as pha and 23 % as tag . finally, for the same culture phase, the acetate culture stored 48 % of the substrate cod consumed, with 78 % in the form of pha and 20 % in the form of tag.fig.  <dig> the conversion rates of storage, substrate, and oxygen, and the growth rate of r. jostii rha <dig> on glucose  and acetate  in the non- and n-limited conditions. panels a and c represent the conversion rates in the non-limited condition, while panels b and d show those in the n-limited condition. note that the conversion rate of pha is the sum of those of phb and phv



metabolic model of storage accumulation
accumulations of storage compounds by rha <dig> were examined using the genome-scale metabolic model  and comparing seven objective functions. to do so, a list of unique reactions was generated by eliminating the redundancy in the network due to the large number of isoenzymes . the goal was to determine the most suitable objective function to predict the biosynthesis rate of glycogen, pha, and tag after the exhaustion of ammonium. for the purpose of this paper, pha was assumed to be a co-polymer of phb and phv in the same proportion as experimentally observed by  <cit> . it should be noted that since acidic methanolysis cleaved the acyl groups in both we and tag  <cit> , the experimental data included fatty acids of both we and tag. predicting tag is also equivalent to predicting we, since the precursors of the tag and we are neutral fatty acids and they are equivalent from a metabolic flux point of view.

the total specific storage production rate ) was found to be very sensitive to the non-growth associated maintenance energy  for most of the objective functions examined as was expected . however, variations in ngam did not affect the observed orders in the yields of storage compounds obtained for all objective functions. to obtain the appropriate ngam for each objective function such that the simulated total storage production rates  were the same as those obtained experimentally, a different ngam was determined for each objective function. doing so assured that the relative production rate of each storage compound and not the total production rate was the basis to differentiate the applicability of each objective function. the total storage fluxes for the environmental moma objective function alone were insensitive to ngam, and they remained much lower than the experimentally measured ones . this was due to the generation of futile cycles in the simulation, which were dissipating the carbon and energy. nonetheless, a ngam value of  <dig>  mmol/ was adopted for the environmental moma objective function for comparison purposes.fig.  <dig> total storage flux as a function of the non-growth-associated maintenance energy on a glucose and b acetate. objective functions are: environmental moma, minimization of fluxes, minimization and maximization of atp production, minimization of nadh production, maximization of the storage pools, and maximization of the storage pools along with environmental moma



for the seven objective functions compared, two patterns of storage accumulation were simulated during the period of n-limitation and carbon excess; most of the objective functions simulated a single storage compound accumulation, while objective functions based on the environmental moma  predicted the accumulation of a mixture of storage compounds .fig.  <dig> measured and calculated storage yields of three different storage compounds glycogen, pha and tag on glucose  and acetate . a measured storage yields on glucose, along with the error bars, b maximization of the storage fluxes+environmental moma on glucose, c environmental moma on glucose, d maximization of the storage fluxes on glucose, e minimization of the metabolic fluxes on glucose, f minimization and maximization of atp production, and minimization of nadh production on glucose, g measured storage yield on acetate, along with the error bars, h maximization of the storage fluxes+environmental moma on acetate, i environmental moma on acetate, j maximization of the storage fluxes on acetate, k minimization of the metabolic fluxes on acetate, l minimization and maximization of atp production, and minimization of nadh production on acetate. note that the storage yields were identical for minimization and maximization of atp production and minimization of nadh production; therefore, they were grouped in one graph



for the objective functions that simulated a single storage compound accumulation, only the maxstorage objective function simulated pha accumulation when the culture contained glucose and acetate as c-source . the other objective function in this group simulated the accumulation of glycogen and pha, respectively, when glucose and acetate were the c-sources . these objective functions are subsets of the family of objective functions aiming at the minimization of the reaction fluxes, an approach justified by the principle that microbes aim at maximizing their metabolic efficiency. thus, it seems that the strict maximization of metabolic efficiency is not the main factor determining the relative composition of the mixture of storage compounds accumulated after the sudden onset of nitrogen limitation.

using a bayesian-based objective function discrimination method  <cit> , all the information in fig.  <dig> were combined to evaluate the relative probability of each objective function for the prediction of the mixture of storage compounds in the n-limited culture phase. maximization of storage in conjunction with environmental moma was the most probable objective function , and the maximization of storage alone was the second most probable one  . all the other objective functions had posterior probability shares lower than  <dig>  %.table  <dig> posterior probability share of each objective function, listing in descending order of probability

objective functiona

anote that the experimentally observed ngam were  <dig> and 39 mg-codstorage compounds/ on glucose and acetate, respectively. the calculated ngam values ) at the measured total storage flux for different objective functions on glucose are as follows: minfluxes:  <dig> , maxatp, minatp, minnadh:  <dig> , maxstorage:  <dig> , and maxstorage+environmental moma:  <dig> . the calculated ngam values ) at the measured total storage flux for different objective functions on acetate are as follows: minfluxes:  <dig> , maxatp, minatp, minnadh:  <dig> , maxstorage:  <dig> , and maxstorage+environmental moma:  <dig> 



the simulation results presented here could be understood as possible outcomes of global regulatory principles applied by r. jostii rha <dig> when faced with sudden nutrient-limited condition. based on our results, it appears that the cells maintain the reaction flux profiles under carbon-excess/nutrient-limited conditions somewhat similar to the one developed during the non-limited growth conditions while maximizing their storage accumulation. this seems logical from a global regulation perspective as this solution would simply follow the regulatory program for growth and diverting the excess carbon found locally in the biochemical network to the closest storage compound. it would also maximize the responsiveness of the organism, while minimizing the protein turnover that would be necessary to adapt to the new conditions.

effect of biomass composition on simulated storage mixture
the previous section concluded that the metabolic fluxes developed during the non-limited growth determined the fluxes during the n-limited storage accumulation period. consequently, changing the biomass composition could affect the relative composition of the predicted mixture of storage compounds. this hypothesis was tested by substituting the biomass of r. jostii rha <dig> used in our model by the e. coli biomass of the ijr <dig>  <cit>  and iaf <dig>  <cit>  metabolic models. note that additional file  <dig> compares the biomass composition of three metabolic models imt <dig>  ijr <dig>  and iaf <dig>  the most probable objective function  was used for these simulations.

using the e. coli biomass of the ijr <dig> model with both carbon substrates led to an increase in the proportion of pha within the storage compounds accumulated by  <dig>  % on glucose and  <dig>  % on acetate, while the proportions of tag and glycogen both decreased . using the e. coli biomass of the iaf <dig> model with both carbon substrates yielded similar results. the decrease in tag could be attributed to the lower lipid content in the e. coli biomass, but it is not clear why the proportion of glycogen would also decrease. this simulation study showed that the quantitative predictions of storage compound accumulation depends on the biomass composition, as it was found for other metabolic fluxes in other studies  <cit> .fig.  <dig> calculated storage yields of three different storage compounds  simulated by the r jostii imt <dig> model for glucose a and acetate b consumption using either imt <dig> or e. coli biomass definitions. two e. coli biomass definitions were used: ijr <dig> and iaf <dig> models. for these simulations, the objective function was maxstorage+environmental moma



constraints imposed by storage accumulation rates vs. environmental moma
the moma objective function was introduced to the flux balance analysis to compare the wild-type and mutant organisms  <cit> ; however, in this study we extended the application of this objective function to compare balanced fluxes of metabolisms operating two different but successive environmental conditions: non-limited and n-limited conditions. in order to understand better the constraints imposed on the n-limited metabolic flux solution by the environmental moma, we first determined by fba the range of fluxes through reactions of the central metabolism on the substrate and nutrient uptake rates and storage compound accumulation rates were fixed according to experimental measurements . this range was then compared with fluxes through the same reactions during the non-limited growth phases as determined by 13c-metabolic flux analysis  to elucidate the metabolic behaviour of the r. jostii rha <dig> cell ; it was not possible to determine the fluxes during the n-limited phase because amino-acids are not synthesized during this phase due to the nitrogen limitation. as it can be seen, the range of the reaction fluxes during the n-limited culture phase remain quite wide, with the net fluxes of certain reactions being possibly in either direction . therefore, the environmental moma objective function imposes a more specific flux solution than the possible range.fig.  <dig> comparison of the fluxes of  <dig> central metabolic reactions of the r. jostii rha <dig> network a estimated using 13c-mfa for non-limited growth phase and using fba for n-limited phase with glucose b or acetate c as substrate. for the non-limited phases, fluxes were calculated using the 13c-mfa approach. the data points  reported are the average of  <dig> solutions inversely weighted on the fitting error of the 13c-mfa model; the error bars are cochran’s weighted standard errors  <cit> . for the n-limited phases, the ranges of fluxes  were computed using the genome-scale fba at zero nitrogen uptake rate. note that the y-axis scales for panels b and c are not the same, and that the y-axis of non-limited data and n-limited ranges of fluxes are not the same in panel c. the x-axis includes the reaction ids appeared in the simplified central metabolic network of r. jostii rha . the corresponding kegg ids can be found with the complete central metabolic network in additional file  <dig>  the reactions in parentheses are the backward reactions of the reversible reactions



CONCLUSIONS
r. jostii rha <dig> can accumulate several storage compounds simultaneously, but the approach to predict the relative synthesis rates of these compounds during nutrient-limited conditions remain to be clarified. a genome-scale metabolic model of r. jostii rha <dig>  was built, and used in flux balance analysis with different objective functions to predict the fluxes of storage compounds during a period of n-limitation following a period of balanced maximal growth. among the seven objective functions examined, the objective function maximization of storage in the n-limited condition combined with environmental moma was able to reproduce best the storage accumulation fluxes observed experimentally for glucose and acetate as c-source. to further understand the constraints imposed by the environmental moma objective function, the possible variability of fluxes through  <dig> central metabolic reactions during n-limited storage-accumulating conditions were compared to fluxes through the same reactions during non-limited growth obtained by 13c-mfa. the comparison showed how the environmental moma could constrain the reaction fluxes in the n-limited conditions. altogether, the data presented in herein suggest that for r. jostii rha <dig> during n-limited storage accumulating conditions the storage production to efficiently save the c-source, while the reaction fluxes remain somewhat similar to the profile in the immediately preceding period when its growth was not limited. finally, the analysis demonstrates the applicability of the moma objective function to analyze rapid changes in successive different environmental conditions such as non-limited growth followed by n-limited storage-accumulating substrate consumption.

