BACKGROUND
ejaculates are a complex mixture of sperm and seminal fluid components, many features of which are thought to have been shaped by sperm competition  <cit> . for example, much recent research has focused on the optimal allocation of limited sperm reserves to maximise fertilisation success . a related but separate question concerns the extent to which overall investment in ejaculate production varies with sperm competition. there is widespread support for the prediction that higher levels of sperm competition select for greater investment in sperm production, both across  and within  species, including the ability to plastically adjust sperm production to match the prevailing competitive conditions . however, seminal fluid contains a diverse array of proteins that exert various influences on female reproductive biology, and it is likely that varying levels of sperm competition could also impact on optimal seminal fluid production and/or composition . a further important consideration is that investment in ejaculate production might also be influenced by the number of females available for mating  <cit> . this complicates interpretation of previous studies because sperm competition and mating rate will often be confounded  <cit>  and under certain conditions, mating rate might predominate in determining optimal male sperm production strategies  <cit> .

here we use an established vertebrate model system, the house mouse , to investigate plasticity in production of different ejaculate components in relation to cues of sperm competition risk and mating rate. house mice have a relatively low overall investment in sperm production compared to many other rodents  <cit> . however, males typically experience a significant but variable risk of sperm competition  <cit> , which previously has been linked to phenotypic plasticity in sperm production  <cit> . moreover, we have shown that there is a rapid turnover of seminal fluid proteins in this species, notably more rapid than spermatogenesis  <cit> , suggesting potential for short-term plasticity in responses of non-sperm ejaculate components. mating opportunities are also likely to vary substantially for male house mice in natural populations, depending on the number of resident females in the territory of a particular male and the proximity of neighbouring territories  <cit> .

to determine the relative importance of sperm competition risk and anticipated mating rates on phenotypic plasticity in ejaculate production requires a controlled experiment with independent manipulation of appropriate cues used to assess these two factors. in rodents, scent represents a crucial sensory modality used in a variety of reproductive contexts  <cit> . for example, male rodents are sensitive to cues of sperm competition conveyed by conspecific male odours  <cit>  and are capable of sophisticated discrimination of odours from female conspecifics  <cit> . the perception of sperm competition risk and mating opportunities  should therefore be influenced by exposure to the odours of adult male and female conspecifics, respectively, in addition to direct encounters with them. that is, a high encounter rate with multiple males and/or their odours should indicate a high risk of sperm competition, whereas a high encounter rate with multiple females and/or their odours should indicate a high potential mating rate.

to test whether male house mice vary investment in the production of different ejaculate components according to social conditions, we used a 2 ×  <dig> factorial experimental design and independently manipulated cues of sperm competition risk and potential mating rate. combined with detailed quantitative proteomics analysis, our experiment reveals that the relative abundance of different proteins found in seminal fluid  and sperm production both differ according to cues of sperm competition risk. by contrast, relative investment in different ejaculate components was unaffected by cues of potential mating rate. sperm competition risk is thus shown to be a key factor influencing male ejaculate production decisions that drives plasticity in seminal fluid composition.

RESULTS
the experiment simultaneously manipulated subjects’ social experience of both male and female conspecifics in a 2 ×  <dig> factorial design to simulate both high or low sperm competition risk  and high or low anticipated mating rates .

sperm production
we measured three sperm production parameters: testes mass, epididymal sperm numbers, and daily sperm production rate . there was substantial variation in all three sperm production parameters across the experimental treatment groups . separate analyses for the two static measures of testis size  and epididymal sperm numbers , as well as for the dynamic measure of daily sperm production , consistently revealed the same pattern. cues of sperm competition  significantly influenced sperm production parameters but there was no effect of mating rate cues  on any of these parameters, and no significant interaction effects . males in high competition treatment groups typically had 12 % larger testes, and 20 % higher epididymal sperm numbers and daily sperm production rates, compared to males in the low competition treatment groups.table  <dig> mean sperm production parameters under contrasting cues of sperm competition risk and mating opportunities

mean  sperm production parameters of male house mice exposed to different social cues of sperm competition risk and potential mating rate. sperm competition risk  was manipulated by altering the number of male competitors regularly encountered  and potential mating rate  was manipulated by altering the number of females regularly encountered . testes mass is the mass of both testes ; epididymal sperm count is the number of sperm recovered from the caput of the right epididymis  and daily sperm production rate is the number of sperm produced per testis per day, based on spermatid head counts from testicular homogenates . 

fig.  <dig> summary of sperm production parameters under variable cues of sperm competition risk and likely mating rate. mean  sperm production parameters: a testis size, b epididymal sperm numbers and c daily sperm production rate. we simultaneously manipulated social cues of sperm competition risk  and potential mating rate , consistently finding that only the former impacts on sperm production parameters . included for comparison in each right-hand panel are previously published data from ramm and stockley , who reported a complementary experiment in which mating rate cues were held constant at a low level and only sperm competition cues were varied. note that overall these experiments point to a primary influence of sperm competition cues on plasticity in sperm production parameters, with the mean parameter estimates for the three treatment groups classified as high sperm competition  differing significantly from those for the three treatment groups classified as low sperm competition  for two out of three sperm production parameters . hsc high sperm competition, lsc low sperm competition, hmr high mating rate, lmr low mating rate

f
p
f
p
f
p
f
p
summary of anovas testing for the effects of sperm competition risk  and potential mating rate  treatments on four ejaculate production parameters: paired testes mass, epididymal sperm count and daily sperm production , plus seminal vesicles mass . in all cases, the degrees of freedom for each f test, d.f. =  <dig>  except for daily sperm production where one subject was excluded and so d.f. =  <dig> .


anova analysis of variance



these results are supported by mixed model analyses taking into account potential non-independence of males from cages grouped within the same enclosure. the effects of competition remained either significant  or very nearly so . taken together with our earlier findings  <cit> , these data strongly support the conclusion that sperm competition cues significantly impact upon sperm production parameters , and that this effect is most pronounced on epididymal sperm numbers and daily sperm production rates, and somewhat weaker on the size of the testes.

neither sperm competition nor mating rate manipulations affected measures of ejaculate quality, such as percentage sperm motility , curvilinear sperm velocity  or straight-line sperm velocity .

seminal fluid production
in addition to effects on sperm production parameters, there was also a marginally significant effect of sperm competition risk  on the size of the seminal vesicles, suggesting these to be on average 25 % larger in males from high competition risk treatment groups , hsc, lmr:  <dig>  ±  <dig>  g; hsc, hmr:  <dig>  ±  <dig>  g; lsc, lmr:  <dig>  ±  <dig>  g; lsc, hmr:  <dig>  ±  <dig>  g; sperm competition: f <dig>  =  <dig> , p =  <dig> ; mating rate: f <dig>  =  <dig> , p =  <dig> ; sperm competition x mating rate: f <dig>  =  <dig> , p =  <dig>  table 2). however, the effect of sperm competition risk on the size of seminal vesicles was marginally non-significant in the mixed model taking potential non-independence due to enclosure effects into account .fig.  <dig> seminal fluid production under variable cues of sperm competition risk and potential mating rate. mean  seminal vesicles mass of male house mice exposed to different social cues of sperm competition risk  and potential mating rate . hsc high sperm competition, lsc low sperm competition hmr high mating rate, lmr low mating rate



seminal fluid composition
we next investigated the protein composition of seminal fluid, and specifically the protein secretion of the seminal vesicles – which is the major accessory reproductive gland in mice – using standard proteomics workflows. we obtained profiles that were qualitatively similar over all four treatment groups , extending to  <dig> proteins, and covering approximately six orders of magnitude of dynamic range . the overall profiles of each of the treatment groups were very similar, permitting comparison, at a protein level, of all treatment groups. to gain an overview of the variation in protein expression patterns revealed by these label-free proteomics data, entire protein profiles were used to direct a hierarchical clustering , restricting our analysis to those proteins for which we obtained a minimum of three high confidence peptides for quantification . the clustering analysis indicated the strongest separation between high and low sperm competition treatments, which we tested formally using two approaches: 1) using the standard proteomics output on relative abundances for each protein obtained from progenesis qi; and 2) a more conservative random forest  analysis of proteome composition, focusing on a subset of  known secreted seminal vesicle proteins, and controlling for potential differences between treatments in the proportion of secreted proteins present in each sample .fig.  <dig> summary of the proteomics data. a consistency of measurements of normalised mean label-free abundances , between treatment groups. the matrix plots show how well the seminal fluid proteomes of each treatment group correlate in pairwise comparisons. b ranked mean log <dig> abundance curves for each of the four treatment group seminal vesicle proteomes, with those proteins found to be important for classifying samples according to the sperm competition risk treatment , labelled as black points with their accession number. c a heatmap of the mean abundance of proteins in the seminal vesicle proteomes across the four treatment groups. un-transformed normalised abundances for those proteins present at significantly different levels between the mating groups  were averaged, based on prior analyses of how well their proteomes correlate with one another between biological replicates, within each treatment group . mean abundances were then centred and scaled based on protein identity  and hierarchically clustered according to both treatment group  and protein  data. euclidean distance measures and the “complete” linkage method for hierarchical clustering were used and the result plotted as a heatmap . clear differences in the abundance of seminal vesicle proteins are apparent. proteins found to be important for classifying samples according to the sperm competition risk treatment , are highlighted with bold accession numbers. abbreviations of treatment groups are as follows: hsc high sperm competition, lsc low sperm competition, hmr high mating rate, lmr low mating rate



progenesis qi analysis of individual proteins
we began with a broad analysis, comparing all proteins using progenesis qi, a standard package for analysis of label-free quantitative proteomics data. for this analysis, all  <dig> proteins were used to normalise the samples , and we focused on exploring responses of subject males to cues of sperm competition risk . we filtered the data according to p <  <dig>  , and a minimum of three unique peptides used for the identification and quantification of each protein . using these criteria,  <dig> proteins were differentially expressed,  <dig> of which were significantly up-regulated under high competition conditions. of those proteins that were down-regulated, the majority were intracellular cytoskeletal or metabolic proteins, the significance of which is unclear. although only 8 %  of proteins identified in our study are known to be secreted , secreted proteins make up 31 %  of proteins that are differentially expressed according to sperm competition risk. of particular interest in the present study are the responses of secreted proteins with likely potential functions in post-copulatory sexual selection. these include a major family of seminal vesicle proteins that are known to be secreted by this accessory reproductive gland , six of which – svs  <dig> , svs  <dig> , svs  <dig> , svs  <dig> , svs  <dig> , and svs  <dig>  – were at or below the individual significance threshold for differential expression of p =  <dig>  in this initial progenesis qi analysis, all being more abundant under high competition  at p =  <dig>  to also vary in the same direction). serine protease inhibitors  are also of interest because recently mated females increase intravaginal endopeptidase production thought to aid plug dissolution, and there is good evidence for a protease: antiprotease system in sexual conflict  <cit> . of five serine protease inhibitors identified in our progenesis qi analyses, two were unchanged: serpin kazal-type  <dig>  and glia-derived nexin . however, one abundant protease inhibitor serpin kazal-like protein  was significantly up-regulated  under high competition conditions. two other low abundance inhibitors, serpin a3k  and serpin b <dig>  were slightly down regulated in high competition groups  . the label-free quantification confirms a broad dynamic range of expression of the individual inhibitors , which would be consistent with their targeting of different proteases. we also explored changes in the coagulum cross-linking transglutaminase tgm <dig>  and ceacam  <dig> , a glycoprotein commonly secreted by seminal vesicles in rodents  <cit>  and implicated in sperm motility . of these, only ceacam  <dig> was significantly up-regulated under high sperm competition risk. two peptidases – dpp <dig>  and cathepsin d  – both exhibit lowered expression under high competition .fig.  <dig> proteomics analysis of key secreted seminal vesicle proteins. combined data from all hsc and lsc mice were used in a label-free quantitative proteomics analysis of seminal vesicle proteins . from these data, requiring at least three unique peptides for quantification and identification, the expression of the proteins was recovered and plotted on a protein-by-protein basis. panel  ‘classical’ svs proteins  <dig> to  <dig>  panel  serine protease inhibitors and  other proteins relevant to coagulation, plug formation and survival, or sperm motility. data are presented as notched box and whisker plots where the midline is the median, box extremes define 25th and 75th percentiles, and the notches are calculated as ; whiskers define extreme data points. n =  <dig> for hsc and  <dig> for lsc. hsc high sperm competition, lsc low sperm competition



random forest analysis of proteome composition
next, we employed a more stringent approach to analysing the seminal vesicle proteome, performing a single analysis of proteome composition and focusing solely on that proportion of the proteome that is secreted and that could thus have functions relevant to sperm competition outcomes within the female reproductive tract. to do so, we implemented a random forest  classification model for proteins secreted by the seminal vesicles . in contrast to the standard progenesis qi analysis reported above , for this analysis we used only known ejaculated proteins  to normalise the samples, again using a minimum of three unique peptides per protein for identification and quantification . normalising to ejaculated proteins is a more conservative approach that controls for any potential differences between treatments in the proportion of secreted proteins present in each sample . this might occur, for example, if larger seminal vesicles associated with high competition were to contain a higher ratio of lumen to tissue, and hence a higher proportion of ejaculated to non-ejaculated proteins. we used this approach for analysis of all four treatment groups, to investigate effects of both sperm competition risk  and potential mating rate .

the results of the rf model indicate that secreted seminal vesicle protein composition indeed differs systematically according to sperm competition risk treatment. the rf model had a classification error rate of  <dig>  % , meaning that it was unlikely to have been achieved by chance . this level of accuracy in the classification of samples was achieved because of differences in the abundances of individual proteins between treatments. of  <dig> proteins analysed, seven had an important influence on the classification accuracy of the rf model, including four also identified as significantly different between treatment groups in our initial progenesis qi analysis . notably, three important proteins with potential roles in sperm competition – svs  <dig>  svs  <dig>  and ceacam  <dig> – were more abundant in the high competition treatment groups. two other proteins – cathepsin d and annexin a <dig>  – were down-regulated under conditions of high sperm competition, and two – peroxiredoxin- <dig>  and phosphoglycerate kinase  <dig>  – are likely to be cytosolic proteins, the precise role of which remains uncertain. differences in the abundance of all important proteins are depicted in fig.  <dig>  and the results of rf models are summarised in table  <dig>  alongside a series of independent t-tests for each individual protein as an alternative method of analysis more akin to the initial progenesis qi protein-by-protein analysis, but here controlling for both potential differences between treatments in the proportion of secreted proteins and statistically for multiple hypothesis testing. the results of the rf model are largely consistent with those based on q-values obtained from these multiple t-tests, that is, p-values corrected for multiple comparisons . the separation of samples using the rf approach with respect to sperm competition treatment is summarised as a multidimensional scaling plot in fig. 6a.fig.  <dig> random forest analysis of seminal fluid composition under variable sperm competition risk. the figure plots the seven secreted seminal vesicle proteins important for classifying samples according to the sperm competition risk treatment, based on variable importance scores. standardised abundance scores of each protein are shown ; red symbols: low sperm competition ; mean ± 95 % confidence intervals). proteins are ordered according to their variable importance score as per table  <dig> . analysis is based on data requiring at least three unique peptides for quantification and identification, with normalisation to ejaculated proteins 

p
the table lists variable importance scores for each secreted seminal vesicle protein from the rf model used to classify samples according to sperm competition risk experienced by subject males. proteins that differ between treatments will make a greater contribution to the accurate classification of samples in rf models and thus have higher variable importance scores. proteins are arranged in descending order of variable importance. the first seven proteins listed are defined as being important for classifying samples according to the sperm competition risk treatment. these are proteins that have a score greater than  <dig> , which is the absolute value of the lowest variable importance score of all proteins. the results of multiple t-tests are also provided for comparison to the results of rf models. p-values resulting from t-tests were corrected for multiple comparisons by the fdr using the benjamini-hochberg method to yield q-values.

abbreviations: svs seminal vesicle secretory protein, ceacam carcinoembryonic antigen-related cell adhesion molecule, spikl serine protease inhibitor kazal-like, pate <dig> prostate and testes expressed protein, spink serine protease inhibitor kazal-type, rf random forest, fdr false discovery rate)

fig.  <dig> multidimensional scaling  plots illustrating seminal fluid compositional differences under variable sperm competition risk and potential mating rate. mds plots showing the distance between samples in two dimensions, mds <dig>  and mds <dig> . plots are produced from the proximity matrix generated in random forest  models that were used to classify samples according to  the number of males and  number of females to which each male was exposed. square symbols are individuals that were exposed to the “low” treatment, i.e. either one male  or two females . triangular symbols are individuals exposed to the “high” treatment in each analysis, i.e. either three males  or four females . filled symbols indicate samples that were incorrectly predicted by the rf model, illustrating the much better ability of the rf analysis to classify samples correctly based on cues of likely sperm competition  rather than cues of potential mating opportunities . hsc: high sperm competition; lsc: low sperm competition; hmr: high mating rate; lmr: low mating rate.



to determine whether males from the same enclosure tended to be more similar, and thus whether our results may be affected by a common environment effect, we also generated a rf classification model that analysed differences in protein abundance that might have arisen between enclosures. the model performed poorly at classifying males to the correct enclosure, having a classification error rate of 100 %. additionally, when analysing the differences between males described in the proximity matrix of this model, males were not more similar to their enclosure partners than individuals from other enclosures.

finally, we investigated the protein composition of seminal fluid using an rf classification model that analysed differences in protein abundances between samples according to the potential mating rate treatment . this rf model had a classification error rate of  <dig>  %  that could easily have been achieved by chance . this shows that cues of potential mating rate did not influence the relative abundance of seminal vesicle proteins, as can be visually inferred from the absence of separation of samples with respect to mating rate treatment in the multidimensional scaling plot summarising the rf analysis .

discussion
our findings reveal that social cues of sperm competition risk are a critical factor in determining male investment in ejaculate traits. whilst previous studies have largely focused on the impact of social conditions on ejaculate allocation  <cit>  , we demonstrate here the importance of the social environment on male ejaculate production strategies. we show that:  sperm competition risk cues strongly influence production of both seminal fluid proteins and sperm; but  cues of potential mating opportunities do not appear to influence ejaculate production in this species.

sperm competition risk drives plasticity in seminal fluid composition and investment
using a proteomics approach to identify and quantify seminal vesicle proteins, we found strong evidence that cues of sperm competition risk influence seminal fluid proteome composition. the response of svs proteins to cues of sperm competition risk are of particular interest. collectively, the svs proteins make up the vast majority of the seminal vesicle secretion; they are likely to be important to male competitive fertilisation success due to established roles in copulatory plug formation, sperm transport and sperm motility , and many exhibit interspecific evidence of rapid evolution . although caution is required in interpreting results of our progenesis qi analyses, overall these suggest a consistent trend of up-regulated svs proteins under high competition conditions. by contrast, the  <dig> other ejaculated proteins that we investigated showed no such directional bias . this pattern is supported by results of our random forest analyses showing significant differences in secreted seminal fluid proteome composition, with svs  <dig> and svs  <dig> among the seven proteins identified as important for classifying samples according to sperm competition treatment group. although a role in sperm competition for svs  <dig> and svs  <dig> appears likely, elucidating their precise function requires further investigation. roles in relation to copulatory plugs could be one possibility. however, neither svs  <dig> nor svs  <dig> contain transglutaminase substrate domains, and so are unlikely to be actively involved in copulatory plug formation  <cit> . interestingly, these proteins have also been suggested to be serine protease inhibitors  <cit> , based on their proximity in the genome to other wfdc proteins, some of which have this activity. however, svs  <dig> and svs  <dig> do not possess the classic four disulphide bond potential, and homology modelling to predict a three dimensional protein structure  <cit>  leads to low confidence models that do not map to known serine protease inhibitors. there has been no direct demonstration of anti-protease activity of these proteins, and although the role of svs  <dig> in copulatory plug survival has recently been questioned  <cit> , this does not preclude other functions in sperm competition unrelated to plug formation or dissolution. also, in relation to copulatory plug formation, we note that the coagulum transglutaminase tgm <dig> – which catalyses the cross-linking of svs proteins – was not itself significantly up-regulated under high sperm competition risk according to our initial progenesis qi analysis.

although we found limited evidence for an influence of the social environment on proteins related to copulatory plug formation, there is some evidence for an up-regulation of proteins linked to sperm motility under conditions of high sperm competition risk. for example, according to our initial progenesis qi analysis, svs  <dig> , a protein that enhances sperm motility  <cit> , was significantly up-regulated in our high competition treatment groups. further support for this idea comes from more robust evidence of increased ceacam  <dig> production under high competition conditions. ceacam  <dig> is a glycoprotein that enhances sperm motility  <cit> , and its increased production under high sperm competition risk is also confirmed by our random forest analysis.

our random forest analysis indicates that two other proteins – cathepsin d, an aspartic protease, and annexin a <dig>  – were down-regulated under conditions of high sperm competition . these responses are less easily explained, although it is possible that reduction of the potential proteolytic environment of the seminal vesicle may exert other effects influencing reproductive success under sperm competition  <cit> .

in summary, these findings based on quantitative protein analysis in a model vertebrate provide direct and broad-scale evidence of plasticity in seminal fluid protein production linked to sperm competition risk. we are aware of only one previous experimental study that attempted to measure plasticity in seminal fluid production in response to sperm competition cues, and this measured gene rather than protein expression levels. fedorka et al.  <cit>  manipulated the social environment of male fruit flies , and found evidence for plastic expression of two out of three seminal fluid protein-coding genes investigated – acp26aa and acp62f  – both of which were down-regulated 72 h after eclosion under high competition conditions.

a further novel finding of the present study is that male house mice appear to adjust investment in the overall size of the seminal vesicles according to cues of average sperm competition risk. the marginal significance of this response means the result should be interpreted with caution, especially because no similar response was found in our previous study  <cit> . nevertheless, it seems likely that altered male investment in the size of the seminal vesicles, and thus presumably in the total amount of seminal fluid production, could be adaptive under varying sperm competition risk. indeed, recent evidence points to an influence of seminal vesicle mass on competitive male reproductive success in semi-natural house mouse populations  <cit> , as would be expected if variation in seminal fluid production is relevant to sperm competition outcomes. socially-mediated plasticity in seminal vesicle size in a second rodent species, the bank vole myodes glareolus  <cit> , the correlated evolution of sperm and seminal fluid investment across rodent species  <cit> , and the rapid evolutionary dynamics of specific seminal fluid components , all serve to further emphasize the likely importance of non-sperm ejaculate components in mammalian sperm competition. future experimental work should now focus on the fitness consequences of variation in total and individual seminal fluid protein production .

sperm competition risk drives sperm production plasticity
male house mice in this study adjusted overall investment in sperm production according to cues of average sperm competition risk experienced during sexual development. specifically, those males that were repeatedly exposed to social cues from three rival males had higher daily sperm production rates and higher epididymal sperm counts compared to those that had encountered social cues from just one rival male. importantly, these changes occurred irrespective of whether subject males were regularly also exposed to social cues from two or four potential mates, suggesting that cues of likely mating rate at this level do not affect sperm production plasticity in this species .

our findings are generally consistent with results from two previous studies in which social experience of male house mice with male  conspecifics was manipulated to vary cues of average sperm competition level, and where sperm production was also higher following regular encounters with more male conspecifics  <cit> . in the present study, and contrary to previous findings  <cit> , we additionally report a moderate but significant influence of male social experience on the testis mass of male house mice, consistent with widely held assumptions linking testis size to sperm production rates . nonetheless, we also found a disproportionate increase in the other sperm production parameters  relative to testis size, a pattern that is highly consistent across studies  <cit> . this implies that an increased testis size alone cannot explain all of the sperm production plasticity response seen in male house mice. similar evidence for invertebrates suggests that this may be a common feature of phenotypic plasticity in sperm production , although the precise adjustments within the testis that enable males to plastically increase investment in sperm production under heightened sperm competition remain to be elucidated .

in addition to sperm production parameters, we also investigated a measure of sperm quality. despite recent evidence that mouse sperm motility parameters respond to different post-copulatory sexual selection regimes under experimental evolution  <cit> , we found no evidence of plasticity in sperm motility parameters in response to cues of either sperm competition risk or likely mating rate, at least under in vitro conditions, consistent with earlier findings in this species  <cit> .

female-mediated cues do not impact on ejaculate production
although male house mice in our study adjusted overall investment in ejaculate production according to their encounters with male conspecifics, we found no evidence that ejaculate investment increased as predicted in response to encounters with female conspecifics. here we predicted a potential response to likely mating rates: males that regularly encounter more females might perceive more potential mating opportunities and increase their sperm and seminal fluid production accordingly. since no such effect was observed, our findings suggest that variation in mating rate may not be as important as sperm competition in determining optimal ejaculate investment decisions for male house mice, at least at the relatively modest but naturalistic levels of variation in potential mating opportunities presented within our experimental treatment groups. in general, male house mice appear relatively constrained in the number of ejaculates they are able to produce within a given 24 hour period , such that some degree of sperm limitation may be expected to occur where two or more females within their territory are simultaneously receptive  <cit> . cues encountered from four females might, therefore, reasonably be regarded as offering a potentially high mating rate for male house mice, although we cannot rule out the possibility that more extreme variation in female encounter rates might reveal a significant response in sperm production traits. for example, an experimental evolution study in drosophila melanogaster revealed that mating rate can significantly impact on sperm production parameters under relatively extreme female-biased sex ratios  <cit>  . similar effects could also explain why some other experimental evolution studies have not observed an evolutionary response in testis size in male-biased populations, where sperm competition is elevated but mating rate is simultaneously reduced  <cit> . in contrast to these previous studies however, the cues of likely sperm competition and mating rate that we manipulated in the present study were indirect; hence, it is possible that repeated emptying and re-filling of sperm reserves under a realised elevation in mating rate might affect sperm production parameters differently .

CONCLUSIONS
in conclusion, our study reveals significant plasticity in different ejaculate components, with both the relative abundances of different seminal fluid proteins and sperm production strongly influenced by the social environment. moreover, we show that experience with male conspecifics – and thus the perceived level of sperm competition – predominates over experience with female conspecifics in determining variable investment in ejaculate components. this confirms sperm competition risk as a key factor in male ejaculate production decisions. we also show here for the first time that this risk drives plasticity in seminal fluid composition as well as sperm numbers. our results, therefore, emphasise the importance of considering the whole ejaculate when seeking to understand male responses to sperm competition  <cit> .

