BACKGROUND
calpains are ca2+-dependent cysteine proteases that regulate a multitude of intracellular processes by limited proteolysis of various substrates  <cit> . defects in calpain function are associated with embryonic lethality in mice, muscular dystrophies in humans, gastropathy, tumorigenesis and neurogenesis disorders  <cit> . furthermore, calpains function during embryonic development in drosophila and mediate an environmental adapation to ph-dependent changes in fungi  <cit> . plants contain only one calpain gene, dek <dig>  present in species ranging from the moss physcomitrella patens to angiosperms, where it is essential for embryo development, and is proposed to have played a critical role in the evolution of differentiated multicellular plants  <cit> .

the calpain family belongs to protease clan ca, and is classified into classical and non-classical forms based on domain architecture  <cit> . the classical calpains consist of four conserved domains: an n-terminal anchor helix , a catalytic protease core domain  with the two subdomains pc <dig> and pc <dig>  a c2-like domain  and a penta-ef-hand domain , designated here as nter-cyspc-c2l-pef. non-classical calpains lack both the nter and the pef domain and may contain additional domains in combination with cyspc  <cit> . the majority of calpain research has focused on the three ubiquitously expressed classical calpains capn <dig> and capn <dig> in mammals and capn <dig> in birds. both capn <dig> and  <dig> are closely related 80-kda proteins and are highly conserved at the sequence and structural levels  <cit> . they can form separate heterodimers by binding to a common 30-kda small regulatory subunit capns <dig>  heterodimeric capns1/capn <dig> and capns1/capn <dig> have been named μ- and m-calpain, respectively, owing to the micromolar versus millimolar levels of ca2+ required for their activation  <cit> . in vivo, calpain activity depends on the presence of three key catalytic amino acid residues  in the cyspc domain  <cit> , although enzymes with substitutions in these residues do not always display loss of function  <cit> . comparative analyses of representative animal genomes have revealed a relatively recent expansion of the calpain family and functional divergence among different paralogs  <cit> . due to the modular nature of calpains, with many group-specific domains, phylogenetic tree construction based on the cyspc domain has proven to be the most efficient approach to understand the evolutionary divergence of classical and non-classical calpains  <cit> . for instance, the acquisition of the c-terminal pef domain was shown, by this approach, to be a relatively recent event in the evolutionary history of classical calpains  <cit> . using the evolutionary conservation of distinct calpain modules in diverse groups of eukaryotes, non-classical calpains were proposed to consist of several subfamilies, including the palb subfamily found in humans, yeasts, fungi, insects and nematodes, the sol subfamily for animals as well as the dek <dig> subfamily that is represented in land plants  <cit> . the phylogenetic relationship among the members of non-classical calpains and the sequential evolution of calpain modules, however, remains unresolved.

until now, studies on the diversity and evolutionary history of the calpain gene family have been focused on multicellular eukaryotes, including animals, land plants and fungi. although calpain-like genes were also reported in several protozoan genomes such as those of the apicomplexan and kinetoplastid parasites  <cit> , the great differences in gene number among those lineages  indicate a large variation of calpain diversity in single-celled eukaryotes. in fact, many unknown calpain genes may exist among hitherto unexplored unicellular organisms, some of which diverged early after eukaryotes arose and that display ancient morphological features and cellular structures  <cit> . currently, almost all unicellular eukaryotes, animals and land plants have been assembled into six major groups  on the basis of multi-gene phylogenies and deductions from cellular structures and chemistry  <cit> . these supergroups comprise opisthokonta , amoebozoa , excavata , plantae , sar , alveolata , and rhizaria ) and a loose assemblage of hacrobia . despite several attempts, the evolutionary relationships between these supergroups have not been completely resolved, but recent reports suggest that plantae, sar and hacrobia are constituting a mega group  <cit> , while opisthokonta and amoebozoa seem to form another mega group  <cit> . in addition to these established supergroups, there are a few orphan eukaryote lineages, such as thecamonas and collodictyon, that may occupy distinct positions in the tree of life  <cit> . they diverged very early in the history of eukaryotes and are crucial for understanding the evolution of eukaryotes. as a consequence, a comprehensive investigation of calpains distributed in these supergroups and deep diverged lineages would represent a key step towards a broader classificaton system as well as revealing the evolutionary events that contributed to the variation in this gene family. importantly, reconstructing calpain phylogenetic profiles among these unicellular lineages may help illuminate the origin and evolution of proteolytic systems in eukaryotes and establish a practical framework on which experimental evidence can be compared between species.

in this study, we have searched for calpain genes in genomes representing a broad taxonomic sampling from all eukaryote supergroups with emphasis on unicellular organisms. we present a massively expanded calpain gene family, in which a large number of the new calpain genes are composed of many other domains than previously reported. evolutionary inferences suggest that most of the calpain variants arose from the combinations of ancient domains through domain shuffling mechanisms. domains derived more recently have contributed to the innovation of the calpain family by multiple independent insertion events. the majority of the new calpain variants are considered as non-classical types, implying that the classical calpains typical for animal and human genomes comprise only a small subset of the total gene family. the vast diversity of calpains described here provides a new framework for addressing the function of calpain genes in unicellular eukaryotes, and for elucidating the various levels by which these important proteins are regulated to prevent diseases or developmental defects in higher eukaryotes.

RESULTS
a large diversity of domains and genes revealed in the calpain family
our survey of calpain diversity identified a total of  <dig> different domain arrangements, of which  <dig> have not been previously reported . combinations between cyspc and  <dig> other domains such as hatc , lim , tpr , ww  and zf_grf  reveal this huge variation in calpain members . by searching protein family databases, we found homologs of  <dig> of these domains in either eubacteria or archeabacteria , implying the majority of domains are ancient and have participated in the formation of other genes than calpains before the origin of eukaryotes. innovation in the calpain family has therefore taken place by adding both ancient and novel domains to the n- or c- terminus of cyspc with variable types, numbers and orders .

star * indicates the type of domain is present in eukaryotes, eubacteria or archaebacteria.

among the investigated species, thecamonas trahens, a lineage that phylogenetically belongs to apusozoa, shows the highest number of different calpain paralogs. it has  <dig> genes that encode nine calpain variants . three other species, the single-celled phytoplankton emiliania huxleyi,  the amoeboa-flagella naegleria gruberi and the ciliate paramecium tetraurelia  also contain a large number of genes encoding seven, five and four calpain variants, respectively. in contrast, one single calpain was found in all land plants , entamoeba histolytica, spizellomyces punctatus, plasmodium falciparum, cryptosporidium parvum and thalassiosira pseudonana. no cyspc domain was detected in giardia intestinalis, dictyostelium discoideum, chlorella nc64a or red algae , even if we loosened the threshold  in the blast searches. thus, we found a large variation in calpain gene numbers in the  <dig> representative taxa. even closed related species, such as species in genera trichomonas and giardia, have very different calpain gene content.

four ancient eukaryotic calpain domain architectures
of all  <dig> calpain types, we identified that  <dig> variants are present in more than one supergroup. for instance, types  <dig> ,  <dig>  and  <dig>  show a scattered taxonomic distribution . in order to determine whether these calpain genes evolved only once or on multiple occasions, we reconstructed their evolutionary relationships based on the alignment of cyspc. based on the distribution of domain combinations across the eukaryote tree and the similarity of domain components in various genes, we propose that four calpain architectures cyspc, cyspc-c2l, mit-cyspc-c2l and tml-cyspc-c2l originated early in the evolutionary history of eukaryotes figure  <dig>  figure  <dig> and additional file 2: figure s <dig> 

first, the type of calpain containing only cyspc is likely the most ancient form, both because it has the broadest distribution across eukaryote supergroups, and is the only form of calpain present in eubacteria  <cit> . as seen from figure  <dig>  this variant is found in opisthokonta, excavata, sar, plantae, hacrobia and thecamonas. the clustering of cyspc calpain into seven different clades , suggests that several ancient paralogs were established by multiple independent duplications and subsequently diverged into distinct forms. interestingly, within some of the cyspc clades, a few sequences are composed of multiple domains , implying that the different cyspc paralogs have recruited other domains along the evolution of the eukaryotes at several independent occasions. in order to investigate whether the eukaryotic cyspc paralogs derived from bacteria once or many times, we added several prokaryote cyspc domains to the alignment and repeated the phylogenetic reconstruction . in the resulting tree, the bacterial paralogs are weakly recovered as a monophyletic group  with affinity to one of the eukaryotic cyspc clades, indicating that all eukaryote cyspc variants may have evolved from a single bacterial paralog.

the calpain type  <dig>  probably arose soon after the early duplication of domain cyspc based on its presence in nearly all supergroups . in addition, it was found in thecamonas. this gene may have been lost early in amoebozoa and plantae . several cyspc-c2l calpains show variable numbers of c2l , suggesting multiple tandem duplications of c2l. since figure  <dig> and additional file 2: figure s <dig> both show cyspc-c2l calpains as a paraphyletic clade, independent c2l domains may have been added to the different cyspc paralogs early in eukaryote evolution. furthermore, the phylogeny indicates that cyspc-c2l calpains have subsequently recruited other types of domains on several independent occasions giving rise to new calpain genes .

the third ancestral calpain subfamily is composed of the mit-cyspc-c2l variants . the members in this subfamily are present in most eukaryote supergroups, and they are strongly recovered as a monophyletic clade in the phylogeny . the mit-cyspc-c2l calpains may have been formed by a integration of a microtubule interacting and transport  module at the n-terminus of the cyspc-c2l. our survey revealed a broad distribution of this architecture in opisthokonta and apusozoa . in addition, we identified several calpains with highly divergent mit domains in the genomes of ectocarpus, thalassiosira, fragilariopsis and leishmania . this broad distribution of the mit domain among eukaryotes indicates that it might have been present since the very early stages of calpain evolution. in unicellular opisthokonta and deeply diverging animals, a few taxa  have one duplicated c2l at the c-terminus, forming mit-cyspc-c2l-c2l. in contrast, the presence of one duplicated mit domain at the n-terminus of cyspc is observed in vertebrates , implying that the calpain architecture in the ancestral vertebrate may have been mit-mit-cyspc-c2l/c2l.

the fourth most ancient architecture is represented in calpain types 19– <dig>  consisting of a large transmembrane domain tml, with more than  <dig> transmembrane segments linked to the n-terminus of cyspc-c2l. these are found in the excavata, plantae and sar supergroups as well as in thecamonas, and are inferred to be monophyletic in the calpain phylogeny . recent multi-gene phylogenomic trees robustly support thecamonas branching as a sister to opisthokonta  <cit> . thus, the broad presence of this particular calpain type implies that the tml-containing calpain gene most likely originated very early but was subsequently lost in the common ancestors of amoebozoa and opisthokonta . interestingly, gene expansions within this subfamily are observed in the excavata species trichomonas. seven paralogs of tml calpains in trichomonas are robustly recovered as a monophyletic group. they all show the absence of the c2l domain, indicating that it may have been lost in a single event before the multiple duplications of the gene . in contrast to other lineages, only one type of calpain gene with a tml domain , named dek <dig>  is found in land plants ranging from physcomitrella to oryza. we did not identify any dek1-like calpains carrying a tml module in the genomes of chlamydomonas, volvox, micromonas or ostreococcus. altogether, the wide distribution of the tml domain among eukaryotic calpains suggests that this domain combination was likely formed before the split of land plants and green algae, then secondarily lost in the early evolution of the chlorophyta green algae.

implications of an alternative eukaryote root
the evolutionary events that contributed to the assembly of these four ancient calpain subfamilies are suggested to have occured before the bipartition of ‘opisthokonta-amoebozoa’ and ‘excavata-plantea-sar-hacrobia’  in accordance with the previously proposed hypothesis for the eukaryotic root  <cit> . however, we still deduced these four calpain types as ancient forms if we change the root of eukaryotes to the excavata as recently proposed  <cit>  , because of the broad taxonomic distribution of the four subfamilies and their presence in key excavata species.

lineage specific gene innovations
several calpain domain architectures appear to be specific for one or more eukaryote supergroups, and are therefore most likely generated before the massive speciation in these lineages along the eukaryote tree. one of these, zn-cyspc, seems to be possessed by opisthokonta  while another domain combination, zf_grf-cyspc, is shared by sar, hacrobia and plantae . both the zn and zf_grf domains have multiple finger-like protrusions that make tandem contacts with their target molecules, but their distinct motifs and distributions among eukaryotes suggest independent origins .

novel domain architectures are also found to be specific for certain groups of eukaryotes . for instance, an insertion of one sol module to the c-terminus of zn-cyspc was observed only in caenorhabditis, drosophilia, homo and mus, indicating that zn-cyspc-sol may have formed after the origin of metazoa. moreover, our survey shows no indications of the classical calpain architecture  outside the metazoa and hence strengthens the notion that these genes are animal-specific  <cit>  . both nter and pef were likely added to the n- and c-termini, respectively, of cyspc-c2l variants in the last common ancestor of metazoa  <cit> . in some calssical calpains, pef domains contribute to protein dimerization . however, based on recent data, it seems that the occurrence of pef and nter domains is not directly associated with dimerization process in all classical calpains. we also found that two calpain variants with an ef-hand module are present in paramecium  and tetrahymena , respectively . however, their motifs are not identical to pef, indicating independent insertion of the ef-hand domains. the ef-hand modules found in ciliate calpains may be involved in binding calcium ions  <cit> , but it is uncertain what concentration of calcium ions is required for regulating these calpains.

a few calpain domain combinations seem to have been derived very recently in a smaller group of organisms. for instance, only the closely related species trypanosoma and leishmania share the domain architecture duf1935-cyspc; hence this combination is exclusive for trypanosomatidae . calpain type  <dig>  composed of cyspc-gukc-adk-aaa, is only identified in chlamydomonas and volvox. it may have been created by the insertion of domains gukc, adk and aaa into the c-terminus of the cyspc paralog, therefore representing a gene unique for chlorophyta green algae . the gain of pub and uba modules at the n-termini of emilinia cyspc paralogs shows that the two ombinations are probably unique to this particular group of haptophyta. the close relationship of pub-cyspc and uba-cyspc in the phylogenetic tree  implies they probably share a common origin . two other calpain variants, one with simple transmembrane motifs  and the other with morn, are both found in tetrahymena and paramecium. they seem to be shared by ciliates . as we show above, many other domains were added to the n- or c- termini of cyspc paralogs by domain-wise evolutionary events and formed lineage specific arrangements  <cit> .

two patterns of domain shuffling in the calpain gene family
altogether, the data reveal two different patterns in the evolution of the calpain gene family. first, the majority of domains in calpains are ancient and have existed as part of other genes and not in combination with cyspc since before the origin of eukaryotes. the early evolution of the calpain gene family therefore most likely occurred by domain shuffling of ancient domains. during the evolutionary history of eukaryotes, domains have been added successively to create increasingly complex genes. in addition, there are several examples of secondary losses or modification of domains. for instance, in the mit-calpain clade in figure  <dig> and additional file 2: figure s <dig>  several sequences either lack or have highly divergent mit domains, indicating that the mit domains have been secondarily lost or modified at several occasions. second, in contrast to this dominating pattern of evolution, we also find nine domains in the calpains which are not present among prokaryotes . such domains have contributed to the generation of genes unique for specific supergroups of eukaryotes and hence constitute lineage-specific paralogs. genes specific to certain eukaryote groups therefore seem to have evolved either by combining only ancient domains, such as uba, gukc and adk, or by combining a mix of ancient and novel domains, such as the trypanosomatidae-specific duf <dig> 

uncover new functions in non-classical calpains
up to now, insight into the regulatory mechansims and physiological functions of calpains has mainly been based on studies of the classical calpains in mammals. obviously, the discovery of a large variety of non-classical calpains creates expectations of many new functions and regulatory mechansims for calpains yet to be uncovered. one important source for new functions lies in the large number of non-classical calpains where one or more of the three amino acid residues essential for enzyme catalytic function have been replaced . in particular, the occurrence of such substitutions is prominent for emilinia, ectocarpus as well as trypanosomatidae  <cit> , where more than 50% of the calpains variants show partial or complete loss of catalytic site residues. the findings support earlier suggestions that these variants may have divergent functions that do not rely on proteolytic processing  <cit> . this is demonstrated by the recent finding that links capn <dig> to a non-proteolytic function in eutherians, where the active site cys is replaced with lys. the non-classical capn <dig> functions as a microtubule-stabilizing protein  <cit> . moreover, capn <dig>  capn <dig>  capn <dig> and capn <dig> have been suggested to share a similar function in the regulation of microtubule stability due to their comparable architectures with tandem c2l/c <dig> domains at the c-terminus of cyspc  <cit> . thus, they are classified together in the palb subfamily. yet, this grouping is not supported by the present analysis. as discussed above, capn <dig>  shows an ancestral origin . in contrast, capn <dig> and capn <dig> seem to have arisen more recently. capn <dig> is placed as sister to capn <dig>  supported by 64% bp,  <dig>  pp_lg and  <dig>  pp_cat . both of them are grouped with capn <dig> close to the clade of the classic calpains . therefore, despite the common domain features, the clustering of capn <dig>  capn <dig> and capn <dig> in different groups, indicate that they may have acquired different functions.

the non-classical calpain dek <dig> is localized to the plasma membrane where it is proposed to be activated by a transmembrane anchor  <cit> . it has been suggested that the dek <dig> homolog of the protist tetrahymena may have been acquired by lateral gene transfer from a green alga-type endosymbiont of ciliates  <cit> . with the addition of more tml-calpains to the phylogeny, the dek1-like calpain in tetrahymena now clusters weakly as a sister to those in thecamonas . this result does not support the lateral gene transfer hypothesis to explain the expansion of dek1-like genes in taxa outside land plants. on the contrary, our phylogeny indicates an early origin of dek1-like genes and subsequent divergent evolution of the amino acid sequences. interestingly, one mammalian non-classical calpain  shows significant similarity to the cyspc domain of dek1-like calpains   <cit> . however, the phylogenetic tree does not indicate that they share the same origin. in addition, we observed complicated multiple domain architectures of tml-calpains in the taxa of stramenopila. they share a common arrangement c2-tml-cyspc. for ectocarpus, the tpr domain was inserted to the n-terminus of c2-tml-cyspc. by contrast, in albugo and phytophthora, the ww domain was anchored to the c-terminus of the sequence. overall, we conclude from these studies that a high degree of sequence divergence and a variety of multiple domain architectures in tml-calpains provide a promising system to elucidate the functional significance of their membrane association.

the simplest calpain variant consisting only of the single cysteine protease domain cyspc is rare in multicellular organisms. rather, it is prevalent in primitive protists and algae. likewise, we observed that a few non-classical calpains do not contain the c2l domain, while all of non-classical calpains lack the pef domain. the regulation of these calpain forms is currently unknown. however, based on the observation that the two ca2+ binding sites of cyspc are implicated in the regulation of classical calpains, one possibility is that ca2+ is the main regulator of these enzymes as well  <cit> . classical calpains, on the other hand, have evolved multiple levels of control over their proteolytic activities imposed by interactions between cyspc and c2l, pef, the small regulatory subunit as well as the calpastatin inhibitor  <cit> . based on the elucidation of the evolutionary history of calpains presented here, it is now possible to study each control step separately in the different calpain variants shown in figure  <dig>  ultimately, this insight may contribute to novel strategies for controlling calpains in human pathologies and further the progress of research into calpain function in general.

CONCLUSIONS
calpains in vertebrates and land plants are known to be crucial for a multitude of physiological and intracellular processes. here, we report a massive expansion of the calpain gene family in unicellular eukaryotes, many of which arose by combining cyspc with protein domains previously unrecognized in this family. phylogenetic inferences support the hypothesis that four calpain gene variants may have been formed in the early evolution of eukaryotes by assembly of ancient domains that were already present among prokaryotes. the lineage-specific calpain genes, however, were formed through shuffling of both ancient and novel eukaryote-specific domains. overall, comparative genomic analyses of this family establish a framework for understanding the evolutionary mechanisms involved in the origin and expansion of eukaryote calpain genes, and it provides a basis for investigating cellular functions of calpain genes.

