BACKGROUND
mate choice is one important force driving sexual selection  <cit> . usually females select males on the basis of vocalisations, behavioural displays, pheromones and morphological traits which may indicate the quality of the males  <cit> . many studies on sexual selection focus on the signalling function and fitness consequences when females mate with males that exhibit particular male ornaments  <cit> . there is little experimental evidence on how intrinsic quality of the choosing individual is integrated in the mate-choice process and affects preference decisions  <cit> . genetic compatibility may be responsible; the best male varies between different female phenotypes and in its extreme form every female may have its own 'best' male  <cit> . alternatively, mate preference may depend on the direct costs and benefits of mating with certain males, which may vary among females. several models of state-dependent mate choice  predict that high-quality females are more choosy and invest more in mate sampling, assuming that mate preference should be more beneficial for high-quality females and low-quality females have less to gain from discrimination. low-quality females are expected to be less choosy or spend less time in mate sampling because they are less successful in attracting a mate or are less successful in mate competition with other females  <cit> .

for bearded tits, hoi  <cit>  demonstrated that only a dominant, high-quality, female initiates males to chase her and she copulates with the 'best' male, which is not necessarily her social partner. females in poor condition try to avoid this energetically costly tactic because every male, even of low quality, would overcome the female's resistance. consequently, low-quality females would not benefit by initiating male competition to chase them. another example in line with the predictions of these state-dependent models is female sticklebacks, gasterosteus aculeatus. they choose between males according to the intensity of red coloration, which decreases as males become more parasitised  <cit> . females prefer redder males, but this varies with the viability of the female. indeed, females in better condition prefer males that are red, whereas females in poorer rearing condition prefer males that are orange  <cit> . several other studies found evidence for condition-dependent variation in mate choice. in photinus ignites fireflies, laboratory-fed females showed lower overall responsiveness for male courtship flashes relative to control females that did not feed in the laboratory  <cit> . female zebra finches, taeniopygia guttata castanotis, spent less time associating with attractive males when their own physical condition was altered by clipped wing feathers  <cit> . experimentally infected female wild turkeys, meleagris gallopavo, assessed a larger set of males, probably to increase the opportunity to obtain complementary parasite-resistance genes  <cit> . our knowledge of the effects of female condition, or phenotypic quality, on mate preference is limited.

the house sparrow, passer domesticus, is a model organism for studying sexual selection in relation to plumage variation . the melanin-based black throat patch is an honest indicator of condition  <cit>  and is often referred to as a 'badge of status' . males with large badges acquire territories of a better quality than small-badged male sparrows and reproductive success is better for females paired with large-badged males because their territories include safe nest sites. moreover, large-badged males are more efficient mate guarders than small-badged males  and reproductive success increase with badge size  <cit> . an experimental study demonstrated a relationship between food quality and the subsequent expression of the badge  <cit> . the badge size seems to be involved in female mate choice, but differences exist among populations . moreover, in some populations it seems that males with small- or average-sized badges invested more in parental care than other males . all these differences among populations could be partially owed to differences in female preferences . the objective of this study was to examine how female condition influences female mate preference based on badge size in house sparrows. in particular we tested two predictions. the first prediction is that females prefer males with larger badges. the second prediction is that high-quality females are more discriminating than females in poor condition. the individual body condition was calculated by dividing body mass by  <dig> . this measure of body condition reflects the relative weight at a given size. previous studies showed that this measure is negatively correlated with a stressful growth situation, in terms of both nutritional and hormonal stress, in passerine birds . in house sparrows, female condition is a positive predictor of laying date, clutch size and number of fledglings . we measured female preferences for male badge size using an aviary two-choice test in which females were presented with two males whose badge was experimentally enlarged to the average size or to the maximum size observed in the natural range.

RESULTS
considering all females together, we did not detect any particular female preference, . after dividing females according to their condition into two groups, however, we found that low-quality females preferred average-badged males . on the other hand, high-quality females did not show a clear preference . therefore, we examined the correlation between females' preference and their own condition. we found that overall there was a strong negative correlation between the proportion of trial time females spent investigating average-badged males in relation to the condition of the female . in the generalised linear mixed models, there were no effects of morphological traits and age, for both males and females, on female preferences . on the other hand, there was a significant effect of male group  on female preferences, and the effect of the interaction between female groups  and male groups on female preferences was also significant . furthermore, when we excluded female groups from the model the significant effect of male manipulation  on female preference disappeared , indicating again that female preference for enlarged or average black bibs is not evident when all the females are considered together. lastly, there was no correlation between the female body condition and the difference  in the proportion of time females spent in front of the two males . this indicates that females of different condition did not display a different degree of preference.

significant values are shown in bold.

discussion
the results of these experiments reveal  a lack of general female preference for the badge enlarged to the maximum size;  selectivity in mate choice varies with female condition and low-quality females prefer males with smaller badges;  in contrast to the prediction low-quality females are more discriminating. to our knowledge, our results provide one of the first experimental evidences that variation in preference for a male ornament is associated with female condition, in particular for females with poorer body condition. a recent study on zebra finches demonstrated that high-quality females preferred high-quality males' mate-advertising songs, whereas low-quality females preferred low-quality males' song  <cit> . our results are partially in line with this previous work, but in our study only females in poor condition displayed a clear mate preference.

cotton and co-workers  <cit>  suggested that condition-dependent preference depends on female ability to pay the costs of or gain benefits from her discrimination. in particular, in their review they supported the hypothesis that high-quality females show the strongest mate preference. our results seem to be contrary to their predictions; indeed low-quality females displayed a clear mate preference. these findings suggest that the relative importance of the benefits  varies with changing female condition and female house sparrows may adjust their preference for badge sizes accordingly . in a wild house sparrow population, males with average-sized badges invested more in parental care than other males  <cit> , which is in line with our results. therefore, poor-quality females may have more to gain directly from choosing average-sized badge males with high parenting ability. a female in poor condition, without the male parental contribution, would have fewer chances to breed successfully than a high-quality female that could even breed without paternal care. this has to do with the dual signalling function of the black melanin badge: contrasting male badge size may signal different male qualities. consequently, whether to choose a male according to genetic quality  or paternal quality  may depend on intrinsic female quality. this is in line with gowaty's 'female constraint hypothesis'  <cit> . according to this hypothesis, low-quality females should try to increase their fitness by selectively mating with a good father. high-quality females should be more selective when choosing the genetic father . females hence may trade parental quality  for genetic quality . this may provide one explanation for genetic variance in sexually selected male signals.

an alternative explanation is that low-quality females are trying to avoid direct attacks from more ornamented males . aggressive chases are a frequent part of sexual behaviour in house sparrows  <cit>  and females may prefer a safe environment by mating with less aggressive males. sexually experienced female japanese quails, coturnix japonica, that are offered a choice between two conspecific males previously observed engaging in an aggressive encounter prefer to affiliate with the less aggressive male  <cit> . therefore, it seems that in japanese quail, a species in which male courtship and mating are potentially harmful to females, females keep away from relatively aggressive males in order to avoid physical punishment.

variation in female preference according to badge size of male house sparrows exists among all populations but the direction of the preference differs. in a danish population males with larger badges obtained a mate earlier during the breeding season than males with smaller badges. females displayed more copulation solicitations in front of male dummies with large badges  <cit> . conversely, on lundy, an island  <dig> km off the south-west coast of england, females preferred males with smaller badges and produced a higher number of offspring with such males  <cit> . moreover, males that invested more in current reproduction subsequently developed a smaller badge. this indicates a trade-off between the reproductive effort and the expression of this sexual ornament. in our study population, males with smaller, but not the smallest, badges started to breed earliest, had the largest clutches and invested in parental care more than other males  <cit> . an experimental study in spain did not find any support for reproductive success being based on badge size  <cit> . lastly, in a controlled laboratory study, females showed no preference for large-badged males  <cit> . all these differences observed among populations could be partly explained by differences in female condition. indeed it is not only female intrinsic quality but also environmental quality, e.g. food availability  <cit> , which may influence female mate choice  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
when we examined female choice in the usual way house sparrows did not show a preference for males with larger badges. the preference, however, was highly variable between individuals. in terms of female quality, poor-quality females preferred smaller-badged males. our results suggest that differences in female condition are the causes of within-population variation in mating preferences. even differences observed among populations could be partly explained by differences in female condition. it would be interesting to know how environmental heterogeneity, female condition and the mate preference pressure they create influence the evolution of a sexually selected trait. depending on the costs and benefits of parental investment the female condition-dependent preference for a sexually selected trait related to male parental investment may vary across populations.

