BACKGROUND
lectins are proteins displaying at least one non-catalytic domain, which specifically and reversibly binds to mono or oligosaccharides  <cit> . lectins are known as being an extremely useful tool for carbohydrate investigation on cell surfaces, for glycoproteins isolation and characterization, and for lymphocytes polyclonal activation. numerous lectins have been isolated from many organisms ranging from viruses and bacteria to plants and animals, and they are known to play a key role in a variety of biological processes . plant lectins have many biomedical applications , including targeted drug delivery  and therapy against several kinds of tumors and infections  <cit> .

artinm is a d-mannose-binding lectin from seeds of artocarpus integrifolia that stimulates macrophages and dendritic cells to produce il- <dig>  <cit> , an activity triggered by the artinm interaction with the n-glycans of tlr <dig>  <cit> , and is able to induce th <dig> biased immune response. as a consequence, artinm administration to mice has been shown to confer resistance to leishmania  <cit> , and paracoccidioides brasiliensis <cit>  infections. the lectin artinm is also capable of inducing neutrophil haptotactic migration mediated by the simultaneous interaction of its carbohydrate recognition domains  with cell surface n-glycans   <cit>  and extracellular matrix n-glycans   <cit> . an amplification loop for the in vivo artinm inflammatory activity is provided by mast cell degranulation, which is most likely due to the lectin interaction with glycans on fcri  <cit> . in addition, artinm is able to accelerate the process of wound healing and epithelial tissue regeneration  <cit> . therefore, artinm has biomedical applications and is a potential pharmaceutical agent. in this study we have aimed to produce high-level expression of active soluble rartinm in e. coli system.

RESULTS
optimization of soluble rartinm expression in e. coli
the number of recombinant proteins used for therapeutic applications has increased dramatically  <cit> . in this work, the artinm coding region was amplified by pcr, using as template the cdna clone pll <dig> described previously  <cit> . the primers used were designed to create an ndei and a bamhi sites at the initiation and termination codons, respectively. the amplified product was about 460 bp , which is in accordance with the length of the artinm coding region . this pcr fragment was digested with ndei and bamhi, and cloned into the ndei and bamhi sites of the pet29a expression vector. the resulting construction was confirmed by restriction analysis and sequencing  and named pet29-artinm.

considering recombinant protein solubility as an indication of its correct folding and activity, our goal was to establish the conditions to obtain high production of soluble protein. therefore, pet29-artinm was introduced in e. coli bl21-codonplus-rp, a strain that contains the t <dig> expression system and extra copies of the argu and prol trna genes. this strain was chosen because the artinm sequence analysis revealed several rare codons . in our study, different conditions were assayed to determine those able to provide optimal overexpression of soluble artinm and four parameters were tested: temperature and shaking speed during induction, concentration of the induction agent  and period of induction . these four parameters were shown to be important in affecting the amount and the solubility of rartinm. figure  <dig> shows the comparison between the results obtained in two different conditions: one in which large amounts of rartinm was produced , but in a insoluble form , and the optimized conditions , in which the highest amount of soluble rartinm was produced .

taking advantage of the specificity of the carbohydrate recognition property of artinm, the recombinant lectin was purified from the e. coli lysate by affinity chromatography on a d-mannose column, and was eluted with  <dig>  m d-mannose in pbs, providing the profile showed in figure 2a. such purification process by itself certifies that the sugar binding activity of rartinm was preserved. measurements by bca assay  revealed an average yield of  <dig>  mg rartinm per liter of culture. the rartinm has been analyzed through tsk-g2000sw gel-filtration column and the elution profile showed a single peak of 16 kda, consistent with the monomer molecular mass. meanwhile, as expected, the jartinm was eluted in a volume compatible with the tetramer molecular mass . the homogeneity of rartinm was confirmed by sds-page . taken together, these results show that the rartinm produced in e. coli is monomeric and capable to bind d-mannose.

production of recombinant proteins in active and highly purified form for biomedical research, biotechnology, and pharmaceutical industry is a huge challenge. the major and frequent difficulty in expressing a heterologous protein in a bacterial system concerns the tendency of the recombinant protein to become insoluble  <cit> . our data shows that in the optimized conditions here defined , soluble and active artinm is produced in large quantities in the e. coli expression system.

rartinm and jartinm have similar primary structure
rartinm was characterized by mass spectrometry and n-terminal amino acid sequencing by automated edman degradation. electrospray ionization mass spectrometry  has been regularly used to characterize recombinant proteins, since it is a rapid and precise method for determining molecular mass of proteins and peptides and can be used to validate protein sequences  <cit> . therefore, a sample of purified rartinm has been analyzed by esi-triple quadrupole – mass spectrometer. maxent  <dig> algorithm was used for de-convolution of multiple envelop ions which determined that rartinm has a molecular mass of  <dig> .5 da . it is in good agreement with the molecular mass determined for jartinm  and the average molecular mass  calculated from the amino acid sequence  <cit> . amino acid sequencing of peptides derived from trypsin digestion of rartinm, performed by esi-ms peptide mass fingerprinting  and collision induced dissociation  has covered 41% of the total artinm amino acid sequence . the spectrum of c-terminal peptide  confirmed that rartinm c-terminal sequence was equal to jartinm . n-terminal sequencing showed that the first  <dig> amino acids are in accordance with the sequence of jartinm, except for the substitution of glutamine  for arginine  at residue  <dig> , which was confirmed by edman degradation and mass spectrometry. this substitution was due to an unintentional mutation introduced at the cloned sequence, as verified by dna sequencing. mass spectrometry detected this new trypsin cleavage site correspondent to a tryptic peptide at residues  <dig> to  <dig> . n-terminal sequencing by edman degradation of rartinm indicates that the recombinant protein was not acetylated at the n-terminal, a modification that was found in jartinm  <cit> . the absence of n-acetylation  at the n-terminal and replacement of q for r  account for a molecular mass of  <dig> . <dig>  which is close to native isoforms .

the absence of the initial methionine at the rartinm n-terminus, as in the mature jartinm, was an interesting and unexpected finding. recombinant proteins produced in e. coli cytosol often possess the methionine, corresponding to the translational initiation codon , at the n-terminus  <cit> . in a significant fraction of the e. coli endogenous cytosolic proteins, this n-terminal methionine residue is excised by a methionylaminopeptidase   <cit> . biochemical and genetic studies indicated that the major determinant for cleavage by map is the amino acid occupying the n-terminal penultimate position or, in other words, the second amino acid  <cit> . according to the generally accepted rules for map, one of the highest cleavage probabilities is found when ala is the second amino acid  <cit> , as in the artinm sequence. therefore, it is reasonable to propose that the n-terminal methionine of the rartinm was efficiently processed in e. coli bl21-codonplus-rp by endogenous maps.

the rartinm has secondary and tertiary structures equivalent to the jartinm
circular dichroism spectra  and fluorescence spectroscopy of rartinm and jartinm were obtained in order to evaluate the correct folding of the recombinant protein and determine some structural details . the analysis of secondary structure content showed that rartinm contained predominantly β-sheet structure, as characterized by the positive ellipicity at wavelength 195 nm and the negative ellipticity at 218 nm. fluorescence measurements were performed in order to verify the presence of tertiary structure, all emission spectra were recorded from  <dig> – 450 nm with excitation at 280 nm . thus, our cd spectrum and the fluorescence analysis indicated that rartinm is correctly folded and has a defined conformational structure suitable for comparative functional studies.

functional analysis of rartinm using glycan array
the characterization of the specificities of glycan-binding proteins is of primary importance for a recombinant lectin, and the glycan array has been an important tool for this investigation. the specificity of the fluorescence-labelled lectins was evaluated by binding to the  <dig> oligosaccharides present on the glycan array available at the consortium for functional glycomics. the glycan array profile for both native  and recombinant artinm reveals that both lectin forms recognized with high affinity the same subsets of complex-type biantennary n-glycans containing manα1-3manβ1-4glcnacβ1-4glcnacβ . this result is coherent with our recent observation that native and recombinant artinm interact with equivalent kinetic rates and affinity equilibrium constants to horseradish peroxidase glycoprotein  <cit> , a n-glycosylated protein that contains the trimannoside manα1-3man, which is a known ligand for jartinm  <cit> .

il- <dig> inducing property of jartinm is preserved in rartinm
functionally, we had previously demonstrated that jartinm induces il- <dig> production by macrophage cell lines, as well as peritoneal and spleen macrophages  <cit> . to determine whether this property of jartinm was preserved in rartinm, we next verified the in vitro il-12p <dig> production by spleen macrophages stimulated with 5 μg/ml of rartinm . we observed that the rartinm-stimulated macrophages released il- <dig> in culture supernatants in concentrations that were similar to the induced by the native protein, demonstrating that the rartinm produced in e. coli preserved this biological activity exerted by the plant jartinm. this fact is conceptually acceptable, because il- <dig> production is triggered by artinm interaction with type  <dig> toll-like receptor, whose usual agonists are low molecular mass microbial components, unable to enclose more than one site of interaction with the receptor. however, it is expected that artinm activities that depend on receptor cross-linking to be triggered, such as mast cell degranulation, will not reproduced by the monomeric recombinant lectin.

CONCLUSIONS
considering the potential use of artinm as an immunotherapeutic molecule, this study was designed to produce high-level of soluble/active rartinm in e. coli system, for both research and pharmaceutical purposes. here we report a high-yield production of rartinm lectin using pet29a and bl21-codonplus-rp as expression system, and its characterization by sds–page, one-step purification through immobilized d-mannose affinity chromatography, circular dichroism , fluorescence spectroscopy, glycoarray analysis and il- <dig> production. several evidences indicate that the final product, rartinm, is correctly folded, biochemically active and endowed of biological properties exerted by the plant lectin artinm. taken together, our data provides evidences that rartinm will be a useful tool for future biomedical studies and that e. coli expression system is appropriate to produce large quantities of functional artinm for industrial purposes.

