BACKGROUND
pectobacterium carotovorum subsp. carotovorum  is a plant-pathogenic enterobacterium which belongs to the soft-rot group of pectobacterium. it has the ability to cause serious damage worldwide on a numerous types of plants in field and storage stage  <cit> . in morocco, approximately 95% of the p. carotovorum isolated from potato plants with tuber soft rot are p. carotovorum subsp. carotovorum <cit> . this bacteria produce a wide variety of plant cell wall-degrading enzymes, causing maceration of different plant organs and tissues  <cit> . many of its virulence genes have been identified, including genes encoding degradative enzymes, diverse regulatory systems, and the type iii secretion system  <cit> . pectobacterium spp. is a complex taxon consisting of strains with a range of different phenotype, biochemical, host range and genetic characteristics. several methods were used to characterize this taxon, including biochemical assays and construction of phylogenetic trees by using gene sequences. for example, toth and his collaborators  <cit>  have shown that there are five major clades of pectobacterium : atrosepticum, betavasculorum, carotovorum, odoriferum, and wasabiae. their analysis did not include p. brasiliensis which form individual clade  <cit> . recently, other authors  <cit>  were interested in molecular typing methods. these methods are increasingly used in the analysis of p. carotovorum subsp. carotovorum relatedness in order to identify their transmission routes and to assess its biodiversity. they have demonstrated a high diversity of polymorphism between these subspecies.

to survive, colonize and cause disease, plant-pathogenic bacteria modulate expression of their genes often using two-component signal transduction systems . these systems typically consist of two conserved components, a sensor histidine kinase and a response regulator  <cit> . p. carotovorum subsp. carotovorum employs different two-component systems for controlling production of virulence determinants  <cit> . pmra-pmrb is one example of tcs for plant pathogenic bacteria, which affects production of extracellular enzymes, virulence and bacterial survival in potato tubers as well as in arabidopsis leaves and generally in planta <cit> . the main target genes of this tcs encode products with sequence similarity to dna binding response regulators and autophosphorylatable histidine kinases.

the pmra locus is required for resistance to the cationic peptide antibiotic polymyxin b and to other plant-derived antimicrobial peptides in pectobacterium. it controls the production of proteins that mediate the modification of the lipopolysaccharide  core and lipid a  <cit> . the changes in lps structure leads to reduction of the negative charges at cell surface and hence altered interactions with iron and cationic peptides  <cit> . this gene was found in almost all enterobacteriaceae <cit> . in p. carotovorum subsp. carotovorum, pmra gene encodes a protein of  <dig> amino acid  that reveals  <dig> % of identity to pmra of salmonella and basr of e. coli. its inactivation in p. carotovorum subsp. carotovorum does not reduce the maceration ability of the bacterium on potato tuber but nevertheless remains essential for survival under adverse environmental conditions  <cit> . phylogenies built with single genes have been used already to examine the relationships of the plant-pathogenic enterobacteria  <cit> . in this study, pmra sequence analysis was used to identify the pectobacterium carotovorum subsp. carotovorum and to estimate their genetic diversity. in addition, in at least one other system, this analysis was better correlated with enterobacterial repetitive intergenic consensus pcr  assays and phylogenies built from 16s rdna genes  <cit> .

RESULTS
twenty-nine isolates from soft-rotted potato tubers  were used in this study. they have been identified by biochemical and phenotypic tests . a part of the strains were already confirmed as p. carotovorum subsp. carotovorum using eric-pcr  <cit> . however, all strains yielded a 434 bp dna fragment in pcr with the y <dig> and y <dig> specific primers for pectate lyase  genes of pectobacterium spp.  <cit>  and a 666pb with specifics primers for pmra of pectobacterium carotovorum subsp. carotovorum  . our purpose in this study was to develop a tool with a high specificity to detect typical pectobacterium carotovorum subsp. carotovorum isolated in morocco and that could serve as a tool to evaluate the genetic diversity of these subspecies. to investigate the utility of pmra-pcr as a method of identification, the dendrogram built  from well-characterized strains was used to illustrate the clustering of subspecies, on the basis of a single-gene  and analysis of 16 s rrna gene sequences of pectobacterium spp. . our phylogenetic tree  revealed a high diversity among the subspecies tested with a maximum identity to the pmra gene of strain wpp <dig> , ranging from  <dig> to 99%. moreover, phylogenetic distance between all strains is  <dig>  suggesting that all pectobacterium carotovorum subsp. carotovorum circulating in morocco, have their origin from the united states  <cit> . following numerical analysis of the  <dig> pmra sequences by neighbor-joining  and upgma, the taxa were divided into two groups , the similarity value between the two main clusters was about 96%. however, both clusters were represented by six different sequences  and over 50% of the strains were included in the cluster i. detailed scrutiny of the results given by the nj method showed that all p. carotovorum subsp. carotovorum formed only one clade with 99% bootstrap. however, to verify the genetic diversity within our subspecies, the sequence alignment with maximum composite likelihood method  were used. a comparison of  <dig> different pmra sequences  revealed  <dig>  as estimated value of the shape parameter for the discrete gamma distribution. the intraspecies comparison of dna sequence identity is determined by the blast algorithm for p. carotovorum subsp. carotovorum strains for pmra gene. this finding suggests that there is considerable genetic diversity in p. carotovorum subsp. carotovorum strains, which is in accordance with previous works reported by different authors  <cit> . also, the multiple sequence alignment of these sequences revealed conserved regions at different stretches. these regions could be used for designing degenerate primers or probes for pcr-based amplification or hybridization-based detection of pmra sequences from different subspecies of p. carotovorum. furthermore, within the genus pectobacterium, there are five major clades forming a polyphyletic group: p. atrosepticum, p. betavasculorum, p. carotovorum subsp. carotovorum, p. odoriferum <cit> , and p. wasabiae. these analyses did not include strains . our phylogeny  places all the strains previously identified using biochemical and phenotypic methods in the group p. carotovorum subsp. carotovorum, noting that, some potato strains collected in different years and in widely different locations were grouped closely in the same group. it places also p. brasiliensis more similar to p. carotovorum subsp. carotovorum than to p. atrosepticum  and p. wasabiae wpp <dig>  knowing that the level of similarity between the two pmra sequences subspecies p. atrosepticum and p. carotovorum subsp. carotovorum is  <dig> %. many others phylogenetic analysis revealed that not all subspecies of p. carotovorum were grouped in a single, robust clade identified by all methods  <cit> . this was a strong indication that the different subspecies of p. carotovorum could indeed belong to different species. despite the fact that some authors have concluded that the phylogenies built with single genes do not have many informative characters, and they “may not accurately reflect interspecies taxonomic relatedness”  <cit> , our current phylogenetic analysis of pmra sequences was clearly sufficient to determine whether all of these subspecies can be placed in the same subspecies or to split into two different subspecies. noting that, the pmra gene sequences have several advantages, including being effectively a single-copy gene, highly conserved in p. carotovorum subsp. carotovorum and easy to amplify. therefore, the sequencing and analysis sequence data for the pmra region of p. carotovorum subsp. carotovorum strains could be a reliable tool for detection of pathogens. moreover, pmra sequence analysis has shown a high genetic diversity among the isolates p. carotovorum subsp. carotovorum. the same results have been reported by other studies  <cit>  using several phylogenetic analyses seeking to understand the relationship among these nominal subspecies.

a all strains have for hosts: potato and for pmra-pcr product:  <dig> pb.

CONCLUSIONS
our pmra gene sequence analysis, linked to pathogenicity studies, could be used to identify and monitor the diversity of the p. carotovorum subsp. carotovorum subspecies.

