BACKGROUND
sequence alignment is a central problem in computational molecular biology. every branch of molecular biology- from database search, phylogeny reconstruction to protein structure prediction- takes sequence alignments as its foundation. the functional and/or structural properties of a new sequence could be predicted from its degree of similarity with some clearly defined and known sequences. if the similarity between two sequences is statistically significant and does not simply stem from sequence repeats of low complexity, then the two sequences are likely to be homologous and thus may have similar functions and/or structures.

to understand whether an observed sequence similarity implies indeed a functional or evolutionary link, or is just a chance event is the central problem for the evaluation of the statistical significance of sequence alignment scores. the basic question to be answered is: what is the probability that a similarity score as great as that actually observed in a comparison between real sequences could have arisen by chance, when sampling from suitably-defined populations of random unrelated sequences? this question is generally addressed by analyzing the distribution of optimal alignment scores from random or real but unrelated sequences  <cit> , which is the approach applied in this research.

accurate statistical estimate for similarity searches for local alignments has been studied comprehensively  <cit> , and the gumbel distribution is used to estimate the statistical significance for local alignments  <cit> . however, we still lack a complete theoretical solution to the optimal global alignment between sequences, due to the fact that global alignment scores grow proportionally to the length of the sequences and small changes in the scoring system can produce a different alignment  <cit> .

abagyan and batalov suggested that global alignment scores between unrelated protein sequences followed the gumbel distribution  <cit> . however, since the scoring system that they used favoured local alignments, these alignments they produced may not be global but local. dayhoff et al  and dayhoff et al evaluated global alignment scores for randomized sequences  using their log-odds scoring matrix at pam <dig> and a constant gap penalty. the distribution of the resulting scores matched a normal distribution  <cit> . webber and barton used sequences belonging to different folds of the scop database whose percent identity to each other is less than  <dig> to analyze the distribution of global alignment z-scores between sequences  <cit> . they found that the gamma distribution describes the distribution of z-scores better than either the normal or gumbel distribution.

the determination of homolog is also affected by the reference datasets used for statistical estimation. lipman et al analyzed the distribution of scores among  <dig> vertebrate nucleic acid sequences and compared these scores with randomized sequences prepared in different ways  <cit> . when the randomized sequences were prepared by shuffling the sequence to conserve base composition, the standard deviation was approximately one-third less than the distribution of scores of the natural sequences, thus leading to an overestimate of the significance if such randomized sequences were used for a significant test. when sequences were locally shuffled for randomization, the standard deviation was similar to that of the natural sequences.

in this research, we chose  <dig> different ways to generate random and real but unrelated protein sequences as reference datasets for significance estimation. four scoring matrices were applied for global alignments. the pam <dig> and pam <dig> matrices were selected because they imply different evolutionary time  <cit> , and the blosum <dig> and blosum <dig> matrices were selected for their sound performance in database search  <cit> . most alignments were carried out with the affine gap penalty  as it penalizes less for additional gaps, which is more reasonable. the resulting alignment scores were then fitted with three distributions to obtain the statistical characteristic of the global alignment scores.

RESULTS
derivation of distributions with different sequence sets
we have generated random and real but unrelated sequences in six different ways as reference datasets. the datasets are abbreviated as lac, lca, gs, ls, smp and rus sequences respectively. the definition of the abbreviations can be found in the list of abbreviations used below.

in general the three-parameter gamma distribution performs the best in the goodness of fit test with the distribution of global alignment scores. when the shape parameter of the gamma distribution is sufficiently large, the gamma distribution closely approximates a normal distribution. thus the normal distribution agrees with the data as well. the gumbel distribution deviates from the alignment score distribution over the majority of the score frequencies, however its performance gets a little better for the ls sequence set than for the other sequence sets.

the distributions of global alignment scores of the lac, lca and gs sequence sets are similar . the three-parameter gamma distribution defines the empirical distributions extremely well. the fitting quality of the normal distribution is better than that of the gumbel distribution, but both of them diverged from the majority of the global alignment frequencies.

for the ls sequence sets the majority of the empirical score frequencies disagree with the normal or gumbel distributions, whereas the three-parameter gamma distribution describes the alignment data extremely well . it also can be seen that the performance of the gumbel distribution is better with this sequence set than with the others.

the distribution of alignment scores of the smp sequence set is quite different. the empirical score distribution of sequences generated with the pam <dig> mutation probability matrix and aligned with the pam <dig> log-odds scoring matrix is different from those generated with the pam <dig> matrix. both the gamma and normal distributions fit the score frequencies of the former well , whereas for the latter, the normal distribution disagrees with the majority of the score curve.

most of the score distributions of the rus sequence set agree well with the gamma distribution, no matter what the sequence length is. although there are occasions when no distribution agrees perfectly well with the score distribution, the three-parameter gamma distribution is still the closest to the empirical distribution .

in database search, it is always the sequences, with higher scores , are of interest. so the score frequencies were also plotted against the natural logarithm of scores at the tail of the distribution . it shows clearly that the gamma distribution outperforms both the normal and gumbel distributions even at the tails of those distributions.

the effect of sequence length on the theoretical distribution
we chose the lac sequence set to analyze the impact of the sequence length on the gamma distribution because the amino acid composition of the lac sequence set is the same. the result shows that the shape parameter of the fitted gamma distribution increases and scale parameter decreases gradually as the sequence length increases, at the same time the performance of the normal distribution for curve fitting improves slowly .

the difference of window size for local shuffling
the impact of the window size of local shuffling approach on the gamma distribution was also studied . the result shows that when the window size increases, the shape parameter of the fitted gamma distribution decreases and the fitting performance of the normal distribution gets worse.

the impact of scoring scheme
the effects of the four scoring matrices are minor on the distribution of global alignment scores. the only exception is the empirical distribution of the smp sequence set aligned with the pam <dig> log-odds scoring matrix, in which the normal distribution performs as well as the gamma distribution.

discussion
dayhoff et al  and dayhoff et al  evaluated global alignment scores for randomized sequences generated as our lca sequence set using the pam <dig> log-odds scoring matrix and a constant gap penalty  <cit> . the distribution of the resulting scores matched a normal distribution. we tried both constant and affine gap penalty for the lca sequence set and found that the distribution of optimal scores of the lca sequence set agrees better with the gamma distribution than with the normal distribution.

webber and barton took sequences of different folds with less than  <dig> percent identity from the scop database for global alignments and fitted the z-scores to peak distributions  <cit> . they found that the gamma distribution describes the alignment scores between different folds better than either the normal or gumbel distribution. the problem is that the derivation of z-scores requires additional alignments to be calculated, and the z-score carries with it an implicit and possible incorrect assignment of significance by the normal distribution.

the score distribution of the smp sequence set simulated from the evolution of the ancestor sequence at pam <dig> is an exception. the fitted shape parameter of the gamma distribution is very large, and the normal distribution fits with the data equally well. this is because sequences generated with the pam <dig> mutation probability matrix are around  <dig> percent similar with each other, so they can hardly be viewed as random sequences for distributional statistical analysis.

this study specifies three-parameter gamma distribution as the theoretical distribution of global alignment scores of random protein sequences. it could be used for the inference of homology between sequences whose relationship is unknown through significance evaluation. one issue worth exploring further is to formulate a function taking sequence length, scoring scheme and amino acid composition into account so that rapid statistics conclusion is reached.

CONCLUSIONS
the global alignment optimal scores have been regarded as normal  <cit>  or gumbel distributed  <cit> . we have shown here that the normal distribution holds only for sequences simulated with the pam <dig> matrix, while the gumbel distribution disagrees with the optimal alignment score frequencies for all sequence sets in this research. the study shows that the three-parameter gamma distribution describes the random sequence alignment scores better than the normal or gumbel distribution. the normal distribution performs as well as three-parameter gamma distribution when the shape parameter of the gamma distribution is sufficiently large.

