BACKGROUND
centromeres serve as the fundamental chromosome structure responsible for accurate chromosome segregation during eukaryotic cell division. most eukaryotic chromosomes are monocentric, having microtubule attachment domains restricted to a small constriction zone. in contrast, holocentric chromosomes have microtubule binding domains along the entire length of the chromosome and have independently evolved many times .

monocentric and holocentric chromosomes have been extensively studied, but less attention has been given to centromeres with intermediate structures. centromeres with longer constrictions occur after robertsonian fusions  <cit>  as well as in atypical situations such as in hybrids and cancer cell lines  <cit> . there are also cases where centromeres appear to have undergone extreme expansion. for example, chromosomes with longer “compound centromeres” have been reported in a few mammalian species, including the muntjac  <cit>  and mouse  <cit> . similarly extremely large primary constrictions, or “metapolycentric” centromeres, have been observed in legume plants  <cit> .

the evolution of such large centromeres may represent cases of “centromere drive”  <cit> . female meiosis in plants and animals is asymmetric with only one of the four meiotic products entering the egg. under the centromere drive model, centromeric alleles on chromosomes, especially longer alleles, attach more strongly or efficiently to spindle microtubules at the kinetochore compared with other alleles and thereby gain a transmission advantage into the egg. this model also may explain the observed rapid evolution of centromeric dna sequences among lineages, which are generally highly repetitive satellites, because such sequences that bind stronger to the spindle would be similarly preferentially transmitted.

success of chromosomes as a result of centromere drive in female meiosis simultaneously can have a negative influence on male meiosis. in contrast to female meiosis, all four meiotic products become gametes in males. unequal binding at the kinetochore during chromosome segregation may trigger cell cycle checkpoints that are deleterious, such as reduced fertility or aneuploidy . as a consequence of these deleterious effects, there should be selection for compensatory mutations  that restore meiotic parity  <cit> . consistent with this idea, kinetochore proteins, including the cenh <dig> protein, which is the histone h <dig> variant that binds and defines centromeres, also evolve rapidly, presumably to compensate for or suppress chromosome segregation defects  <cit> . in addition to faster sequence evolution, duplication of cenh <dig> has occurred in some legume species, but only in those with expanded centromeres  <cit> . once suppression has evolved, continued competition for the oocyte during female meiosis may select for different but “stronger” primary centromeric sequences, leading to repeated cycles of expansions and collapses  <cit> . additionally, deleterious mutations that become linked to driving centromeres likely counterbalance unlimited expansion  <cit> .

the recent discovery of metapolycentric chromosomes reveals that there is likely a continuum in centromere structures between monocentric and holocentric chromosomes  <cit> . we first noticed unusual chromosome structures in the red imported fire ant solenopsis invicta in a fish experiment  <cit>  and decided to explore further. in this article, we report the first observations of extremely long centromeres in s. invicta. we conducted cytological, bioinformatics, molecular, and comparative analyses to identify and characterize censol, the major centromeric satellite dna repeat in fire ants. our results are consistent with a model of simple runaway centromere expansion due to centromere drive for the evolution of long centromeres in fire ants.

RESULTS
centromeres are larger in s. invicta than s. geminata
we used dapi to stain metaphase chromosomes and found that, in contrast to typical monocentric chromosomes with a narrow constriction at the centromere, every s. invicta chromosome exhibited long primary constrictions . primary constrictions spanned an average of 34 % of the chromosome length . we used a quantification method  <cit>  that adjusts for the lower dna intensity and narrowness at the constricted region to estimate the proportion of the chromosome represented by the centromere. with the qualification that condensation patterns may be affected by the specific chromosomal preparation method used, we estimated that the primary constrictions accounted for ~ <dig>  mb of individual chromosomes , and in total covered ~58 mb  of the predicted haploid genome size of 484 mb  <cit> .fig.  <dig> contrasting centromere morphologies in s. invicta and s. geminata. the centromere structure was revealed by dapi staining of metaphase chromosomes. the elongated  and the small  primary constrictions are indicated. scale bars, 5 μm



we examined centromere structure in the closely related tropical fire ant s. geminata to test whether this extended primary constriction was specific to s. invicta. surprisingly,  <dig> of the 16 s. geminata chromosomes showed the typical monocentric morphology with small primary constrictions; a single exception exhibited an elongated constriction . the primary constrictions on the  <dig> typical chromosomes spanned an average of only 11 % of the individual chromosome length , which was about three-fold less than that of s. invicta. the centromere on the exceptional chromosome spanned  <dig>  % . the centromere morphology found on all s. invicta chromosomes and a single chromosome of s. geminata is similar to that described as ‘compound centromeres’ or ‘metapolycentric’ chromosomes .

candidate centromeric satellite sequences in fire ants
the most prevalent tandem repeat, or satellite, in a genome generally is assumed to be the candidate centromeric repeat  <cit> . we followed an established bioinformatics pipeline  <cit>  to identify high copy tandem satellites from the draft genomes of s. invicta and s. geminata . the top ten satellites and their summary statistics for both species are shown in additional file 3: table s <dig>  we compared the sequences by blast similarity searches to identify shared satellites within the two top-ten lists. we found nine repeats were shared between the ant genomes, with only the top two having identical ranks .

centromeres are composed of only one dominant repeat in many species, but some species do have more than one type of repeat  <cit> . thus, we focused on the top two satellites for both s. invicta and s. geminata. the top satellite for both fire ants was a similar 109 bp repeat. these monomers had minor sequence and length variation, which is typical of centromeric satellites in other species . the average gc content was  <dig>  and  <dig>  % in s. invicta and s. geminata, respectively, which is compatible with observations suggesting a slight preference for at-rich centromeric satellites in animals  <cit> . this repeat showed no significant similarity to any dominant tandem repeat from  <dig> species, including the candidate centromeric repeats in four ants  <cit> , and also no similarity to known transposons or satellite sequences .

the second most abundant satellite was 139 bp in s. invicta and 138 bp in s. geminata. although the modal lengths differed by 1 bp, the repeats in both clusters had an average identity of  <dig>  %. similarly, the counts of the second ranked satellites had a dramatic drop  compared with that of the top repeat for both genomes. we next examined the chromosomal localization of these satellites using fluorescence in situ hybridization  analysis to determine if they were centromeric.

chromosomal localization of the satellites in s. invicta and s. geminata
we performed fish experiments on metaphase chromosomes to determine the localization of the predominant 109 bp satellite. using a labeled monomer as the probe we found that the hybridization signals  localized to all chromosomes in both males  and females  . hybridization signals were restricted to one large region per chromosome rather than scattered over each chromosome suggesting a largely uninterrupted organization in the genome. hybridization signals on average occupied  <dig>  %  of the chromosome length in s. invicta. bac-fish revealed a pattern qualitatively indistinguishable from the fish analysis using one monomer . importantly, the hybridization location coincided with the centromeric constrictions , and hereafter we refer to this satellite as censol.fig.  <dig> 
a localization of the first and the second most abundant satellites on the metaphase chromosomes of s. invicta and s. geminata. fish analysis on haploid cells combining the censol probe  with the second most abundant satellite ; chromosomes counterstained with dapi . b summary of the length distributions of the censol repeat in the s. invicta and s. geminata draft genomes. blastn hits of the consensus censol sequence against the s. invicta and s. geminata genomes were binned by sequence length. the 109 bp unit was the dominant repeat length for both ants. c sequence logos generated with  <dig>  and  <dig> unique 109 bp censol sequences from s. invicta and s. geminata, respectively. the height of each letter is proportional to the frequency of four nucleotides, adenine , thymine , guanine , and cytosine . the total height of each stack, measured in bits, is related to the binding energy  <cit> . ecorv and bsaai restriction sites are indicated with arrowheads. the bsaai in parenthesis indicates a less common polymorphic cutting site in the censol monomers. the locations of the a1repv <dig> primers are shown

fig.  <dig> 
censol satellite fully localizes to the primary constriction of the haploid chromosomes in s. invicta and s. geminata. a and b fish analysis with the censol probe ; chromosomes counterstained with dapi . a the elongated  and the small  primary constrictions of chromosomes in s. invicta  and s. geminata  are indicated. b positions of centromeres and censol coverage on chromosomes. centromeric positions were categorized based on censol signal locations in fish analysis. chromosomes from s. invicta  and s. geminata  in  are artificially aligned and sorted according to the centromeric positions. the censol coverage rates  on each chromosome are labeled. c dapi staining of the s. invicta chromosomes from a cell transitioning from metaphase to anaphase. fifteen chromosome pairs are together while one pair has separated . d aceto-orcein staining of metaphase chromosomes from male testes imaginal discs. chromosome number is  <dig> likely because chromosomes come from two adjacent cells, although we cannot exclude potential diploidization which occurs in some cells of haploid male ants  <cit> . scale bars, 5 μm



the censol hybridization signals were more restricted on all s. geminata chromosomes compared to s. invicta  and only occupied an average of  <dig>  %  of the chromosome length. for  <dig> of  <dig> chromosomes, the censol signal coincided with the centromeric constrictions. interestingly, censol was localized only at the edge of the constriction for the one s. geminata chromosome with an extended centromeric constriction . the centromeric hybridization patterns of censol were confirmed in all cells examined .

in contrast to the centromeric localization of the censol satellite, the second most abundant satellite, hereafter called solmin, was patchily distributed only on  <dig> and nine of the s. invicta and s. geminata chromosomes, respectively . the fluorescence signals of this repeat did not overlap with those of censol or the primary constrictions, excluding it as a centromeric or pericentric repeat. together, these data show that the censol satellite is part, or probably all, of the centromeric satellite in s. invicta and all but one chromosome in s. geminata.

centromeric positions can be used to describe the types of fire ant chromosomes. the centromeres of s. invicta previously were reported to be predominantly metacentric  <cit> , whereas the chromosomes of s. geminata were metacentric and acrocentric  <cit> . based on the censol signals in our fish analysis and the cytological metaphase staining, we re-categorized s. invicta chromosomes into four metacentric, four submetacentric, seven subtelocentric, and one telocentric  chromosomes . chromosome classification was consistent between the censol fish localization and our own karyotyping methods . on the other hand, we found six metacentric, nine submetacentric, and one subtelocentric chromosomes in s. geminata . differences between the previous studies  <cit>  and ours likely can be explained by our inclusion of high-resolution fish analysis and better chromosome resolution.

sequence conservation of censol in s. invicta and s. geminata
we compared censol sequences of both fire ants obtained from intact genomic arrays, which preserve the native structure, rather than the sequences from whole-genome assemblies, which may be assembled inappropriately due to their repetitive nature. previous screening of a s. invicta bac library by end sequencing revealed that  <dig> reads from six bac clones  were composed of tandem repeats formed by the same monomer. analysis using tandem repeat finder  <cit>  confirmed that the satellite dna was composed of multiple 109 bp units, which corresponded to censol found using the bioinformatics approach. additional screening of the s. invicta bac genome library by pcr to survey censol abundance in the ant genome revealed that  <dig>  %  were positive for this satellite. this percentage was higher than the genome coverage estimated from fish , possibly indicating that the bac library is biased for centromeric dna, that short stretches of censol are scattered throughout the s. invicta genome, or both.

we next used the s. invicta a1repv <dig> primer pair to clone censol elements from the s. geminata genome. electrophoresis of pcr products revealed a ladder-like pattern, consistent with censol being arranged tandemly in the s. geminata genome . the consensus sequence for each fire ant was generated using  <dig> units from the s. invicta bac clones  and  <dig> units from the s. geminata clones. sequence analysis showed that most of the repeats from both species carried the recognition site for the restriction enzymes ecorv  and bsaai acgt) with a modal length of 109 bp .

we performed a multiple sequence alignment using the same sets of cloned sequences from s. invicta and s. geminata. we used the maximum likelihood method implemented in mega  to construct a gene tree for these censol sequences. these analyses revealed that the gene sequences from each species did not cluster into species-specific groups . this result indicates only minor divergence between the two censol sequence sets of the two ant species.

we used blastn to query the consensus sequence against the s. invicta  <cit>  and s. geminata draft genomes and found  <dig>  and  <dig>  matches in the respective genomes, with some polymorphism in both length and sequence, in total covering ~ <dig>  and ~ <dig>  mb. these values likely considerably underestimate the total censol coverage because repeats generally are collapsed in genome assemblies derived from short sequencing reads. the modal length of the censol blastn matches was 109 bp for both ant species . similar to the cloned products above, nucleotide substitutions, insertions, and deletions were present among different monomers with some creating polymorphisms in the presence of restriction endonuclease recognition sites . this length variation also explains censol multimerization and the additional ‘off’ ladder steps in the restriction digestions .fig.  <dig> the abundance of the censol repeats in fire ant genomes. a detection of the censol repeat by restriction digestion of s. invicta and s. geminata genomic dna. equal amounts of uncut or restriction digested  genomic dna were separated by agarose gel electrophoresis and then stained with sybr safe . southern analysis of the dna from the left panel transferred to a nylon membrane with the censol probe . two types of ladder-like patterns  are indicated. b slot blot hybridization to estimate the relative amounts of the censol sequence between the s. invicta and s. geminata genomes. dna amounts are labeled



considering only the 109 bp monomers, there were  <dig>  and  <dig> copies  in the s. invicta and s. geminata genomes, respectively . pairwise comparisons of these unique 109 bp monomers using blastn  <cit>  revealed that the nucleotide identity between species ranged from  <dig>  to  <dig>  % . we used weblogo to summarize the aligned sequences and found that the nucleotides at each position were generally identical between s. invicta and s. geminata, with a few sites having a different predominant nucleotide . however, the two species did not share any identical censol sequences. the most similar pair between the two species differs at one base; position  <dig> is a thymine  in s. invicta and an adenine  in s. geminata. these data indicate that the censol repeat sequences are polymorphic but also highly similar between these species. taken together, the conserved 109 bp censol repetitive sequence is the basic satellite dna unit in both s. invicta and s. geminata genomes.

censol copy number variation in s. invicta and s. geminata
we performed genomic restriction fragment analysis followed by gel electrophoresis to determine if censol repeats are arranged tandemly in both fire ants. the ecorv digestion pattern of s. invicta genomic dna displayed a ladder-like pattern with ~100 bp intervals . similarly, the bsaai digestion pattern also produced an ~100 bp ladder-like pattern, with additional bands in between the main ~100 bp fragments , which was due to the presence of infrequent bsaai recognition sites created by sequence polymorphisms in the censol repeats . in contrast to s. invicta, no apparent restriction fragments were visible by dna staining of the s. geminata genomic dna digestions even though the same amount of dna was used .

southern hybridization using censol dna confirmed that these restriction fragments were censol elements in s. invicta . notably, this also revealed a clear ladder pattern in s. geminata . the similar restriction pattern in the censol southern hybridization experiment between s. invicta and s. geminata confirmed that this satellite is arranged tandemly on chromosomes. also the differences in dna staining and hybridization signals indicate that the s. invicta genome has more censol units compared with the s. geminata genome. thus, both ant species have the same or similar censol satellite but at different copy numbers.

we performed a slot blot hybridization experiment to quantify the difference in the relative amounts of censol repeats between the s. invicta and s. geminata genomes. a comparison of the censol hybridization intensity on different dilutions of genomic dna revealed that the censol copy number in the genome of s. invicta was 10– <dig> fold more than that in s. geminata . the weaker hybridization intensities in s. geminata are not likely due to divergence of the censol sequence because this probe  has a high average similarity to the ensemble of copies for both species . thus, the slot blot results in combination with the restricted censol hybridization patterns in the fish experiment reveal that the censol satellite is present but is far less abundant in the s. geminata genome.

cenh <dig> copy number in fire ants
legume species with two copies of the cenh <dig> gene have larger centromeres than those with a single copy  <cit> . we searched for cenh <dig> paralogs in the s. invicta and s. geminata genomes to determine if either has additional cenh <dig> gene copies. we found only a single copy of the cenh <dig> gene in both genomes, and the gene sequences of both are most similar to the predicted cenh <dig> genes of other insect species . the nearest similar sequence was the canonical histone h <dig>  as predicted. thus, there is no clear association between the cenh <dig> gene copy number and centromere size in fire ants.

censol copy number evolution in other solenopsis
centromeric satellites may undergo differential expansion or contraction in closely related species  <cit> . we examined five additional species to determine how censol copy number has evolved in this group of ants. altogether, we examined: three socially polymorphic fire ants from south america s. invicta, s. macdonaghi, and s. richteri ; the social parasite fire ant s. daguerrei; two north american fire ants s. aurea and s. geminata; and a more distantly related thief ant s. indagatrix . s. geminata forms a monophyletic clade with s. aurea, and this clade is sister to the group with s. daguerrei, s. invicta, s. macdonaghi, and s. richteri  <cit> .

we estimated relative censol copy number differences using slot blot hybridization. we detected censol hybridization signals in six of the seven solenopsis species . s. invicta, s. macdonaghi, and s. richteri contained comparable large numbers of censol repeats relative to each other, and  <dig>  to  <dig>  fold more than that of s. geminata . the censol copies of s. daguerrei and s. aurea showed a moderate increase  relative to s. geminata . we did not detect censol in the outgroup species s. indagatrix using the slot blot assay . however, we could amplify the censol satellite by pcr using a high concentration of template dna . this suggests that a trace amount of censol satellite is present in the s. indagatrix genome . the pcr assay also revealed a ladder-like pattern of censol with ~100 bp interval in all seven species , which resembled the restriction digestion pattern of the s. invicta and s. geminata genomes . these data suggest that the censol repeats are distributed tandemly in all seven solenopsis species.fig.  <dig> evolution of censol copy expansion in solenopsis. a slot blot hybridization to estimate the relative amounts of the censol sequence among seven genomes. the censol signals were normalized with the staining intensities of total dna  by methylene blue. the censol signals at unsaturated dilutions for each species  were first calculated relative to the shared s. daguerrei genome and then rescaled relative to the s. geminata genome. dna amounts are labeled. the evolutionary relationships of the seven species are shown below. b pcr assay for detecting censol satellite in seven solenopsis species. genomic dna concentrations used for pcr are indicated below. c localization of censol by fish on diploid interphase cells in five solenopsis species. d a model for the evolution of censol copy number in solenopsis. the censol levels for the fire ant species  were used to infer ancestral state levels for censol  using the linear-change parsimony model. continuous censol values were manually split into four bins , which placed the seven studied species into four groups based on their relative censol levels



we used fish to compare the censol distribution for six of the seven species assayed by slot blot hybridization. we could not include s. richteri because we lacked tissue samples. also, we decided to examine interphase cells for s. macdonaghi, s. daguerrei, s. aurea, and s. indagatrix because fresh ant samples of these species with dividing cells were not available. the censol signals were widely distributed on s. invicta, s. macdonaghi, s. daguerrei, and s. aurea chromatin, which parallel the expanded censol copies in their genomes . in contrast, s. geminata exhibited more localized signals of censol , which is consistent with the restricted censol signals on metaphase chromosomes  and the weak signals in the hybridization experiments . lastly, censol signals were undetectable by fish for s. indagatrix , which is consistent with the absence of signal in the slot blot assay and the requirement of high template amounts for the pcr assay.

the long centromeres in s. invicta, s. macdonaghi, and s. richteri could be due to expansion from an originally shorter centromere; alternatively long fire ant centromeres contracted in the four other fire ant species. we conducted an ancestral state reconstruction analyses to infer which condition might have been more likely. our analysis using the linear-change parsimony model indicates that the ancestral centromere state was short or moderate in length, supporting centromere expansion in the lineage leading to s. invicta, s. macdonaghi, and s. richteri . however, the direction of centromere evolution for s. indagatrix, s. aurea, and s. geminata was unresolved. we obtained a similar ancestral state pattern using squared-change parsimony .

discussion
centromeres and centromeric satellite dna in ants
studies on ant chromosomes were led largely by imai, crozier and their co-workers starting in the mid-20th century  <cit> . as fish was not available at that time, the vast majority of these cytological studies focused on the chromosome number and the karyotype  <cit> . despite knowledge of the karyotypes for > <dig> ant species  <cit> , detailed examination of the centromere and identification of centromeric satellite sequences are lacking.

to the best of our knowledge, this is the first study combining bioinformatics and cytologicial examination of candidate centromere sequences in any ant. previously, candidate centromeric repeats of four ant species were identified using computational methods to find the most dominant satellite in the genome  <cit> ; however, no cytological evidence was provided to support centromeric localization of these satellites. we used a similar bioinformatics approach to identify the top ten satellites for two fire ant species, s. invicta and s. geminata. we then used fish to demonstrate that the most common tandem repeat, censol, is localized to the centromeres on all chromosomes in both fire ants, whereas the second-most abundant satellite does not. our results support that the censol satellite is a major component of fire ant centromeres, however definitive evidence will require cenh <dig> localization and chromatin immunoprecipitation studies .

unusually long centromeres in s. invicta
we demonstrated that the s. invicta centromeres are unusually long, spanning ~34 % of each chromosome. such long centromeres have been found previously in only a few cases in plants and animals . in contrast, the s. geminata chromosomes  have the more typical, narrow centromeres commonly found in many animals and plants. we did not directly examine centromere length in s. macdonaghi and s. richteri, but they likely have long centromeres as well because both have high censol copy numbers and have censol interphase fish patterns that were qualitatively similar to s. invicta. correspondingly, s. daguerrei and s. aurea, which have ~4-fold greater censol copy number than s. geminata but less than s. invicta, s. macdonaghi, and s. richteri, likely have centromere lengths intermediate to those of s. invicta and s. geminata. we found very low but detectable levels of censol in the outgroup thief ant, s. indagatrix, suggesting that censol is not part of its centromere  or is too divergent with only a few copies remaining conserved enough for detection .

based on the current hypothesis of the phylogeny of the study species, our data suggest that there have been at least two bouts of censol expansion in the solenopsis genus . ancestral state reconstruction supports one centromere expansion event occurring in the common ancestor of four south american fire ants   <cit> , and another later at the base of s. invicta, s. macdonaghi, and s. richteri . centromere evolution in s. geminata, s. aurea, and s. indagatrix is unclear. resolving whether expansion or contraction occurred in these three species  will require additional karyotypic studies of multiple solenopsis species.

a new centromere may be evolving in s. geminata
our cytological studies showed that one s. geminata chromosome has an extended centromeric constriction . interestingly, censol hybridization was localized only to the edge of this constriction , possibly indicating that a new centromeric satellite has invaded this s. geminata chromosome and may represent the early stages of a centromere revolution. alternatively, it is possible that censol has not yet displaced the original centromeric satellite on this chromosome. the identity of this satellite remains to be determined, but our data demonstrate it is not the second most common repeat in the genome .

how did centromeres become so long in fire ants?
centromeric satellite sequence turnover is well established and copy number differences of satellite repeats can be extreme both between species and among chromosomes within the same species . however, why are all the centromeres so long in s. invicta ?

one possibility is genetic drift whereby the copy number of censol on each chromosome increases or decreases by mutation  or recombination  with copy number changes in either direction being equally likely and occurring independently for each chromosome. by chance all  <dig> of the s. invicta centromeres may have drifted to the longer sizes. a second possibility is that centromere length evolves neutrally but cell biological processes constrain all the centromeres to be of similar size, e.g., perhaps to avoid aneuploidy during cell division. while this may explain how all centromeres are uniformly long, it cannot readily explain the initial transition from the ancestral short to current long centromeres.

a third explanation, which we favor, is that selection for longer centromeres has occurred , at least in some fire ants. we suggest centromere drive is likely the selective force underlying evolution of long centromeres in fire ants. because only one of the four meiotic products in females is inherited by the egg, centromeres that violate the normally ostensibly fair process of meiosis have a selective advantage. the large sizes of all the primary constrictions in s. invicta chromosomes are consistent with a model of inter-homolog chromosomal competition  <cit> . differences in centromere dna length between the chromosome homologs may result in an uneven distribution of kinetochore proteins , such that longer centromeres have more microtubule binding sites, and thus, preferential transmission into the oocyte. because this is a general mechanism for all chromosomes, centromere drive could select for longer centromeres on every chromosome  <cit> . thus, s. invicta and its relatives may have experienced runaway expansion of their centromeres.

the long s. invicta centromeres resemble the recently characterized metapolycentric centromeres in legumes and the compound centromeres in muntjacs and wallabies . these monocentric chromosomes have clear multiple centromeric protein docking domains, exhibiting either dotted or continuous patterns along the entire length of the constrictions. metapolycentric chromosomes in legumes are associated with the maintenance of a duplicated copy of cenh <dig> gene in the genome  <cit> . we found no evidence of additional copies of cenh <dig>  and thus fire ant centromere expansion occurred through a mechanism independent of cenh <dig> duplication.

could centromere expansions be a common feature of hymenoptera?
studies in the ciliated protozoan tetrahymena, which only has female meiosis, has led to the proposal that species without male meiosis have unsuppressed  centromere drive, thereby facilitating greater centromere complexity and turnover  <cit> . in ants , males are haploid, and therefore, competition between centromeres is absent during male meiosis. thus, selection for suppression of centromere drive during male meiosis would also be expected to be relaxed in hymenoptera. this leads to an intriguing speculation that centromere complexity, expansion, and turnover in hymenopteran species is greater relative to species with both male and female meiosis.

one unanswered question is why haven’t long centromeres been reported more frequently in hymenoptera? we suggest a reason is that long centromeres in hymenoptera simply may have gone undetected as a result of previous karyotyping methods. although there have been many karyotype studies in hymenoptera, the vast majority of these cytological studies used colchicine or cocemid  <cit> , a mitosis inhibitor. these inhibitors arrest cells at metaphase, making it easier to find cells to karyotype, but prolonged exposure leads to artificially over-condensed chromosomes. resolution of centromere morphology on such small chromosomes is difficult. indeed the original karyotypes for s. invicta are tiny and long centromeres cannot be seen  <cit> . additionally, given the frequent goal of categorizing centromeric locations , there may have been inadvertent biases to focus on chromosome photos with well defined ‘x’ configurations. in this study we did not use a cell cycle inhibitor, a choice that likely considerably aided our ability to detect long chromosomes. we suggest that with better microscopy resolution and examination of less compacted chromosomes, more ants, other hymenoptera, and other haplo-diploid organisms with long centromeres likely will be found.

CONCLUSIONS
we describe a case of evolution of long centromeres in the fire ant solenopsis invicta; centromere lengths are on average one-third of each chromosome. several other species also have long centromeres while one species has the typical shorter centromeres. expansion of this centromeric repeat likely occurred multiple times in fire ants. we also identified and characterized the major centromeric dna repeat. our results are consistent with a model of simple runaway centromere expansion due to centromere drive. we suggest that expanded centromeres may be more prevalent in ants, and other haplodiploid organisms, than previous considered.

