BACKGROUND
it has been long argued and widely accepted that early metazoan evolution included the progressive addition and elaboration of cell layers, with the first animals being little more than a small sphere of epithelial cells. the addition of a second inner layer is thought to have followed, resulting in the so-called ‘gastraea’ that possessed an ectoderm and endoderm. a middle mesodermal layer is proposed to have evolved last  <cit> . it has been noted that this progression is reflected in contemporary early branching animals, with sponges and placozoans being interpreted as having one, two or no germ layers, cnidarians and ctenophores possessing two or possibly three germ layers and bilaterians having three or possibly four  <cit> . the generation of two or more germ layers by gastrulation and the consistency of the fate of these layers unites the eumetazoa . further, comparative developmental genetic evidence supports the homology of the endomesoderm  <cit>  and ectodermal neurogenesis  <cit>  across eumetazoans. however, it remains controversial whether the cell layers in sponges are homologous to eumetazoan germ layers and whether sponges undergo gastrulation.

sponges consist of four classes - demospongiae, calcarea, homoscleromorpha and hexactinellida  <cit>  - of simple animals that share a common body organisation. as juveniles and adults, they are sessile, tri-layered animals that lack true muscles and nerves. sponges possess an internal network of canals and ciliated choanocyte chambers lined with epithelial cells, primarily endopinacocytes and choanocytes, and are separated from the external environment by another epithelial layer, the exopinacoderm . sandwiched between these epithelial layers is the collagenous mesohyl, which is enriched with multiple types of amoebocytes, including the pluripotent stem cell type, the archeocyte . water currents created by ciliary beating in choanocyte chambers enable most of the physiological requirements of sponges, including feeding, respiration, excretion and reproduction. this juvenile/adult body plan is the outcome of the dramatic reorganisation of the radially-symmetrical, bi- or trilayered larva at metamorphosis  <cit> .

sponges utilise recognisable gastrulation-like morphogenetic movements during embryogenesis  and metamorphosis  . in marine haplosclerid demosponges, for instance, morphological evidence suggests that early cleavage leads to the formation of a stereoblastula, which then delaminates to form a multilayered parenchymella larva . in homoscleromorphs , multipolar egression of a stereoblastula generates a single-layered cinctoblastula larva  <cit> , while in a hexactinillid , cellular delamination of a coeloblastula gives rise to the trichimella larva  <cit> . interestingly, the pattern of embryogenesis can be polymorphic. in a halisarcid demosponge , multipolar ingression and/or invagination of a coeloblastula or a stereoblastula forms a multilayered parenchymella or disphaerula  larva  <cit> . epithelial-mesenchymal transitions are common at metamorphosis in diverse homoscleromorphs, calcareans and demosponges .

despite the occurrence of gastrulation-like morphogenetic processes in sponges, it is still unclear how sponge development relates to eumetazoan gastrulation, which is defined as a morphogenetic event that leads to the establishment of germ layers. some authors consider cell movements that generate multi-layered embryos during sponge embryogenesis gastrulation , although some argue that gastrulation occurs during sponge metamorphosis when an adult internal layer develops by emt and transdifferentiation of larval ciliated epithelial cells . yet it remains unclear whether sponge cell layers display the defining characteristic of eumetazoan gastrulation. this uncertainty led others to question the existence of germ layers, and hence gastrulation, in sponges .

here, we show by cell-labelling experiments in the demosponge a. queenslandica that the cell layers established during embryogenesis lack fixed identities and do not directly give rise to the cell layers of the juvenile. in addition, inner epithelial choanocytes in the juvenile can alter their fate by transdifferentiating into a range of cell types, including cells of the outer epithelium. thus, sponge cell layers lack fate determination and stability. however, we find that expression of the sponge orthologue to the highly conserved eumetazoan endomesodermal marker gata <cit>  is consistently restricted to the inner layer of larvae and juveniles, suggesting a deep shared ancestry between the sponge internal cell layer and the eumetazoan endomesoderm.

RESULTS
germ layers by definition exhibit restricted cell fate  <cit> . thus, to address whether sponge embryonic and early juvenile cell layers are germ layers, we employed cell-labelling techniques in the demosponge a. queenslandica to examine the fate of larval epithelial and internal cells at metamorphosis, as well as the stability and fate of differentiated choanocytes in newly established juvenile tissues at the so-called ‘rhagon’ stage .

the swimming a. queenslandica larva metamorphoses into a feeding juvenile with choanocyte chambers within three days of attaching its anterior end onto a natural substratum  at 25°c. within hours of settling, the three-layered, bullet-shaped larva transforms into an encrusting mat. a previous cell-labelling study in a. queenslandica indicated that external larval cells transdifferentiated into internal choanocytes in juveniles  <cit> . however, it was not determined whether all cell types found on the larval exterior are transdifferentiating at metamorphosis, and whether the larval epithelial cells differentiate directly into choanocytes or indirectly via an intermediate cell type. in other sponges, the larval epithelial layer has been reported to shed entirely  <cit> , be phagocytised by archeocytes  <cit> , differentiate into choanocytes through a non-ciliated amoebocyte intermediate  <cit> , or directly differentiate into choanocytes without loss of cilia  <cit>  . using the terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase dutp nick end-labelling  assay for detecting apoptotic dna fragmentation, we demonstrate that a large proportion of a. queenslandica larval epithelial cells undergo programmed cell death shortly after the onset of metamorphosis . tunel-labelled nuclear fragments can be observed readily in the metamorphosing animal, often as phagocytised bodies within archeocytes .

to study the fate of non-apoptosing larval epithelial cells, the outer layer was labelled with the plasma-membrane dye cm-dii. we assume that the cell lineage will be indicated by retention of this label in their plasma membrane, while the plasma membrane of the cells that phagocytised apoptotic fragments of larval epithelial origin will not be labelled. an overnight incubation of free-swimming a. queenslandica larvae in seawater containing 10 μm cm-dii strongly labelled the plasma membrane of ciliated epithelial cell types, the columnar epithelial cell and the flask cell . during metamorphosis, these labelled cells internalised, resorbing their cilia and differentiating into archeocytes, which migrated throughout the animal . within two to three days, a number of juvenile cell types were labelled, including choanocytes and exopinacocytes , suggesting that these differentiated from pluripotent archeocytes, which were originally derived from the larval epithelium. therefore, at metamorphosis ciliated epidermal cells of the larvae can either undergo apoptosis or transdifferentiate, via an archeocyte intermediate, into a range of juvenile cell types that are found in the inner, outer or middle layer of the juvenile.

using the thymidine analog, 5-ethynyl-2′-deoxyuridine , to label the nuclei of proliferating cells, we found that only amoeboid cells localised to the inner cell mass, identified here as archeocytes , and no other cell types, continue to proliferate in the swimming larva . taking advantage of this observation we followed the fate of these edu-labelled cells during metamorphosis. we found that these archeocytes of the larval inner cell mass origin also gave rise to choanocytes and exopinacocytes during metamorphosis . together, these observations indicate that a range of larval cell types can generate the diversity of cell types present in the juvenile and that there is no correspondence between the cell layers established during embryogenesis and those produced at metamorphosis.

sponge metamorphosis has been regarded by some as gastrulation . as observed here and in previous studies, morphogenetic processes operational during sponge metamorphosis occur also during eumetazoan gastrulation . therefore, we sought to determine if cell layers established at the end of a. queenslandica metamorphosis are developmentally determined. to test this, we labelled choanocytes that form internal choanocyte chambers and a small number of archeocytes surrounding choanocyte chambers by incubating juveniles with cm-dii . within one week, the majority of the labelled choanocytes had undergone emt and dedifferentiated into archeocytes , of which some had migrated away from the chambers and differentiated into other cell types including exopinacocytes  and sclerocytes . thus, inner epithelial choanocytes are capable of transdifferentiating into outer epithelial cells via an archeocyte intermediate, demonstrating the lack of cell fate determination.

the lack of fate determination in cell layers in a. queenslandica is consistent with this demosponge lacking germ layers as classically defined. in light of this finding, genes shown to be instrumental in eumetazoan ectoderm or endomesoderm formation may not be expected to be present in demosponges. indeed, of the genes previously implicated in the differentiation of the endomesoderm across cnidaria and bilateria, namely twist, snail, forkhead and gata <cit> , only gata was identified in the genome of the demosponge a. queenslandica <cit>  . also, amongst the  <dig> transcription factor- and signalling molecule-encoding genes shown to be ‘endomesodermally’ expressed in the cnidarian nematostella vectensis <cit> , only nine orthologues are present in the a. queenslandica genome .

a. queenslandica gata transcripts are localised to a substantial fraction of internal cells of late-stage embryos, free-swimming larvae  and juveniles , but not detectable in outer layer epithelial cells at any developmental stage, similar to predominantly internal  expression of bilaterian gata <dig> <cit>  and cnidarian gata <cit> . thus, although this study argues against the existence of true germ layers in demosponges, the striking parallel in gata expression patterns suggests a common ancestry between the sponge inner cell layer and the eumetazoan endomesoderm.

gata genes are present in other early branching taxa, including placozoans, ctenophores and the other classes of sponges  <cit> , although a. queenslandica is the only species for which there currently are published expression patterns. understanding the evolution of germ layers will be assisted by the analysis of the evolution and expression of genes conserved in bilaterian mesoderm specification and formation, along with further analysis of developmental processes in these taxa. for example, recent analysis of the genome of the ctenophore mnemiopsis leidyi failed to reveal many ‘mesodermal’ genes despite it appearing to have genuine endomesoderm  <cit> , and it is known that cell movements from one embryonic layer to another occur during metamorphosis in some medusozoan cnidarians  <cit> . these approaches, along with resolving the exact order in which these early-branching metazoans diverged from the lineage leading to bilaterians , provide an opportunity to reconstruct the evolution of germ layers and gastrulation.

CONCLUSIONS
comparison of demosponge and eumetazoan development and body plans minimally provides insights into their last common ancestor, which appears to have existed some  <dig> million years ago  <cit> . although the possibility that their last common ancestor possessed germ layers and these were lost in the demosponge lineage cannot be excluded, the lack of developmental commitment of larval and juvenile cell types in a. queenslandica and homology of internal layers across a demosponge and eumetazoans are consistent with eumetazoan germ layers and gastrulation evolving after the divergence of demosponge and eumetazoan lineages. thus, we propose that ancestrally metazoans consisted of multiple cell layers whose fate was labile. the evolution of the gene regulatory network endowing progressive determination of cell layers resulted in the emergence of primary germ layers and mechanisms to segregate these layers in eumetazoans . the origin of the majority of genes that have conserved roles in eumetazoan gastrulation and germ layer determination evolved after the divergence of demosponge and eumetazoan lineages , giving credence to this supposition. the conserved expression of gata in cells located inside the body of all metazoans, along with conserved differential expression of wnt and tgf-β ligands along demosponge and eumetazoan body axes  <cit> , suggests that these genes were essential in providing critical positional information to cells in the first multicellular metazoans. these, along with eumetazoan-specific genes, later became essential components of the specification and determination of eumetazoan germ layers.

