BACKGROUND
neurogenesis in the subgranular zone of hippocampal dentate gyrus continues throughout lifetime. the rate of neurogenesis decreases with aging, and mild cognitive impairment is closely related to the reduction of neurogenesis . decreased neurogenesis is a well-known causative factor for the clinical signs of neurodegenerative disease, and enhancing hippocampal neurogenesis with methods like exercise, diet restriction, environment enrichment decelerates the progression of disease . in particular, exercise is associated with a decreased risk of cognitive impairment and improved memory and learning capability in an animal model of alzheimer’s disease and in aged mice  <cit> . many studies show that exercise enhances memory function and hippocampal plasticity under normal and pathological conditions . in a previous study, we showed that treadmill exercise positively affected cellular proliferation and neuroblast differentiation in the dentate gyrus of type  <dig> diabetic model  <cit> .

d-galactose  is a reducing sugar and over-dose results in the accumulation of galactitol and the formation of advanced glycation end products  <cit> . as a result, increased oxidative stress caused aging-like changes in brain; thus, d-gal has been used in chemically induced aging models . chronically exposing mice to systemic d-gal causes decreased adult neurogenesis in the hippocampal dentate gyrus . in addition, administrating d-gal to mice impairs learning and memory by reducing expression of pre- and post-synaptic proteins  <cit> . d-gal-induced brain aging is partially caused by an impaired astrocyte and cholinergic system  <cit> . however, the effects of treadmill exercise in the aspect of hippocampal adult neurogenesis have not been confirmed in the d-gal-induced aging model.

as a common mediator of various signal transduction pathways, phosphorylated camp-response element binding protein  binds to the camp-response element  in the promoter region of target genes  <cit> . pcreb has been highlighted for its role in adult neurogenesis which has been demonstrated in vitro and in vivo studies . during adult neurogenesis, pcreb expression site is localized at the subgranular zone of hippocampal dentate gyrus and pcreb expression period overlaps with doublecortin  expression  <cit> . but until now, the role of pcreb during adult neurogenesis after treadmill exercise in the d-gal-induced aging model is not clear. therefore, we investigated the effect of treadmill exercise on hippocampal neurogenesis and pcreb expression in the hippocampus of the d-gal-induced aging model with or without exercise.

methods
experimental animals
five-week-old male c57bl/6 j mice were purchased from japan slc, inc. . the animals were housed under conventional conditions with adequate temperature  and humidity  control on a 12-h light-dark cycle. food and water were available ad libitum. the procedures for handling and caring of animals followed the guide for the care and use of laboratory animals issued by institute of laboratory animal resources, usa,  <dig>  and the experimental protocol was approved by the institutional animal care and use committee  of seoul national university . all experiments were conducted in a manner to minimize the number of animals used and the suffering caused by the procedures used in this study.

drug and exercise treatment
following a 1 week acclimation to laboratory conditions, the animals were divided into four groups : sedentary vehicle-treated , exercise vehicle-treated , sedentary d-gal-treated , and exercise d-gal-treated  groups. d-gal was subcutaneously administered  to 6-week-old mice once/day for 6 weeks. in addition, ex-veh and ex-d-gal animals were familiarized with running on a motorized treadmill  for 1 week at 6 weeks of age. the running speed and durations were 10 m/min, 20 min for the first day, with an increment of 10 min/day until reaching 60 min/day to fulfill the 70% of maximal oxygen consumption  <cit> . after becoming familiarized with the treadmill, electrical stimulation to encourage the mice to run was discontinued to avoid pain stress beginning at 7 weeks of age. the running duration was 60 min/day, and the running speed was increased gradually from  <dig> to 12 m/min. the speed was accelerated 1 m/min every 2 weeks.

check for body weight and food intake
body weight was measured on monday morning of every week and at the end of the experiment. food intake was measured, and corrected for spillage by weighing the jars containing food every week between  <dig>  to  <dig>  h. data are expressed as gram/day/body weight .

tissue processing
at the end of the experiment, all mice were anesthetized with mixture of zolazepam and tiletamine  and perfused transcardially with  <dig>  m phosphate-buffered saline  followed by 4% paraformaldehyde in  <dig>  m phosphate-buffer . the brains were removed and postfixed in the same fixative for 12 h. for brain derived neurotrophic factor  and pcreb immunohistochemistry, brain tissues  were dehydrated with graded concentrations of alcohol and xylene for embedding in paraffin. three μm-thick sections were serially cut using a microtome , and they were mounted onto silane-coated slides . for immunohistochemical staining except bdnf and pcreb, brain tissues  were cryoprotected by infiltration with 30% sucrose for 1- <dig> days. following equilibration in 30% sucrose in pbs, the brain were serially cut on a freezing sliding microtome  into 30-μm-thick coronal sections. the sections were collected in six-well plates containing pbs and stored in storage solution until further processing.

immunohistochemistry
in order to obtain accurate data, immunohistochemical staining was carefully conducted under the same conditions. for paraffin sections, five tissue sections were selected at 30 μm apart between  <dig>  and  <dig>  mm posterior to the bregma in reference to a mouse atlas  <cit>  for each animal. bdnf and pcreb immunohistochemical staining was performed according to a previous study using paraffin-embedded block  <cit> . briefly, the sections were placed in 400-ml jars filled with citrate buffer  and heated in a microwave oven  operating at a frequency of  <dig>  ghz and 800 w power setting. after three heating cycles of 5 min each, slides were allowed to cool at room temperature and were washed in pbs. free floating sections were also carefully processed under the same conditions to obtain accurate data for immunohistochemistry. five sections in 180 μm apart from each other were selected between  <dig>  mm and  <dig>  mm posterior to the bregma for each animal with reference to a mouse atlas  <cit> .

the sections were sequentially treated with  <dig> % hydrogen peroxide  in  <dig>  m pbs and 10% normal goat or rabbit serum in  <dig>  m pbs. then, they were incubated with diluted chicken anti-nestin antibody , rabbit anti-ki <dig> antibody , goat anti-dcx antibody , rabbit anti-bdnf  or rabbit anti-pcreb  overnight, and subsequently exposed to biotinylated goat anti-chicken, rabbit anti-goat, or goat anti-rabbit igg  and streptavidin peroxidase complex . then, the sections were visualized by reaction with  <dig> ’-diaminobenzidine tetrahydrochloride .

to elucidate the effects of exercise in this experiment, the corresponding areas of the dentate gyrus were measured from five sections per animal. the number of ki67-, dcx-, and pcreb-positive cells in all groups was counted using an image analysis system equipped with a computer-based ccd camera . additionally, total dendritic length of dcx-positive neuroblasts  was measured using nih image  <dig>  software  with neuronj plug-in  <cit> .

in addition, the region of interest in the dentate gyrus was analyzed using an image analysis system. images were calibrated into an array of 512 × 512 pixels corresponding to a total dentate gyrus . pixel resolution was  <dig> gray levels. the intensity of nestin, dcx and bdnf immunoreactivity was evaluated by means of a relative optical density , which was obtained after transforming the mean gray level using the formula: rod = log . rod of the background was determined in unlabeled portions using imagej and the value was subtracted for correction, yielding high rod values in the presence of preserved structures and low. the rod ratio of was calibrated as a percentage.

western blot
to confirm the effects of d-gal and/or exercise on nestin, dcx and bdnf protein levels, mice  were sacrificed by decapitation after deep anesthesia. brains were rapidly removed and hippocampi were dissected out with a surgical blade. hippocampi were immediately frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at -80°c until further processing. tissues were homogenized in 50 mm pbs  containing  <dig>  mm ethylene glycol bis -n,n,n′,n′ tetraacetic acid  ,  <dig> % nonidet p- <dig>  10 mm ethylendiamine-tetraacetic acid  , 15 mm sodium pyrophosphate, 100 mm β-glycerophosphate, 50 mm naf, 150 mm nacl, 2 mm sodium orthovanadate, 1 mm phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride  and 1 mm dithiothreitol . after centrifugation, the protein level was determined in the supernatants using a micro bca protein assay kit using bovine serum albumin as the standard . aliquots containing 50 μg of total protein were boiled in a loading buffer that contained 150 mm tris , 3 mm dtt, 6% sds,  <dig> % bromophenol blue and 30% glycerol. the aliquots were then loaded onto a polyacrylamide gel. after electrophoresis, the proteins were transferred from the gel to nitrocellulose transfer membranes . to reduce background staining, the membranes were incubated with 5% non-fat dry milk in pbs containing  <dig> % tween  <dig> for 45 min, followed by incubation with chicken anti-nestin antibody , goat anti-dcx antibody , or rabbit anti-bdnf , peroxidase-conjugated anti-chicken, anti-goat or anti-rabbit igg and an enhanced luminol-based chemiluminescent  kit . the blot was densitometrically scanned for the quantification of rod of each band using nih image  <dig>  software.

statistical analysis
data represent the means of experiments performed for each experimental area. differences among the means were statistically analyzed by two-way analysis of variance followed by bonferroni’s post-tests using graphpad prism  <dig>  software  in order to elucidate differences between d-gal × exercise. a p < <dig>  was considered significant.

RESULTS
effects of exercise on body weight and food intake in adult and d-gal treated mice
body weight was increased with age. body weight and food intake was higher in ex-veh group compared with those in s-veh, s-d-gal or ex-d-gal groups, but significant differences were not detected. body weight and food intake in ex-d-gal group, was slightly low compared to that in the s-d-gal group  .figure  <dig> 
effects of exercise on body weight and food intake in adult and d-gal treated mice. changes in body weight  and food intake  of sedentary-vehicle , exercised-vehicle , sedentary-d-galactose , and exercised- d-gal  groups .



effects of exercise on neural stem cells in adult and d-gal treated mice
in the s-veh group, the nestin immunoreactive cells and fibers were detected in the subgranular zone and granule cell layer of dentate gyrus . in the ex-veh group, nestin-immunoreactive cells and fibers were prominent compared to that in the s-veh group . in this group, nestin immunoreactivity increased significantly to  <dig> % of that in the s-veh group  . in addition, nestin protein levels were significantly increased to  <dig> % of that in the s-veh group . in the s-d-gal group, few nestin immunoreactive cells and fibers were detected in the dentate gyrus . in this group, nestin immunoreactivity decreased to  <dig> % of that in the s-veh group  . additionally, nestin protein levels in the hippocampal homogenates of the s-d-gal group was significantly lowered to  <dig> % of that in the s-veh group  . in the ex-d-gal group, nestin immunoreactive cells and fibers increased compared to of s-d-gal group  . in this group, nestin immunoreactivity increased significantly to  <dig> % of that in the s-d-gal group, however, its level was significantly lowered as  <dig> % of that in the ex-veh group  . in the ex-d-gal group, nestin protein levels were significantly increased to  <dig> % of that in the s-d-gal group  . additionally, in this group, nestin protein levels were significantly reduced by d-gal treatment compared to the ex-veh group   .figure  <dig> 
effects of exercise on neural stem cells in adult and d-gal treated mice. immunohistochemistry for nestin in the dentate gyrus of the s-veh , ex-veh , s-d-gal , and ex-d-gal  groups. granule cell layer, gcl; polymorphic layer, pol; ml, molecular layer. scale bar =50 μm. e: relative optical density  demonstrated as percentages of s-veh in nestin immunoreactivity per section in all groups. f: rod of the immunoblot bands is demonstrated as percent values . all data are shown as the mean ± sem.



effects of exercise on cell proliferation in adult and d-gal treated mice
in the s-veh group, ki67-positive nuclei were clustered mainly in the subgranular zone of the dentate gyrus . in this group, the average number of ki67-immunoreactive nuclei was  <dig>  per section . in the ex-veh group, the average number of ki67-positive nuclei increased significantly compared to that in the s-veh group and was  <dig>  per section  . in the s-d-gal group, the average number of ki67-positive cells was lowest with  <dig>  per section . in the ex-d-gal group, the number of ki67-positive cells increased significantly compared to that in the s-d-gal group  and was similar to that in the s-veh group . however, the increase in average number of ki67-positive cells was significantly low in the ex-d-gal group compared to the ex-veh group  .figure  <dig> 
effects of exercise on cell proliferation in adult and d-gal treated mice. immunohistochemistry for ki <dig> in the dentate gyrus of the s-veh , ex-veh , s-d-gal , and ex-d-gal  groups. ki67-positive nuclei are observed in the subgranular zone of the dentate gyrus. granule cell layer, gcl; polymorphic layer, pol; ml, molecular layer. scale bar =50 μm. e: mean number of ki67-positive nuclei per section in all groups . all data are shown as the mean ± sem.



effects of exercise on neuroblast differentiation in adult and d-gal treated mice
in s-veh group, dcx-immunoreactive neuroblasts were observed in the subgranular zone of dentate gyrus, and they had dendrites extending into the molecular layer of the dentate gyrus . in this group, the average number of dcx-immunoreactive neuroblasts in this group was  <dig>  . the average dendritic length of dcx-immunoreactive neuroblasts in this group was  <dig>  μm .figure  <dig> 
effects of exercise on neuroblast differentiation in adult and d-gal treated mice. immunohistochemistry for doublecortin  in the dentate gyrus of the s-veh , ex-veh , s-d-gal , and ex-d-gal  groups. granule cell layer, gcl; polymorphic layer, pol; ml, molecular layer. scale bar =50 μm , 25 μm .
mean number, relative optical density, dendritic length of dcx-immunoreactive neuroblasts and its protein level. mean number of dcx-immunoreactive neuroblasts per section  and relative optical density  demonstrated as percentages of s-veh in dcx immunoreactivity per section  in the dentate gyrus of s-veh, ex-veh, s-d-gal, and ex-d-gal groups. c: mean of dendritic length of dcx-immunoreactive neuroblasts in the s-veh, ex-veh, s-d-gal, and ex-d-gal groups. d: rod of the immunoblot bands is demonstrated as percent values . all data are shown as the mean ± sem.



in the ex-veh group, dcx-immunoreactive neuroblasts have prominently developed dendrites  and the number of dcx-immunoreactive neuroblasts increased significantly compared to that in the s-veh group with  <dig>  per section  . in addition, dcx immunoreactivity increased significantly to  <dig> % of that in the s-veh group  . the average length of dendrites was significantly increased to  <dig>  μm  and the complexity of the dendritic branching was enhanced in the ex-veh group . dcx protein levels in ex-veh group were significantly increased to  <dig> % of that in the s-veh group  .

in the s-d-gal group, dcx-immunoreactive neuroblasts and their dendrites decreased significantly compared to those in the s-veh group  . in this group, the average number of dcx-immunoreactive neuroblasts was the lowest among groups at  <dig>  per section . in addition, dcx immunoreactivity decreased significantly with  <dig> % of that in the s-veh group  . the average length of the dendrite was also decreased to  <dig>  μm and the complexity of dendritic branching was decreased . the dcx protein levels in the hippocampal homogenates of the s-d-gal group were significantly lowered to  <dig> % of that in the s-veh group  .

in the ex-d-gal group, dcx-immunoreactive neuroblasts significantly increased , and their dendrites were well-developed compared to those in the s-d-gal group . the number of dcx-immunoreactive neuroblasts and dcx immunoreactivity in this group was similar to that in the s-veh group . in the ex-d-gal group, average dendritic length of dcx immunoreactive neuroblasts increased as  <dig>  μm, representing  <dig> % and  <dig> % of the s-veh and s-d-gal group, respectively . additionally, in ex-d-gal group, the average number, dendritic length of dcx-immunoreactive neuroblasts and dcx immunoreactivity was significantly decreased compared to the ex-veh group  . dcx protein levels were significantly increased to  <dig> % of that in the s-d-gal groups  . however, compared to the ex-veh group, dcx protein levels was low in the hippocampal homogenates compared to that in the ex-d-gal group  .

effects of exercise on pcreb expression in adult and d-gal treated mice
in the s-veh group, pcreb-immunoreactive nuclei were mainly detected in the subgranular zone of the dentate gyrus . in this group, the average number of pcreb-immunoreactive nuclei was  <dig>  per section . in the ex-veh group, the average number of pcreb-immunoreactive nuclei increased significantly compared to that in the s-veh group and was  <dig>  per section  . in the s-d-gal group, pcreb-immunoreactive nuclei decreased significantly compared to that in the s-veh group and the average number of pcreb immunoreactive nuclei was  <dig>  per section  . in the ex-d-gal group, the average number of pcreb-immunoreactive nuclei increased significantly compared to that in the s-d-gal group at  <dig>  per section  . in this group, the average number of pcreb-immunoreactive nuclei was higher than that in the s-veh group and significantly lower than the ex-veh group  .figure  <dig> 
effects of exercise on pcreb in adult and d-gal treated mice. immunohistochemistry for phosphorylated camp-response element binding protein  in the dentate gyrus the s-veh , ex-veh , s-d-gal , and ex-d-gal  groups. granule cell layer, gcl; polymorphic layer, pol; ml, molecular layer. bar =50 μm. e: mean number of pcreb-positive nuclei per section in all groups . all data are shown as the mean ± sem.



effects of exercise on bdnf expression in adult and d-gal treated mice
in the s-veh group, bdnf-immunoreactive cells were mainly detected in the granule cell layer of the dentate gyrus . in the ex-veh group, the bdnf immunoreactivity was increased prominently as  <dig> % of that in the s-veh group  and the mean bdnf protein levels in hippocampus were increased as  <dig> % of the s-veh group  . in the s-d-gal group, the bdnf immunoreactivity was significantly decreased as  <dig> % of that in the s-veh group  and its protein levels showed were significantly decreased as  <dig> % of the s-veh group  . however, in the ex-d-gal group, the bdnf immunoreactivity was increased compared to that in s-d-gal group as  <dig> % of that in the s-d-gal and  <dig> % of that on the s-veh group  . additionally, in this group, bdnf protein levels were restored to as  <dig> % of that on the s-veh group and  <dig> % of that in the s-d-gal . bdnf immunoreactivity and protein levels were low as  <dig> % and  <dig> % of the in ex-veh group  .figure  <dig> 
effects of exercise on bdnf in adult and d-gal treated mice. immunohistochemistry for brain-derived neurotrophic factor  in the dentate gyrus the s-veh , ex-veh , s-d-gal , and ex-d-gal  groups. granule cell layer, gcl; polymorphic layer, pol; ml, molecular layer. bar =100 μm. e: relative optical density  demonstrated as percentages of s-veh in bdnf immunoreactivity per section in all groups. f: rod of the immunoblot bands is demonstrated as percent values . all data are shown as the mean ± sem.



discussion
in the present study, we observed changes in body weight and food intake of adult and d-gal-treated mice with or without physical exercise. we did not observe significant changes of body weight and food intake between groups. however, body weight and food intake tended to be higher in the ex-veh group and lower in the ex-d-gal group although statistical significance was not detected.

we induced senescence in mice by administering d-gal for 6 weeks and observed neural stem cells, cell proliferation, neuroblast differentiation, and pcreb expression in the hippocampal dentate gyrus. we evaluated neural stem cell by staining nestin because most nestin-expressing neural stem cells are destined to neuronal fate . nestin, ki <dig> and dcx immunohistochemical staining revealed that d-gal treatment reduced neural stem cells, cell proliferation and neuronal differentiation in the subgranular zone of dentate gyrus. along with reduction of the cell number, the negative effects of d-gal on dendritic length and complexity of dcx immunoreactive neuroblasts were apparent. protein expression level of the nestin and dcx showed similar pattern with immunohistochemistry as d-gal-induced reduction of nestin, ki <dig>  dcx, bdnf and pcreb proteins in the hippocampus. the results presented here coincided with previous studies that both d-gal-induced aging and natural aging reduce adult hippocampal neurogenesis  <cit> . however, there are controversial results about the neural stem cell pool. some studies reported that natural aging animal shows a reduction of neural stem cell pool  <cit> , while other studies do not observe any aging induced reduction of neural stem cell pool .

in the present study, we also investigated whether treadmill exercise attenuates the reduction in neural stem cells, cell proliferation and neuroblast differentiation induced by d-gal treatment. enhanced neural stem cells, cell proliferation and neuroblast differentiation were found in both the ex-veh and ex-d-gal groups compared with those in the s-veh and s-d-gal groups, respectively. in addition, exercise-induced increases in the dendritic length and complexity of dcx-immunoreactive neuroblasts were confirmed and the positive effects of exercise were prominent in d-gal-treated group. protein expression level of the nestin and dcx showed similar pattern with immunohistochemistry as exercise-induced increase of above proteins in the hippocampus. these results suggest that physical exercise significantly increases neural stem cells, cell proliferation and neuroblast differentiation in the hippocampal dentate gyrus in both adult and chemical-induced aging mice. our present results are supported by previous studies showing that exercise increases the neurogenesis in subventricular zone and dentate gyrus of rats and mice  <cit> . in addition, exercise increased neural stem cell and it enhances neuronal proliferation and differentiation by the asymmetric cell division of neural stem cell  <cit> . however, the effects of treadmill exercise on hippocampal neuronal activity and adult neurogenesis are controversial depending on the exercise conditions such as intensity and duration period  <cit> . high intensity treadmill exercise results in slight or no significant changes in adult hippocampal neurogenesis  <cit> . in the present study, we used the exercise protocol that was confirmed in a previous study  <cit> . we also observed that cell proliferation and neuroblast differentiation were lower in the ex-d-gal group than those in the ex-veh group. this result was supported by previous study reporting that positive effects on cell proliferation induced by treadmill exercise decreases with aging in rats  <cit> . also we suggest d-gal induced reduction in nestin-expressing neural stem cells can be one of the reasons in the reduction of cell proliferation and neuronal differentiation. in the contrary, exercise induced increase in nestin-expressing neural stem cells can be related with the enhanced cell proliferation and neuronal differentiation.

we additionally investigated whether exercise treatment modulated pcreb expression in the hippocampal dentate gyrus. pcreb expression decreased in the s-d-gal group, whereas it increased in treadmill-exercised adult and d-gal-treated groups. the change of pcreb showed similar pattern with that of the nestin, ki <dig> and dcx. some studies have reported that pcreb plays roles in neurogenesis . the genetic disruption of creb by null mutation results in perinatal death and a conditional mutation causes progressive neurodegeneration in the hippocampus  <cit> . on the contrary, enhancing the pcreb pathway rescues amyloid beta-induced impairments in synaptogenesis, neurogenesis, and memory  <cit> . these results support our present results and we suggest that the change in pcreb by d-gal and exercise is closely related with the degree of hippocampal cell proliferation and neuronal differentiation.

along with pcreb, we investigated the bdnf protein expression in the hippocampus using immnunohistochemistry and immunoblot. we observed that d-gal treatment caused significant reduction in bdnf and exercise restored the reduction of bdnf. bdnf’s positive roles in neurogenesis and synaptic plasticity corroborate bdnf relation with adult hippocampal neurogenesis in our present results . additionally, bdnf is neuroprotective against brain injury and increase of bdnf is related with enhancement in aging dependent cognitive impairment . creb is a downstream molecule of bdnf signaling, increase of pcreb cause target gene transcription including bdnf  <cit> . though, we did not demonstrate the positive feedback relationship between bdnf and pcbeb, we can suggest that change of bdnf by d-gal and exercise is also closely related with adult hippocampal neurogenesis.

CONCLUSIONS
treadmill exercise mitigated the reduction of neural stem cells, cell proliferation, and neuroblast differentiation in a d-gal-induced senescence mouse model by enhancing the transcription factor pcreb and bdnf protein expression in the hippocampal dentate gyrus.

additional file
additional file 1: figure s <dig>  western blot analysis of nestin, dcx and bdnf in the hippocampus.



competing interests

the authors declare that they have no competing interests.

authors’ contributions

smn, jwk, dyy, hsy, dwk, wk, hyj, ikh, jks, and ysy conceived the study, designed and conducted the experiments, and drafted the manuscript. jhc and mhw participated in designing and discussing the study. all authors have read and approved the final manuscript.

