BACKGROUND
heterosis , the improved performance of f <dig> hybrid plants compared with their inbred parents, has been used by plant breeders to develop crosses with improved agronomic characteristics for many years  <cit> . the biological phenomenon heterosis is described by the trait-specific performance of hybrids relative to the average of its two parents, termed mid-parent heterosis  or relative to the parent having the best value for the trait, termed best-parent heterosis .

in breeding, qtl mapping is used to identify chromosomal regions contributing to agronomic traits  <cit>  and integration of data from different populations has led to the identification of qtl associated with hybrid performance  and heterosis in maize  <cit> . the identification of candidate genes underlying a qtl is important both for developing markers and determining the molecular genetic basis of a trait, but remains difficult to achieve owing to the large number of genes often contained within individual qtl  <cit> . data on gene expression have been used to identify candidate genes in animals  <cit> , for review] and have also been employed in the search for genes involved in water-use efficiency in cereals  <cit> . the combination of qtl mapping data and gene expression analyses has led to the identification of candidate genes regulating grain fiber content in wheat  <cit>  and grain weight in maize  <cit> . despite the merits of this approach, the large size of many qtl, the number of genes within them and particularly their loose association with both locus and trait makes assigning individual genes or groups of genes to particular traits very challenging.

we have addressed this specific problem for heterosis for gy - an important heterotic trait by carrying out gene/qtl co-localization analyses only where a close relationship with heterosis had been observed. for genes, this relationship was based on expression pattern such that they showed differential expression levels in the parents, and their additive, mid-parental expression level significantly correlated with mph for gy  <cit> . the heterotic qtl we used have been demonstrated to exhibit certain conservation between three maize populations  <cit> . to combine these different datasets by a meta-analysis, the genomic positions of qtl and the genes identified from different maize lines were projected onto a physical map of the b <dig> reference genome. genomic segments, with an overrepresentation of heterosis for gy-correlated genes, were subsequently analyzed for co-localization with the heterotic qtl.

this meta-analysis strategy provides a high level of confidence when associating individual genes with qtl and enabled us to determine the identity of genes that are situated at qtl significantly associated with heterosis for gy. we further investigated the functions of these genes and determined functional classes of genes that are enriched at the heterotic loci identified. finally, we performed microarray analysis of nine hybrids and their corresponding parents to quantify the actual relative expression variation for mph for gy-correlated genes in hybrids.

RESULTS
in silico mapping of genes correlated with mid-parental heterosis
our meta-analysis for the identification of qtl-associated genes relies on establishing strong associations between genetic expression levels and the trait of interest. we therefore analyzed genes with a differential parental expression and a linear correlation  between the additive, mid-parental gene expression levels and mph for gy field data from thiemann et al. <cit> . the field data  comprised four flint lines with an european flint background three with an flint/lancaster background, eight dent lines with an iowa stiff stalk synthetic background and six dent lines with an iodent background and  <dig> corresponding hybrids , which were combined in a mixed model analysis with field data of additional factorials obtaining best linear unbiased predictors   <cit> . two examples of a positively and a negatively mph for gy-correlated gene are shown in figure  <dig> 

if mph-correlated genes contribute significantly to heterosis, this role should be interpretable in terms of quantitative genetics. to this end, we analyzed the  <dig>  mph-correlated genes from thiemann et al. <cit>  for possible co-localization with known heterotic qtl for gy, by first mapping those genes to the b <dig> maize genome followed by distribution analysis.

we compared the genome locations of the mph-correlated genes, in silico, to a random gene distribution reflecting the actual distribution of genes in the b <dig> genome, to discover whether the mph-correlated genes are distributed randomly or non-randomly in the maize genome. a non-random distribution of the mph-correlated genes would thus indicate a level of functional grouping. the random gene distribution was calculated via bootstrapping, in which random sets of oligonucleotides from the 46k-microarray  and of the subset size of the mapped mph-correlated genes were mapped to  <dig> equally sized genomic segments .

in total  <dig>   of the  <dig>  mph-correlated genes were unambiguously localized on the b <dig> genome by mapping and filtering analysis of the array probe sequences. these genes were located on all  <dig> maize chromosomes in a non-random pattern that diverged significantly  =  <dig> ; p =  <dig> ) from the random gene distribution . to identify the genomic regions contributing most to the overall significant differences, we focused on regions of the genome containing a significantly elevated number of mph for gy-correlated genes. we termed these segments mph-associated genomic segments . thus mph-ass with a threshold p-value of  <dig>  in the bootstrap analysis indicated an increased number of mph-associated genes compared to the expected gene number per genomic segment, ranging from  <dig>  to  <dig>  fold. in total, we identified  <dig> mph-ass containing a total of  <dig> mph-correlated genes . the three most significant mph-ass  are located on chromosomes  <dig> and  <dig>  additional mph-ass with p-values below  <dig>  are located on chromosomes  <dig>   <dig> and  <dig>  five mph-ass with p-values below  <dig>  are located on chromosomes  <dig>   <dig>   <dig> and  <dig>  the p-values from the bootstrap analysis of the individual segments are represented as negative decadic logarithms in figure  <dig> 

surprisingly, mapping these mph-ass to the b <dig> genome revealed a predominant localization close to centromeres. of the  <dig> mph-ass, six locate inside bins comprising the centromere, and six are located in bins adjacent to centromeres . schön et al. <cit>  proposed that parental alleles involved in heterosis became fixed adjacent to centromeres as a result of the low recombination rates in these regions. such a fixation of alleles could result in higher levels of differential expression. to investigate this further we analyzed the frequency of differential expression of all mapped mph-correlated genes between pairs of the  <dig> inbred lines of the original breeding factorial  <cit> . we found that the  <dig> mph-correlated genes contained within the mph-ass were differentially expressed between more pairs of inbred lines than the residual mph-correlated genes .

co-localization of genes with known heterotic qtl
qtl co-localization of the  <dig>  mph-correlated genes was performed with heterotic qtl for gy from schön et al. <cit> , who re-analyzed qtl from three different maize populations with a stiff stalk synthetic and lancaster genetic background  <cit>  by performing two joint fit linear transformations. one of the two transformations, named z <dig> , addresses the augmented dominance effects .

in comparison to qtl data from schön et al. <cit> ,  <dig> of the  <dig> mph-ass were shown to co-localize with at least one heterotic qtl for gy, with an augmented dominance effect  . schön et al. <cit>  identified heterotic z <dig> qtl solely present in one or two of the three different maize populations as well as qtl with a congruent genomic position between all populations. these conserved, congruent qtl were identified on three genomic positions on chromosome  <dig>   <dig> and  <dig>  most of our mph-ass are located on chromosomes  <dig> and  <dig>  and co-localize with the congruent qtl positions described by schön et al. <cit> . specifically, two mph-ass co-localize with all three qtl at the congruent genomic position on chromosome  <dig>  and three mph-ass co-localize with one of the three qtl. on chromosome  <dig> all four mph-ass co-localize with at least one of the three congruent qtl described by schön et al. <cit> . the mph-as with the most significant number of mph-correlated genes  co-localizes with all three congruent qtl on chromosome  <dig>  furthermore, mph-ass on chromosomes  <dig> and  <dig> were found to co-localize with less conserved heterotic qtl found in solely one population analyzed by schön et al. <cit> .

to test the significance of co-localization of the mph-ass with the heterotic qtl described by schön et al. <cit> , chi-square analysis was carried out comparing the qtl coverage of the b <dig> genome  and the mph-ass coverage of the qtl. in total  <dig> , <dig> bp  of the mph-ass co-localize with the heterotic qtl, resulting in significant p-values  and confirming that mph-ass are significantly associated with the heterotic qtl described by schön et al. <cit> .

we investigated the possibility whether absolute numbers of mph-associated genes are a factor influencing qtl co-localization, by counting them on all genomic segments, with  and without  co-localization. the data showed that gene number alone was not a significant factor  in the co-localization of segments with any of the heterotic qtl described by schön et al. <cit> .

functional characterization of genes contributing to heterosis
to determine the biological functions of the  <dig> mph-correlated genes located on mph-ass , they were sorted into functional categories using the mips functional catalogue database . in this database more than one functional category can be assigned to an individual gene.

mips functional categories were successfully assigned to  <dig> of the  <dig> genes . the majority of genes code for proteins with either a binding function or a cofactor requirement . the principal biological functions identified were metabolic processes , processes related to protein fate  including folding, modification and destination of proteins, and processes involved in transport . a further significant group of proteins is involved in interaction with the environment  and cellular communication and signal transduction . smaller subsets of proteins are indicated to function in cell cycle and dna processing , cell rescue, defense and virulence  and the regulation of metabolism and protein function .

to explore specific biological processes enriched among genes underlying heterosis for gy, we tested for overrepresentation of go terms among the  <dig> mph-correlated genes located on the mph-ass . we found significant  overrepresentation of processes including interaction with the environment , protein fate and metabolism , signal transduction , dna replication and endoreduplication . additionally, a large subset of genes encoded proteins identified as being involved in transport processes .

analyzed heterosis-correlated genes are mainly additively expressed
the hybrid expression of the mph-correlated genes from our former study  <cit>  has not yet been analyzed. for this reason we performed microarray hybridization on a subset of the  <dig>  mph-correlated genes. the custom-made  <dig> k-microarray used, comprises  <dig> mph-correlated and  <dig> non-correlated genes  and we performed the analysis on nine hybrid genotypes and their corresponding inbred parents. the f <dig> hybrid combinations analyzed were selected to cover a wide range of mph levels for gy .

we first identified genes differentially expressed in the nine hybrid-inbred triplets , and found  <dig> %  of the mph-correlated genes and  <dig> %  of the non-correlated genes to be differentially expressed in at least one of the nine hybrid-inbred triplets .

to validate these microarray results, the data were compared with the 46k-microarray data from our previous study  <cit> . this was possible, since seven inbred lines  were analyzed in both independent studies. in total  <dig> % of all  <dig> genes, including also the non-differential genes, and  <dig> % of the significantly  differentially expressed genes between the seven inbred lines showed a similar expression tendency in both datasets.

within the mph-correlated and the non-correlated subsets, we analyzed the hybrid expression levels of differentially expressed genes and found that,  <dig> %  correlated, and  <dig> %  non-correlated genes exhibited non-additive expression in at least one hybrid. the remainder of the differentially expressed genes showed a continuum of additive, mid-parental expression pattern among the hybrid-inbred triplets .

we then considered the expression of each gene in individual hybrids, and discovered the non-additive expression pattern to appear inconsistently. for example, among the genes with a differential expression in at least one hybrid-inbred triplet no gene was identified with a non-additive expression in a second hybrid. again, in the remaining hybrids these genes are either additively or not differentially expressed. the low level and stochastic nature of non-additive expression of differentially expressed genes results in an overall proportion of additive expression of  <dig> %  for mph-correlated genes, and a slightly smaller contingent of  <dig> %  for those non-correlated genes.

further analysis of the non-additively expressed mph-correlated genes revealed predominantly expression levels similar to one of the two parents, or within the parental range, with only a minor fraction falling outside the parental range .

shown are the microarray expression results of the mph for gy-correlated and non-correlated genes. the results consist of the number  and percentage  of differentially expressed genes . the percentages of additive gene expression pattern relative to all differential gene expression pattern are given. from the differentially expressed genes the number  and percentage  of genes showing a non-additively expression in at least one inbred-hybrid are given. also the percentages of different patterns of non-additive expression  are given.

discussion
genes contributing to heterosis for gy have a distinct and conserved distribution, even in divergent maize inbreds
our data show mph-correlated genes to be distributed in a non-random pattern within the maize genome, with genes involved in heterosis being significantly clustered. this clustering analysis revealed a striking enrichment in centromeric regions. a number of studies have shown that qtl for gy harbor predominantly major dominance or overdominance effects  <cit>  – effects, which are consistent with multiple mph-correlated genes being localized in a single qtl. our results suggest that the individual effects on heterosis of the many mph-correlated genes underpinning the qtl can result in its overall dominance or overdominance, an inference supported by charlesworth and willis  <cit>  who also assumed that linked genes with a small, cumulative phenotypic effect underlie major qtls, especially in regions with high gene density relative to recombination frequency. both larièpe et al. <cit>  and schön et al. <cit>  assumed fixed parental alleles in regions of low recombination flanking centromeres  <cit>  interact with, or compensate each other to contribute to heterosis; importantly our data confirm these regions to be enriched in heterosis-correlated genes, and reveal thereby the existence of conserved, heterosis-associated genomic regions.

different maize genomes are characterized by high sequence diversity and broken co-linearity  <cit> . this leads to variation in qtl locations between different mapping populations, and can effectively prevent comparison of genomic features between different maize inbred lines. the fact that we can co-localize mph-ass underlying genes with the same qtl in different lines, despite these limitations, reveals the strength of the drivers behind the conservation of these gene clusters. a significant factor contributing to this conservation is likely to be the fixation of allelic cis-regulatory elements. these elements are, rather than trans-regulatory elements, sufficient to explain the differential parental expression of additive genes and therefore, according to our microarray results, for the majority of mph-ass underlying genes in the pericentromeric regions of the  <dig> inbred lines studied.

the higher rates of conserved differential parental expression observed, also suggest that centromeric regions are diverging rapidly at the sequence level and that initially this can result in hybrid vigor. this fits with the model of “meiotic drift”, in which selfish sequences diverge rapidly and thereby confer a transmission advantage during meiosis  <cit> . for this reason, rapid sequence divergence in heterochromatic/pericentromeric sequences resulting in high levels of heterosis might be anticipated in maize. moreover our findings of conserved mph-ass in centromere-adjacent genomic bins fits with the observation that in maize meiotic drive can be conferred at multiple locations throughout the genome by repetitive dna containing heterochromatic knobs with potential neocentromeric function  <cit> .

additionally, the high conservation of mph-ass most probably enabled their identification based on enrichment in gene numbers across diverse inbred lines. interestingly, mph-correlated genes in segments other than mph-ass, failed to contribute to conserved heterotic effects between the  <dig> inbred lines and the three populations analyzed by schön et al. <cit> . instead, since differential expression in these segments is less conserved, these mph-correlated genes are more likely to contribute to heterosis within a limited set of inbred lines.

functional analysis of heterosis-associated genes reveals processes contributing to the heterotic phenotype
heterosis in plants is characterized by an increase in biomass , faster development and enhanced resistance to biotic and abiotic stress  <cit> . appropriately, our go overrepresentation analysis of mph-ass underlying mph-correlated genes revealed significant enrichment in sequences involved in the perception of biotic and abiotic stimuli. these genes have the potential also to contribute to more vigorous development as they enable the plant to react more effectively to environmental stress – an interpretation corroborated by the mips analysis, which revealed enrichment in genes involved in interaction with the environment and plant defense. the analysis of the functional classes of our mph-correlated genes also supports our contention that both dosage effect and epistatic interactions are important in heterosis. a role for epistasis is underlined by the fact that more than 60% of mph-correlated genes are involved in binding to other proteins or dna, or acting as co-factors or as components of small gtpase-mediated signal transduction pathways. likewise, enrichment in signal transduction and metabolism genes lends support to the view that dosage plays an important role in heterosis.

our work clearly identifies heterosis to be partly a result of the altered expression of a large number of genes encoding proteins involved in a range of biological processes, an interpretation supported by both functional analyses based on mips categories and go overrepresentation analyses. most importantly, we identified mph-correlated genes in seven-day-old seedlings, revealing that hybrid expression levels of genes with a measurable impact on mph for gy are established well before the trait is expressed. while correlations between a number of physiological traits and gy have been shown prior to flowering and seed development  <cit> , our data on mph-correlated genes represent by far the earliest association of this type.

additive expression as a component of heterosis
in this study, for a set of mph-correlated genes, hybrid expression was determined and was shown to be mainly additive . non-additive expression among the analyzed genes was further shown to be inconsistent among the nine hybrids, all of which exhibited varying, but significant degrees of heterosis. a similar extent of inconsistency has previously been described in maize, with only a small number of genes being non-additively expressed in more than one hybrid  <cit> . our findings suggest that the additive, mid-parental expression values used in our previous correlation analysis  <cit>  in most cases accurately reflect the actual expression levels in the  <dig> hybrids and that, in our experiments and for our analyzed genes, non-additivity does not contribute significantly to heterosis across the genotypes. additive expression of this type reflects a direct link between parental and hybrid expression levels on account of its mainly exclusive regulation in cis <cit> , and explains, at least in part, the effective use of parental transcriptome data to predict mph  <cit> .

our findings also indicate a quantitative relationship between additive gene expression and heterosis, and are consistent with a positive correlation between percentage additive expression and heterosis reported for maize by guo et al. <cit> . that additive gene expression represents a major force in generating heterosis is also supported by the correlation between high genetic variation  <cit> , resulting in predominantly cis-regulated additive expression  <cit> , and exceptionally high heterosis values in maize  <cit> .

a mechanistic model by which additive gene expression contributes to the maize heterotic phenotype
theoretical models providing a biochemical basis of heterosis in plants  <cit>  have proposed hybrid vigor to result from the presence of two alleles with differing regulatory elements, which in homozygotes would restrict growth to less than the maximum possible in a particular environment. in the heterozygous state it is suggested that they would relax their control of metabolism and growth processes, resulting in improved flux through biochemical pathways. importantly, there is also evidence that additive gene expression impacts heterosis by balancing expression of genes in metabolic pathways; for example a more consistent, and lower variation in metabolites has been reported for heterotic maize hybrids compared with their inbred parents, presumably caused by improved metabolic flux  <cit> . a similar correlation between mainly additive gene expression and enhanced metabolic flux has been recorded for arabidopsis <cit> .

a related theoretical model explaining the role of additive expression in heterosis was proposed by springer and stupar  <cit>  in which additive, mid-parental gene expression levels of certain genes in the hybrid were proposed to balance out detrimental parental over- or underexpression. in support, springer and stupar  <cit>  argued that many genes with optimal expression ranges are known, citing as examples genes involved in pathogen defense  <cit> .

we have developed a model to explain how additive gene expression impacts heterosis in maize based on the findings reported here . the model relies on the following precepts: 1) our mph-correlated genes are mainly additively expressed in hybrids, as confirmed by our findings. 2) within a certain range, expression levels of mph-correlated genes display either a linear positive or a linear negative correlation with heterosis, resulting in a continuous relationship between expression level and the phenotype. 3) mph-correlated gene expression between inbred parents differs significantly. 4) the expression level of a mph-correlated gene is more favorable in one of the parents than in the other. 5) when compared to the additive  value, an increase or decrease in expression level of every single gene results in a gain or loss of heterosis. 6) additive gene expression contributes to heterosis through transcriptome-wide compensation for detrimental parental expression levels.

in our model we assume that additive expression compensates for the collective, transcriptome-wide detrimental parental expression levels of mph-correlated genes in the hybrid and thereby contributes to the formation of heterosis. however, the highly significant, linear correlation between gene expression levels and heterosis revealed by our work suggest that an increase or decrease in the expression level of every single gene must lead to a gain or loss in the vitality of the hybrid when compared with the additive, mid-parental value.

this important finding supports a complex, multigenic model for heterosis in maize, and implies that expression level changes of genes exert a stronger influence on the performance of the hybrid than on the performance of their inbred parents. it is likely that this results from positively enhanced and altered molecular interactions in the hybrid state and may apply to both the functional capacity of two divergent alleles of the same gene  <cit> , and to multigenic interactions. dosage effect  <cit>  may also be particularly important, because the proportions of single components of protein complexes, for example in signal transduction, strongly influence the efficiency of the entire complex. in the terms of quantitative genetics, the role of an altered molecular interaction in hybrids corresponds to an epistatic effect on heterosis formation  <cit> . both of these mechanistic explanations are supported by the enrichment of specific functional classes of candidate genes .

thus, we assume that the linear correlation between the additive, mid-parental expression levels of particular genes and heterosis reflect both transcriptome-wide compensation of detrimental parental expression levels and intensified molecular interactions in the hybrid.

CONCLUSIONS
we have carried out a meta-analysis approach comprising different molecular and phenotypic datasets that allow us to investigate heterosis for gy in maize. the potential role of additively expressed genes in heterosis formation is shown by their significant enrichment in known heterotic qtl for gy. our data reveal these genes to be clustered in pericentromeric regions of the maize genome. the rapid divergence at the sequence level and the low recombination rate at pericentromeric regions explain the observed enrichment of differentially expressed alleles associated to heterosis and their assumed fixation in parental inbred lines. based on these findings we propose a model to explain the role of additive expression in generation of heterosis for gy in maize by the compensation of fixed detrimental expression levels in parents. we anticipate that our data will aid the development of more accurate predictive molecular breeding markers for heterosis through the identification of qtl-underlying genes.

