BACKGROUND
flow cytometry has been established as a standard tool in the characterization of eukaryote cells and their interactions. flow cytometric adherence assay has in recent years also been adopted for the analysis of interactions between bacteria and eukaryotic cells  <cit> . the results suggest some benefits over conventional assays but the method has not yet been much used. in conventional adherence assays, bacteria are allowed to attach to solid-phase immobilized cells, and after washings, released by lysing the host cells and enumerated either by time-consuming plate cultures or by counting the bacteria using a microscope. in contrast, the flow cytometric assay displays characteristics such as fast performance, large through-put of analyzed cells, and the avoidance of washing steps. this should allow even the detection of weak interactions between bacteria and host cells. in addition, since the bacteria and host cells interact in liquid phase, other types of bacterium-cell interactions may take place as compared to solid-phase assays. on the other hand, mechanical detachment of the cell for flow cytometry based adhesion assay may in theory create artificial binding activities, which are avoided in conventional monolayer adhesion assays.

streptococcus pyogenes  is the etiologic agent of a variety of human diseases, like pharyngitis and erysipelas. it causes substantial morbidity in industrialized countries, and is a leading cause of rheumatic heart disease especially in the developing world  <cit> . also, life-threatening infections, like necrotizing fasciitis and toxic shock-like syndrome have been on the increase since the beginning of the last decade  <cit> . an increasing number of s. pyogenes strains resistant to certain antibiotics have been reported world wide  <cit> . to develop novel therapeutic and preventive approaches against these infections, a thorough understanding of the interaction between s. pyogenes and the host is needed.

the adherence of pathogenic bacteria to a host is in many cases mediated by an interaction between adhesins on the surface of the microbe and receptors molecules, in many cases carbohydrates, on the host tissues. s. pyogenes expresses a large array of molecules on its surface implicated in adhesion to host structures. these are among others lipoteichoic acid  <cit> , m protein  <cit> , various fibronectin-binding proteins like protein f   <cit> , protein f <dig>  <cit> , fibronectin-binding protein fbp <dig>  <cit> , serum opacity factor/sfbii  <cit> ,  <dig> kda fibronectin-binding protein  <cit> , fba  <cit> , pfbp  <cit>  and sfbx  <cit> , and the hyaluronic acid capsule  <cit> . although several interactions between s. pyogenes and structures of the host have been characterized, the issue of gas adhesion remains open. this is clearly attributed to the fact that gas expresses a wide variety of adhesins which recognize many host structures leaving the role of specific molecules incompletely understood.

we wanted to test the applicability of the flow cytometry based cell adhesion assay in the analysis of the binding of s. pyogenes surface protein mutant strains to human epithelial cell lines. we have previously characterized 'strepadhesin' activity as a novel mechanism mediating the binding of s. pyogenes to glycoproteins thyroglobulin, submaxillar mucin, fetuin and asialofetuin  <cit> . we have shown that the activity is present in the majority of strains studied, and that it is upregulated by mga and downregulated by rgg, both of which are central transcriptional regulators of s. pyogenes gene expression. we have also identified two molecules that carry strepadhesin activity on streptococcal surface, streptococcal cysteine protease, speb, and streptococcal pullulanase, pula  <cit> . speb is a  <dig> kda extracellular protease and surface associated molecule produced by most gas strains. pula is a  <dig> kda surface adhesin of gas with pullulan and starch hydrolysing activities. in the present study, we analyzed the binding of speb and pula surface protein mutants, as well as an rgg-regulator deficient mutant strain to an array of human epithelial cell lines with flow cytometry.

RESULTS
flow cytometry based adherence assay
the method used for the study of the adhesion of the streptococcal mutants to epithelial cells was adapted by modification from previously described reports  <cit> . the bacteria were labelled with cfda-se, a non-fluorescent membrane permeable ester, which is converted to a fluorescent molecule by non-specific intracellular esterases, and covalently linked to intracellular proteins through its succinimidyl group  <cit> . streptococci were found to be effectively labelled with cfda-se as shown in fig.  <dig>  for example, there is a ~ <dig> fold increase in the fluorescence of labelled nz131rgg bacteria compared to unlabelled bacteria .

the scc cell lines used in the adhesion experiments were derived from epithelial squamous cell carcinomas originating from the human oral cavity  and from nasal skin . we chose to use these cell lines because they originate from the two natural habitats of group a streptococcus and they are easy to culture. also, sethman and others  <cit>  reported that buccal epithelial cells, which are often used as a substrate in studies with oral streptococci, are not ideal for s. pyogenes adhesion assays due to non-specific binding. however, we are aware of the fact that malignant cells do not necessarily express the same sets of surface proteins and carbohydrates as native cells, and thus the results that we obtained using these cells lines must be interpreted with caution.

the initial analysis of the epithelial cells revealed a population of cells with some cellular debris . also, bacterial aggregates were occasionally detected within the size range of the epithelial cells , but were discarded by running a sample of bacteria alone and excluding this data from the analysis of epithelial cell fluorescence. thus, the flow cytometer was set to include a subpopulation of epithelial cells and to gate out cellular debris and bacterial clumps . the epithelial origin of the gated cells was confirmed with a fitc-labelled ber ep <dig> antibody specific for epithelial cells . epithelial cells are weakly autofluorescent which is seen in the scatter plot . however, epithelial cells incubated with fluorescent bacteria for  <dig> h at rt shifted along the fluorescence axis in the scatter plot indicating attachment of bacteria to the cells . there is a ~ <dig> fold increase in the mfi of cells incubated with bacteria compared to the epithelial cells alone. the incubation of the cells with unlabelled bacteria in the absence of labelled bacteria did not affect the fluorescence of the cells . the results indicate that streptococci are efficiently labelled with cfda-se, and that the binding of streptococci to epithelial cells can be assayed using this flow cytometric approach.

adhesion of rgg deficient streptococci to human epithelial cells
the role of rgg regulated molecules in the adhesion of streptococci to cells originating from various tissues of the human oral cavity  and from the skin  was next investigated. rgg has been shown to be a central regulator of virulence factor expression in gas  <cit> , and it is also involved in the regulation of the strepadhesin activity  <cit> . rgg appears to be a negative regulator of the transcription of at least part of the genes it regulates, since in the rgg deficient bacteria the expression of several virulence-associated genes is upregulated  <cit> . fluorescently labelled nz <dig> wild-type and nz131rgg  <cit>  mutant bacteria were allowed to adhere to the cells for  <dig> h at rt and the fluorescence of the cells was measured . the binding of nz131rgg bacteria to all the studied cell lines was increased two to four fold as compared to the wild-type strain. these results demonstrate that streptococcal adherence to human epithelial cells is upregulated in the absence of the rgg regulator, and thus, in the presence of several surface molecules that are missing in the wild type strain. also, the results demonstrate that there is no major difference in nz <dig> adhesion either between the scc cell lines originating from the different parts of the oral cavity, or between the oral cell lines and the cell line derived from the skin. nz131rgg adheres most avidly to the cells originating from gingiva.

adhesion of speb deficient streptococci to human epithelial cells
the role of speb, a secreted and surface associated virulence factor in the adhesion of streptococci to scc1a, scc <dig>  scc24a, scc60a and scc12a cells was next investigated. fluorescently labelled nz <dig> wild-type and nz131speb  <cit>  mutant bacteria were allowed to adhere to the cells for  <dig> h at rt and the fluorescence of the cells was measured . adhesion nzspeb bacteria to epithelial cells was not much changed as compared to the wild type strain. however, there was a slight, although not statistically significant, trend towards increased adherence of speb-deficient bacteria to scc1a, scc12a and scc60a cells. the increase may be related to the fact that speb is an enzyme known to cleave proteins from streptococcal surface  <cit> . therefore, the absence of speb production may result in decreased shedding of gas surface proteins, like the m-protein, which may in turn lead to increased adhesion.

contribution of pullulanase to the cell adhesion
we have previously shown that the expression of streptococcal pullulanase is increased in rgg deficient nz131rgg strain, and that pullulanase carries strepadhesin glycoprotein-binding activity  <cit> . in order to analyse the contribution of pullulanase to epithelial adherence, the binding of pullulanase-deficient nz131rgg-pula bacteria to epithelial cells was analyzed. also, another pullulanase-deficient derivative was generated as previously described from a <dig> wild type strain, which has high strepadhesin activity. parental nz131rgg and a <dig> strains and mutant nz131rgg-pula and a8173pula bacteria were allowed to adhere to the cells for  <dig> h at rt. statistical analysis showed that the difference between a <dig> and a8173pula in adherence to scc1a, scc <dig>  scc12a and scc60a, and between nz131rgg and nz131rgg-pula in adherence to scc1a, scc <dig>  scc24a and scc60a was significant  . these results suggest that streptococcal pullulanase may have a role in the adherence of gas to epithelial cells.

CONCLUSIONS
use of flow cytometry has been adopted during the recent years for the analysis bacterial binding to host cells. the flow cytometric assay is faster than the conventional assays and the number of analyzed cells is bigger. in addition, the flow cytometry based assay is presumed to allow the detection of weak and/or additional bacterium-cell interactions as compared to the conventional solid phase adhesion assays. this may, in fact, be the case with the streptococcal strains of this study since our conventional adherence experiments with the wild type bacteria and pula deficient mutants demonstrated no difference in the binding to scc cells , while with the flow cytometric assay there is a statistically significant difference between the strains in adhesion to majority of the analyzed cell lines. in summary, the results of the present study suggest that the flow cytometric assay of streptococcal adhesion to human epithelial cells is a valuable tool in the characterization of the interactions between s. pyogenes and the host.

