BACKGROUND
cancer cell lines have been widely used as models of human cancer to better understand the biology of tumor formation and progression, as well as to help develop new therapeutic agents to treat the disease  <cit> . however, cell lines do not duplicate the in vivo environment, are subject to genetic drift, and cell-cell interactions are lost  <cit> . therefore, we sought to quantitatively assess which of the commonly used cell lines in cervical cancer research were better models of cervical cancer relative to the cell lines we tested.

current in vitro research of cervical cancer involves the culture of immortal cervical cell lines in monolayer  <cit> . cell lines typically used include hela, siha, and caski, among others. an alternative method to culturing in monolayer is organotypic culture, an advanced cell culture technique that transforms the growth environment from two dimensions into three dimensions. organotypic culture imitates the in vivo phenotypic structure of epithelial tissue and has been used in different types of research, including breast  <cit> , skin  <cit> , cervical  <cit> , and head and neck  <cit>  cancer, as well as to study epithelial differentiation  <cit>  and individual gene expression  <cit> .

few attempts have been made to quantitatively assess how closely cell lines actually model tissue. most results from analyses such as clustering of expression profiles of cell lines and tissues simply conclude that cell lines resemble their tissue of origin  <cit> . for example, sandberg et al. used the nci  <dig> microarray data to compare cell lines in culture to their respective cancer microarray data sets. they performed a singular value decomposition  cluster analysis and generated a quantitative value termed the tissue similarity index , which denotes how well various cell lines still represent their tissue of origin  <cit> .

with this in mind, we wanted to quantitatively assess how well cervical cancer cell lines commonly used to study cervical cancer actually model the disease, focusing on late-stage invasive cervical cancer. therefore, the gene expression profiles of nine different cervical cell lines were correlated separately to the expression profiles of nine cervical cancer and three normal cervical biopsies. in addition to their american type culture collection  recommended culture media, hela and siha cell lines were additionally cultured in different media as well as in an organotypic environment to assess how their correlation to tissue changes in different culture environments. conditions with higher correlations indicate better models of cervical tissue. in order to move beyond a simple global comparison, the correlations of each condition were also compared to cervical tissue at individual pathway-specific levels. this information provides a more detailed view of our ability to model cancer using cell lines.

RESULTS
differential gene expression between cervical cancer and normal cervix
before comparing cervical cancer transcriptional profiles with cell line profiles, we first determined that the biopsies used in the analysis accurately represented cervical tissue and invasive cervical cancer. we tested the differentially expressed genes between normal and cancerous biopsies by first examining transcriptional changes in light of presumed biological mechanisms of cancer biology; we then compared the differentially expressed genes with regard to previous cervical cancer research.

we first used presumed biological mechanisms of cancer biology to assess our differentially expressed genes. first, groups of genes that represented common cancer pathways were checked for correct expression changes  <cit> . a t-test using the benjamini-hochberg multiple hypothesis correction  and a 2-fold minimum expression change was used to identify  <dig> genes that were differentially expressed between cervical cancer and normal cervix. the  <dig> genes  were involved in many expected pathways involved in tumorigenesis; the top  <dig> up- and down-regulated genes can be found in table  <dig>  individual genes, as well as sets of pathways including cell proliferation, cell-cell adhesion, and cell differentiation, were identified as correctly changing expression according to the general biology of cancer.

a second analysis provided further evidence that the expression profiles in these cervical cancer biopsies were consistent with previous observations in the literature and therefore suitable for further detailed analysis. approximately  <dig> differentially expressed genes identified in the literature, derived from small scale microarray studies  <cit> , differential rna display  <cit> , or single gene studies  <cit> , were compared to the  <dig> genes identified in our study . nineteen genes were observed in both data sets  ;  <dig> genes in the same sequence family  were also identified  . despite the apparent small overlap in large scale datasets, the overlap is significant  and indicates that our tissue biopsies are representative of the literature and can be used for further analysis.

a transcriptional comparison of cervical tissue to cell lines was performed using hierarchical clustering  and svd   <cit> . with few exceptions, all replicates were seen to cluster together, indicating high data quality. the few exceptions were likely due to small changes in gene expression, for example the organotypic and organotypic control  samples only exhibit small numbers of gene changes that are overshadowed when subjected to large scale clustering. hierarchical clustering separated cell lines from tissue but did not provide information on how well cell lines model cervical cancer. a more quantitative assessment was used next to determine which cell line and growth condition most resembled cervical cancer at a pathway level.

we recognize that the particular cervical cancer biopsy samples that we used in this study do not represent the diversity of all possible cervical cancer samples. however, the comparisons described above provide strong evidence that the expression profiles collected accurately represent both cervical cancer and normal cervix. once the reliability of the expression profiles was established, they could be used to compare the cell line expression profiles to identify which of the tested cell lines is a better model of cervical tissue.

global correlations of cell line models to cervical cancer
the correlation of cell lines to both cervical cancer and normal cervix were calculated to evaluate how well different cell lines and culture conditions modeled the gene expression programs in cervical cancer. the global correlation of transcriptional profiles provided a quantitative assessment of how well cell lines model tissue; a higher pearson correlation coefficient denoted a better model of cervical tissue. the correlations for each cell line and growth condition were summarized in figure  <dig>  all immortal cell lines were cultured in their atcc recommended media . to assess how changes to the environment affected the correlation between cell lines and cervical tissue, hela and siha cell lines were also cultured in a different type of media. these cell lines were individually cultured first in eagle's minimum essential medium  and later in dulbecco's modified eagle's medium . in addition to the media change, hela and siha cell lines were cultured in an organotypic environment as well as an organotypic, fibroblast free control. the organotypic culture constructs a 3-dimensional growth environment, whereas the organotypic control simply results in a monolayer culture on a bed of collagen.

the correlation of normal to normal tissue or cancer to cancer tissue samples was calculated to provide a best-case scenario for the cell line correlations and to provide an estimate of patient variation. these results also provided a measure of how well cell lines can be expected to model tissue in general. the pearson correlation coefficient among cervical cancer specimens was  <dig>  while the correlation among normal cervix specimens was  <dig> , setting the upper expected limit of this measure. the correlation of cervical cancer to normal cervix was higher than any cell line at  <dig> . of the cell lines we tested, the primary cell line was found to be a better model than others, of both cervical cancer and normal cervix in terms of overall mrna expression correlation. the primary cell line was expected to have the highest correlation to cervical cancer over the other cell lines because it was more recently out of its in vivo environment. hela cultured as a monolayer had a surprisingly poor correlation to cervical cancer, given that it has been extensively used in cancer research  <cit> . hela was the poorest model of cervical cancer with a correlation of  <dig> , consistent with hela cells' separation from other cell lines in the svd analysis. however, hela cells increased their correlation to cervical cancer  when cultured in an organotypic environment, which was not evident in the svd analysis. this analysis determined that relatively simple changes to a cell culture, such as different types of media, can affect how well a cell line can model tissue. the structural environment had a large impact on how well a cell line models the in vivo environment. it is possible that culturing the primary, c4-i, and c4-ii cell lines in an organotypic environment would further increase their correlation to both cervical cancer and normal cervix.

once we had identified a cell line with the highest correlation to cervical cancer , we generated a list of  <dig> differentially expressed genes between the c4-i and primary normal cell lines. this list was used to hierarchically cluster the normal cervix and cervical cancer biopsies. the resulting dendrogram  demonstrates that potential biomarkers can be derived from cell lines that can separate the normal and cancer biopsies as well as their own complete expression signatures . cell lines can therefore be used to find potential biomarkers if it is known that they actually model the tissue reasonably well.

this quantitative analysis provided information on how changes to the culture environment can change a cell line's performance as a model to cervical cancer. to provide a deeper analysis of how well cell lines model tissue, the correlation of each gene ontology  pathway was calculated to both cervical cancer and normal cervix for each cell line and growth condition.

pathway correlations of cell line models to cervical cancer
the global correlation of cell line models to tissue provided an analytical way to choose better overall models of cervical tissue; however, choosing an appropriate model for a specific pathway may be of more utility. using go annotations, the correlation for each pathway and for all cell lines and growth conditions was calculated against both cervical cancer and normal cervix. as shown in figure  <dig>  cell lines varied dramatically in the extent to which they modeled cervical cancer for a particular pathway. as discussed above, the better overall models of both cervical cancer and normal cervix that we tested were the primary, c4-i, and c4-ii cell lines, with global correlations to cervical cancer of r =  <dig> ,  <dig> , and  <dig> , respectively. however, when studying the "regulation of apoptosis" pathway  for example, the primary cell line retained a high correlation  but the c4-i and c4-ii cell lines perform poorly with correlations of  <dig>  and  <dig> , respectively . further analysis of the genes that resulted in a lower correlation for the cell line c4-ii resulted in  <dig> genes in the "anti-apoptosis" pathway , a sub-pathway of "regulation of apoptosis". these genes included bag <dig>  bfar, birc <dig>  birc <dig>  birc <dig>  malt <dig>  prkcz, and tnfaip <dig>  and had a 2– <dig> fold difference when compared to cervical cancer. this pathway failed to achieve significance when calculating individual pathway correlations, but was strong enough to lower the correlation for c4-ii in the "regulation of apoptosis" pathway calculation. interestingly, the hela cell line cultured in an organotypic environment had a correlation of  <dig>  for the "regulation of apoptosis" pathway, whereas its global correlation to cervical cancer was  <dig> . this pathway was not an exception, the organotypic hela cell line had a stronger correlation  for six apoptotic pathways than even the primary cell line .

of even greater importance, some cell lines had negative pathway-specific correlations to cervical cancer. for example, hela cells cultured in monolayer had a negative  correlation to cervical cancer in the pathway "g-protein signaling"  . fourteen out of  <dig> genes resulted in the negative correlation to cervical cancer, since they showed opposite expression to cervical cancer . these genes included gng <dig>  cxcl <dig>  fzd <dig>  gna <dig>  calu, gpr <dig>  akap <dig>  grina,  <dig> ests, calm <dig>  gnai <dig>  dgkd, and ednrb, and had a 3– <dig> fold difference when compared to cervical cancer.

researchers studying a particular gene or pathway may not be interested in the best global model if that cell line does not represent their pathway of interest. only cell lines with the highest correlation should be used to study a specific pathway in vitro. the example where hela had a negative correlation to the "g-protein signaling" pathway is extremely important, indicating that this system is dysregulated in these cells relative to cervical cancer. research on this pathway involving hela cells as a model may draw inconclusive results. care must be taken to identify which cell line and growth condition would yield the most appropriate model. the results here can not be quantitatively represented by cluster analyses such as svd. therefore, the pathway analysis was of great use when determining which cell line should be used to model cervical cancer or normal cervix at a pathway-specific level.

highest and lowest pathway correlations to cervical tissue
in order to identify pathways that require more attention when selecting a cell line model, the correlations of all cell lines to cervical cancer for a specific pathway were averaged to generate a single correlation that represented all cell lines and growth conditions . biologically relevant pathways that had the highest and lowest correlation to tumor tissue were plotted. examples include the jnk cascade, which was modeled well by all cell lines, whereas the "rna processing" pathway and several cell cycle pathways were the most poorly represented by most cell lines, compared against cervical cancer. these examples are plotted in detail in additional file  <dig> 

a pathway analysis of normal cervix versus cervical cancer is shown in figure 5b. pathways that share similar gene expression between normal and cancer include the regulation of cytokines, the jnk cascade, and a few metabolic pathways; the jnk cascade is modeled well in most cell lines studied as mentioned above . pathways with a low correlation between normal and tumor cervical tissue include mitosis, g-protein signaling, and regulation of development. the "mitosis" pathway is modeled poorly by most cell lines when compared to cervical cancer , and has a low correlation between normal and tumor tissue . further, the correlation to normal tissue by most cell lines is - <dig> , indicating that mitosis is poorly modeled by cell lines in general, but model tumor tissue much better than normal tissue, as expected.

most of these cell lines have been outside the in vivo environment for decades and as a consequence have adapted to their new environment, resulting in changes of gene expression. we expected to see many important pathways with low correlations to tissue, and this was the case. we observed poor correlation to the cell cycle, rna processing, and cell signaling pathways in cell lines compared to cervical cancer. this was due perhaps to both accumulated mutations and the fact that cultured cell lines may have different modes of cell-to-cell communication. these pathways, with low correlation to tissue , are extensively studied in cancer research  <cit> . there were pathways that retained a high correlation to tissue across many cell lines, including the jnk cascade, positive regulation of cell proliferation, and other transcriptional regulation pathways, which indicates they are still relevant to study by researchers using current cell lines.

media effect on correlation
hela and siha cell lines were cultured in a different type of media to assess whether small changes to the environment could have a large impact on the correlation to tissue. the effect of different culture media on the correlation to cervical tissue was assessed at the pathway level using both siha and hela cell lines. an example of three biologically relevant pathways that changed in correlation between the two media is shown in figure  <dig>  though the changes were not restricted to metabolic pathways. the correlation to cervical cancer increased by changing the medium to dmem; the increased correlation to cervical tissue was expected after the transition from a minimal medium  to a richer medium . we hypothesized that the increase in correlation was due to the addition of glucose in dmem, which is absent from mem. after ranking the genes based on their impact on the correlation, the third highest gene that lowered the correlation of hela cultured in mem was pdk <dig>  pyruvate dehydrogenase kinase has been found to increase its expression during starvation  <cit> . in our experiments, pdk <dig> was found to have a 4-fold decrease in expression in cervical cancer, a 2-fold increase in expression in hela cultured with dmem, and a 20-fold increase in expression in hela cultured with mem. as the function of pdk <dig> is the regulation of glucose metabolism, this indicates hela cultured in mem experience starvation-like conditions, whereas hela cultured in dmem have an environment similar to in vivo cancer conditions. this example of pdk <dig>  along with the three metabolic pathways shown in figure  <dig>  provided examples of how an increase in the correlation to normal cervix was achieved by simply changing the medium. simple changes to the culturing environment can therefore have a dramatic affect on the relevance of some cell lines as models of cervical cancer.

organotypic effect on correlation
organotypic culture physically resembles the structure of cervical epithelium. hela and siha cell lines increased the correlation to tissue when cells were cultured in organotypic cultures versus monolayer. the organotypic control, which consists of the same culture environment minus the fibroblasts, also increased the correlation over the cell lines, indicating a simple collagen bed was sufficient to increase the global modeling of cell lines to cervical cancer. in the case of the organotypic and organotypic control, the two environments did not differ significantly in their correlations .

further evidence that organotypic cultures were better models over monolayer culture was provided by calculating the overall shift in pathway correlations for different environments, plotted as a histogram in figure 7a. since organotypic cultures had a high correlation to tissue, we expected to see an increase in the overall number of pathways that had a higher correlation to tissue by the organotypic culture. this was observed by a shift of the histogram to higher correlation and confirmed statistically . although significance was not reached when compared to normal cervical tissue, likely due to low sample numbers, an increase in the number of pathways with a higher correlation was still evident.

the individual gene expression changes between monolayer and organotypic environments was studied to shed light on how expression changes of a relatively few genes can affect their correlation to cervical cancer. for example, in the case of siha cells cultured as monolayer versus organotypic, we observed specific induction of membrane proteins. cadherin, a cell adhesion gene, had a  <dig>  fold increase in expression in the 3-dimensional culture over the monolayer, arguing for cadherin's role in stimulating cell stacking in the organotypic model. interestingly, the cell adhesion gene cyr <dig> had a dramatic decrease  in expression. there was an increase in expression in many genes whose function was integral to the plasma membrane, including slc7a <dig>  slc04a <dig>  cldnd <dig>  ier <dig>  homer <dig>  and aoc <dig>  many of these genes play a role in metabolic signaling or plasma membrane transport and were possibly up-regulated due to the increased communication between cells in this 3-dimensional culture. many of the gene changes that allowed a cell line to grow in 3-dimensions were involved in cell-cell signaling pathways , further highlighting the importance of this pathway in tumorigenesis.

as cell-cell attachments and signaling play an important role in differentiation of the epithelium, the pathway "cell-cell signaling"  was analyzed as to whether 3-dimensional culture conditions can improve the modeling performance of cell lines . the "cell-cell signaling" pathway contains  <dig> genes that transfer information from one cell to another. some genes in this pathway include fibroblast growth factor, gap junctions, interleukins, and leptin precursors. the hela gene expression in the "cell-cell signaling" pathway was more similar to both normal cervix and cervical cancer when cultured in the organotypic environment versus monolayer as well as the organotypic control. therefore, hela organotypic experiments appear better models of cervical cancer than hela cultured in monolayer. the addition of fibroblasts allowed the formation of cell layers, which increased the cell-cell contact. this increase in contact apparently changes the communication between cells and thus increases the consistency in expression patterns of genes involved in cell-cell communication.

CONCLUSIONS
expression profiles of cervical cancer biopsies were compared to previous cervical cancer research to provide evidence that the expression profiles accurately represent both cervical cancer and normal cervix. primary normal cells and the c4-i and c4-ii cells lines were found to be better models than the other cell lines we tested, even the more commonly used hela cell line. we found that simple changes to the environment, such as media, increased the correlation of hela and siha cells to cervical cancer. in addition, culturing hela and siha cell lines in an organotypic environment rather than in monolayer significantly increased their correlation to cervical cancer. the correlation of each cell line and growth condition was also analyzed at the pathway level. despite the fact that many cell lines still retain a high expression correlation to cervical cancer, our pathway level analysis also revealed cell lines that had an anti-correlation to cervical cancer. cell lines with low correlations to cervical cancer should be avoided in future studies as models of this disease.

