BACKGROUND
the independent evolution of the same phenotype in different taxa implies to many observers that some underlying selection pressure has been shared among taxa to produce the convergent phenotype. while similarities in phenotype can arise independently in taxa by chance  <cit> , there are many cases in which natural selection is responsible for repeated evolution . spectacular examples include the replicated morphologies that reflect similarities in habitat use among caribbean anolis lizards  <cit>  or three-spined stickleback fish  <cit> . such examples are striking because they appear to override the idiosyncrasies inherent in the process of evolutionary differentiation  <cit> . for example, gould  <cit>  argued that evolutionary outcomes are contingent on a complex sequence of unique historical events that invariably leave an imprint on the phenotypes of descendent taxa. the vagaries of evolution will therefore lead phylogenetically divergent taxa to respond in different ways to similar selection pressures. there is extensive empirical and theoretic work to support this view . yet cases of repeated evolution seem to refute it by presenting clear evidence that natural selection can override the contingent nature of evolution. this in turn suggests that the phenotypes of taxa are shaped by present-day ecology more so than past evolutionary events.

the seemingly conflicting views of historical contingency and ecological determinism have been the subject of much debate . supporters of gould’s view might argue that anolis lizards and stickleback fish—and most other examples of adaptive convergence for that matter—are cases where the same adaptation has evolved independently among closely related taxa. members of the same genus or species tend to occupy similar environments  <cit>  and tend to share key aspects of their genome or developmental pathways that can predispose them to follow similar evolutionary trajectories . it is not surprising, then, that closely related taxa are often exposed to similar selection pressures or that they subsequently respond to those selection pressures in a similar manner.

the key point of contention then is time. gould’s argument rests on the assumption that the signature of contingency will become greater the longer taxa evolve independently of one another. this predicts the likelihood of similar adaptations evolving independently in different taxa will decrease with the phylogenetic separation of those taxa. however, others might argue that the number of possible adaptations that might evolve in response to a given selection pressure is finite, and this will tend to “stack the deck” in favour of taxa evolving similar adaptations irrespective of the length of time those taxa have evolved independently of each other  <cit> . consider the textbook examples of flight in birds and bats through the repeated evolution of the wing  <cit> , or vision in vertebrates and cephalopods through the repeated evolution of a lensed eye  <cit> . in both instances, there are probably a limited number of adaptive options: some sort of wing or some sort of eye. there may also be developmental constraints that limit the pool of potential outcomes that can be expressed and bias organisms to converge on similar phenotypes  <cit> . whether adaptation is or is not contingent therefore has important implications for our understanding of the adaptive process and the predictability of evolution more generally.

there have been at least two investigations of the likelihood of repeated adaptive evolution as a function of evolutionary time. conte et al.  <cit>  found a general decrease in the occurrence of repeated adaptive evolution caused by the same genetic processes  as the amount of evolutionary time separating taxa increased . vermeij  <cit>  adopted a different approach and examined incidences of putatively unique adaptations and repeated evolution of the same adaptation  over the entire history of life. he found an apparent increase in the incidence of unique adaptations coupled with a reduction in repeated evolution with increasing geological time. however, he argued that this almost certainly reflected the increasing difficulty in distinguishing unique from repeated evolution over vast stretches of geological time . he concluded that adaptive evolution was not contingent on past evolutionary events and that convergent evolution has probably been frequent throughout the history of life  <cit> . although the perspectives taken by these two studies were different, the discrepancy in their conclusions might also reflect the type of repeated evolution examined: parallel evolution in the first instance  and the more broadly defined convergent phenotypic evolution in the second instance  <cit> . parallel evolution is arguably less likely among distantly related taxa because the probability of two taxa sharing the same genetic mechanism presumably decreases with the length of time separating those taxa . when adaptations arise through different genetic pathways, however, the probability of convergent adaptations evolving is likely less contingent on the length of time separating taxa  <cit> .table  <dig> glossary of terms



our goal was to examine published examples of the various types of repeated evolution and whether the likelihood of similar adaptations arising through these was contingent on shared evolutionary history. to this end, we conducted a broad survey of reports of repeated evolution among animal taxa published over the last 10 years . if contingency in the adaptive process is strong, then the likelihood of repeated evolution will decrease with the increasing phylogenetic distance of taxa. alternatively, if adaptation is free to vary independently of past evolutionary events, then the probability of repeated adaptive evolution when exposed to similar selection pressures should be just as likely among distantly related taxa as more closely related taxa. we tested these predictions in three types of repeated evolution :  ‘parallel’ evolution in which adaptation is generated by the same genetic mechanism;  ‘convergent’ evolution in which adaptation is likely the product of different genetic mechanisms; and  ‘functionally redundant’ evolution in which different phenotypic forms serve the same functional outcome . we predicted that reported examples of parallel and convergent evolution of adaptations would be less likely to occur among distantly related taxa, whereas adaptations that were functionally redundant would be equally likely or even more likely to evolve among distantly related taxa compared to closely related taxa. finally, given that different aspects of an animal’s phenotype are potentially more or less “evolvable”, the extent to which the evolution of different aspects of the phenotype are historically contingent might also vary. we therefore examined the incidence of repeated adaptive evolution separately for the most commonly reported aspects of the phenotype found to evolve repeatedly .

RESULTS
type of animals and characteristics found to exhibit repeated adaptive evolution, and associated selection pressures
fish were by far the most common taxa reported to exhibit adaptations arising from repeated evolution , followed closely by insects and mammals . the vast majority of examples of repeated adaptive evolution were morphological , with instances of repeated adaptation less frequently reported for behavior  or physiology , and rarely for life history .fig.  <dig> published reports of repeated adaptive evolution. examples by  taxonomic group,  aspect of the phenotype exhibiting convergence, and  selection pressure believed to have produced convergence. “disparate” refers to repeated evolution among taxa across taxonomic groups 



similarity in habitat type among taxa was clearly the predominant factor associated with the repeated evolution of similar adaptations in most reports . exploiting similar types of food resources or dealing with similar types of predators were less frequently reported but still reasonably common selection pressures believed to have prompted the evolution of similar adaptations among taxa . in contrast, sexual selection was rarely invoked to explain repeated evolution .fig.  <dig> incidence of repeated adaptive evolution. reports of repeated evolution among taxa as a function of phylogenetic separation . reports were also categorised by the type of repeated evolution involved  and phenotypic characteristic studied . error bars associated with estimated exponents are 95 % confidence intervals. numbers above error bars correspond to the number of reports found



likelihood of repeated adaptive evolution as a function of phylogenetic distance
overall, the number of reports of repeated adaptive evolution dropped progressively with the increasing phylogenetic separation of taxa. this was the case irrespective of whether absolute time  or taxonomic distance  was used to gauge the separation of taxa, or whether the analysis was restricted to taxa with roughly similar generation times . nevertheless, there were important differences depending on the type of repeated evolution and phenotypic characteristic studied.

examples of adaptations resulting from ‘parallel’ evolution tended to drop off with increasing phylogenetic distance, but the trend was weak . more pronounced was the reduction in the number of reports of ‘convergent’ evolution as taxa became increasingly separated from one another . adaptations described as ‘functionally redundant’ appeared least contingent on evolutionary history , with reports being frequent among both closely related and distantly related taxa.

of the three most commonly studied phenotypic characteristics , adaptations in morphology seemed heavily contingent on the length of evolutionary time separating taxa , whereas examples of repeated adaptive evolution in behavioral and physiological characteristics were less contingent .

finally, our examination of the expected distribution of repeated evolution if adaptation was not contingent showed that incidences of repeated evolution should tend to be clustered among more distantly related taxa, simply because there are more distantly related taxa than closely related taxa to share potential adaptations . that is, the incidence of repeated evolution should, in general, increase with the phylogenetic separation of taxa if not contingent on past evolutionary events. given that the computed exponents in our meta-analysis were either negative or close to zero , all types of repeated adaptive evolution  and all aspects of the phenotype reported to exhibit repeated adaptive evolution  seemed to be historically contingent to a lesser or greater degree. however, the interpretation of exponents that were not significantly different from zero may not be straightforward. the distribution of non-contingent repeated evolution will tend to differ depending on whether all or part of a phylogeny is considered. for example, the null distribution of non-contingent repeated evolution among taxa within squamate clades separated by less than  <dig> my appears evenly distributed among closely related and distantly related taxa , which would equate to an exponent estimate of zero. however, consideration of the entire squamate phylogeny shows a prominent skew in the probability of repeated evolution towards taxa separated by more than  <dig> my. similar, disparate patterns in the distribution of non-contingent repeated evolution are also evident in clades of mammals separated by less or more than  <dig> my .fig.  <dig> proportion of reports of repeated adaptive evolution versus null distributions in two key taxonomic groups. morphological and physiological repeat adaptations among mammalian  and squamate taxa  as a function of phylogenetic separation. shown as dashed bars are the proportion of species pairs at different phylogenetic separations across the entire super-tree for each group. these provide a general estimate on the proportion of species that have the potential to exhibit repeated evolution, if adaptive outcomes were not contingent and taxa were exposed to similar selection pressures



factors associated with historically contingent adaptation
given the clear skew in the repeated evolution of morphological adaptations towards closely related taxa compared to the seemingly less contingent evolution of behavior and physiology, we examined whether there were any obvious differences among these phenotypic characteristics and the type of repeated evolution or selection pressure involved in generating adaptation. there were no noticeable differences in either the type of repeated evolution or selection pressure reported between morphological, behavioral or physiological adaptations. in general, all aspects of the phenotype were produced by parallel, convergent and functional redundant evolution in roughly equal proportions . there was also little difference in the type of selection pressure reported to have generated repeated adaptation among phenotypic characteristics, .fig.  <dig> the degree to which different aspects of the phenotype exhibit similar adaptations through  parallel, convergent, or functional redundant evolution or  similarities in selection pressure. error bars are 95 % confidence intervals computed from equations found in  <cit> 



discussion
if the literature provides a reasonable reflection of the incidence of repeated adaptive evolution in nature, our results imply that closely related taxa tend to be predisposed to adapt in similar ways, and that gould  <cit>  was generally right: evolution does not tend to repeat itself over large macroevolutionary time scales. nevertheless, there was important variation underlying this general trend that provides further insight on how important contingency is in the outcome of adaptive evolution.

first, the inverse relationship between the likelihood of repeated adaptive evolution and the phylogenetic separation of taxa was not linear, regardless of whether time or taxonomic level was used to categorise the degree of separation of taxa. this implies the influence of evolutionary history on the trajectory of evolution has a disproportionately greater impact on evolutionary outcomes over the longer term than the short term . this was unexpected, but the pattern may be broadly consistent with a brownian motion mode of evolution. under this model, phenotypes are expected to change gradually, with the accumulation of phenotypic change occurring largely constant over evolutionary time . while this means the phenotypic distance of two lineages originating from a common ancestor will tend to be proportional to the evolutionary time separating the two taxa, the magnitude of phenotypic separation between those taxa will scale as a square-root function of time . if one of those taxa happens to be near an adaptive peak, the distance of the other taxon from that same peak will be, on average, the square-root of the length of time separating the two taxa from a common ancestor. that is, distantly related taxa will tend to be disproportionately further away from a common adaptive peak than closely related taxa. similar patterns are also expected under alternative modes of evolution such as ornstein-uhlenbeck, although the disproportionate influence of time on phenotypic distance will likely be even greater  <cit> .

alternatively, most adaptations  might have a complex genetic architecture associated with their origin or are subject to developmental constraints that result in a non-linear change in the probability of convergence as a function of time. natural selection might produce similar adaptations in different taxa separated by less than  <dig> my  or among members of the same species or genus , but over longer periods of separation, any adaptive resemblance among taxa becomes unlikely. for example, there are potentially important differences in the genetic mechanisms that cause phenotypic variation among intraspecific and interspecific taxa . at this stage, however, how these differences or some other aspect of the genetics or development of adaptation might influence repeated evolution over different phylogenetic scales is unclear. furthermore, although nearly half of the reported cases of parallel adaptive evolution included in our meta-analysis occurred among taxa separated by less than  <dig> my , there were still cases reported among taxa separated by more than  <dig> my . this at least shows that the evolution of similar adaptations is possible through similar genetic changes among distantly related taxa .

second, the extent to which adaptations were contingent on evolutionary history appeared to depend on the specific aspect of the animal’s phenotype under selection. the evolution of similar morphologies appeared to be more contingent than either behavior or physiology. for example, the incidence of repeated adaptive morphological evolution among mammals sharing a common ancestor of up to  <dig> mya was almost  <dig> times more likely than would be expected if repeated evolution was not contingent . in contrast, the distribution of reports of repeated adaptive evolution in physiology were more similar to that expected for the outcome of adaptations unaffected by evolutionary history . either researchers of morphology have approached the study of repeated evolution in a fundamentally different manner to behavioral ecologists and physiologists , or the process of morphological adaptation differs in important ways to that of behavior and physiology. for example, behavior and physiology are often viewed as being more evolutionary labile than morphology . plasticity might also increase the ability of taxa to adapt their behavior or physiology to environmental changes in ways that increase the probability of more distantly related taxa achieving similar adaptive phenotypes. if we assume that researchers are studying repeated adaptive evolution in similar ways , then our findings suggest that behavior and physiology exhibit a higher degree of adaptability than morphology.

finally, the result that functionally redundant adaptations exhibit less contingency than other adaptations suggests the adaptive response of distantly related taxa exposed to similar selection pressures might often be to evolve innovations in phenotype that achieve the same adaptive result . here, the notion that repeated evolution limits the evolution of phenotypic diversity is relaxed  <cit> . intuitively, it might seem obvious that distantly related taxa would be more prone to evolve functionally redundancy simply on the basis that the criteria for classifying this form of repeated evolution requires only a demonstration that a characteristic is functionally equivalent and not also similar in form between taxa. however, taxa exhibiting functional redundant characteristics must still experience similar selection pressures in the same way as taxa that are found to have converged in phenotype as well. the likelihood that such similarities in selection occur among taxa presumably decreases with increasing phylogenetic separation, which will tend to coincide with taxa diverging in ecology and biogeography. that is, it is simplistic to assume that functionally redundant adaptations should not exhibit contingency in their evolution, and our survey also confirmed that it frequently evolves among closely related taxa  that do share much of their genome and developmental pathways .

it is important to note as well that adaptations classified as functionally redundant should not be discretely classified from adaptations more “typical” of classical convergence . rather the phenomena of functional redundant, convergent, and parallel evolution is more appropriately viewed as a hierarchy in which the evolution of similar functions  are achieved through increasingly specific ways .

CONCLUSIONS
the same adaptive solution evolving independently in different taxa provides a powerful illustration of natural selection in nature. not surprisingly, then, documenting repeated evolution and confirming its adaptive origin has been the subject of much research effort, with over a hundred examples reported for animals alone over the last decade or so . our meta-analysis of these examples showed the likelihood of repeated adaptive evolution appears to diminish as taxa become increasingly more phylogenetically divergent from each other, and dramatically so for some forms of adaptation .

however, to fully understand the evolutionary contingency of the adaptive process, examples across all types of repeated evolution need to be considered . although we found a large number of reports of adaptive convergence in the literature, the limited representation of functionally redundant adaptations , as well as the clear bias of morphological examples of convergence , is unlikely to reflect biological reality given that all aspects of the phenotype are subject to adaptive evolution. this indicates a broader perspective in the study of repeated adaptive evolution beyond morphology is clearly warranted.

it should also be considered that the nonlinear decrease in reports of repeated adaptive evolution with increasing phylogenetic separation might actually reflect that researchers are heavily biased towards studying adaptation among taxa belonging to the same species or genus. to some extent, this is to be expected given that most comparative biologists focus their investigations on particular taxonomic groups rather than a diverse range of taxa across the tree of life. only the most striking cases of repeated evolution would therefore be recognised among highly disparate groups . cases of repeated adaptive evolution in distantly related taxa might also have been a greater focus of classical studies of convergent evolution because it was easier to conclude independent evolution when taxa belonged to vastly different taxonomic groups . with the proliferation of molecular phylogenetic techniques and statistical advances in phylogenetic comparative methods over the last decade—a period of research that was the predominate focus of our meta-analysis—the study of repeated adaptive evolution may have shifted primarily to the study of closely related taxa. this seems unlikely given these same methodological advances have allowed phenotypic comparative analyses to be conducted at unprecedented phylogenetic scales . it is nevertheless possible that many examples of repeated evolution in distantly related taxa remain undocumented. if this were the case, the impact of evolutionary history on adaptation documented in our analyses could be overestimated. more generally, such bias would represent a critical impediment to fully understanding the predictability of evolution and the process of adaptation at macroevolutionary time scales. natural selection may in fact erase the signature of past evolutionary events from phenotypes more readily than our analyses imply, or genetic and developmental constraints may play a far greater role in adaptive evolution than currently appreciated  <cit> .

however, any publication bias in reported examples of repeated adaptive evolution would presumably affect all forms of repeated evolution and all types of phenotypic characteristics studied. that is, the same skewed pattern in the incidence of repeated adaptive evolution among closely related taxa that is so obvious for morphology  should be readily apparent in all of our data: i.e., parallel, convergent and functionally redundant examples, and morphological, behavioral and physiological characteristics should all exhibit the same general pattern. this was not the case and our results instead showed prominent—and predicted—differences in the incidence of repeated adaptive evolution across different forms of repeated evolution and different phenotypic characteristics. we believe, then, that our results are broadly reflective of the adaptive process in nature.

some insight on potential research biases might be obtained by a future investigation that applies a quantitative estimate of adaptive similarity among taxa as a function of phylogenetic distance . this type of meta-analysis would not rely on count data and would potentially avoid any skew that might be generated by the types of organisms selected for study by comparative biologists. if enough examples could be obtained, a similar pattern in which the strength of convergence diminishes with phylogenetic distance would be particularly convincing support of gould’s position on adaptive evolution. given the increasing availability of data in public repositories, we anticipate that this type of meta-analysis should be achievable in the near future.

