BACKGROUND
physiological increase in cardiac muscle mass occurs normally during development, during pregnancy, and in response to sustained exercise  <cit> . conversely, pathological cardiac hypertrophy is an adaptive response to increased pressure load, such as with hypertension or in the setting of aortic stenosis, or it may be associated with an inherited disease characterized by thickening of the left ventricle and disarray of myocytes  <cit> . moreover, regional hypertrophy can result as a consequence of myocardial infarction in response to ischemic heart failure. cardiac failure remains a major source of human morbidity and mortality in the united states  <cit> . the disease has multiple specific etiologies, and much research has been performed to elucidate some of the multiple molecular pathways important in the development of myocardial failure  <cit> . many animal models of cardiac failure have been devised, and they have played an important role in understanding this complicated disease  <cit> . however, in many cases the specific method of inducing heart failure in animals does not obviously correlate with common human diseases  <cit> .

for example, some of the animal models of heart failure are induced by pharmacologic agents to induce a direct cardiomyopathy; however, it is relatively rare for the human heart to be injured through such a mechanism  <cit> . even the surgical occlusion of a coronary artery to induce acute ischemia of the animal heart does not precisely model the more common chronic ischemia that characterizes the failing human myocardium  <cit> . although creation of a pressure overloaded heart by aortic banding might very closely model the pressure overloaded human heart, such as might be seen in aortic valvular disease, it is likely that there are significant differences in myocardial response to acute pressure load induced in the animal when compared to the more chronic human situation. therefore, it is difficult to know which animal models best exemplify particular types of heart failure in humans.

genetic expression array analysis allows the characterization of tissue by assessing the expression patterns of thousands of genes. such investigations of diseased human myocardium have been used to elucidate which molecular pathways are altered in particular etiologies of heart failure  <cit> . in some cases, the differences in genetic expression patterns elucidated by microarray analysis are significant enough for clustering algorithms to distinguish different categories of human heart failure. we hypothesized that the sensitivity of this approach will allow us to determine how closely a common animal model of cardiac failure recapitulates the genetic milieu of the human disease.

we induced cardiac hypertrophy in mice using isoproterenol, which has been shown to induce significant cardiac dysfunction associated with a high mortality rate   <cit> . we subjected the myocardium to genetic expression array analysis. genes demonstrating altered expression compared to normal control myocardium and myocardium that was hypertrophied following an exercise regimen were compared to various other animal models of cardiac hypertrophy  and also human diseased myocardial expression data obtained from publicly available databases. we reasoned that microarray genetic expression analysis of a murine heart failure model might exhibit similarities at the genetic expression level with some category of human disease, and would therefore help determine which animal models correlate most precisely with particular human diseases.

RESULTS
analysis of pathological and physiological cardiac hypertrophy mouse models
isoproteronol  administration and chronic exercise training successfully created cardiac hypertrophy in experimental animals. as shown in fig. 1a, heart weight/body weight ratios increased significantly  for both the iso-treated  and exercised mice , compared to sedentary animals . however, the increase in heart weight was much more pronounced for mice with iso-induced cardiac hypertrophy than for exercised mice. similar results were obtained when heart weight/tibia length ratios were compared . hearts were also visibly larger, particularly after iso-treatment, as determined by examination of h&e stained cryosections . while both iso treatment and exercise induced enlargement of the heart, only the pathological hypertrophy model resulted in an increased heart rate . this finding may be related to treatment with the beta-agonist isoproterenol, and may not be unique to myocardial hypertrophy. exercised mice, on the other hand, experienced a profound reduction in heart rate  that was evident within the first  <dig> days of the swimming regimen .

to determine whether the increase in heart size was due to increased myocyte size or increased numbers of cardiomyocytes, we quantified cell cross-sectional area in h&e stained heart cryosections. each cell examined had a circularity  =  <dig> , and >  <dig> cells were measured for each sample type . as expected, myocyte cross-sectional area was significantly increased in mice treated with iso, compared to sedentary control mice , and cardiomyocytes generally appeared thicker in iso-treated  than in sedentary  mouse hearts, when examined individually. cardiomyocytes from exercised hearts were also larger than those from sedentary mice , although the increase in size was less dramatic , compared to iso-treated mice. we also assessed the levels of fibrosis and apoptosis in sedentary, exercised, and iso-treated hearts . as shown by h&e and trichrome staining, there was significant fibrosis detected in iso-treated hearts  that was not observed in sedentary  or exercised  mouse hearts. conversely, there was no evidence of apoptosis in any of the experimental groups apart from the positive control , as measured by tunel assay . considered together, these data indicated that the two models induced the desired effects: maladaptive and beneficial increases in heart mass representing pathological and physiological hypertrophy, respectively.

expression profiles of iso-treated and swim-exercised mice
to assess and compare the global transcriptional profiles of mice with pathological and physiological cardiac hypertrophy, we performed gene expression microarray analysis of rna from the left ventricles of iso-treated mice, mice that were exercise trained, and sedentary control animals. the experiments were performed in triplicate, and a separate microarray ran for each individual mouse heart. a gene was considered as differentially expressed if the fold-change was at least  <dig> , the benjamini and hochberg-corrected  p value was less than  <dig> , and the alteration occurred for each of the  <dig> possible pairwise comparisons . based on these criteria, there was a total of  <dig> probe sets representing  <dig> different genes  that were significantly and reproducibly altered between control and iso-treated animals. the transcriptional profile of mice that were swam twice daily, on the other hand, was more profoundly affected, with  <dig>  probe sets representing  <dig>  genes altered , compared to sedentary control animals. eight genes were selected for verification by real-time reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction , the results of which validated the microarray analysis . the entire list of genes altered in response to exercise or iso treatment is provided as additional file  <dig>  and examples are shown in fig.  <dig>  in which genes with similar expression patterns clustered together using cluster/treeview software programs to analyze z-score transformed signal intensity values from all nine arrays.

asterisk  indicates that a related gene  was down-regulated  <dig> -fold in exercised mice, compared to sedentary control animals. nd = no significant difference detected. fc = fold-change. fold-change values shown are representative of  <dig> independent experiments.

based on pathway analysis results using ingenuity pathway analysis software, the top associated signalling network functions in mice treated with iso were cardiovascular disease, free radical scavenging, and molecular transport , whereas the top associated network functions for mice that exercised were gene expression, cell morphology, and cell-cell signalling and interaction . interestingly, the most over-represented molecular functions after multiple hypothesis testing correction were cell death for iso-treated mice  and cellular growth and proliferation for mice that were swam . the top physiological functions in iso-treated mice were immune system development and function  and immune response , whereas the most over-represented physiological functions in exercised mice were organismal survival  and organ development . molecular pathway analysis also indicated that cardiovascular system development and function  was a major physiological function associated with genes altered in exercised mice, but not in iso-treated animals. the top canonical signalling pathways in iso-treated mice included acute phase response , fibrosis , nrf2-mediated oxidative stress response , and vegf signalling . the most over-represented signalling pathways identified by ingenuity for the list of genes altered in response to exercise were pi3k/akt , erk/mapk , integrin , ppar signalling , and pparα/rxrα activation .

the vast majority of genes altered in response to iso treatment or swimming were specific to the condition  however, there were  <dig> genes that were altered by both types of cardiac hypertrophy, whose functions were mainly related to immune response, particularly antigen presentation  and hematological system development and function . of these  <dig> overlapping genes,  <dig> were altered in the same direction in pathological and physiological cardiac hypertrophy models . conversely, there were  <dig> genes that were altered in each condition in the opposite direction  .

fc = fold-change. dash  before number indicates down-regulation, compared to appropriate controls. na - not applicable, where a gene without a gene symbol was identified as altered in expression . iso and swim = control mice versus isoproeteronol-treated or exercised mice, respectively. gene functions were obtained from ingenuity pathway analysis software, supplemented with information obtained from the ncbi and stanford source search databases.

comparison of physiological and pathological cardiac hypertrophy across various studies and models
to compare our results to previously published studies, we obtained all available data files from the geo website for experiments previously conducted to measure transcriptional responses to exercise-induced cardiac hypertrophy or experimentally-induced pathological hypertrophy. exercise models included swimming mice and various rat strains trained on treadmills for various time intervals  <cit> . experimentally-induced pathological cardiac hypertrophy models causing significant cardiac dysfunction and varying degrees of cardiac failure and mortality included familial hypertrophic cardiomyopathy  in mice , myocardial infarction in mice  <cit> , aortic banding   <cit>  in various strains of rats and mice, arteriovenous shunt, myocardial infarction, and hormone  treatments in rats  <cit> , as well as high salt diet in dahl rats  <cit> . we also obtained microarray data comparing "normal" human hearts  to heart samples collected during heart transplant surgeries from patients with end-stage heart failure   <cit> . for affymetrix data in which cel files were available, data were rma normalized, student's t test was performed, and each group was averaged in order to obtain a fold-change value . this less stringent data analysis approach was intended to make the results more comparable across microarray platforms and studies and minimize the level of false negatives. for data provided only in text form, data were assumed to be pre-normalized by the previous researchers , and student's t test and fold-change were calculated directly from the provided data. for two of the previous studies  <cit> , raw data were not publicly available; we therefore used the gene list provided in the publications. all studies, including overall comparative results, are listed in table  <dig> 

acel files analyzed, btext files analyzed, c genes obtained from published article, dstrain information not provided by submitters, ec57bl6/j-fvb/n genetic background; ang <dig> = angiotensin ii; dipta =  <dig> -diiodothyropropionic acid, fhc = familial hypertrophic cardiomyopathy

as expected, there was a great deal of variation in the total numbers of altered genes between the various studies, array platforms, disease models, strains, and time frames. it is perhaps worth noting, however, that our intention was not to highlight potential differences in experimental technique between groups or compare the potential value of one disease model over another. rather, we hoped to identify a set of genes that would represent those canonical changes that are captured most frequently under various experimental conditions and thus might represent consistent genetic expression alterations that might be applicable to the study of the human end-stage failing heart. we therefore grouped study types together and considered the most profound alteration  as representative for that group. groups were chosen based on model type and animal, while more detailed parameters  were not considered. this resulted in  <dig> distinct experimental groups with relevant cardiac expression data:  <dig> exercise models ,  <dig> pathological models , and  <dig> human diseases .

based on our analyses and comparison methods, there were  <dig> genes that were altered in response to exercise in our study and in swimming mice from other studies or treadmill-exercised rats . however, there were only two genes  that were altered in our study and in both mice and rats irrespective of the model type or study. col3a <dig> was of particular interest, because it was down-regulated in response to exercise in mice  and rats  but up-regulated in most pathological cardiac hypertrophy models, including αmhc403/+ mice , aortic binding in mice  and rats , arteriovenous shunt , myocardial infarction , and idiopathic and ischemic cardiac hypertrophy in humans . interestingly, col3a <dig> was down-regulated  in dahl rats fed a high salt diet, but only at the latest time point tested . there were two exercise-induced genes that differed in directionality depending upon which type of rodent or experimental model was used. timp <dig> was up-regulated in swimming mice but down-regulated in exercised rats. conversely, dbp was up-regulated in rats and down-regulated in mice . interestingly,  <dig> genes, including dbp, that were represented by more than one "polony" , were detected as up-regulated and down-regulated by pmage in αmhc403/+ mice, compared to wild-type littermates . this result could reflect the greater sensitivity of pmage to detect transcripts present at low abundance , transcript isoform differences, or detection of technique-specific artifacts resulting from the use of fold-change as a filtering criterion.

fc = fold-change. dash  before number indicates down-regulation, compared to appropriate controls. a blank indicates that no significant alteration  was observed. the asterisk indicates that a variant of mhc-β  was up-regulated. for pmage data, "i" and "d" indicate induction and down-regulation with  <dig> transcripts detected in either wild-type or αmhc403/+ mice, respectively. where genes that were represented by more than one polony  conflicted in direction , "+/-" is used in place of a fc value. gene highlighted in bold font was a consistent finding . idiop, isch, as, and cong = idiopathic, ischemic, aortic stenosis, and congenital, respectively. "drug" refers to isoproterenol, angiotensin ii, or  <dig> -diiodothyropropionic acid treatment. sh, mi, and ab = shunt, myocardial infarction, and aortic banding, respectively. rq = αmhc403/+ mice, representing familial cardiac hypertrophy. gene functions were obtained from ingenuity pathway analysis software, supplemented with information obtained from the ncbi and stanford source search databases. some genes perform more than one function, but are only listed under one category.

consistent with molecular signalling events known to occur under conditions of physiological cardiac hypertrophy, there were three pi3k/akt signalling pathway molecules  altered in exercised mice and rats. moreover, the pi3k/akt was statistically over-represented in the  <dig> genes consistently altered across experimental models, based on ingenuity pathway analysis . over-represented cellular processes included cell death , cellular assembly and organization , molecular transport , and cellular development . immune response  was the most significantly over-represented physiological function.

we used a similar approach to examine iso-induced transcriptional alterations, expecting that each gene was similarly altered for at least one human disease equivalent to be considered significant. the results of this comparison, including fold-changes obtained from other animal models and also exercised rodents, are shown in table  <dig>  there were  <dig> gene expression alterations  that showed considerable overlap between model types and studies that were also similarly altered in at least one of the four human diseases. this included two traditional markers of cardiac hypertrophy . ingenuity pathway analysis confirmed that the most over-represented molecular pathways in this canonical list of genes were cellular growth and proliferation , cell-cell signalling and interaction , cell death , cellular movement , and cellular development . twelve of the genes were specifically associated with cardiovascular system development and function .

fc = fold-change. dash  before number indicates down-regulation, compared to appropriate controls. a blank indicates that no significant alteration  was observed. the asterisk indicates that a variant of mhc-β  was up-regulated. for pmage data, "i" and "d" indicate induction and down-regulation with  <dig> transcripts detected in either wild-type or αmhc403/+ mice, respectively. idiop, isch, as, and cong = idiopathic, ischemic, aortic stenosis, and congenital, respectively. "drug" refers to angiotensin ii treatment.  sh, mi, and ab = shunt, myocardial infarction, and aortic banding, respectively. rq = αmhc403/+ mice, representing familial cardiac hypertrophy. phys = physiological. gene functions were obtained from ingenuity pathway analysis software, supplemented with information obtained from the ncbi and stanford source search databases. some genes perform more than one function, but are only listed under one category.

analysis and comparison of animal cardiac hypertrophy models to human cardiac disease
to identify genes that are most likely to be relevant to human disease, we compared the microarray results from our study along with all the previous studies listed in table  <dig> to the gse <dig> gene expression dataset . an average fold-change was calculated to represent each model type . inclusion in the final list of relevant genes required that at least one of the rodent pathological cardiac hypertrophy models  exhibit an alteration in the same gene in the same direction. also included were genes that were altered in the opposite direction  if the alteration was observed in at least two animal models. finally, to eliminate those genes that might be specific to just one group of humans  an alteration was expected to have occurred in at least two out of the four human diseases included.

when examined individually, there were  <dig>   <dig>   <dig>  and  <dig> genes in humans with idiopathic, ischemic, aortic stenosis, and congenital-related cardiac hypertrophy, respectively, that exhibited significant overlap with results obtained from studies using animal models . when the four lists were compared, there were  <dig> genes that were significantly altered in at least two of the human diseases that also exhibited significant overlap  with the animal models . interestingly, the most statistically significant over-represented molecular and cellular functions, based on ingenuity pathway analysis software, were cell death , cellular movement , cellular growth and proliferation , cell-to-cell signalling and interaction , and cell cycle . the most over-represented physiological functions were tissue morphology , cardiovascular system development and function , connective tissue development and function , skeletal and muscular system development and function , and organismal development . the most profoundly affected signalling network, involving  <dig> out of the  <dig> genes broadly associated with animal cardiac hypertrophy models and the human disease indicated that tgf-β in particular might be generally involved in the dysfunctional heart .

fc = fold-change. dash  before number indicates down-regulation, compared to appropriate controls. a blank indicates that no significant alteration  was observed. for pmage data, "i" and "d" indicate induction and down-regulation with  <dig> transcripts detected in either wild-type or αmhc403/+ mice, respectively. where genes that were represented by more than one polony  conflicted in direction , "+/-" is used in place of a fc value. idiop, isch, as, and cong = idiopathic, ischemic, aortic stenosis, and congenital, respectively. "drug" refers to angiotensin ii,  <dig> -diiodothyropropionic acid, or isoproterenol treatment. sh, mi, and ab = shunt, myocardial infarction, and aortic banding, respectively. rq = αmhc403/+ mice, representing familial cardiac hypertrophy. phys = physiological. gene functions were obtained from ingenuity pathway analysis software, supplemented with information obtained from the ncbi and stanford source search databases. some genes perform more than one function, but are only listed under one category.

to compare animal models and human disease data sets, we generated a similarity matrix based on average fold-change observed for each disease type compared to its appropriate study control for all overlapping genes . the two data sets for which raw data were unavailable were excluded. similarity was measured as the number of genes in common with fold-changes that occurred in the same direction  with a magnitude of at least  <dig> . all possible pairwise comparisons were performed, and the resulting matrix was used to create a clustering diagram to illustrate which groups most closely resembled one another . as expected, the rodent exercise model least resembled induction of pathological cardiac hypertrophy in animals or human cardiac disease. the angiotensin ii,  <dig> -diiodothyropropionic acid, and high salt animal models least resembled human disease, and iso treatment was most similar to ischemic and idiopathic cardiac failure in humans. similar results were obtained when ontological categories of altered genes were analyzed for each model and disease group using ingenuity pathway analysis software program . as shown, the most common functions were related to cellular growth and proliferation, immune-related signalling/processes, and cardiovascular functions.

discussion
a variety of methods have been used to simulate human heart disease in animals, and a great many studies have been conducted to examine the transcriptional profiles of these animals, especially in conjunction with signalling pathway perturbation or drug discovery. few studies, however, have attempted to coalesce these various data to identify canonical molecular signalling pathways. a notable exception is strom et al  <cit> , who comprehensively compared several different rodent models of cardiac hypertrophy to identify a core set of genes that might generally characterize cardiac hypertrophy signalling. this previous study, however, did not include iso, which is thought to induce myocardial damage via an increase in catecholamines and subsequent imbalance of energy supply and cardiac hyperactivity  <cit> . iso is mainly used as a cardiac hypertrophy model because it is convenient and yields rapid and reproducible results, but very little is known regarding the precise mechanism of action of this drug or exactly how it induces cardiomyopathy  <cit> . our laboratory previously tested an fda-approved generic antibiotic using the iso model and found that physiological and microarray data supported the use of doxycycline as an efficacious treatment for iso-induced cardiac hypertrophy  <cit> . these results were reproducible using transverse aortic banding and post-myocardial infarction hypertrophic animal models  <cit> ; however, it is nonetheless important to identify the underlying molecular mechanisms of iso-induced hypertrophy and correlate this animal model with human cardiac disease.

the results of this study show that iso induces transcriptional alterations in mouse hearts that differ drastically from those elicited by normal hypertrophy in response to exercise training . moreover, the differential functions and pathways associated with gene expression alterations elicited by the two types of treatments are consistent with what is known about molecular signalling events that are specific to pathological versus physiological cardiac hypertrophy. for instance, iso treatment results in the alteration of several genes involved in acute phase and oxidative stress response signalling, which is associated with maladaptive cardiac remodeling  <cit> . conversely, swimming-induced gene expression alterations in mouse hearts were mainly those known to be involved in normal increases in heart mass resulting from exercise   <cit> .

based on our comparisons of our genetic expression results and the results of others using a wide variety of other animal models of cardiac hypertrophy, we conclude that the transcriptional profile of iso-treated mice most resembles gene expression alterations induced by the transverse aortic banding model. however, the similarity is mainly limited to mice, with few overlapping genes detected between iso-treated mice and the various rat models. a more extensive study would be required to compare mouse and rat models in order to conclusively determine which best mimics human cardiac disease. our results indicate that profound differences in gene expression patterns exist between the two types of models that warrant further investigation.

despite the expected variability between studies arising from differences in animal disease models, strains, experimental variations, array platforms, and species-related differences, our results indicate that among human cardiac diseases, ischemic-related cardiac hypertrophy most closely resembles iso-treatment of mice . the similarity of iso-treatment to idiopathic heart disease suggests that the majority of idiopathic patients exhibited ischemia-associated cardiac hypertrophy and also implies that molecular signatures might be used to classify idiopathic diseases. alternatively, our findings may simply reflect the notion that a common molecular signature underlies many forms of endstage cardiac failure, irrespective of the etiology. a further complication is that some of the changes in transcript expression may be secondary to changes in cellular composition of cardiac tissue. however, we identified a core set of genes that characterize animal models and human cardiac disease, particularly ischemia-induced cardiomyopathy . this list represented several major cellular functions, including cell adhesion and migration, cardiovascular-specific and muscle-specific functions , cellular growth, proliferation, and survival, extracellular matrix morphology, immune response and inflammation, and stress response.

one potential weakness in comparing human to animal models is that the human samples may have been subjected to varying degrees of warm ischemia during collection and processing, whereas the animal models were probably collected under more controlled circumstances. there are nonetheless some interesting findings in the results obtained from comparing the various animal model and human cardiac disease gene expression profiles, as shown in fig.  <dig>  first, as might be expected, the genetic expression profile from murine exercised hearts is strikingly dissimilar from any of the expression profiles from either the human diseased hearts or hearts obtained from murine models of human disease. secondly, the murine cardiac disease models that do not have a readily recognizable human disease analog  cluster together, and are not particularly similar to the human disease models. finally, the murine expression profile for animals treated with aortic banding is very similar to the one obtained from humans with aortic stenosis; these physiologic processes would be expected to be very similar, and the extreme similarity in the gene expression profiles for these conditions strongly supports the notion that microarray genetic profile analysis can be used to determine the faithfulness of animal models in replicating human disease.

CONCLUSIONS
we characterized the transcription profile of mouse hearts exposed to isoproterenol, a convenient, reproducible, and rapid model of cardiac hypertrophy. we also indentified the animal model and human cardiac disease transcriptomes that most closely resemble iso-treatment: myocardial infarction and mutation of αmhc in mice and ischemia-induced cadiomyopathy. we further identified a core set of genes that might represent a universal maladaptive cardiac response to stress and provide individual gene candidates for further investigation.

