BACKGROUND
human faces provide key social and emotional information via the expressions portrayed. in a single encounter, an individual's facial expressions change rapidly, requiring a quick deduction of meaning. this ability to process facial expressions quickly or automatically is particularly advantageous when the expressions predict threat   <cit> . given the importance of processing social threat cues in facial expressions quickly, the meaning may be conveyed by several key features .

schematic faces, simple line drawings or caricatures of faces, extract these features from a complex facial expression. a schematic face capturing the key components of a facial expression may be useful in studies of emotion because the prototype is relatively devoid of confounding characteristics . several studies have discovered that schematic faces still retain emotional meaning  <cit>  and schematic faces activate brain structures involved in processing human facial expressions   <cit> , providing evidence that a simple representation of a facial expression can be used to study emotion.

it is well-established that the amygdala response habituates  to repeated presentations of human facial expressions; however, it is unclear whether the brain's response to schematic faces is maintained or habituates over time. amygdala single cell recordings show reduced activity to repeated human faces  <cit> . additionally, neuroimaging studies have reported early vs. late within-block habituation in the amygdala and hippocampal formation in response to repeated fearful and neutral human faces  <cit> . to our knowledge, only two studies have reported on habituation effects in response to schematic faces. in an event-related study involving both human and schematic faces, significant amygdala habituation was reported to schematic faces of anger relative to neutral in individuals with social phobia  <cit> . in a block-design study of healthy individuals, the amgydala response to schematic faces  was maintained across time  <cit> ; however, the presentation order  may have inhibited habituation.

in this fmri block-design study, we examined the brain responses  to schematic and human facial expressions using a within-run facial expression  and between-run face type  counterbalanced design. this design allowed examination of habituation and of face type in a single experiment without potentially confounding influences of presentation order. we hypothesized within-run habituation effects would be detected in response to the alternating blocks of schematic facial expressions as well as the human facial expressions in the amygdala.

RESULTS
face recognition and emotion ratings
during the post-scanning recognition task, participants identified the faces viewed with high accuracy rates .

the negative faces  were rated as being more arousing than the neutral faces . no differences in arousal ratings between face type  were detected . no interaction effects were noted .

the negative faces  were rated as being more negative than the neutral faces . the human faces tended to be rated more negatively than the schematic faces . in addition, the valence rating difference between angry and neutral faces was greater for schematic faces than for human faces . this difference was due to greater negative valence ratings of the human neutral faces compared to more positive ratings of neutral schematic faces .

bold activation
a temporal effect of responses across blocks within the run were detected in amygdala  and fusiform gyrus  . a significant quadratic response was detected in both regions .

post-hoc tests were conducted using a significance threshold of p <  <dig>  to correct for multiple comparisons and demonstrated a "u" pattern of activity. in the amygdala and fusiform, the response in the initial block  was greater than the other blocks  . contrary to the amygdala , the responses in the fusiform gyrus tend to progressively decline  . in addition, a trend towards significant region  x time  interaction was detected in the left  and the right hemispheres . responses to block  <dig> were greater than block  <dig> significantly in the right amygdala and bilateral fusiform gyrus  and at trend-level significance in the left amygdala .

in the right amygdala, a trend emotion x time effect was significant . because the initial block yielded the largest response and was subsequently followed by a habituated response, the responses in the first time block were investigated further for valence effects. greater responses were elicited to negative faces compared to neutral faces . .

there were no other significant effects  in the amygdala. no significant valence, face-type main effets or interactions were found in the fusiform gyrus. .

discussion
within each run, the amygdala and the fusiform gyrus showed a "u" response pattern with the initial and final blocks eliciting the greatest activation to a repeated facial expression. the amygdala profile may reflect an initial orienting response, then habituation, followed by recovery of activation in the final block. a similar "u" pattern was observed in skin conductance response  and late-phase scr-associated left amygdala response to repeated fearful faces  <cit> . like fear, anger is highly arousing and may prompt a similar orienting response and skin conductance response. the activation recovery may be due to emotional priming  <cit> . alternatively, it may reflect spontaneous recovery or reinstatement. vigilance maintenance via a system reset, even in the absence of imminent threat, may be an important survival function  <cit> . consistent with this notion, primate electrophysiological data demonstrate that neuronal populations within the amygdala respond maximally to novelty, show decreased activation with familiarity , and reset  after limited number of repeated stimulus presentations  <cit> .

in this study, fusiform gyrus activation followed this "u" pattern in response as well; however, a trend towards different temporal patterns are observed in the amygdala and fusiform gyrus. in the amygdala, habituation occurs rapidly; whereas, in the fusiform gyrus, habituation occurs more gradually. this delayed recovery may be explained by enhanced modulation of the amygdala or a slower resetting system of the fusiform gyrus.

negative faces are discriminated from neutral faces in the right amygdala. our findings replicate previous work showing that the right amygdala, responds to angry relative to neutral faces  <cit> . in this study, the differential amygdala response to facial expressions was present only during the early time period, suggesting that it is related to the amygdala orienting response. although some studies report fusiform gyrus activation to emotional faces relative to neutral faces, we did not detect such an effect. it may be that differential fusiform gyrus activation to emotional  faces is task-dependent. the fusiform gyrus responds more non-selectively to facial stimuli in the context of limited-attentional demands   <cit> , yet exhibits a selective or differential pattern of activation when increased attention to face emotional content is required  <cit> . in fact, the existence of projections from the amygdala to the fusiform cortex suggest that the amygdala may modulate the sensory processing stream according to the salience of the target visual stimulus  <cit> .

interestingly, no significant differences between schematic and human faces were detected in the amygdala and fusiform gyrus. in a recent study, the amygdala response to human and avatar  was similar, yet the fusiform showed a greater response to human faces  <cit> . for studying the amygdala, it appears that there is some utility to this response similarity between human and face representations . schematic and avatar faces may be useful to study emotion perception because the key facial features that underlie the neural activation are relatively isolated from stimulus features like race/ethnicity and gender, which may increase the variability in responses. it is also important to note that schematic and avatar faces may be useful in answering different questions concerning emotion that take advantage of the static or moveable representations .

this study has some potential limitations. evaluating the temporal dynamics of neural responses is dependent on the time scale examined. in this study, within-run habituation effects were investigated; however, other time scales  may show different effects. only angry faces were used to represent negative faces. future studies should examine the temporal dynamics of other expressions , including positive expressions . our findings suggest schematic and human faces elicit generally similar responses in the amygdala and fusiform gyrus; however, replication in a larger sample is needed. schematic faces reduce expressions to line drawings and a single exemplar was used in this study. while using a single exemplar may be problematic, it does diminish confounds due to variability in human facial expressions. finally, although using roi-based analysis is a more powerful approach for detecting differences in specific a priori regions , this approach does not allow the observation of other regions that may also respond to these stimuli.

CONCLUSIONS
in summary, it appears that both the amygdala and fusiform gyrus responses to facial expressions do habituate over time; however, the "u" pattern suggests that the responsivity of these structures resets, possibly to allow attentional reengagement with repeatedly presented stimuli. future studies with larger samples should investigate whether this pattern discriminates between emotions or stimulus type.

