BACKGROUND
lactic acid bacteria  constitute a very important group of microorganisms for
the food industry, as well as the health of humans and animals  <cit> . several species in this group have a long history of safe use in
fermented foods and thus belong to the very few bacteria that may qualify for the
"generally regarded as safe"  or the "qualified presumption of safety" 
status according to fda and efsa, respectively  <cit> . other lab species are commensals of the skin, the oral cavity, the
respiratory system, the gastrointestinal tract  and the genitals of mammals or
other organisms. furthermore, the presence of specific lab strains, called
"probiotics", in certain niches of the body is considered to promote the health of
the host  <cit> . this benign nature of lab, as well as their economic value, often
obscure the existence of notorious lab pathogens that are among the leading causes
of human morbidity and mortality worldwide  <cit> .

this oxymoron about the vast differences in the pathogenic potential within the lab
group is probably best exemplified by streptococci. the genus basically consists of
commensals that include several severe pathogens, like group a streptococci ,
group b streptococci  and streptococcus pneumoniae <cit> . streptococcal pathogens are implicated in a plethora of diseases,
ranging from mild  to invasive and life-threatening  infections  <cit> . in contrast, streptococcus thermophilus is one of the most
frequent starter lab consumed by humans in yogurt and cheese  <cit> . it is believed that this is the only streptococcal species that, during
its adaptation to the nutrient-rich milk environment, underwent extensive genome
decay, resulting in the loss of pathogenicity-related genes present in members of
the genus  <cit> .

apart from s. thermophilus, other streptococci can grow in milk and milk
products. such streptococci mainly belong to the streptococcus
bovis/streptococcus equinus complex   <cit> . the exact route that would explain their presence in milk is yet
unidentified. in theory, since some of them can naturally occur in the git or on the
teat skin of lactating animals, they could be passively transmitted to raw milk. in
addition, species of the sbsec are known to be involved in human cases of
endocarditis, meningitis, bacteremia and colon cancer  <cit> . however, streptococcus macedonicus, which is a member of this
specific complex, has been suggested to be adapted to milk and it has been
hypothesized that it could be non pathogenic. these assumptions were based on the
fact that the primary ecological niche of s. macedonicus appears to be
naturally fermented foods, mostly of dairy origin similarly to s.
thermophilus <cit> . initial in vitro and in vivo evaluation did not
support virulence of s. macedonicus aca-dc  <dig>  <cit> . pcr and southern blotting analyses indicated the absence of several
streptococcus pyogenes pathogenicity genes. in addition, oral
administration of the organism at high dosages  for an extended
period of time  to mice did not result in any observable adverse
effects including inflammation in the stomach or translocation from the git to the
organs of the animals  <cit> . moreover, strains of s. macedonicus have been shown to present
important technological properties of industrial cultures like the production of
texturizing exopolysaccharides and anti-clostridial bacteriocins  <cit> .

streptococcus macedonicus was originally isolated from traditional greek
kasseri cheese  <cit>  and it is phylogenetically related to streptococcus gallolyticus
subsp. gallolyticus and streptococcus pasteurianus , as well as to
streptococcus infantarius . the inclusion of s. macedonicus and s. pasteurianus as
subspecies of s. gallolyticus subsp. gallolyticus  has been previously suggested  <cit> , but this taxonomic reappraisal has not been formally accepted so far  <cit> . streptococcus gallolyticus and s. pasteurianus are
considered pathogenic. preliminary investigations concerning the mechanisms by which
s. gallolyticus causes endocarditis indicated that s.
macedonicus may lack at least some of the pathogenic determinants
implicated in this disease  <cit> . furthermore, the recent study of the genome of s. infantarius
subsp. infantarius cj <dig> 
isolated from spontaneously fermented camel milk in africa has indicated
strain-dependent traits of adaptation to the dairy environment despite the fact that
the species is considered as a putative pathogen  <cit> . overall, the presence in fermented foods of sbsec species with a
currently unresolved pathogenicity status, such as s. macedonicus and
s. infantarius, may represent an underestimated cause of concern in
terms of food safety and public health, which needs to be addressed.

here we present the first complete genome sequence of s. macedonicus in
order to shed light on the biology of the species. we are particularly interested in
assessing niche adaptation and in investigating the pathogenic potential of the
strain analyzed based on comparative genomics against other complete genomes within
the sbsec. this is an important step to rationally deduce whether the bacterium is
safe to be used as a starter or if extra technological measures are needed to avoid
its presence in food fermentations.

RESULTS
general features of streptococcus macedonicus aca-dc  <dig> genome
the circular chromosome of s. macedonicus aca-dc  <dig> consists of
 <dig> ,034 bp  with a
g + c content of  <dig> %, which is among the lowest values within the
available complete streptococcal genomes . a total of  <dig>  protein coding dna sequences
 were annotated, covering  <dig> % of the s. macedonicus chromosome.
of these,  <dig> were identified as putative pseudogenes according to geneprimp  <cit>  analysis followed by manual curation. the bacterium also carries 18
rrna genes organized in  <dig> clusters co-localized with most of the  <dig> trna genes.
the s. macedonicus genome was found to be 220–232 kb smaller
and only 30 kb larger than the genomes of s. gallolyticus and
s. pasteurianus, respectively. streptococcus infantarius
has one of the smallest genome sizes within the sbsec reported up to now . the percentage of
potential pseudogenes in s. macedonicus was  <dig> %, in s.
pasteurianus  <dig> % and in s. infantarius  <dig> %. in contrast, the
percentage of pseudogenes in at least two s. gallolyticus strains  has been found to be  <dig> % or less. this analysis
is in accordance with previous findings  <cit> . based on the close phylogenetic relationship among the four species,
these observations suggest that the genome of s. macedonicus, as well
as those of s. pasteurianus and s. infantarius may be evolving
under selective pressures that allow gene loss events and genome decay processes
when compared to the s. gallolyticus genomes.
aca-dc  <dig>  genomic features appearing from the
periphery to the centre of the map:  <dig>  forward cdss ;  <dig>  reverse
cdss ;  <dig>  putative pseudogenes ;  <dig>  rrna genes ;  <dig> 
trna genes ;  <dig> % gc plot;  <dig>  gc skew.

whole genome phylogeny, comparative genomics, and core genome analysis
a phylogenetic tree based on the currently available complete streptococcal
genome sequences was constructed using the edgar software  <cit> . on this tree, s. gallolyticus, s. macedonicus,
s. pasteurianus, as well as s. infantarius formed a
single, monophyletic branch, providing strong evidence for the taxonomic
integrity of the sbsec .

subsequently, full chromosome alignments were performed using progressivemauve  <cit> . the analysis revealed a mosaic pattern of homology organized in
local collinear blocks  among s. gallolyticus, s.
macedonicus and s. pasteurianus . evidently, a significant portion of the genetic information has
been overall conserved, as the majority of the lcbs are shared by all species.
in addition, chromosomal rearrangements seem to have been rather minimal, as the
number of lcbs showing a change in relative genomic position among the strains
was low and their length short. nevertheless, numerous differences were also
detected. some lcbs were common only among some of the strains, while some
regions were identified as strain-specific . the presence of such strain-specific regions suggests that, in addition to
gene loss mentioned earlier, gene acquisition events mediated by horizontal gene
transfer  may have played a role during the evolution of the three species
. interestingly, the inclusion of the s. infantarius genome
in the mauve analysis resulted in an increased number of lcbs with a decreased
average length. as the level of sequence conservation of individual lcbs among
the four species remains relatively high, this observation suggests that
specific genome structure reorganization events occurred specifically in s.
infantarius . analysis with the
edgar software revealed a core genome of only  <dig>  orthologous genes based on
the sequence and the current annotation of s. gallolyticus, s.
pasteurianus and s. macedonicus   <cit> . once more, inclusion of s. infantarius increased the
diversity, resulting in reduction of the core genome by more than  <dig> genes
among the four species . the significant percentage of
variable genes within the four sbsec species may underpin their adaptation to
specific environments.
bovis/streptococcus equinus
complex members as calculated by progressivemauve.
chromosome alignments among streptococcus gallolyticus,
streptococcus macedonicus and streptococcus
pasteurianus and all the aforementioned streptococci
and streptococcus infantarius. local collinear blocks
 of conserved sequences among the strains are represented by
rectangles of the same colour. connecting lines can be used to visualize
synteny or rearrangement. lcbs positioned above or under the chromosome
 correspond to the forward and reverse orientation,
respectively. the level of conservation is equivalent to the level of
vertical colour filling within the lcbs . sequences not placed within an lcb are unique for the
particular strain.
bovis/streptococcus equinus
complex. whole cds venn diagrams of
streptococcus gallolyticus, streptococcus
macedonicus and streptococcus pasteurianus
or streptococcus gallolyticus, streptococcus
infantarius, streptococcus macedonicus and
streptococcus pasteurianus. in
streptococcus gallolyticus atcc  <dig> was
selected as a representative of the s. gallolyticus species,
since it has the longest genome size among the three sequenced
strains.

genes involved in the survival in the git
it has been established that s. gallolyticus displays the notable
ability to accumulate and metabolize a broad range of complex carbohydrates from
plants when compared to other streptococci  <cit> . the necessity for this repertoire of carbohydrate-degrading
activities has been considered to reflect the adaptation of s.
gallolyticus to the rumen of herbivores  <cit> . preliminary analysis indicated that at least some of the relevant
genes are either entirely absent or they have been converted into pseudogenes in
the genomes of s. macedonicus, s. pasteurianus and s.
infantarius . the presence of
pseudogenes related to carbohydrate metabolism reinforces the notion that s.
macedonicus, s. pasteurianus and s. infantarius have
undergone genome decay processes during adaptation to their ecological niches.
the entire glycobiome of the sbsec members was further analyzed based on the
data available in the cazy database   <cit> . important differences in the distribution of enzymes among the sbsec
members were observed for all cazy categories including glycoside hydrolases
, glycosyl tranferases, polysaccharide lyases, carbohydrate esterases and
carbohydrate-binding modules . streptococcus macedonicus and
streptococcus infantarius had the smallest glycobiome within the
sbsec. the two strains had only  <dig> and  <dig> ghs, while the rest sbsec members had
more than  <dig>  given that most of these ghs are potentially involved in plant and
dietary carbohydrate catabolism   <cit> , it could be hypothesized that s. macedonicus and s.
infantarius have a diminished necessity for such enzymes in their
ecological niche. streptococcus pasteurianus had the highest number of
ghs, some of which were unique among sbsec . this observation indicates differences in the range of carbohydrates the
strain is able to catabolize in comparison to the other members of the complex.
interestingly, none of the sbsec members were found to carry ghs that are
implicated in the degradation of host derived oligosaccharides   <cit> . in contrast, streptococcus gallolyticus strains, s.
macedonicus and s. infantarius had hits in the cbm <dig> family,
while s. pasteurianus in the cbm <dig> family, both of which have been
associated with the recognition of host glycans  <cit> .
streptococcus bovis
/
streptococcus equinus 
complex potentially involved in adaptation to the rumen

s. gallolyticus 
s. gallolyticus 
s. gallolyticus 
s. pasteurianus 
s. macedonicus 
s. infantarius 
 not found;  truncated;  split cdss corresponding to
fragments of the original gene not yet characterized as pseudogenes;
 pseudogenes;  transposase genes in italics.

furthermore, s. gallolyticus can detoxify toxic compounds met in the
rumen and other environments. again, s. macedonicus, s. pasteurianus
and s. infantarius miss some of the genes involved in detoxification
. none of them carry genes for tannin
hydrolysis similar to gallo_ <dig> or gallo_ <dig>  the potential to degrade
additional phenolic compounds like gallic acid seems to be comparable between
s. gallolyticus and s. pasteurianus. in contrast, s.
infantarius has no orthologs of either padc  or gallo_ <dig> 
i.e. the two gallic acid decarboxylases found in s. gallolyticus ucn <dig> 
while s. macedonicus has retained only padc. furthermore, the
bsh gene , coding for a bile salt hydrolase, is present
in all four species with the exception of s. macedonicus, in which it
appears as a pseudogene. thus, our findings clearly suggest that not only s.
macedonicus, but also s. pasteurianus and s.
infantarius have deviated from s. gallolyticus in their
potential to cope with the harsh environment of the git of herbivores.

genes involved in the growth in milk or dairy products
dairy lab are considered fastidious microorganisms due to their adaptation to
growth in milk that is particularly nutritious by nature. lactose and milk
proteins  are characteristic of the dairy
environment. lab are able to ferment lactose to lactic acid and they have
evolved a proteolytic system for the degradation of milk proteins down to amino
acids  <cit> .

all sbsec species are able to utilize lactose and to catabolize galactose.
sequence similarity searches revealed a gene cluster 
dedicated to lactose metabolism with a unique organization in sbsec when
compared to those previously reported for other lab . the typical sequence of lac genes is interrupted in the
majority of sbsec strains by genes coding for the iia, iib and iic components of
a pep-pts . annotation of this pep-pts varies among
the sbsec species/strains and for this reason functional analysis is required to
properly determine its exact function. in contrast to other sbsec species, these
three pts genes are absent from s. infantarius. the lactose-specific
pts found at the end of the lac gene cluster  is also inactivated in s. infantarius through disruption of the
lact antiterminator gene by transposases  <cit> . interestingly, the lac gene cluster in s.
macedonicus contains two 6-phospho-beta-galactosidase 
genes that may be indicative of adaptation of this particular species to milk.
galactose can also be catabolized through the leloir pathway and a
galrkte operon coding for the relevant enzymes was previously
determined in s. infantarius <cit> . the gal operon is conserved in all sbsec species analyzed
here .
streptococcus bovis
/
streptococcus equinus 
complex potentially involved in lactose and galactose
metabolism

s. gallolyticus 
s. gallolyticus 
s. gallolyticus 
s. pasteurianus 
s. macedonicus 
s. infantarius 
 not found;  pseudogenes;  transposase genes in italics.

a partial gal-lac operon
galt/gale1m/lacsz with high sequence
identity to s. thermophilus is also present in the genome of s.
infantarius <cit> . it has been demonstrated that the lactose and galactose permease
 and the β-galactosidase  are responsible
for the uptake and initial hydrolysis of lactose in s. infantarius in a
manner similar to that employed by s. thermophilus <cit> . this gal-lac operon of s. infantarius is
missing from the other sbsec strains as a whole. a lacz ortholog  is
only present in s. pasteurianus and dispersed gale and
galm genes can be found in the s. gallolyticus and s.
pasteurianus genomes. similarly to the presence of the extra
gal-lac operon in s. infantarius, we detected a
second lac gene cluster in s. macedonicus , also suggesting adaptation to the milk environment. this second gene
cluster is solely present in s. macedonicus and not in any other sbsec
member. surprisingly, an additional lactfeg region coding for a
complete lactose pep-pts and a 6-phospho-beta-galactosidase is present in the
genomes of s. gallolyticus and s. pasteurianus. this is an
unexpected finding since s. gallolyticus and s. pasteurianus
have hardly ever been related to milk up to now  <cit> .

we then investigated the proteolytic system of s. macedonicus and the
rest of the sbsec members adapting the scheme previously described by liu and
co-workers   <cit> . in milk, casein utilization by lab is initiated after hydrolysis by
a cell-envelope associated proteinase  releasing oligopeptides. the
oligopeptides are then transferred intracellularly via specialized peptide
transport systems where they are systematically degraded into amino acids by an
array of intracellular peptidases. the four species have essentially the same
proteolytic system, albeit showing some differences . none of them has a typical prtp cep, but s.
gallolyticus and s. infantarius carry a lactocepin coding
gene. the lactocepin of the sbsec shows ≥ 63% sequence
similarity to the prts cep involved in the degradation of milk proteins in
s. thermophilus <cit> . the exact role of lactocepin in sbsec species needs to be
experimentally examined. sbsec strains like s. macedonicus may require
cep activity to be provided by other bacteria when growing in milk. this is a
common strategy of nonstarter lab that rely on starter cep-producing strains for
casein hydrolysis  <cit> . streptococcus infantarius carries two oligopeptide
transport systems   <cit> , but all the other sbsec species have only one such system. all sbsec
strains own a proton motive force -driven dtpt transporter for the
transport of di- and tri-peptides and they all possess an entire repertoire of
proteolytic enzymes including endopeptidases, general aminopeptidases and
specialized peptidases . they only lack
enzymes of the pepe/pepg  and the pepi/pepr/pepl  superfamilies in accordance to previous observations for
streptococci and lactococci  <cit> . the conservation of this proteolytic system among streptococci in
the sbsec despite their presumed adaptation to different ecological niches  <cit>  indicates that it may somehow be essential. furthermore, s.
macedonicus and the other sbsec members are autotrophs for several
amino acids  and only s. pasteurianus has been reported
to be unable to synthesize tryptophan  <cit> . thus, the preservation of an entire proteolytic system by sbsec
members while retaining the ability to synthesize most, if not all, amino acids
is puzzling, especially when considering that some of them have obviously
undergone extensive genome decay processes. it could be hypothesized that this
property of sbsec species may provide a competitive advantage in poor
environments, but this needs to be further investigated.
streptococcus bovis
/
streptococcus equinus 
complex potentially involved in proteolysis of milk proteins

s. gallolyticus 
s. gallolyticus 
s. gallolyticus 
s. pasteurianus 
s. macedonicus 
s
. 
infantarius 
apart from amino acids, s. gallolyticus ucn <dig> also carries complete
pathways for the synthesis of a number of vitamins including riboflavin,
nicotine amide, pantothenate, pyridoxine, and folic acid, while the biosynthetic
pathways for biotin and thiamine are partial  <cit> . the genes potentially involved in the de novo biosynthesis
of pyridoxine in the sbsec strains were determined based on the respective
pathway of s. pneumoniae d <dig>  <cit> . the corresponding loci are conserved among s. gallolyticus
strains but once more s. macedonicus, s. pasteurianus and
s. infantarius appear to have undergone a heterogeneous gene loss
process, indicating the necessity for exogenous supply of some of these vitamins
. for example, s. macedonicus
misses the biobdy, panbcd and ribdeah loci involved in the
biosynthesis of biotin, pantothenate and riboflavin, respectively. in addition,
the presence of pseudogenes or truncated/split genes may have disrupted the
biosynthesis of pyridoxine, nicotine amide and thiamine through the routes
analyzed here. it is not uncommon for lab to be auxotrophic for several vitamins  <cit> , though milk and other dairy products may contain all essential
vitamins to sustain the growth of these microorgansims.
streptococcus bovis
/
streptococcus equinus 
complex potentially involved in the biosynthesis of vitamins

s
. 
gallolyticus 
s
. 
gallolyticus 
s. gallolyticus 
s. pasteurianus 
s. macedonicus 
s
. 
infantarius 
 not found;  split cdss corresponding to fragments of the
original gene not yet characterized as pseudogenes;  pseudogenes;
 truncated.

genomic islands  and unique genes of streptococcus macedonicus
gis are sites of hgt that can uncover important features of the plasticity of a
bacterial genome and they are primarily linked to gene gain processes. we used
the islandviewer application  <cit>  to identify gis of the sbsec members in parallel. streptococcus
macedonicus had  <dig> predicted gis with an average length of
 <dig>  bp corresponding to a total sequence of  <dig>  bp or  <dig> % the
size of the bacterium’s genome . this percentage of externally acquired dna is
higher compared to the other sbsec members, in which it ranged from  <dig> % in
s. gallolyticus atcc baa- <dig> down to  <dig> % in s.
gallolyticus ucn <dig> 

as could be expected, the highest degree of sequence conservation among gis was
observed in the s. gallolyticus strains . when different sbsec species were compared, a
number of gis were only partially conserved . unique gis were also present in most genomes analyzed
. partially conserved gis may
be remnants of gis acquired before speciation events in the sbsec and their
subsequent gene decay may be the result of adaptation to diverged ecological
niches. the existence of unique gis among the sbsec species, whose acquisition
must have been more recent , also points to
the same direction. furthermore, our analysis suggests that s.
macedonicus shares stretches of gi sequences exclusively with s.
infantarius among the sbsec members  in accordance with previous findings  <cit> . potential donors of gi sequences were identified from best blastn
hits showing sequence identity > 90%. in several instances
sequence segments within s. macedonicus gis may have derived from more
than one donor .
potential donors of the s. macedonicus gis were streptococcus
agalactiae, streptococcus intermedius, streptococcus
suis, streptococcus uberis, enterococcus faecium,
lactococcus garvieae and pediococcus pentosaceus. most
importantly, lactococcus lactis or s. thermophilus were found
among these donors in  <dig> out of 14 s. macedonicus gis and the same
applies for s. infantarius in  <dig> out of  <dig> gis. none of the gi sequences
of the other sbsec members could be linked to l. lactis or s.
thermophilus apart from the s. gallolyticus atcc baa- <dig> gi 6
that exhibited a 96% identity over an approximately 3 kb genomic region of
s. thermophilus jim  <dig> . these observations
constitute additional evidence that s. macedonicus and s.
infantarius are the only members of the complex that have extensively
interacted with the dairy l. lactis and s. thermophilus.

we then calculated the unique genes  of
s. macedonicus against the other sbsec species twice, taking or not
into account the genome of s. infantarius. results from singleton gene
analysis using edgar  <cit>  were manually curated to relieve the set from the high numbers of
transposable elements. there was an important overlap between the list of genes
found in gis of s. macedonicus and the singleton genes . again, s. macedonicus and s.
infantarius were found to share a number of genes that are absent from
the other sbsec genomes .

according to the aforementioned analysis s. macedonicus carries the
complete biosynthetic pathways for two lantibiotic bacteriocins, i.e. the
macedocin and the macedovicin peptides  <cit> . the presence of both antimicrobials can provide an additional link
between s. macedonicus and the milk environment. production of
macedocin has been observed only in milk up to now and proteolytic fragments of
casein may trigger biosynthesis of this peptide  <cit> . in addition, the entire macedovicin gene cluster is practically
identical  to the respective clusters of thermophilin  <dig> and bovicin hj <dig> found
in the dairy isolates s. thermophilus sbt <dig> and s. bovis
hj <dig>  respectively  <cit> . the locus seems to have spread among the three strains by hgt and
their common dairy origin increases the possibility that this exchange of
genetic material has taken place in milk  <cit> .

another evident characteristic of the s. macedonicus genome was the
presence of multiple restriction modification  systems among the singleton
genes .
streptococcus macedonicus possesses the highest number of rm
systems within the sbsec and it is the only member of the group with all three
types of rm systems. a yet unresolved difference in the number and the type of
rm systems between commensal and dairy lab has been previously observed  <cit> . as mentioned earlier, phages are present in milk and dairy products
often in high numbers  <cit>  and traditional practices  may promote the
selection of phage resistant strains  <cit> . in s. thermophilus rm systems are considered as important
technological traits  <cit>  and it has been previously suggested that genes of the type iii rm
system may provide a signature for milk adaptation  <cit> . streptococcus macedonicus has two type iii rm systems, one
of which is inactive since it consists of pseudogenes. the increased number of
rm systems of s. macedonicus compared to the other sbsec members
suggests that it should be particularly competent in resisting invading dna.
these findings coincide with the fact that s. macedonicus carries the
highest number of spacers in its crispr  locus within the sbsec . furthermore, blastn analysis of the spacers in the
s. macedonicus crispr revealed that four of them, namely spacers  <dig> 
 <dig>   <dig> and  <dig>  had hits in s. thermophilus phages , s. thermophilus plasmids  or s.
thermophilus crispr spacer sequences . in contrast,
among the  <dig> spacers of the different crispr found in the other sbsec species,
only one had a hit in l. lactis phage  <dig> . according to these findings the occurrence of
s. macedonicus in the same habitat as that of s.
thermophilus can be supported.

in addition, s. macedonicus contains singleton genes – several
copies in some instances – coding for proteins involved in the transport
and homeostasis of metal ions . some of
these genes are also shared by s. infantarius, but not all. these genes
may play a role in the transport of copper , cadmium , manganese  and magnesium . copper and cadmium are of no
evident biological role for lactobacillales <cit>  and thus transport systems for such metals in s. macedonicus
should be perceived as a protective mechanism towards their deleterious effects
. the presence of metal transport genes has been
previously reported in several lab including l. lactis and s.
thermophilus strains  <cit> . in our opinion the high number of metal transport associated genes
in s. macedonicus was an unexpected observation and further
investigation is required regarding their physiological relevance.

distribution of virulence factors  within species of the sbsec
one of the main goals behind the genome sequencing of s. macedonicus was
to clarify its pathogenic potential. unfortunately, despite the well-known
association of s. bovis with human disease, especially endocarditis and
colon cancer, there is very little knowledge about the pathogenicity mechanisms
employed by members of the sbsec. in table   <dig> we have
gathered genes previously assigned as potential vfs in sbsec. the available
studies have shed some light on the ability of s. gallolyticus to
colonize host tissues, a step that is considered as a prerequisite for the
initiation of the infection by this bacterium. streptococcus
gallolyticus ucn <dig> contains three pilus gene clusters which may mediate
binding to the extracellular matrix , similarly to the clinical isolate
tx <dig> whose genome is partially characterized  <cit> . the pil <dig> and pil <dig> of strain ucn <dig> have been found
identical to the acb-sbs7-srtc <dig> and sbs15-sbs14-srtc <dig> loci of
strain tx <dig>  respectively, but their additional predicted pilus gene cluster
 was only
distantly related  <cit> . while all three strains of s. gallolyticus carry the three
pilus loci , s. macedonicus, s.
pasteurianus and s. infantarius carry only the pil3
locus. functional analysis indicated that pil <dig> is a crucial factor of
s. gallolyticus ucn <dig> for binding to ecm, especially to collagen  <cit> . the preference of s. gallolyticus to bind to collagen is of
particular importance, since it may allow the adherence of the bacterium to the
collagen-rich surfaces of damaged heart valves and cancerous sites  <cit> . besides the pilus loci, additional mscramm  proteins have been predicted in s.
gallolyticus, most of which are either absent or preudogenes in s.
macedonicus, s. pasteurianus and s. infantarius
  <cit> . the cell surface protein antigen c  also appears exclusively in
the s. gallolyticus genomes, sometimes in more than one copy. only the
surface-exposed histone-like protein a  and the autolysin  are
universally conserved in the sbsec. hlpa has been shown to be a major
heparin-binding protein regulating the ability of s. gallolyticus
adherence to the heparan sulfate proteoglycans at the colon tumor cell surface  <cit> . atla is a fibronectin-binding protein which is a vf of s.
mutans associated with infective endocarditis  <cit> . furthermore, s. gallolyticus ucn <dig> carries loci for the
biosynthesis of insoluble glucan polymers from sucrose and the synthesis of
hemicellulose  <cit> . insoluble glucan polymers may contribute to feedlot bloat in cattle  <cit> , while hemicellulose could play a role in biofilm formation  <cit> . it is possible that the production of these polymers may vary among
strains of s. gallolyticus .
streptococcus macedonicus is devoid of the biosynthetic gene
cluster of glucan, while the hemicellulose synthesis operon seems to be
comprised of pseudogenes. similarly, s. pasteurianus and s.
infantarius seem to be also unable to synthesize both sugar polymers,
either due to full or partial absence of the genetic loci.
streptococcus bovis
/
streptococcus equinus 
complex identified as putative virulence factors

s. gallolyticus 
s
. 
gallolyticus 
s
. 
gallolyticus 
s. pasteurianus 
s. macedonicus 
s
. 
infantarius 
 not found;  pseudogenes;  split cdss corresponding to
fragments of the original gene not yet characterized as pseudogenes;
 truncated.

more genes whose products may be implicated in other interactions with the host
cells beyond adherence could be identified. despite the fact that the sbsec
members are considered non-hemolytic ,
s. gallolyticus atcc baa- <dig> has been reported to cause
alpha-hemolysis on schaedler agar with 5% sheep blood  <cit> . three hemolysins are conserved among the sbsec members . sequence analysis of sinf_ <dig> and sinf_ <dig>  also
annotated as hemolysin genes, was not supportive of a hemolysin protein product
. apart from hemolysins, a putative exfoliative toxin b
 and a macrophage infectivity potentiator protein  are
present in the s. infantarius genome  <cit> . similar genes can be found in s. thermophilus strains but
not in the other sbsec species and in our opinion functional analysis is
required to verify these annotations.

in order to expand our investigation for putative pathogenicity traits, we
screened the genomes of s. macedonicus and its related sbsec species
using the vfdb   <cit>  and the genes determined to encode putative vfs during this analysis
are presented in additional file 11: table s <dig> 
current results of comparative pathogenomics have allowed the classification of
available streptococcal vfs in nine categories, i.e. adhesion factors, dnases,
exoenzymes, immune evasion factors, immunoreactive antigens, factors involved in
metal transport, proteases, superantigens and toxins  <cit> . the general profile of vfs for the six streptococci under
investigation was rather similar and we determined a number of previously
unidentified potential vfs dispersed among all or some of the sbsec members.
several of these genes coding for putative vfs like the agglutinin receptor, the
fibronectin/fibrinogen-binding protein , the
lipoprotein rotamase a , the plasmin receptor/gapdh
multifunctional protein, the streptococcal enolase exoenzyme, the pneumococcal
surface antigen a and specific proteases  have been
experimentally correlated with the virulence of pathogenic streptococci beyond
sbsec members  <cit> . some genes were also involved in the production of a capsule that
enables bacterial cells to evade phagocytosis   <cit> . according to our analysis, all sbsec streptococci carry a main gene
cluster spanning practically the same position in the chromosome that could be
involved in the biosynthesis of a capsule . even though the cps clusters are
identical between s. gallolyticus ucn <dig> and atcc baa- <dig>  <cit> , multiple sequence alignment indicates significant structural
diversity in the rest of the strains. the existence of dispersed pseudogenes in
the gene clusters of s. infantarius and s. macedonicus  may prohibit the production of capsule substances. it
should be emphasized that the strains of the sbsec missed hits in several major
categories of streptococcal vfs  supporting a reduced pathogenic potential for the
sbsec in general.

CONCLUSIONS
in this study we presented the analysis of the first complete genome sequence of a
dairy isolate of s. macedonicus. while comparative analysis among specific
subgroups of the sbsec species has been previously presented  <cit> , comparative genomics of the six complete genome sequences was missing.
most importantly, the inclusion of s. macedonicus into this analysis
provided a better opportunity to assess niche adaptation of the sbsec species that
was so far limited by the presence of only one dairy isolate  among four clinical strains.

our findings clearly support two distinct evolutionary patterns within the sbsec. on
the one hand, s. gallolyticus is a species without apparent genome decay
and the available genomes suggest that it is a robust bacterium able to thrive in
the rumen of herbivores. on the other hand, the remaining sbsec species, i.e. s.
macedonicus, s. pasteurianus and s. infantarius exhibit
decreased genome sizes accompanied by increased percentages of potential pseudogenes
due to extensive genome decay, suggesting adaptation to nutrient-rich environments.
this does not necessarily mean that the environment to which the three species have
been adapted is the same. the three species appear with a reduced ability to
catabolize complex plant carbohydrates and to detoxify substances met in the rumen,
which indicates that they must have deviated from this niche. it has been proposed
that s. pasteurianus may now reside in the human gut  <cit> , while s. infantarius presents adaptations to milk  <cit> . streptococcus macedonicus also possesses traits that may
contribute to growth in the dairy environment, like the extra lactose gene cluster
and its proteolytic system. however, all sbsec strains, including clinical isolates,
seem to be competent in the metabolism of lactose and galactose or the degradation
of milk proteins. taking into account these shared characteristics of all sbsec
species, it is tempting to speculate that their common ancestor may have been able
to grow in milk.

in our opinion, several genome traits per se suggest adaptation of s.
macedonicus to milk. this hypothesis is also supported by the predicted
interspecies interactions of s. macedonicus with other bacteria. as it has
been recently reported for s. infantarius <cit> , the s. macedonicus genome may have acquired genes originating
from l. lactis and s. thermophilus through hgt. the predicted
exposure of s. macedonicus to s. thermophilus phages, based on our
crispr sequence analysis, is also in favor of this theory. no such evidence was
found for the rest of the sbsec members apart from s. infantarius. these
findings are in accordance with the frequent isolation of s. macedonicus
from dairy products  <cit>  and the prevalence of s. infantarius in certain african
fermented milks  <cit> . one additional question that arises is whether s. macedonicus
and s. infantarius are specialized dairy microbes like s.
thermophilus. we believe that the available data does not support this
idea. traits of milk adaptation have been shown to be strain-specific in s.
infantarius <cit> . in addition, the genome size of s. macedonicus is significantly
larger, containing a higher number of functional genes in comparison to s.
thermophilus. streptococcus macedonicus and s. infantarius may
thus represent intermediate evolutionary stages analogous to those followed by the
ancestors of s. thermophilus before it became today’s starter
culture.

thus, the safety concerns raised from the presence of sbsec members in foods remain,
even if reports implicating s. macedonicus with disease are rather scarce  <cit> . our comparative genomic analysis showed that both s.
macedonicus and s. infantarius miss several vfs that are highly
conserved in s. gallolyticus. however, the interpretation of these findings
becomes complicated as the available genome of the human blood isolate s.
pasteurianus atcc  <dig> also exhibited diminished traits of pathogenicity
similarly to the two dairy sbsec members. overall, our analysis provides evidence in
agreement with the clinical perception that the members of the sbsec are lower grade
streptococcal pathogens  <cit> . in terms of food safety, the dairy sbsec could thus constitute a risk
factor similar to the presence of enterococci that are widely found in fermented
products, but cause no major problem for the average healthy and adult consumer.
nevertheless, it is the correlation of the sbsec microorganisms with human
endocarditis and colon cancer in particular that may require special considerations.
for example, it has been proposed that members of the sbsec like s.
gallolyticus may be part of the etiology of colon cancer by causing chronic
inflammation  <cit> . in order to assess the pathogenicity of this group of streptococci, more
research is needed on the specific mechanisms employed by sbsec members to cause
disease. more comparative and functional genomics studies comprising sbsec genomes
are necessary that will cover additional species of the complex, like the recently
sequenced streptococcus lutetiensis <cit> . new clinico-epidemiological studies should also be undertaken in view of
the most recent changes in the taxonomy of the sbsec complex  <cit> . in the meantime, assuming the worse case scenario, we propose that the
presence of sbsec members including s. macedonicus and s.
infantarius in foods should be avoided until their pathogenicity status is
resolved.

