BACKGROUND
as part of the human genome project that was carried out by an international consortium, a laboratory information management system  was developed for genome research and evaluated as an essential tool for advanced studies in the life sciences  <cit> . it is now widely expected that in the post-genome era considerable advances will be made in the ongoing human proteome project. many research scientists working in the field of proteomics are required to manage huge volumes of experimental data, which are obtained by two-dimensional polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis , image analysis, mass spectrometry  analysis and related information downloaded from the public databases in field of life science. therefore there is a need to develop another proteomics-oriented lims in order to manage large volumes of proteomic data more efficiently.

most of the software for 2-d gel image analysis carries out detection of protein spots on 2-d gel images, matching the spots among multiple gel images and quantifying the spot density automatically. the software for mass spectrometry analysis picks out peaks in mass spectra and searches them against a database, the so-called "peptide-mass fingerprint", for protein identification.

members of a research project team are often required to carefully consider their experimental schedules, which have to run in parallel with the processing of data imported from various analyzers. a lims that is optimized for proteomics would undoubtedly be helpful for scheduling experiments in proteomic research projects and for processing bulk data imported from 2-d gel image analyzers and mass spectrometers. at the same time, it has been widely acknowledged since the inception of proteomics research that data sharing among researchers worldwide is essential. accordingly, many research groups have attempted to construct public proteome databases on web-based servers.

in many of these proteome databases, information about protein masses, post-translational modifications, expression and variation have been assembled onto 2-d gel images. these are known as "2dpage databases", such as swiss-2dpage  <cit>  and tmig-2dpage  <cit> . it is expected that a lims for proteomics will adopt the same approach as that of the 2dpage database. in  <dig>  cho and co-workers developed an original lims for proteome research   <cit> , constructed using a commercial relational database , oracle8i. the interface of the database was designed for web browsing with php <dig>  and managed data imported from 2-dgel image analyzers and mass spectrometers. they intended to establish yrc-pdb as a proteome data warehouse. in  <dig>  goh and co-workers developed spine <dig>  a lims for structural proteomics  <cit> , constructed with mysql and perl, and also designed to work as a pipeline to public data resources. in  <dig>  garwood and co-workers developed pedro, the proteomics experimental data repository  <cit> , constructed with a native xml database, xindice with an ambitious apache software foundation basis. the xml-based document format has better quality for communication than the other formats. the native xml database has great potential, but may have critical limitations for proteomic research. on the other hand, commercially available limses  have also been developed and released, but they are not exactly suitable for most small laboratories like ours.

many of the lims for proteomics designed in the past have a web interface instead of special client software, and have adopted the format of an internet-based public proteome database. moreover they have often been linked to public proteome databases, and attempted to support xml format as a communication format.

for researchers in the field of proteomics, it would be highly advantageous to develop a lims that would allow export and import of data in a standard format. the human proteome organization proteomics standards initiative, hupo-psi, began steps to establish a standard format in  <dig>  <cit> . initially, an attempt was made to standardize the items for data representation and exchange. steps were then taken to standardize the linkage between the items in xml format for the various workflows of mass spectrometry analysis. now all of the hupo-psi is in xml format, and includes many items and links among them. the xml format is excellent for communication but not so suitable for data management in a relational database system. the appropriate data capacity of a lims and optimal performance for data management depend on the total proteomics system used in each laboratory.

we have developed an original open source lims for 2-d gel electrophoresis-based proteomics workflow on the basis of the above background. the major features of our lims are compactness, flexibility, and connectivity to public databases.

implementation
 <dig>  software and hardware architecture
we developed the lims on the pc servers poweredge  <dig> and poweredge sc <dig> . the operating system is red hat linux  <dig>  we decided to use a web browser as the user interface of the lims, because it is universally available on most client systems, even though it is not a full-featured database client. internet explorer version  <dig>  or later, netscape version  <dig>  or later, or firefox version  <dig>  or later should be installed in the client pc. we also adopted a php-hypertext preprocessor  <dig> .7-involved gd-graphics library to make the screen of the web page dynamic. php works as an interface between the web server and rdb in our lims. our lims has the typical architecture of an "apache-php-postgresql" system. within the framework of the interfaces of the rdb, although java is a more portable software that runs well on a variety of computing platforms, we decided to use php because it is easier for software programming and has a better performance.

the contents of the rdb include raw data files imported from kompact mass spectrometry software , pdf files  from the mascot database search system , and jpeg image files from the pdquest image analyzing system . kompact, adobe reader and some other application software packages are needed on the client system for the lims. they must be registered as helper applications to work on the web browser.

the inclusion of raw data in the contents makes the lims architecture simpler, but disturbs data conversion for exportation. the contents of the rdb also include datasets for constructing our public tmig-2dpage database. we convert the datasets of the lims to the contents of the mirror tmig-2dpage database in our institution's intranet. the xml format data and jpeg image files in the tmig-2dpage database are opened for public access via the internet. while developing the system, many php script files became extremely complex, but improvable. our lims is not designed to work only on a very high-performance hardware system. we verified the performance of the system client using internet explorer  <dig> , netscape  <dig>  and firefox  <dig>  on the windows xp platform, and using netscape  <dig>  on the macos  <dig>  and macos  <dig>  platforms.

 <dig>  workflow
to access the lims server using a web-based client pc, the user must first login with an authorized username and a given password . at the login page, users are guided to the next layer of data entry in two ways. one is a "menu selection mode", which lists material id, gel method id, analysis method id, gel id, digestion plate id, ms plate id or map id that correspond to the gel id in the 2dpage database. small gel images are displayed as icons in the gel id and the map id lists. all members of a research team in a laboratory share usernames and all content ids. convenience is considered more important than absolute security in our proteome lims, which is optimized for small laboratories in universities and academic institutions like ours.

the second guide mode is a "keyword search mode". to access the result of a keyword search, users must enter their username and a given password on the login page. they are then allowed to enter or edit data at any step of the proteomics workflow.

while entering the corresponding ssp number and the corresponding well ids in the digestion plate and the ms plate, the user can move and browse the various steps of proteomics workflow by clicking the linked button. if it is necessary to change the ssp number after the entering the data for some steps, the user enters the reference ssp number . the user is allowed to use the reference ssp number in the map for the public database.

only the administrator of the lims can add the user and his attribution using the web interface. only individual users can change their respective passwords. the lims does not have a special interface for entering the attribution of the administrator and the types of plates. only the administrator of the postgresql can enter them with the sql command on the server console.

 <dig>  database tables
RESULTS
we have developed an open source lims, which is compatible with a variety of data, formats and data sizes for current proteomic research. the data in the lims including raw files work as a backup of personal experimental data for permanent storage. users are able to store their data with a certain degree of security. we have also encoded scripts for dumping and transferring all of the data automatically to a data backup server via ethernet by ftp.

we have achieved a common "look and feel" in the lims. the "look and feel" that is designed with buttons and illustrations in the user interface supports user-friendly operation. development of a lims featuring the above concepts is quite challenging because the 2-d gel electrophoresis-based workflow varies among laboratories.

our intention was to develop a compact "personal" lims that is appropriate for small laboratories. our lims can be customized easily by any laboratory. the lims we have developed may be a practical tool for proteome researchers at any institutions where 2-d gel-electrophoresis-based proteomics research is being conducted.

discussion
we have developed an open source lims optimized for proteomics after completion of the development of a commercial base lims, worksbase, by bio-rad laboratories inc. we have experienced the experimental operation of worksbase, which is an integrated bioinformatics platform for 2-d gel electrophoresis-based proteomics. in view of the severe competition that exists in the field of life science research, both security and perfection of the experimental information in worksbase were considered important. however, data management using worksbase was still troublesome for some reason or other. we discussed the specifications and problems inherent to worksbase and designed our own lims based on our experience with its operation. we considered that simplicity and usefulness were more important than perfection for a lims in our laboratory. the major features of our lims are compactness, flexibility and compatibility with the public database.

many proteomics researchers have been awaiting the development of a lims for 2-d gel electrophoresis-based workflow. up to now, however, most commercial lims have not supported 2-d gel electrophoresis-based workflow because the concept is more complex than other workflows employed in proteomics lims. therefore we designed our lims to specifically support 2-d gel electrophoresis-based proteomics workflow. consequently, the content of our lims is not satisfactory for allowing all proteomics researchers to manage all proteomic information properly. we think that the content of the standardized format established by hupo-psi is appropriate for proteomics in general, but the linkages within it are too complex for our lims. thus we were unable to organize these linkages, which had been established in xml format, in our lims. we intend to develop a lims without a xml native database to allow more rapid use. we would like to further improve the lims in order to support the contents of hupo-psi with the function of conversion.

currently, many proteomics researchers are eager to use effective data-mining tools for analysis of proteomic data. however, we think that our proteomics lims should be developed as a module separate from the data-mining tools in our "bio-medic db" bioinformatics platform that will be constructed in the future . we are planning to develop a multi-module system, "bio-medic db", that will be composed of a lims module and a data-mining module for proteome, genome and clinical research at our institution. on the other hand, we can assay relative abundance in the form of a bar graph by searching the tmig-2dpage database with key words, which is calculated by copies of the lims contents . both private and public tools for proteomics data-mining need to be discussed.

we are also planning to develop a new interface of the lims for xml format files exported from pdquest . pdquest compares 2d gel images to determine differential protein expression. we intend to develop special client software running a data-upload function in windows xp because the xml format files exported from pdquest are too complex for web applications.

in  <dig>  garden, alm and hakkinen developed proteios: an open source proteomics initiative  <cit> . proteios is implemented in java and sql. it is a client-server open source application for proteomics. however, our lims was originally developed and distributed under the gnu general public license, which means that its source code is freely distributable and available to the general public. everybody can download the source code on the basis of the requirements listed below.

CONCLUSIONS
we have developed a basic model for an open source lims that is effective for 2-d gel electrophoresis-based proteomics workflow. we expect that the open source lims will be a powerful tool in advance proteome researches in many small laboratories. we hope many proteomics researchers to download and use our open source lims, and wish to receive feedback about their experience in operating it in order to draw up guidelines for a proteomics lims. please see the additional file that includes all php scripts, sql and html files of our lims .

availability and requirements
. project home page:  by following the web link.

. operating system: red hat linux 9

. programming language: php, postgresql

. requirements: apache revision  <dig> . <dig> or later, postgresql revision  <dig> . <dig> or later, php revision  <dig> . <dig> or later

. license: lesser general public license

the source file of the new lims for proteomics can be accessed using a web browser at  by following the web link.

abbreviations
lims, laboratory information management system: xml, extensible markup language: php, hypertext preprocessor: 2-d page, two-dimensional polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis: ms, mass spectrometry: tmig, tokyo metropolitan institute of gerontology: rdb, relational database: ssp number, standard spot number

supplementary material
additional file 1
our program of lims. the file is a compressed file that includes all php scripts, sql and html files of our lims. please install apache revision  <dig> . <dig> or later, postgresql revision  <dig> . <dig> or later, php revision  <dig> . <dig> or later and gd library revision  <dig> . <dig> or later in advance of setting up the lims. the lims is licensed under gnu lesser general public license. please set up as follows. tar zxvf lipage_ <dig> .tar.gz. mv lims/usr/local/apache/htdocs. please read/usr/local/apache/htdocs/lims/readme.

click here for file

 additional file 2
the documentation of simple usage for our lims. the file is a documentation of simple usage for our lims.

click here for file

 acknowledgements
we discussed the specifications and performance of worksbase in partnership with the life science division, nippon bio-rad laboratories inc.
