BACKGROUND
clostridial neurotoxins  are the most poisonous biological toxins known and molecular agents of botulism and tetanus neuroparalytic diseases  <cit> . due to their extreme toxicity and potential threat as bioterrorism agents, they are listed as category a agents by the centers for disease control and prevention along with other deadly agents such as anthrax. elucidating the mechanisms by which cnts evolved is therefore of significant importance to our understanding of pathogen evolution and emerging diseases.

while considerable progress has been made in understanding cnt structure and function  <cit> , like many toxins and virulence factors, the evolutionary origins of cnts are unclear. cnts are produced by four phylogenetically distinct groups  of c. botulinum, and also by strains of c. tetani, c. baratii, and c. butyricum  <cit> . as demonstrated by the scattered phyletic distribution of neurotoxin-producing clostridia  <cit>  and the patterns of sequence similarity between different neurotoxin gene clusters  <cit> , cnt genes appear to have undergone significant lateral transfer between different species of clostridium. the occurrence of lateral transfer is also supported by the discovery of plasmid-encoded neurotoxin genes in numerous c. botulinum strains  <cit> , as well as the existence of putative insertion sequences flanking the neurotoxin gene cluster  <cit> .

while cnts have undergone frequent lateral transfer between species of clostridium, no cnt homologues have been identified outside of the clostridium genus. cnts form an isolated protein family according to scop  <cit>  and pfam  <cit>  and have a unique structural architecture that complicates the identification of related proteins and potential ancestors. while cnt domains have little detectable sequence similarity to proteins outside of the cnt family, there are however some structural and functional similarities to other domain families. the beta-trefoil, a three-fold symmetrical structure that forms the c-terminal receptor binding domain  and associated hemagglutinin components, is common to interleukins, ricin-like lectins, and fibroblast growth factors  <cit> . the adjacent hcrn domain, also involved in receptor binding, forms a jelly-roll like structure similar to laminin globular g domains  <cit> . the central translocase adopts a long alpha-helical structure containing alpha-helical bundles that resemble those found in translocase-like domains of other toxins  <cit> . lastly, the n-terminal catalytic domain has been grouped under the zincin-like group of metalloproteases by scop and under the peptidase ma clan by the merops database  <cit> . it contains a hexxh zinc-binding motif found in other zinc endopeptidases, but has only weak structural similarity to other members of the peptidase ma clan  <cit> .

diversity of domain and fold composition and extreme sequence divergence are common features of bacterial toxins  <cit> . rapid sequence evolution in toxin genes is largely a consequence of the evolutionary 'arms race' between pathogen and host  <cit> . therefore, it is important to consider that evolutionarily related toxins may only share weak sequence similarity and may have undergone considerable structural rearrangements. here, we present evidence supporting the hypothesis that cnts were formed within an ancestral clostridium species by duplications and rearrangements of neighboring genes within the neurotoxin gene cluster, and identify the likely evolutionary precursors of cnts and surrounding genes. multiple links to collagenase-related sequences and functions are detected through an analysis of the nearby flagellin and hemagglutinin genes  in addition to the cnt domains. the detected links provide novel insights into the evolutionary origins and ancestral function of the neurotoxin gene cluster.

RESULTS
ancient gene duplications within the bont/a neurotoxin gene cluster
a comprehensive analysis of pairwise sequence similarities was performed for all proteins encoded within the c. botulinum  genome  <cit> , in an attempt to identify distant homologues of cnts and possible sequence remnants of the evolutionary process by which cnts originated. this initial analysis was limited to a single genome for a more sensitive detection of pairwise homologies using a restricted database, however subsequent searches were also performed using all available clostridial genomes. for the  <dig> proteins encoded within c. botulinum   <cit> , a 'heat map' of pairwise sequence similarity was constructed  . for each pairwise alignment, the e-value and percentile rank relative to all other pairwise alignments was calculated using ssearch  <cit> . when compared by percentile rank, the neurotoxin gene cluster stood out as a "hot spot" of local pairwise sequence similarities. the neurotoxin gene cluster can be seen as a distinct cluster of high-scoring pairs in the centre of the heat map region in figure 1a. based on both the percentile ranks and e-values for the pairwise alignments corresponding to these genes , there are clear sequence similarities between multiple sequences within this region, including bont/a, non-toxic non-hemagglutinin , the adjacent hemagglutinin  components and the adjacent cbo <dig> gene encoding a flagellin protein . bont/a and ntnh produced the top-scoring alignments with each other out of  <dig> proteins in c. botulinum strain a , an expected result given previously identified sequence similarities between bonts and ntnh  <cit>  as well as their virtually identical domain architecture as identified by the ncbi's conserved domain database annotation . surprisingly, the next highest match in both cases corresponds to the cbo <dig> flagellin gene located immediately upstream of the neurotoxin gene cluster . the associated e-values were  <dig>  and  <dig>  for bont/a and ntnh, respectively . cbo <dig> aligned with ntnh and bont/a in two different cnt regions  . additional searches using the sequences of cnts from other strains also identified cbo <dig> as the most consistent top ranked hit out of all c. botulinum strain a proteins with sequence identities between cnts and cbo <dig> ranging from 20–24%, and the strongest alignments involving region ii of cnts .

in addition to the detected similarities between cbo0798-bont/a and ntnh-bont/a, sequence similarities were also detected between the beta-trefoil hemagglutinin components . ha <dig> and ha <dig> were identified as reciprocal top ranked matches , and a weak similarity was detected between ha <dig> and the c-terminal  regions of ntnh . sequence similarity was also found between the hemagglutinin components ha <dig> and residues 39– <dig> of ntnh . though the e-values calculated above are not all statistically significant, the high-ranking scores relative to the  <dig> c. botulinum proteins suggest that multiple genes within the bont/a neurotoxin gene cluster are likely distant homologues that have undergone extensive sequence divergence.

sequence similarity to the upstream flagellin gene
to identify other clostridial sequences homologous to cbo <dig>  a psi-blast  <cit>  search was conducted starting with the cbo <dig> sequence . all homologues identified in the first iteration were members of the flagellin family. the second iteration identified additional flagellins, followed by the type e botulinum toxin  from c. butyricum with an e-value of  <dig>  . to check for the influence of composition on the alignment, two permutation reshuffling tests were performed, which calculate the probability that random sequences of the same composition could result in similar alignment scores. the permutation reshuffling tests detected significant sequence similarity between the two proteins with  and without  statistically overrepresented amino acids included .

according to the sequence alignments produced by psi-blast and ssearch, the region of cnts with the strongest detected similarity to cbo <dig>  includes most of the translocase domain as well as the hcrn domain . region i was also detected by ssearch , spanning the peptidase and 'belt' region, though without definitive statistical significance . the translocase, an extended alpha-helical domain, has a general structural similarity to the central helical regions of known flagellin structures . the beta-rich domains of flagellin are highly variable however, and it is this variable region of flagellin that shares similarity with the hcrn domain of cnts. as a structure is not available for the variable region of cbo <dig>  3d-pssm  <cit>  was used to predict the fold of cbo0798's central region. the structure for the cnt's hcrn jelly-roll domain was the top ranked structural match for this region , additionally supporting homology between the two proteins.

cbo <dig> is annotated in the ncbi database as a member of the flagellar hook associated protein  <dig>  family. this flagellin gene has been mentioned in previous cnt studies due to its close proximity to the neurotoxin gene cluster  <cit>  and its existence in numerous c. botulinum type a strains and associated plasmids  <cit> . flagellins are also known to have key roles in the virulence of bacterial pathogens  <cit> , have been shown by mass spectrometry studies to interact with cnt components  <cit> , and possess previously unreported common structural features with cnts . these additional functional and structural links further support a potential evolutionary relationship between cbo <dig> and cnts.

collagenase-like domains in the flagellin hypervariable region
comparative sequence analysis of cbo <dig> was performed by aligning cbo <dig> to other flagellins from clostridium species . according to the alignment, cbo <dig> has a highly divergent central region containing a unique insert , and this insert region comprises a large portion of cbo0798's alignments with cnts. the existence of a unique central region within cbo <dig> is not surprising, since flagellins are known to contain conserved regions at the n- and c-terminus but have a hypervariable central region that is structurally exposed on the flagellar surface  <cit> . as the structurally exposed region of the flagellar filament, the hypervariable region can interact with the host cell and is thus critical to flagellin-mediated virulence  <cit> . interestingly, it is the variable region of cbo <dig> that is central to the cbo0798-cnt alignments and that was predicted by 3d-pssm to possess a jelly-roll fold similar to hcrn.

to characterize the origins of the insert, we examined similarly located inserts identified within the hypervariable region of a small number of additional flagellins from clostridium species . while the sequences within the hypervariable region are highly divergent from one another as expected, one insert in particular  was identified to be both the largest insert and the only insert region with detected homology to other proteins using psi-blast. flia is a relatively close homolog of cbo <dig>  as flia was the only flagellin detected using cbo0798's c-terminal region  as a blast query sequence . a psi-blast search revealed that the hypervariable region of flia possesses significant similarity to microbial collagenases  and to the hypervariable regions of several flagellins from non-clostridial species . remarkably, both the detected microbial collagenases and collagenase-like regions within the identified flagellins contain a hexxh motif, the critical catalytic residues responsible for the cnt's zinc-endopeptidase activity. the alignment of cbo <dig> with collagenase-containing flagellins and alignment of the hexxh-containing segments from these flagellins, bont/b, and a representative microbial collagenase are shown in figure  <dig> 

the identified link to collagenase sequences by analysis of the flagellin hypervariable region is a striking result given the strong similarities between collagenases and the cnt's peptidase m <dig> domain. both collagenases  and peptidase m27's are zinc-endopeptidases and are grouped under the same peptidase family  by the merops database  <cit> . as exotoxins, collagenases play a major role in clostridial toxicity by degrading collagenous host tissues  <cit> . for instance, c. perfringens, a species responsible for clostridial myonecrosis , produces a tissue-degrading collagenase known as kappa-toxin  <cit> . collagenases are therefore an excellent candidate evolutionary precursor of cnts as both collagenases and cnts function as clostridial toxins, and both share the same fundamental proteolytic mechanism.

as the hypervariable region encodes the outer exposed portion of the flagellin filament, it would be ideally situated to interact with  host cell wall components such as collagen. the identified sequences may therefore encode a novel family of virulent flagellins with collagenase activity. future experimental verification of this predicted activity would be valuable, and could potentially lead to new avenues of research concerning the virulent functions of bacterial flagellins.

additional evidence of collagenase-related functions within the neurotoxin gene cluster
several additional links to collagenases and collagen-related domains were detected for other sequences present within the bont/a neurotoxin gene cluster. all sequenced clostridium genomes were screened for potential homologues of each of the bont/a neurotoxin gene cluster components. in a dataset of over  <dig> sequences, a search of bont/a detected flagellin as the third top ranked hit outside of the cnt family . while ha <dig> expectedly displayed similarities with other ricin-like components , ha <dig> displayed the strongest similarity to c. perfringens enterotoxin  followed by c. tetani collagenase . a hexxh binding motif was also identified within this collagenase sequence. a psi-blast search of flagellin cbo <dig> restricted to the clostridium genus also detected collagen-adhesion proteins with alignments spanning the hypervariable region after three iterations . this result is consistent with the analysis linking cbo <dig> with flagellins containing collagenase-like hypervariable regions.

another key result was obtained when examining sequence and structural similarities between the hcrn domain and the full ncbi nr database, including eukaryotic sequences. after two iterations starting with bont/a's hcrn domain, psi-blast detected a region of chicken type xii collagen . the detected sequence similarity occurred with collagen's thrombospondin n-terminal like domains. recently, the structure of this family of domains has been determined for the nc <dig> domain of collagen ix  <cit> . the fold of nc <dig>  is remarkably similar to that of hcrn . to determine the extent of structural similarity between these two domains, we analyzed structural neighbours of the nc <dig> domain using the vast structural alignment algorithm  <cit> . sorted by vast e-value, the two most structurally similar domains to pdb id 2uur were its identified fold family , the thrombospondin n-terminal domain), followed by the hcrn domain  of the tetanus neurotoxin . ranked by sequence similarity based on structural alignments, the tetanus hcrn domain  ranked first out of all known structures in the protein data bank .

as the detected similarities between the hcrn domain and the collagen nc <dig> domain occur across kingdoms, this may represent an instance of structural mimicry rather than a direct evolutionary relationship. given the multiple identified links to collagenases, and that structural mimicry of collagen has been proposed as a mechanism for other collagenase enzymes  <cit> , the link between hcrn and the collagen nc <dig> domain may be indicative of a similar mechanism. a role in collagen-binding is entirely possible for cnts as previous studies have shown that expression of tent enhances adhesion of epithelial cells to collagen, laminin, and fibronectin  <cit> . while the observed similarities support the hypothesis of convergent evolution and structural mimicry, the possibility that hcrn was transferred to clostridium from a eukaryotic source cannot be completely ruled out. this scenario has been demonstrated recently for the clostridium glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase gene  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
a comprehensive search was conducted for potential distant homologues of cnts, starting with a genomic analysis of c. botulinum strain a, followed by a more general search involving additional clostridial and eukaryotic species. multiple independent links to collagenase-related sequences were identified, including the detected similarities involving the upstream flagellin gene  in the bont/a neurotoxin gene cluster, distant blast hits to collagenase-related domains, and detected structural similarities to the collagen nc <dig> domain. as microbial collagenases are phyletically widespread compared to cnts, they represent a protein family likely to be ancestral to cnts. given this and the multiple detected links to collagenase-related sequences, it is proposed that the ancestral function of the neurotoxin gene cluster may have been related to collagen binding and degradation, a hypothesis that places cnt sequence, structure, and function within the broader context of other clostridial toxins and the evolution of clostridial pathogenesis.

the cbo <dig> flagellin gene appears to be a divergent member of a unique class of flagellins containing a collagenase-like hypervariable domain, an ideal arrangement for the development of novel virulent functions and co-evolution with host cell walls. it is possible that repeats and rearrangements of a gene ancestral to cbo <dig> may have been involved in the origin of the ancestral cnt gene. to date, the cbo <dig> flagellin sequence has only been identified in a number of group i strains , and identification and analysis of additional cbo <dig> homologues in other strains could provide a broader context to the evolutionary relationship between flagellins, collagenases, and cnts.

