BACKGROUND
development of efficient cancer treatments is a top priority in health related research. one of the most common available options, in particular to treat advanced stages or as post-operation treatment, is chemotherapy which still today mostly employs extremely cytotoxic drugs that kill metabolically active cells. such drugs include alkylating agents , anti-metabolites , anti-microtubule agents , and topoisomerase inhibitors . unfortunately, all these drugs have low tumor specificity and a frequently narrow therapeutic index thus producing significant unwanted side effects  <cit> . this situation has resulted in an intense search for cancer drugs that are more tumor-targeted and less toxic to normal cells  <cit> . as the result, a set of tumor-targeted nanomedicines is currently being studied that exploit hallmarks of cancer for reviews see references  <cit> . targeting mechanisms include coupling of cytotoxic agents to ligands, antibodies, analogs targeting overexpressed receptors, formulation as nanoparticles to exploit the enhanced permeability and retention  effect, drugs specifically targeting enzymes involved in ontogenesis, among others  <cit> . drug molecules involved in this area include small molecules, peptides, proteins, rna molecules, and even complete oncolytic viruses  <cit> .

proteins are a potentially attractive class of drugs because they can be used to exploit the hallmarks of cancer by targeting specific events. one hallmark is that in cancer cells, particularly cancer stem cells, apoptosis is frequently disabled  <cit> . delivery of a molecule to the cell switching apoptosis back on is therefore a potential treatment strategy. cyt c is exactly such a molecule. it is a small mitochondrial heme protein involved in the intrinsic apoptotic pathway  <cit> . severe dna damage in cells and other events such as increase in p <dig>  oxidative stress, and hypoxia lead to the activation of the intrinsic apoptotic pathway, which involves formation of pores in the mitochondrial membrane by bax, bak, and smac  <cit> . the bh3-only domain proteins directly bind and activate mitochondrial-localized bak and bax, triggering bak/bax oligomerization and inhibition of bcl-xl proteins  <cit> . the resulting depolarization of the mitochondrial membrane induces the release of cyt c and other apoptotic factors into the cytoplasm  <cit> . cyt c then interacts with the protein apaf- <dig> to form the apoptosome  <cit> .

apoptosis is absent in many cancer cells for multiple reasons including mutation of critically important elements upstream from the event involving cyt c  <cit> . thus, a valid strategy is the delivery of cyt c directly to the cytosol of cancer cells to induce apoptosis and eradicate the tumor. using cancer models this has been accomplished multiple times by delivering cyt c from nanoparticles  <cit>  but it is yet unclear whether such systems would be sufficiently effective to allow for cancer treatment under real conditions. for example, uptake of nanoparticles frequently involves receptor-mediated endocytosis and thus the protein is exposed to conditions of low ph and proteases in lysosomes prior to the necessary endosomal escape  <cit> . furthermore, the interstitium of tumors is frequently rich in proteases that are detrimental to pharmaceutical proteins  <cit> .

in addition to aforementioned specific reasons, development of effective protein formulations is a significant challenge in the biopharmaceutical industry due to the inherent chemical and physical instability of proteins during production and purification  <cit> , formulation  <cit> , storage  <cit> , transportation  <cit> , and administration  <cit> . particularly challenging is the development of smart drug-delivery and release systems for protein drugs in this context, because they typically rely on immobilization of the drug in the carrier  <cit> . the immobilization frequently employs linkers with ph- or redox-sensitive bonds that are cleaved in the cell but many proteins are structurally sensitive to the linker attachment, as we have demonstrated recently for carbonic anhydrase  <cit>  and also for cyt c  <cit> .

improving the stability of pharmaceutical proteins under the many different aforementioned circumstances, in particular during delivery, likely requires covalent strategies. one current example of such strategies consists in modifying fda approved protein drugs with poly  to afford increased plasma life time and reduced immunogenicity  <cit> . however, pegs have not been reported to significantly stabilize proteins thermodynamically  <cit> . also, pegs are not biodegradable and can in tendency accumulate in the body  <cit> . a possible biodegradable alternative to modification of proteins with peg is the covalent modification with carbohydrates. chemical as opposed to natural glycosylation has recently been used as a strategy to stabilize commercially available medicines  and glycosylated brain natriuretic peptide   <cit> .

we have in recent years introduced chemical modification to stabilize several model proteins. we have systematically investigated the structure, function, dynamics, and stability interrelationships in the neo-glycoconjugates obtained  <cit> . we found that glycosylation of many model proteins provides the advantages typically associated with pegylation but we also found significantly increased thermodynamic stability  <cit> . in this work we set out to investigate in more detail the stability, functional, and structural consequences of chemical protein glycosylation using for the first time a cancer relevant pharmaceutical protein, namely, cyt c. we are able to demonstrate that chemical glycosylation is a potentially very useful method to stabilize cyt c in pharmaceutical applications.

RESULTS
our strategy was to attach sugars via suitable linker chemistry to the ϵ-amino groups of lysine residues of cyt c to establish various glycoconjugates. in order to vary the glycan size in our experiments, we chose dextran with molecular weights of  <dig> kd and  <dig> kd and lactose  as glycans. the  <dig> kd dextran was first activated by reductive amination followed by modification with a homo-bifunctional linker to form amine reactive mono--mono-suberate  as described by us  <cit> . however, this did not work for the small dextran because the precipitation step failed. thus, we used established 1-ethyl-3-carbodiimide hydrochloride /n-hydroxysuccinimide  crosslinking chemistry with dextran hexanoic acid  to form nhs-dex . activated lactose  is commercially available and was used as supplied. the amine and succinimidyl functionalization of the dextrans was followed by ftir and nmr spectroscopy as described by us  <cit> . the activated sugars were then coupled to available amines of cyt c  as previously described by us for various proteins  <cit> .

the neo-glycoconjugates obtained were characterized . five different conjugates were obtained with the three different glycans. throughout the manuscript we adopt the following nomenclature: cyt c modified at  <dig> and  <dig> lysine residues with lactose was named lac4-cyt c and lac9-cyt c; cyt c modified at  <dig> and  <dig> lysine residues with dextran of  <dig> kd were named dex5-cyt c and dex8-cyt c; and the glycoconjugate with  <dig> lysine residues modified with dextran of  <dig> kd was named dex3-cyt c. glycosylation did not affect the pseudo-enzyme activity even for the most heavily glycosylated sample -cyt c) in which there was a total of  <dig> kd of glycan attached to the roughly  <dig> kd protein. we can surmise that structure of cyt c was likely not affected by binding of the sugars and that the substrate could still relatively freely diffuse to the active site even in the presence of a “sugar shell”.

#
$ 
% 
% 
d

& 
#glycosylation degree refers to the number of glycan modified cyt c lysine residues as determined by  <dig> ,6-trinitrobenzene sulfonic acid  assay. $the residual activity was calculated with respect to the specific activity of native cyt c.%the caspase  <dig> and caspase  <dig> activation is with respect to the activation induced by non-modified cyt c. the substrates used for caspase- <dig> and caspase- <dig> activation assay were 10 mm devd-pna and 4 mm lehd-pna, respectively. &the rate of degradation was calculated for cyt c and cyt c glycoconjugates after exposure to  <dig>  mm h2o <dig>  each experiment was performed in triplicate, the values averaged, and the ± values are the calculated sd.

the use of cyt c as an anti-cancer drug depends on the formation of the apaf-1/cyt c complex , which is responsible for the activation of the caspase cascade leading to apoptosis. electrostatic interactions between positively charged lysine residues of cyt c at the exposed heme edge and the wd- <dig> region of apaf- <dig> are critically important to facilitate cyt c-to-apaf- <dig> binding  <cit> . thus, it is imperative to preserve the cyt c conformation subsequent to any chemical modification to assure that cyt c is still able to bind to apaf- <dig> and induce apoptosis. we performed a cell-free caspase  <dig> and  <dig> assays since cyt c is a cell-membrane impermeable protein  <cit> . after the freeze and thaw cycles the lysate was centrifuged at  <dig>  g to ensure mitochondrial removal. this is important to avoid false positives from mitochondrial leakage of cyt c. furthermore, we added the substrates to the lysates as controls and subtracted any small absorbance developing from the samples to which the external cyt c or cyt c glycoconjugates was added. the data obtained  show that at most levels of glycosylation the bioactivity of cyt c was still ca. 90% compared to non-modified cyt c. this result is in thus far remarkable as there are lysine residues in the putative cyt-c-apaf- <dig> binding epitope. we have reported a similar finding albeit with lac4-cyt c and cyt c-lac4-spdp for cyt c activity on hela cells  <cit> .

there are several potential explanations for this that need to be verified by site-directed glycosylation . first, glycosylation could be inefficient for lys residues in the apaf- <dig> interaction epitope. we have highlighted why we believe this is happening in additional file  <dig>  second, glycosylation could make cyt c intrinsically more reactive and this could compensate for activity loss by glycosylation of residues in the interaction epitope. third, glycosylation might not prevent cyt c binding to apaf  <dig> because ionic interactions are long-range. regardless of the mechanistic reason, however, even highly glycosylated cyt c was still remarkably active in activating the caspase cascade.

to investigate the structural consequences of glycan binding to cyt c, we performed circular dichroism  spectroscopy. three spectral regions were investigated: the far-uv cd region from 200–280 nm which is sensitive to secondary structural perturbations, the near uv-cd region from 260–320 nm which is sensitive to tertiary structure perturbations, and the soret region of heme absorbance from  <dig> to 460 nm which is sensitive to the heme environment and thus the structure of the heme binding pocket . in the far uv-cd region only minor spectral and thus secondary structural changes were observed. in contrast, spectral variations were evident when investigating the glycoconjugates in spectral regions that are sensitive to tertiary structural changes. the near uv-cd spectra of cyt c and the lactose glycoconjugates were similar, while the dextran bioconjugates showed a reduced signal, which can be interpreted as being indicative of less tertiary structure . nevertheless, the cd spectra in the heme absorption region  all showed a pronounced cotton effect, which is typical for a native heme environment. the cotton effect, named after its discoverer aimé cotton , is the characteristic change in circular dichroism in the vicinity of an absorption band of a substance characterized by a positive and negative cd signal and a zero crossing at the absorption maximum. structural changes in the heme-binding pocket lead to the disappearance of the cotton effect as reported by others and us for cyt c  <cit> . this is in agreement with the activity data in table  <dig>  which show that all bioconjugates had a similar pseudo enzyme activity than cyt c. we can surmise that for all bioconjugates the structure was native-like with the exception of a somewhat more lose tertiary structure packing in case of the dextran conjugates.

next we proceeded to study the cyt c stability in selected experiments. chemical glycosylation has been shown to assist in overcoming chemical protein instability and provide protection against proteases  <cit> . this is highly relevant since it has been established that the tumor interstitial space presents significant trypsin-like protease activity and also oxidative stress  <cit> . trypsin-like activity is particularly harmful to the integrity of basic proteins. the proteolytic degradation in tumors enables cell movement and the metastatic spread  <cit> . potential improvement of cyt c stability towards the tumor environment by glycosylation was tested by tryptic and chymotryptic assays.

the results of the tryptic digestion are shown in figure  <dig>  as anticipated, trypsin had a devastating effect on cyt c integrity. glycosylation stabilized the protein against proteolysis. it is evident that the amount of glycan bound to the protein is more significantly related to protection against proteolysis than the size of the bound glycan. for example, lac9-cyt c and dex8-cyt c show similar protection from trypsin degradation even though there is about  <dig> times more glycan bound per weight in the dextran containing bioconjugate. this can be understood because trypsin cuts the peptide backbone next to lys or arg residues and the more lys residues are chemically blocked, the lower the propensity for the proteolytic event to happen  <cit> .to obtain a better idea of whether glycans in general protect cyt c from proteolytic degradation by steric shielding, we also performed digestion with α-chymotrypsin, which cuts preferentially next to aromatic residues. we employed those samples for which glycosylation provided the best protection in the tryptic assay . it is evident that glycosylation protected cyt c from proteolysis, albeit to a much lesser degree than in the tryptic assay . we can therefore conclude that glycosylation protects cyt c from proteolytic degradation in general, but much better against those proteases having a binding pocket selective for lys.

in summary, glycosylation should provide some protection against proteolytic degradation in the tumor interstitium and possibly after endocytosis of suitable constructs in lysosomes in agreement with our recent data using hela cells  <cit> .

cancer tissues frequently display an increased level of reactive oxygen species and oxidative stress as a result of persistent chronic inflammation  <cit> . the in vivo degradation of proteins by h2o <dig> interferes with normal cellular function, accelerates aging, and enhances metabolism of carcinogens  <cit> . higher levels of free radicals also induce dna mutations, which promote cancer progression and development of resistance  <cit> . to test whether glycosylation could protect the protein from oxidative stress, cyt c was incubated with 200 μl of  <dig>  mm of h2o <dig>  which attacks the s-s bridge that covalently couples the heme group to apo cyt c thus promoting unfolding  <cit> . the rate of degradation  was determined from the decaying heme soret absorbance . no significant effect was found in this instance and chemical degradation by cyt c with the small molecule h2o <dig> was not significantly slowed down. therefore, it might be of value to protect cyt c from the oxidative stress in tumor tissues by packaging it inside a delivery vehicle. the experiment also provides some insight into the effect of glycosylation on cyt c structural dynamics or compactness of the folded state. the cd experiments revealed that cyt c was not packed more densely as the result of glycosylation  in contrast to what we have found for some other proteins  <cit> . this is not unexpected since cyt c is intrinsically already very stable and not dynamic. the lack of an effect of sugars to stabilize cyt c by reducing structural dynamics  against the small molecule h2o <dig> is in agreement with the cd data.

we have previously reported that chemical protein glycosylation was able to reduce moisture-induced aggregation of chymotrypsin under accelerated conditions  <cit> , which is pharmaceutically relevant once vials or formulations of pharmaceutical proteins are exposed to moisture  <cit> . one has to keep in mind that this phenomenon is not only relevant to the exposure of lyophilized proteins to moisture upon opening sealed and dehydrated vials under atmospheric conditions, but also applies to the slow rehydration of dehydrated proteins inside of drug delivery systems  <cit> . water frequently cannot penetrate the interior of drug delivery systems that are based on hydrophobic materials  acid) and encapsulated proteins are rehydrated slowly upon polymer swelling and degradation.cyt c and cyt c glycoconjugates were exposed to accelerated storage conditions of high humidity   and high temperature   for 72 h. it is evident that glycosylation substantially reduced the susceptibility of cyt c to the heat and moisture stresses.

the stabilization of cyt c towards moisture  was related to the amount and size of the glycan attached. the disaccharide lactose had only little effect on improving cyt c stability at the lowest ratio. increasing the amount of that glycan attached to cyt c improved its stability. in contrast, dextran with a mw of  <dig> kd practically completely prevented cyt c degradation by moisture already when five molecules were bound.

similarly, denaturation by heat was prevented the more efficiently the more glycan was bound to cyt c and the larger the sugar entity . our interpretation for the data is that the cyt c surface was shielded by the glycans and that this reduced protein-protein interactions which can cause irreversible denaturation events. regardless of the exact mechanism, it is clear that the dex8-cyt c was the most stable preparation, in particular under elevated temperature conditions.

finally, we also aimed at assessing the effect of exposure of cyt c to an organic solvent interface. such interfaces are common when preparing protein nanoparticles by precipitation  <cit>  or upon protein encapsulation into hydrophobic polymers, e.g., by the water-in-oil-in-water double emulsion technique  <cit> . we selected one representative sample -cyt c) and two solvents previously employed in nanoparticle preparation following solvent precipitation protocols, i.e., acetone and acetonitrile  <cit> . using various ratios, we found that 1: <dig> and 1: <dig> water-to-acetonitrile volume ratios were sufficient to induce cyt c precipitation and result in stable suspensions. next we tested the effect of the protein-solvent interface on the capacity of cyt c to induce in vitro caspase  <dig> activation in a cell-free system . therapeutic use of cyt c in cancer applications relies on the induction of apoptosis after the protein was delivered to the cytoplasm  <cit> . the results demonstrate that cyt c suffered significant activity loss when precipitated with acetonitrile and acetone . in contrast, glycosylation prevented inactivation completely for both solvents. we interpret the results as being indicative for the glycan preventing cyt c – organic solvent interface interactions, which are typically initiated by hydrophobic protein surface patches and driven by entropic effects  <cit> .
3
-cyt c to activate apoptosis after their exposure to water-organic solvent  interface conditions

# 
#the relative activity was calculated with respect to the caspase  <dig> activation induced by cyt c/apaf- <dig> complex.

while the cyt c functionality upon contact with the two organic solvents was maintained regardless of the desolvating agent used, sem images show differences in the particle properties after the precipitation process . sem images of dex3-cyt c show that the powder particles obtained with both solvents had a spherical shape and that the particle size was in the nanometer range. however, particles obtained by using acetone were smaller and more homogeneous than those obtained with acetonitrile. for drug delivery applications using the epr effect a diameter of <400 nm and good homogeneity are desirable  <cit> .
3
-cyt c after the precipitation via solvent displacement with  acetonitrile and  acetone as desolvating agent.

from our data we can surmise that chemical cyt c glycosylation is a very useful approach to protect the protein from various stresses that are typically associated with pharmaceutical production processes and the delivery. even though we have not conducted detailed mechanistic studies in this work, the data are consistent with the glycans providing protection in an amount and size dependent manner. the larger the glycan and the more attached to cyt c, the better the protection. it is likely that the protection afforded is due to a combination of effects, i.e., restriction of the conformational space, reduction of solvent accessible area, and avoiding protein-solvent hydrogen bonds, as previously suggested by us  <cit>  and others  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
protein instability is a major factor limiting their use in pharmaceutical applications. herein we explored how the covalent attachment of lactose and dextran via amine-directed linker chemistry affects the stability of cyt c. cyt c is a protein with good potential in cancer applications since it can be utilized to induce apoptosis upon intracellular delivery. we show that glycosylation does not negatively affect the capability of cyt c to induce apoptosis. furthermore, glycosylation improves the stability of cyt c towards many stress factors relevant to the formulation, storage, and delivery of the protein into the cancer tumor microenvironment. we conclude that glycosylation should be a very useful method for improving cyt c properties in cancer and other pharmaceutical applications.

