BACKGROUND
high-throughput, next-generation sequencing allows for the efficient sequencing of millions of nucleotides from organisms lacking a reference genome  <cit> . next-generation sequencing therefore can identify numerous genes vital to key evolutionary innovations or unique adaptations in non-model organisms. one particularly robust tool for use in non-model organisms is deep sequencing of the mrna, e.g., rna-seq. the depth of coverage afforded by the ability to sequence millions of rna fragments, at a fraction of the time and cost of sanger sequencing  <cit> , facilitates de novo construction of transcriptomes . the de novo transcriptomes can enable identification of functional genes without sequencing and assembling the often repetitive non-coding genomic regions . additionally, sequencing mrnas from specific tissues, developmental time points, or experimental conditions allows for rapid profiling of transcript abundance at a global scale  <cit>  and analyzing phylogenetically restricted adaptations .

spiders  are a genome resource poor arthropod order, despite their taxonomic and ecological prominence. araneae is one of the most species rich metazoan orders, consisting of over  <dig>  described species that are found in every terrestrial ecosystem on the globe  <cit> . spiders synthesize the most diverse repertoire of functionally differentiated silk fiber types among all the silk producing organisms. they are also by far the largest clade of venomous animals. the most closely related species with fully sequenced and annotated genomes diverged from spiders nearly  <dig> mya . unlike these fully sequenced arachnids, spiders are characterized by silk and venom production, the mechanics of which are poorly understood, due in part to the paucity of spider genomic resources. recent studies have begun to use next generation sequencing in spiders to de novo assemble partial transcriptomes for a tarantula, an orb-web weaver  <cit> , two cobweb weavers  <cit> , and three social species in the genus stegodyphus <cit> . these studies were restricted either to a single tissue   <cit>  or whole animals  <cit> , limiting the biological interpretation of genes identified.

silk synthesis is vital to spiders throughout all their life stages for numerous functions including prey capture, reproduction, protection, and dispersal  <cit> . orb-web weaving spiders and their relatives  spin up to seven task-specific fibers and glues, each originating from different abdominal glands. each of the functionally differentiated silk types has their own suite of remarkable material properties, including varying levels of stickiness, strength, stiffness and extensibility  <cit> . for instance, dragline silks synthesized in the major ampullate glands have tensile strength similar to steel, while capture spiral silk synthesized in flagelliform glands can stretch up to 300%  <cit> . the remarkable physical properties of silk have motivated attempts for in vitro synthesis of silk  <cit> , but these efforts have been hindered by a lack of understanding of the full molecular processes that create the silk fibers  <cit> .

past molecular studies of silk have overwhelmingly focused on fiber-forming structural proteins . the spider specific fibroins, also called spidroins, are encoded by members of a single gene family  <cit> . spidroin genes are known to be very large and internally repetitive  making them difficult to sequence and assemble de novo. characterization of spidroins has largely been based on traditional sanger-sequenced cdna libraries. each of at least six functionally differentiated silk types is formed from 1– <dig> distinct spidroins, which exhibit silk gland specific patterns of expression  <cit> . within each silk gland type, the spidroins are highly expressed  <cit> , which impedes the discovery of transcripts expressed in lower abundance, yet may nevertheless play important roles in silk production.

recent studies have identified a few examples of non-spidroin genes involved in silk fiber and glue production. these include the egg case silk proteins, ecp- <dig> and ecp- <dig>  <cit> , that appear to interact with the primary egg case silk spidroin tusp <dig>  <cit> . however, ecp- <dig> and ecp- <dig> are expressed at levels that are several orders of magnitude below that of tusp <dig> in tubuliform silk glands  <cit> . additionally, a transcription factor, sgsf, has been implicated in the regulation of the egg case proteins in latrodectus hesperus <cit> . finally, two non-spidroins expressed in the aggregrate silk gland have been shown to be involved in aqueous glue droplet production  <cit>  and in web connection joints  <cit> . these various discoveries hint at a broad range of both regulatory and structural proteins involved with silk production.

here we use de novo assembly of deeply sequenced cdna fragments to characterize the transcriptome of the western black widow, latrodectus hesperus . the western black widow is an attractive spider with which to investigate the genomics of silk production given their strong dragline silk  <cit>  and the existing molecular characterization of this species' spidroin encoding genes. l. hesperus has an estimated genome size of  <dig>  billion bp  <cit> , which while on the lower range of spider genomes, would be challenging to fully sequence. thus far, spidroin paralogs have been described from five of the six functionally differentiated gland types in the black widow , including three of the six completely sequenced spidroin genes . of the spidroins synthesized by orb-weaving relatives of black widows, only flag, the spidroin used in the orb-web capture spiral, remains unknown from l. hesperus, perhaps because l. hesperus builds a three dimensional cobweb that lacks the capture spiral. this collection of spidroin sequences can serve as a benchmark for the quality of the transcriptome and the capacity of the assembly to successfully integrate the large repetitive regions, where de novo transcriptome assembly has traditionally struggled  <cit> .

our goal was to construct a high quality reference database that could be used to identify tissue specific expression patterns in black widows, and to contribute to ongoing evolutionary genomics of spiders. here, we identify and analyze genes specifically expressed in silk glands, and thus represent candidates for silk components or involvement with silk synthesis, assembly or regulation. we evaluate the functions of these silk specific genes to generate a transcriptional program for silk glands. we also identify putative gene families to which these silk specific transcripts belong, allowing us to test if silk-restricted expression tends to evolve once, followed by gene expansions, or if, in contrast, silk-restricted expression has been co-opted from gene copies expressed in other tissues. more generally, our multi-tissue transcriptome is important for evolutionary analyses of any adaptive protein system present in spiders and provides extensive resources for the production of silk through recombinant or synthetic biology approaches.

RESULTS
high quality black widow transcriptome
we generated over  <dig> million, high quality,  <dig> or 100 bp paired-end sequence reads from genes expressed  in three tissues of adult female black widows: silk glands, venom glands and cephalothoraxes . de novo assembly of each tissue-specific library with trinity resulted in ~19- <dig> thousand transcripts grouped into  <dig> - <dig>  thousand “components”, depending on the tissue type . a “component” is typically interpreted as representing a single genomic locus. combining the three assemblies with cap <dig> produced a multi-tissue transcriptome containing  <dig>  sequences that are predicted to encode at least  <dig> amino acids . all reads and the final transcriptome are available under bioproject accession prjna <dig> figure  <dig> 
flowchart of the
de novo
transcript assembly process. the western black widow transcriptome was assembled in three major steps. first, high-quality  <dig> or  <dig> base paired-end cdna sequence reads were generated for each of three tissues . second, transcripts were de novo assembled for each tissue separately . finally, the high quality non-redundant transcriptome was generated . relevant programs are shown parenthetically in the boxes. the number of sequence reads, trinity de novo assembled sequences, and final assembled transcripts generated in each step are shown in bold below the arrows.



the multi-tissue transcriptome included complete homologs to 99% of the core eukaryotic genes , and the arthropod benchmarking genes . importantly, the multi-tissue transcriptome recovered 99% of  <dig> previously described l. hesperus cdna and genomic sequences. based on blastx alignments to drosophila melanogaster proteins, we found few potential cases of chimeric assembled transcripts . in all of these metrics, the trinity derived transcriptome outperformed an independently generated velvet/oases derived transcriptome .

trinity can have difficulty resolving allelic variants from isoforms or even paralogs, and thus errs on the side of splitting variants into separate transcripts  <cit> . to account for this potential redundancy, we removed copies of assembled transcripts that were predicted to encode identical amino acid sequences, thereby reducing the total number of assembled transcripts from  <dig>  to  <dig> . removing redundant assembled transcripts resulted in only a slight reduction of raw reads that aligned to the transcriptome, with 80-86%  aligning to the initial set of assembled transcripts and 74-86% aligning to the unique assembled transcripts . the non-redundant transcriptome still included 99% of the arthropod benchmarking universal single copy orthologs . after removal of redundant amino acid sequences, 64% of the busco genes matched multiple uats in our transcriptome .

annotation of black widow transcriptome
due to the lack of a closely related species with a well annotated genome, we approached the annotation of the assembled transcripts using a variety of methods. first, we used blast to ascertain homology to the reference proteins of one of the closest relatives with a completely sequenced and annotated genome, the deer tick ixodes scapularis, and the reference proteins of the best annotated arthropod, the fruit fly drosophila melanogaster, as well as a global protein database, uniprotkb. approximately 30% of the transcriptome could be annotated by homology to tick, fruit fly, or uniprotkb . second, since it is possible that our transcriptome contained sequences that are only partially complete, we looked for protein domains within the translated uats using pfam, though this only added annotations for an additional  <dig> % of the uats. finally, we compared the translated uats to the published l. hesperus proteins in genbank , but this annotated a scant additional  <dig> uats .figure  <dig> 
blastx derived annotation of the western black widow transcriptome. the number of sequences with homology between the full set of assembled transcripts  and the unique assembled transcripts  using e-score < 1e- <dig> to the uniprotkb database , fruit fly refseq proteins , and the tick refseq proteins  are shown.



deep sequencing can also reveal low-level contamination  as well as infectious species  or endosymbionts that are co-isolated with the mrna of the species of interest. we identified potential non-black widow uats using uniprot blast hits . a sizable minority of the transcriptome was closest to bacterial genes . these potential contaminants contributed only a very minor proportion of the expression . examination of the genera of bacteria suggests that most of the bacterial sequences are not from endosymbionts, such as wolbachia <cit> , but from lab strains, such as e. coli . however, most of the expression is from neither endosymbionts nor e. coli . these contaminants were removed from the published uats in ncbi . there was negligible evidence of contamination from human genes , similar to the number of “contaminants” from other model vertebrate species, including mouse, chimpanzee and frog, suggesting that these uats are spider homologs of genes only described in vertebrates thus far.

functions of silk gland-specific transcripts
we were able to classify silk gland-specific transcripts  by identifying uats that had at least one expected count per million  and were at least  <dig> times more abundant in silk compared to venom and  <dig> times more abundant in silk compared to cephalothoraxes. we used ecpm as opposed to correcting for sequence length  so as not to discriminate against longer transcripts with low expression levels. these expression fold changes represented the top  <dig> % most differentially expressed uats between silk and the two other tissues . thus, out of  <dig>  uats with an ecpm >  <dig> in at least one tissue,  <dig> were silk gland specific, including  <dig> that were expressed exclusively in the silk glands. from the  <dig> ssts, we found that  <dig> had a significant blastn hit  to our database of  <dig> non-redundant l. hesperus cdna and genomic sequences. these  <dig> ssts contributed  <dig> % of the total silk gland expression, with nearly half of the total silk gland expression  from  <dig> ssts that matched spidroins. approximately  <dig> % of the expression in the silk glands is from the remaining ssts.

to identify the functionality of the ssts, we used homology to both the full proteins in uniprot and to domains in pfam. approximately 50% of the previously undescribed ssts had a significant blastx alignment to a protein in uniprot or pfam. out of all the ssts, we were able to assign go terms to 25%, which is low compared to the non-ssts with an ecpm >  <dig> . the ssts assigned go terms based on uniprot were enriched for  <dig> go terms and depleted for a single go term compared to the entire set of uats that had ecpm >  <dig> and were assigned go terms . the pfam numbers were slightly lower as only 16% of the ssts were assigned a go term based on pfam. there was a reduction in the pfam go terms in number enriched  and an increase in the number depleted . the enriched terms were a subset of the uniprot go terms, while the depleted terms did not overlap between pfam and uniprot .

ssts are enriched in peptidases and peptidase-inhibitors
the enriched and depleted go terms within the ssts implicated a wide range of functions. paradoxically, the ssts are enriched in both peptidase inhibitors  and peptidases , including several sub-sections of peptidases such as metallopeptidases , and endometallopeptidases . the ssts are also enriched for functions related to oxygen, including oxidoreductase, oxidation-reduction, monooxygenase, dioxygenase, iron ion binding, heme binding, and choline dehydrogenase. the ssts are depleted for atp binding , and nucleic acid and zinc ion binding . extending the analysis to go slim terms, as opposed to the full go set, reveals that the ssts are depleted in the broad scale categories of signaling and binding proteins .figure  <dig> 
go slim term representation in both the silk specific transcripts  and the non-ssts. biological process  and molecular function  representation within ssts  and non-ssts  with ecpm >  <dig>  go terms that are significantly over-represented in the ssts compared to all the uats are bolded in dark orange while those that are significantly under-represented are shown in bold and blue. significance was determined using a wallenius test .



as spider silk proteins that are destined for incorporation into fibers must first be exported from the cell into the storage compartment, we searched for signal peptides at the n-terminal end of the translated uats to identify potentially secreted proteins. from all the m-started predicted proteins in the non-redundant transcriptome with an ecpm >  <dig>  we found that only  <dig> % possessed a signal peptide according to signalp  <cit> . in contrast,  <dig> % of the m-started ssts have signal peptides, representing a significant increase in expression of secreted proteins in silk glands compared to the entire transcriptome . we examined go terms of the uats with signal peptides to see if the silk glands are secreting any functional class of proteins differently from the non-silk gland tissues. most of the functions were not enriched for secretion in the ssts compared to all of the transcripts, with the single exception of the peptidase inhibitors . of the sst peptidase inhibitors, 83% contain a signal peptide. in contrast, only 23% of the non-sst peptidase inhibitors contain a signal peptide .

silk-specific transcription factors
silk glands are a spectacular example of gland-specific gene expression of the functionally differentiated spidroin gene family members. we thus expect to find silk gland specific transcription factors contributing to increased transcription of spidroins and other proteins that are incorporated into fibers in the silk glands. using the uniprot-based go term annotation of site-specific transcription factor , we identified ten ssts, of which nine are a homolog of a fruit fly transcription factor . as the transcriptional program of the fruit fly is well annotated, we were able to investigate the roles of fruit fly orthologs of our sst transcription factors. we observed that the orthologs of sst transcription factors are most highly expressed in a range of tissues and developmental stages, including the 8 hour embryo, the 16 hour embryo, l <dig> nerve cells and the embryonic s <dig> cell lines . we also identified the known physical and genetic interaction partners of the sst transcription factor fruit fly orthologs collected in flybase. we then searched our black widow transcriptome for homologs of these interacting partners and, if found, determined if they were ssts. we identified homologs of many of the fruit fly interacting partners . however, none of the documented physical or genetic interaction partners of the sst transcription factor homologs in fruit fly had black widow homologs that were ssts .table  <dig> 
silk gland-specific unique assembled transcripts  predicted to encode transcription factors


western black widow sst
a
b
c
d
e
f

asst = silk-specific transcript. see methods for identification of ssts.


bpfam id was assigned using highest match to a domain with hmmer  <dig> .


cfruit fly, drosophila melanogaster, proteins were from the reference sequences  available in ncbi as of july  <dig> 


dfruit fly tissues with the highest fpkm support were selected from flybase fpkm report obtained april  <dig> 


einteraction partners are fruit fly genes noted in the flybase physical interaction database obtained in april  <dig> as interacting with the fruit fly homolog of black widow ssts.


fhomologous black widow uats to fruit fly interaction partners were chosen by best blastx match .



dynamics of silk-specific gene families
thus far, only two gene families with silk gland-restricted expression have been identified, spidroins and egg case proteins   <cit> . the spidroins represent a relatively rapidly evolving gene family, in terms of sequence evolution, gland-specific expression, and functional diversification  <cit> . they also represent a gene family expansion that is both taxonomically  and tissue  restricted. to test if gene family expansion of genes expressed in silk glands is a general phenomenon, we constructed clusters of potential gene families with at least one member that was an sst. we found  <dig> putative gene families that had at least five ssts, five of which were entirely composed of ssts and seven of which included non-sst members . the entirely sst families include one containing both the spidroins and ecps . the largest sst-only cluster  contained  <dig> uats with a significant blastx alignment to aggregate spider glue  <dig> from nephila clavipes . a third cluster composed of  <dig> ssts includes an almost exact match  to the recently described l. hesperus aggregate silk gland factor  <dig> . two clusters contained  <dig> and  <dig> glycine-rich encoding transcripts, respectively, that had no significant identity to published proteins . the final exclusively sst cluster contained  <dig> members with significant identity to a putative l. hesperus protein . the clusters that included non-ssts have a variety of functions including lipase, lipid transport, metalloproteolysis, and protease inhibition .table  <dig> 
putative gene families that include at least five silk-specific transcripts 


fam id
a
b
c
c

afamily ids were assigned to clusters generated by blastclust.


bnon silk specific transcripts .


cfrom blastx of uats against uniprotkb, using the optimal hit in the family as decided by e-score.


dfrom blastp of translated uats against published l. hesperus sequences.



multiple derivations of silk-specific expression
given that some of the putative gene families contain both ssts and non-ssts, we examined if the ssts were each other’s closest relatives, and thus might represent a single evolutionary derivation of silk expression followed by gene family expansion within silk glands. alternatively, silk-specific expression could have evolved at multiple times within the gene families. using  <dig> gene families that had at least  <dig> ssts and  <dig> non-ssts , we calculated the ancestral states as either silk-specific or non-silk-specific using discrete maximum likelihood reconstruction. to increase our power of detection, we added transcripts as silk specific that had an ecpm >  <dig> and which were in the  <dig> % tail for fold expression change, as opposed to the prior  <dig> % . this added  <dig> uats to the set of potential ssts, which were much more likely to group with a previously defined sst family than were other assembled sequences . we then constructed  <dig> random trees for each of the  <dig> families and similarly calculated ancestral states. on average across the  <dig> families there are slightly fewer observed shifts from non-silk to silk-specific than expected from random trees , but this is not significant in any of the trees . the two putative gene families in which there may be expansions of ssts are family id  <dig>  astacin-like metalloproteases  and family id  <dig>  papilins .

transcriptome reveals novel black widow spidroins
gene families with expression restricted to silk glands can present obstacles for gene family reconstruction. for instance, because spidroins are highly repetitive and often contain simple  amino acid sequence motifs, it is possible that non-homologous sequences can cluster according to similar amino acid compositions. indeed, the ecps are joined with the spidroins into a single cluster based on similar amino acid sequence motifs found in both families , even though ecps lack the defining n and c-terminal domains of the spidroin gene family. therefore, for each of the clusters that included previously described spider silk-specific proteins, we also used blastp derived alignments to break clusters into putative gene families.

spidroins are expected to be difficult to de novo assemble due to their extreme length and repetitiveness. nevertheless, our transcriptome included almost exact matches to the n and c-terminal encoding regions of all the described l. hesperus spidroins . these uats included varying amounts of repetitive encoding sequence adjacent to the non-repetitive n or c terminal regions, although the c terminal containing fragments typically included more of the repetitive region than the n terminal containing fragments . in addition to these almost exact matches to previously described l. hesperus sequences, we discovered new spidroin paralogs. although multiple copies of masp <dig> have been sequenced  <cit> , we identified an additional masp <dig> c-terminal encoding uat  and n-terminal encoding uat . each of these masp1-like uats were only 74% identical to previously described masp <dig> loci, compared to the other masp <dig> uats, which were 96-99% identical to previously described loci . however, these newly identified loci appear to be lowly expressed compared to the other masp <dig> loci . likewise, we identified two uats that grouped with the misp c-terminal region, one of which is 100% identical to the previously described misp mrna, versus one that is only 85% identical over the entire length of the uats .figure  <dig> 
maximum likelihood tree of published spidroin c-termini and homologous black widow unique assembled transcripts . the c-terminal regions of known l. hesperus  spidroins are shown in orange, other known spidroins are shown in grey, and translated uats are black. accession numbers for published spidroins are in  <cit> . the tree is midpoint rooted and all bootstrap values greater than  <dig> are shown. expression rank and fpkm  are shown on the right. rank is based on fpkm in the silk glands out of all uats expressed in silk glands. clades corresponding to different gland specific expression are in colored rectangles.
maximum likelihood tree of published spidroin n-termini and homologous black widow unique assembled transcripts . the n-terminal regions of known l. hesperus  spidroins are shown in orange, other known spidroins are shown in grey, and translated uats are black. accession numbers for published spidroins are in  <cit> . the tree is midpoint rooted and all bootstrap values greater than  <dig> are shown. expression rank and fpkm  are shown on the right. rank is based on fpkm in the silk glands out of all uats expressed in silk glands. clades corresponding to different gland specific expression are in colored rectangles.



perhaps even more striking is the discovery of three uats that grouped with flag, the capture spiral spidroin, which was previously unknown in l. hesperus. one of the uats, silk_contig <dig>  strongly groups with flag c-terminal domains . the other two uats, contig <dig> and silk_comp104020_c1_seq <dig>  group with flag n-terminal domains, albeit with low support . however, contig <dig> is predicted to encode a complete protein that lacks characteristic spidroin amino acid motifs, although the most abundant amino acid is proline , which is found in similar proportions in known flag proteins. the other uat that groups with the flag n-termini, silk_comp104020_c1_seq <dig>  only contains  <dig> aa predicted to be part of the repetitive region, which is insufficient to assess if this transcript encodes a protein with similar characteristics to previously described flag repetitive regions. it is also possible that this uat actually represents the pysp n-terminus, which has yet to be described in any spider.

transcriptome reveals novel glue proteins
thus far, no spidroins have been found expressed in the aggregate silk gland, which synthesizes aqueous glue droplets. instead, a few distinct proteins have been described including aggregate gland spider glue   <dig> and  <dig> from nephila clavipes <cit> , and aggregate gland silk factor   <dig> and  <dig> from l. hesperus <cit> . we found  <dig> uats that align significantly to n. clavipes agsg <dig>  but none of them are ssts . in contrast, agsg <dig> has a known homolog in l. hesperus <cit> , and we found  <dig> uats with significant alignments to n. clavipes agsg <dig>  of which  <dig> are ssts . these agsg2-like sequences range in length from ~ <dig> to ~ <dig> aa. the shorter sequences all align to the same region of n. clavipes agsg <dig> , which is the most conserved region of the global alignment. phylogenetic analyses of the global amino acid alignment as well as of the conserved region reveal multiple divergent clades, three of which include six of the top  <dig> most abundantly represented uats in silk glands .figure  <dig> 
maximum likelihood tree of aggregrate spider glue  <dig>  and homologous unique assembled transcripts . the trees were estimated from alignments of complete protein sequences  and domain-specific sequences . trees are midpoint rooted. trinity-defined isoforms of a single component are shown in blue while the published nephila clavipes  and published latrodectus hesperus  sequences are shown in purple and orange, respectively. all bootstrap values greater than  <dig> are shown above branches. expression rank and fpkm  are shown on the right. rank is based on fpkm in the silk glands out of all uats expressed in silk glands.



we also found seven uats with significant alignments to agsf <dig>  six of which are in the top  <dig> most expressed sequences in silk glands . however, they did not group together using our clustering algorithm. instead, these sequences likely represent fragments of the same gene. in contrast, we found a cluster of  <dig> sequences that included one that is almost an exact match to the previously published l. hesperus agsf <dig> . ten of the sequences in this cluster appear to be grouping with agsf <dig> based on a high percentage of glycine, rather than true sequence identity. agsf <dig> and the three uats most similar to it  are extremely glycine rich  and the other ten uats that clustered with agsf <dig> are somewhat less glycine rich . both groups, however, include ssts that are among the top  <dig> most abundantly represented sequences in silk glands .figure  <dig> 
maximum likelihood trees of cluster containing black widow aggregrate gland silk factor  <dig> .  tree of unique assembled transcripts  that includes published l. hesperus  agsf <dig> .  tree of translated uats that clustered with uats in  based on amino acid composition, rather than true homology. a third group of three uats that was also in this cluster is not shown. trinity derived isoforms of a single component are shown in dark blue. the trees are midpoint rooted. all bootstrap values greater than  <dig> are shown above branches. expression rank and fpkm  are shown on the right. rank is based on fpkm in the silk glands out of all uats expressed in silk glands.



in both agsg <dig> and agsf <dig> families, there are multiple sequences associated with a single trinity component, which is usually interpreted as evidence for isoforms generated from the same locus. for agsg2-like, the isoforms are part of component  <dig>  and are either long sequences  of over  <dig> aa, or domain specific short sequences . however, the conservation between the smaller sequences and the larger sequences makes it possible that trinity is incorrectly joining these sequences into one component due to near identical sequences over at least  <dig> nucleotides. more likely, each of these uats probably encodes paralogous small peptides, each containing portions of the agsg2-like domain. an alternative pattern emerges in the agsf <dig> cluster, where the six isoforms are identical, except for two indels of between  <dig> to  <dig> amino acids .

discussion
using deep sequencing of mrnas expressed in three tissues, we generated a high quality transcriptome for the western black widow. we captured 99% of the core eukaryotic genes , the benchmarking single copy orthologs in arthropods , and previously described black widow genes . we were able to annotate  <dig>  of the uats by homology with published proteins . these sequences represent a minimum of  <dig> unique protein-coding genes based on homology to unique tick proteins. thus, compared to the currently published protein sequences in genbank , we have increased the number of annotated western black widow genes 20– <dig> fold, depending on the extent to which our ~ <dig>  annotated uats represent paralogs versus alleles or isoforms. our transcriptome represents a reference set for analyzing the evolution of spider genomes, identifying tissue-specific genes and their functions, and understanding the molecular processes underlying the evolution of novel spider protein-systems, such as silks  and venom .

a large scale gene duplication event, such as a whole genome or chromosome duplication, in spiders was previously proposed based on the presence of two copies of each of the hox genes in multiple spider species  <cit> . consistent with this hypothesis, we found 64% of genes considered single copy in arthropods  matched multiple uats. furthermore, we found an average of two homologs per core eukaryotic gene . while some of our uats may represent allelic variation, partially assembled genes, or isoforms, we expect a large proportion to represent genuine paralogous gene copies . transcriptome or genome sequencing of additional spider species and phylogenetic comparisons with other arthropods will help elucidate whether spiders experienced a genome or chromosome-wide duplication event as opposed to smaller scale duplication events.

we focused on discovering candidate genes encoding silk components  and genes involved in silk synthesis, fiber assembly, or regulating silk gland specific expression. the silk glands themselves present a number of obstacles to de novo assembly, including very few spider sequences available to use as a scaffold, and the potential for expression dominance of spidroins, which are very large and highly repetitive . additionally, we generated less than half the number of sequence reads for the silk glands and assembled fewer transcripts than the other tissues . despite these limitations, we assembled near identical sequences to all the described genes known to have silk gland restricted expression, including the n-terminal, c-terminal, and portions of repetitive regions of spidroins , the complete aggregate gland spider glues , and the complete aggregate gland silk factors . we additionally identified novel spidroin paralogs, most notably potential orthologs of the capture spiral protein, flag, which had not previously been described for any cobweb weaving spider.

overall, we identified  <dig> uats with expression restricted to silk glands or considerably higher in silk glands than other tissues, which we have designated ssts . many  of the ssts were not assigned a functional annotation by association with a gene ontology  term, possibly because they represent silk fiber or glue components that have not been assigned go terms . however, based on the go terms that were assigned to the ssts, we found enrichment for both proteinases and proteinase inhibitors, and a number of functions involved in oxidation or oxidation-reduction . we thus propose that the primary roles of the silk glands are to synthesize fiber  and glue components, transport these components out of the cell, protect these proteins from degradation while in the storage compartment, and then assemble and extrude these fibers and glues. under this model, the seemingly paradoxical dual enriched terms of serine peptidase inhibitor and protease, can be explained by preferential exportation of peptidase inhibitors out of the cell. the high proportion of sst peptidase inhibitors with a signal peptide supports this hypothesis. the peptidase inhibitors can protect the spidroins against proteolysis in the external cellular environment, while, within the cell, the proteases can be used to degrade all non-exported, and therefore failed, spidroins or other proteins. the enrichment of go terms associated with oxidation-reduction is consistent with the fact that silk proteins, at least in major ampullate silk glands, undergo a number of ph changes as they travel through the duct that aid in fiber assembly  <cit> .

spider silk glands are especially notable due to the evolution of morphologically distinct glands that synthesize functionally differentiated spidroin paralogs  <cit> . because we profiled the combined set of silk gland types, we are unable to propose novel silk gland type-specific genes or evaluate the extent to which a single spidroin paralog is exclusively expressed in a single gland type. we were also limited in discovering transcription factors that could regulate the gland-specific expression of spidroins and other fiber or glue components. all the same, we discovered ten ssts that were putative transcription factors . gland-specific expression profiling, using our transcriptome as a reference, will help elucidate if these transcription factors are integral to the regulation of spidroins and/or glues. intriguingly, the sst transcription factor homologs in drosophila melanogaster are involved in regulating genes in a variety of tissues and developmental stages , suggesting that potential silk gland regulatory systems were derived from multiple tissue types rather than co-opting an entire tissue system en masse.

our transcriptome enabled us to address questions about the extent to which silk gland functions evolved through gene family evolution. the spidroins form the paradigm for the evolution of silk gland restricted paralog expression. the spidroins are a spider-specific and highly dynamic gene family that evolved through gene duplication and sequence and expression divergence. the expansion of this gene family concomitant with the morphological differentiation of the silk glands has been proposed as the explanation for the evolution of novel silk functions  <cit> . however, the putative families of ssts we describe offer additional models for silk specific functional expansions. one alternative model to gene family expansion is to generate multiple isoforms from a single gene. this possibility was observed in the clusters of assembled sequences with homologs to previously described aggregate gland-specific genes where the genes shared the same trinity-derived identifier . however, within these families, it is also possible that the aggregate gland spider glue  <dig> homologs are simply difficult for trinity to assemble given their high level of sequence identity within a conserved domain. even accounting for the potential to generate multiple isoforms from a single gene, our phylogenetic analyses demonstrate multiple divergent sequences are homologous to aggregate gland spider glue  <dig> , suggesting gene family expansion. if this gene family is restricted in expression to the aggregate gland it will represent a markedly different pattern from the spidroin gene family, in which gene duplication often co-evolves with glandular differentiation. aggregate glands are often enormous compared to the other silk glands, and gene family expansion may expedite the synthesis of copious amounts of aggregate glues.

an additional alternative model to the spider silk gland-specific gene family expansion is the independent derivation of silk gland-restricted expression from paralogs expressed in other tissues. the clustering of many ssts with non-ssts supports this model. in contrast to the spidroins and glue proteins, these putative gene families are not restricted to spiders . in most cases of ssts clustering with non-ssts, we did not find evidence for single derivations of ssts . instead, ssts were interspersed with non-ssts, suggesting recurrent co-option of paralogs of non-silk specific genes within the silk glands. two potential exceptions were clusters containing members homologous to  astacin-like metalloproteases and  papilins, which are metalloprotease inhibitors. within these putative gene families, there were many fewer shifts from non-sst to sst, compared to the random expectation , suggesting potential gene expansions within silk glands. considering the importance of protecting spidroins from degradation in the storage compartment, it is possible that the proteases and protease inhibitors co-evolved with spidroin paralogs.

CONCLUSIONS
silk fibers are vital to the lifetime fitness of spiders. the spectacular mechanical properties of spider silks motivate the development of numerous biomimetic applications. our de novo transcriptome provides an illuminating glimpse into the functional and evolutionary processes involved in silk production, as well as resources for further investigations into silk glands and other spider tissues. while the spidroins have historically occupied the central space within the study of silk glands, our analyses indicate a rich transcriptional program beyond the spidroins, including multiple functional roles of non-spider specific genes, new models of gene family expansion in spider specific genes, and multiple derivations of silk-specific expression from closely related paralogs expressed in other tissues. the efficiency of generating our transcriptome demonstrates the lowered barriers to performing genomic analysis even within species and tissues currently lacking any reference sequences. our findings strongly support expansion of genomic resources and analyses of the functionally differentiated silk gland types, other tissues of interest, as well as into other spider species.

