BACKGROUND
a growing body of neuroimaging studies links white matter  measures to anxiety-related psychological processes  <cit> . these studies in summary point to the uncinate fasciculus , a prominent fronto-temporal fiber tract known to innervate the amygdala  <cit> . the amygdala has been shown to be part of a limbic network that is hyper-responsive in individuals with increased anxiety  <cit>  and in patients with anxiety disorders  <cit> . in this network, the uf is a pivotal part providing a link from the amygdala to prefrontal/orbitofrontal cortical areas, and thus is involved in modulating anxiety  <cit> . therefore, the uf is of particular interest for investigating the relation between anxiety and wm morphometry.

using fiber tractography, we previously showed that patients with social anxiety disorder compared to healthy subjects demonstrate reduced volume of the left uf, suggesting fronto-temporal structural hypoconnectivity  <cit> . regarding the preliminary nature of this result, identification of correlates of uf volume in a completely independent study sample is needed to validate uf volumetric measure and to further characterize in what way left uf volume is associated with anxiety. anxiety is complex, involving emotional, cognitive, motivational, and physiological components and is dimensional with high inter-individual variability  <cit> . personality traits are seen as intra-individual stable factors, which can be linked to brain structure . trait anxiety is defined as a psychological construct including several components, which merge and result in feelings such as discomfort, nervousness, and unpleasantness. trait anxiety is a fixed stage of anxiety existing for a relative long duration or is even stable over a longer time period. strong trait anxiety is also seen as the propensity to become extra-anxious in the context of provoking stimuli  <cit> . here, we sought to explore the dimensional association of uf volume with trait anxiety as assessed by means of the widely used spielberger state-trait anxiety inventory   <cit> . in addition to wm, we also investigated grey matter  volumes of subcortical structures. the amygdala-hippocampus complex has been implicated in fear- and anxiety-related behavior  <cit> . functional imaging studies have also demonstrated a link between individual differences in trait anxiety and amygdala activity by showing increased amygdala activity with increasing anxiety  <cit> . regarding volumetric associations with trait anxiety, two studies point to a prominent role of the left amygdala compared to the other subcortical structures  <cit> . however, studies focusing on the specific anxiety-related neuroanatomical features of the amygdala and linked pathways are still rare. in addition, these studies do not consistently report anxiety-related volumetric associations for the amygdala . thus, we focus - beside the uf - on the amygdala gm volume and its relatedness to anxiety as well as its relatedness to uf volume .

in the present study, we investigated volumes of the uf, the amygdala, and the hippocampus in a non-clinical sample of  <dig> subjects with different levels of trait anxiety. for this study, we formulated the following hypotheses:

 uf volume should correlate negatively with trait anxiety ;

 the amygdala volume should correlate positively or negatively with trait anxiety;

 uf and amygdala volumes should be strongly intercorrelated either negatively or positively, depending also on the association between trait anxiety and amygdala volume;

since the anterior hippocampus has been associated with anxiety and this hippocampal part is also tightly linked to the amygdala   <cit> , we also anticipated a correlation between trait anxiety and hippocampus volume.

RESULTS
demographic, psychometric and global anatomical measures
demographic and psychometric measures are summarized in table  <dig>  stai values ranged from  <dig> to  <dig> . mean  intra-cranial volume was  <dig>   ml. intra-cranial volume showed significant positive associations  with volumes of left uf , right uf , left amygdala , and left hippocampus ; non-significant positive associations were observed for right amygdala  and right hippocampus . there was no correlation of intra-cranial volume with trait anxiety . for all further statistical analyses, relative values were used for each measure .

a using pearson bivariate correlations, shown are r-values 

b according to the spielberger state-trait anxiety inventory , trait section

c according to the beck depression inventory 

d according to the anxiety sensitivity index  <dig> 

e according to the bis subscale of the action regulating emotional systems  questionnaire

f according to the eysenck personality inventory , neuroticism subscale

g according to the eysenck personality inventory , extraversion subscale

associations of trait anxiety with white matter and grey matter volumes
correlations are summarized in figure  <dig> 

left hemisphere: trait anxiety was negatively correlated with uf volume , but not with volume of the inferior fronto-occipital fasciculus . regarding subcortical gm, trait anxiety was positively correlated with amygdala volume . the correlation for the hippocampus was marginally significant, conversely, there was no significant correlation for the caudate nucleus . uf volume correlated negatively with amygdala volume , but not significantly with the hippocampus or caudate nucleus . scatter plots are shown in additional file  <dig>  figure s <dig>  importantly, results did not change qualitatively when excluding the left-handed subject and the three subjects reporting a history of psychotherapeutic treatment. correlations of fractional anisotropy, a measure indicative of fiber organization and integrity, for the left uf with trait anxiety and amygdala volume as well as uf volume are presented in additional file  <dig>  table s <dig>  these correlations were similar to those observed for volume.

a using partial correlations with age, sex, and depression as covariates of no interest, shown are r-values . note: for uncinate fasciculus, amygdala, and hippocampus, results underlay hypothesis-driven tests; the remaining tests underlay the null hypothesis.

b one-tailed

a using partial correlations with age, sex, and depression as covariates of no interest, shown are r-values 

uf: uncinate fasciculus, ifof: inferior fronto-occipital fasciculus

note: significant/marginally significant results correspond to uncorrected p-values. except of for uf-amygdala volumetric associations, tests underlay the null hypothesis.

right hemisphere: except for the hippocampus, no significant correlations of wm or gm volumes with trait anxiety  were observed. moreover, there was no uf-amygdala volumetric association in the right hemisphere .

to test discriminant validity of associations with trait anxiety, we additionally assessed correlations with depression, anxiety sensitivity, behavioral inhibition, and neuroticism for each wm/gm volume of interest on an explorative level. here, no associations were found in both hemispheres . post-hoc exploratory tests did not show significant correlations with trait anxiety for the remaining subcortical volumes . absolute and relative volumes of all examined wm and gm structures are listed in additional file  <dig>  table s <dig> 

discussion
this study's focus was on the associations between anxiety and the volumes of the uf, amygdala, and hippocampus as well as on the associations between uf and amygdala. in our non-clinical sample, trait anxiety correlated negatively with uf volume and positively with amygdala volume. in addition, the volumes of uf and amygdala were inversely correlated with each other. these effects were prominent in the left hemisphere and independent of global brain volume, age, sex, and current depression.

in a previous study of our group, we demonstrated reduced left uf volume in patients suffering from social anxiety disorder compared to healthy control subjects using the same deterministic tractography approach  <cit> . the main goal of the present study was to assess the relation between uf volume and trait anxiety in a non-clinical sample. in this particular sample, we identified a negative correlation of the left uf volume with trait anxiety. in our previous study where we examined a clinical sample, we demonstrated reduced left uf volume in pathologically anxious patients  <cit> . both studies demonstrate that anxiety is negatively related to left uf volume, with high anxiety associated with smaller uf volumes. thus, both studies using entirely different samples point into the same direction and emphasize the pivotal role of the left uf volume in the modulation of anxiety. what may the negative correlation between uf volume and trait anxiety point to? the left uf volume might indicate the structural prerequisites for the efficiency of left amygdala-orbitofrontal functional interactions. these interactions underlie reappraisal as an emotion regulation process  and are critical for reappraisal-initiated reduction of negative affects  <cit> . moreover, changed cross-correlated hemodynamic responses in amygdala-orbitofrontal areas have been demonstrated in pathological anxiety  <cit> . thus, our result supports the notion that specific features of structural and functional connectivity within the amygdala-orbitofrontal network are crucial in modulating and possibly determining individual anxiety  <cit> . the uf may be considered the main facilitator of signal propagation from and to the amygdala in interactions with the orbitofrontal cortex. it is a "limbic" tract  <cit>  and, in fact, has been described in post-mortem and non-human primate studies to innervate the amygdala  <cit> . yet, further areas also interlinked by the uf may be of interest as well with respect to the present results. the anterior temporal cortex/temporal pole has been related to anxiety  <cit>  and might serve as a relay station between frontal cortex and amygdala, given also strong  projections from the temporal pole to the amygdala  <cit> . the present approach used deterministic tractography of well-characterized fiber bundles according to standardized protocols, encompassing the uf as a whole. thus, specific subparts of the uf could not be delineated with this approach. further studies using more sophisticated approaches could try to disentangle uf fiber subbundles connecting the amygdala and the orbitofrontal cortex  <cit> . as a supplemental and commonly assessed measure, fractional anisotropy of the left uf was similarly correlated with trait anxiety as compared to volume . in addition, uf volume and fractional anisotropy were directly positively correlated. it was, however, not within the scope of the present study to explicitly contrast these two measures of wm connectivity. taken together, the present data rather suggest that uf volume is a measure of interest beside fractional anisotropy.

a further goal of the present study was to examine whether the left uf volume correlates with volume measures of adjacently located brain areas in subcortical gm. in this context we identified, to the best of our knowledge for the first time, that the left-sided uf volume negatively correlated with the left-sided amygdala volume. beside the relationship between left uf volume and trait anxiety, we also identified a significant relationship between left amygdala volume and trait anxiety. in addition to our study, there are three studies that have examined the relationship between amygdala volume and trait anxiety so far, with different findings. two of them reported negative correlations  <cit> , one no correlation  <cit> , and our study reports a positive correlation. the reason for these discrepant findings is currently difficult to disentangle due to sample  and methodological differences . further studies are needed to examine the influences that are modulating the amygdala-anxiety relationship. from an intuitive point of view, a positive correlation between amygdala volume and trait anxiety may be plausible: arguing that a larger amygdala in strong trait-anxious subjects may reflect increased usage would be in line with a couple of studies showing a positive association between amygdala activation and trait anxiety  <cit> . beside the amygdala, the right hippocampus was significantly and the left hippocampus was trend-wise positively correlated with trait anxiety in the present study . the anterior hippocampus has been implicated in anxiety-related behavior  <cit> , as it is also closely connected to the amygdala. as such, our results support the view that the amygdala-hippocampus complex is linked to trait anxiety.

the reasons for these specific volumetric associations of the uf, amygdala and hippocampus with trait anxiety as well as between uf and amygdala are unclear so far. however, two possible interpretations can be offered here: first, it could be that the specific structural features we uncovered here are the anatomical prerequisites for inefficient and hyper-responsive anxiety behavior in these subjects. in other words, if this explanation is true, the extent of anxiety-related reactions relies on the specific anatomical features of the uf-amygdala complex. the second interpretation relates more to experience-related structural modifications of the uf-amygdala complex. it could be that in high anxious subjects, the amygdala is more often activated, at the end causing a use-dependent increase of the amygdala volume. due to this increase, the preponderance to automatically react with anxious behavior increases with less influence from the frontal cortex, causing a decrease of uf volume. which of these explanations hold true cannot be determined with this experimental design. longitudinal studies are needed to decide whether a kind of genetically/biologically defined anatomical prerequisite results in anxious reactions or whether frequent fear and anxious feelings modify the structure of involved brain areas.

the results of the present study may also raise the question of laterality with regard to volumetric associations between uf, amygdala, and trait anxiety. the fact that these associations were prominent in the left hemisphere may prompt further investigations to directly address the issue of a possible lateralized involvement of these volumes implicated in limbic emotional circuits associated with anxiety.

limitations
a major finding of this study is based on self-report data by the participants and it cannot be excluded that there are biases in terms of social desirability. however, the stai is widely used to measure trait anxiety and there is currently no objective method available to quantify trait anxiety. due to the reliability of around  <dig>  of the stai  <cit>  and the assumed reliability of our anatomical measurements of approximately  <dig>   <cit> , a maximum structure-behavior relationship of r structure-anxiety, measured = r structure-anxiety, real * sqrt  <cit>  can principally be obtained with the applied methods. thus we are pretty sure that the captured correlations are in the range one could anticipate.

a further limitation is the cross-sectional nature of this study. thus, we are not in the position to explain our findings being due to experience-driven or biologically-/genetically-driven influences. longitudinal studies are thus needed to examine the development of anxiety-structure relationships more precisely.

CONCLUSIONS
the left-sided uf-amygdala complex is strongly related to anxiety, even in non-pathological, non-clinical subjects. this study is in line with a previous study that has identified exactly the same quality of relationship between uf anatomical features and anxiety in a pathologically anxious sample. taken together, these and other studies support the notion that the uf-amygdala complex is pivotal for the control of trait anxiety.

