BACKGROUND
carotenoids, which first appeared in bacteria over three billion years ago, belong to a subfamily of isoprenoids that are commonly found in all organisms  <cit> . in nature, carotenoids originate from the condensation of geranylgeranyl pyrophosphate , which is derived from the synthesis of isoprenoid precursors via the plastid-localized 2-c-methyl-d-erythritol 4-phosphate  pathway. in the crucial rate-controlling step, phytoene synthase  mediates the condensation of ggpp, forming the first carotenoid, phytoene  <cit> . subsequently, different types of carotenoids are generated through various synthetic pathways including desaturation, isomerization, cyclization, hydroxylation, and other modifications  <cit> . carotenoids and their derivatives play essential physiological and ecological roles. they are involved in the photosynthetic apparatus, photoprotective pigments, antioxidants, hormone precursors, and attractants for pollinators in plant growth, development, and reproduction  <cit> . carotenoids are the precursors of phytohormones such as abscisic acid, strigolactones and the recently identified carlactone, which negatively regulates plant axillary outgrowth  <cit> . ramel et al.  <cit>  recently revealed that a carotenoid endoperoxide that originates from a reaction between β-carotene and reactive oxygen species  can serve as a stress signal that mediates gene responses to singlet oxygen in arabidopsis. in addition, an epistatic influence on the expression of endogenous carotenogenic genes has been observed in carotenoid-engineered potato tubers, which suggests a feedback regulation of carotenoid metabolites  <cit> . it is reasonable to hypothesize that there are still more biological functions associated with carotenoids or their derivatives that are waiting to be uncovered.

due to the health promoting function of carotenoids, research on their biosynthesis and accumulation in plants has been a predominant focus. however, knowledge of the effects of carotenoid metabolism on other plant processes is still relatively limited. in natural systems, such as in the fruits of citrus and tomato, carotenoid biosynthesis and accumulation often occur in parallel with the ripening process  <cit> . it is quite certain that the ripening process involves cellular activities related to metabolic networks and to organelle modification, which eventually determine product quality. in addition to playing a role in fruit quality, some metabolites, such as malate and anthocyanin, have newly discovered physiological functions associated with the regulation of fruit metabolism, development, and shelf life  <cit> . fraser et al.  <cit>  discovered the effects of enhanced carotenoid accumulation on isoprenoids, plastid development, and intermediary metabolism in tomato fruits. in investigations of carotenoid-accumulating citrus mutants, some biological processes associated with carbohydrate metabolism and oxidative stress were found to differ from the wild types  <cit> . relatively little is known about how the carotenoid accumulation program might contribute to these unintended metabolic changes.

chromoplast formation is one of the most important cellular changes during the ripening of carotenoid-rich plant tissues; it involves significant carotenoid sequestration and the use of other metabolic pathways, which are all essential for the nutritional and sensory quality of agricultural products  <cit> . chromoplasts are generally derived from preexisting plastids such as amyloplasts or chloroplasts, and the chromoplast transition is often associated with tissue and organ development  <cit> . during chromoplast development, plastoglobules and carotenoid crystals form, starch breakdown occurs, starch granules and thylakoids disappear, and the metabolism of terpenoids and lipids is greatly enhanced  <cit> . to date, there is limited understanding of how the chromoplast developmental program is established  <cit> , and the associative inner system including metabolic variation and structural remodeling still exhibits intricate behavior. in recent years, a considerable amount of research has shown that chromoplast biogenesis is mediated by crucial factors such as orange  and chrc   <cit> . furthermore, in tobacco floral nectaries and carrot roots, the mutually exclusive relationship between carotenoid accumulation and starch granule development suggests that enhanced carotenogenesis serves as a developmental signal that directs the transition from amyloplasts to chromoplasts  <cit> . additionally, modification of chromoplast morphology has been previously observed in carotenoid engineered plants, which suggests the possibility that cellular structures can adapt to facilitate the sequestration of newly formed carotenoids  <cit> .

in addition to carotenoid biosynthesis, anthocyanin accumulation is an important biological event during the ripening of some fruits. anthocyanins are plant phenolic secondary metabolites that are part of the phenylpropanoid pathway  <cit> . like carotenoids, they are involved in a series of pivotal biological processes, such as antioxidative protection and the producion of attractants for reproduction, and they are also essential for the protection of human health  <cit> . anthocyanins can co-exist with carotenoids in plant tissues and organs, but in some carotenoid-rich organs, there is relatively little anthocyanin accumulation. this phenomenon was observed in oncidium gower ramsey flowers and in tomato fruits  <cit> . it is unknown if there is a negative correlation between carotenoid and anthocyanin, and it is a difficult question to answer. carotenoids and anthocyanins are often involved in concurrent biosynthetic processes that accompany natural development, which makes it difficut to define a causal relationship. similar observations have also been made for other hypothesized carotenoid-associated biological processes. recently, genetic manipulation has been used successfully in many plants to modify carotenogenesis and other quality-associated components  <cit> . in these engineered plants, which have targeted metabolic pathway modifications, various unintended physiological, biochemical, and cellular changes have occurred  <cit> . engineered systems appear to provide an effective approach for regulating the accumulation of a given metabolite, and they can facilitate the identification of associative biological relationships  <cit> .

in our previous study, engineered cell models  were established by activating the rate-controlling reaction by overexpressing the crtb protein  in citrus embryogenic calli  <cit> . these ecms exhibit diverse colors and accumulate significant levels of carotenoids. they are useful for understanding not only carotenoid biosynthesis, but also the potential biological processes associated with carotenoid accumulation. in the present study, we use affymetrix microarrays, biochemistry, and cellular investigation of citrus calli to gain deeper insight into carotenoid-related biological processes, including redox status alternation, starch metabolism, and decreased flavonoid/anthocyanin accumulation. engineering these pathways in fortunella hindsii swingle  and malus hupehensis  calli further validate these results.

RESULTS
ecm transcriptional patterns
engineered cell models  generated by over-expressing 35s:: crtb in citrus embryogenic calli show a striking accumulation of carotenoids  <cit> . however, relatively little is known about the other biological processes associated with engineered carotenoid accumulation. thus, to further comprehend the cellular responses to enhanced carotenoid biosynthesis, we used three representative ecms  and their wild types in affymetrix microarray analysis. genes that were up- or down-regulated more than 2-fold  were identified, but a relaxed threshold of  <dig> -fold  was used for genes in the m-33/wt microarray data . this relaxed threshold was utilized because there was a relative lack of differentially expressed genes between m- <dig> and its wild type, most likely due to strong acclimation to carotenoid accumulation in the marsh grapefruit genotype. to validate the microarray data, a quantitative real-time pcr  experiment was performed on the three representative ecms and their wild types. a total of  <dig> genes were selected, and gene-specific primers were designed. linear regression analysis showed an overall correlation coefficient of r2 =  <dig>  between the qrt-pcr and microarray data, which confirmed that the microarray data were reliable .

mapman bin indicated that the three representative ecms had similar transcriptional responses to carotenoid accumulation . we further examined the differentially expressed genes that were annotated as being involved in stress, redox, hormone metabolism, and secondary metabolism; these groups represented the major transcriptional responses in the ecms. as shown in additional file  <dig>  many stress- and redox-response genes were up-regulated in the ecms. hormone metabolism genes for aba, auxin, ethylene, gibberellin, jasmonate , and salicylic acid  showed significantly higher transcription levels in the ecms than in the wild types. moreover, many genes involved in the synthesis of phenylpropanoids, alkaloids, wax, and simple phenols were up-regulated in the ecms, whereas the majority of the genes related to flavonoid/anthocyanin and isoprenoid synthesis were down-regulated. notably, a mapman bin for major cho metabolism contained one gene that encoded the α-amylase. this gene was up-regulated in the ecms compared with the wild types . this result was supported by qrt-pcr analysis and was in accordance with the consistently up-regulated transcriptional pattern of three α-amylase genes , and their significantly increased enzymatic activity, as shown by enzyme activity analysis .figure  <dig> 
the mapman bin of differentially expressed genes showed that three genotypes behaved similarly in their transcriptional patterns.  three representative ecms used in the microarray analysis. m- <dig>  rb- <dig>  and sbt- <dig> were the representative ecms of marsh grapefruit, star ruby grapefruit, and sunburst mandarin, respectively.  mapman bin of differentially expressed genes. genes up/down-regulated more than 2-fold  are collected in rb and sbt, and more than  <dig> -fold  are regarded as differentially expressed in m.
validation of the up-regulated transcriptional pattern of the α-amylase gene from microarray data via qrt-pcr and enzyme activity analysis.  up-regulated transcriptional pattern of cit. <dig> .s1_at in microarray data, and this gene was annotated as α-amylase gene.  qrt-pcr analysis of α-amylase genes in m, rb, and sbt. three α-amylase genes used for qrt-pcr analysis were from a previous report  <cit>  and the ncbi. amy, citrus sinensis alpha-amylase-like gene ; sd <dig>  α-amylase gene ; sd <dig>  α-amylase  <dig> gene . transcript levels are expressed relative to wt .  enzyme activity analysis of α-amylase in wild-type m and m- <dig>  α-amylase activity was expressed as mg maltose produced per gram tissue per minute. columns and bars represent the means and ± sd, respectively . **indicates that the values are significantly different compared with wild type at the significance level of p <  <dig> . m, rb, and sbt represent marsh grapefruit, star ruby grapefruit, and sunburst mandarin, respectively. m- <dig> represents the ecm line of marsh grapefruit.



furthermore, gene annotation revealed that in the three ecms, a significant number of up-regulated genes were annotated as encoding peroxidases , glutathione s-transferase , and hydroxyproline-rich glycoprotein family proteins. the down-regulated genes primarily encoded protein kinases, zinc finger family proteins, glycine-rich proteins, and senescence-related factors .

redox status was significantly altered in the ecms
pod, gst, hydroxyproline-rich glycoprotein family proteins, heat shock proteins, and universal stress protein  family proteins have often been regarded as important stress response factors in plants  <cit> . interestingly, our microarray showed that these stress-related genes, especially pods, were significantly induced in the ecms . prediction of subcellular localization and class of the differentially expressed pods suggested that they were extracellular class iii peroxidases . engineered carotenoid modification can disturb aba levels  <cit> , which could be associated with the stress and redox responses observed in the ecms. however, comparative analysis showed that, compared with the corresponding wild type, aba content was higher only in the rb ecm and not in the m and sbt ecms . furthermore, several differentially expressed genes from the microarray data were verified by rt-pcr analysis in the calli, these genes included wrky <dig>  a protease inhibitor gene, a hydroxyproline-rich glycoprotein family protein gene, and a usp family protein gene . previous reports have shown that these four investigated genes are induced by ros  <cit> . this information suggested the possibility that engineered carotenoid accumulation modified the ros levels in the ecms. therefore, we investigated the ros levels in the calli. nbt staining showed that superoxide radical  levels in the ecms were markedly reduced compared with the wild types . in contrast, hydrogen peroxide  levels showed an unexpected increase . this result corroborated the microarray data, which revealed that many stress- and redox-responsive genes were up-regulated; h2o <dig> has a signaling role in stress responses  <cit> .figure  <dig> 
determination of ros levels and the activities of related enzymes in calli. m- <dig>  and rb- <dig> represent the ecm lines of marsh grapefruit and star ruby grapefruit, respectively. wt represents wild-type calli.  o2
- is detected by histochemical staining with nbt. m and rb are shown as representatives for o2
- levels.  h2o <dig> determination is based on the titanium reagent method.  nox activity , sod activity  and cat activity  were analyzed in the m- <dig> and its wild-type control. the columns and bars represent the means and ± sd, respectively . **indicates that the values are significantly different compared with wild type at the significance level of p <  <dig> .



to further identify ros changes in the ecms, we used m- <dig> and its wild-type control to analyze the activities of ros-related enzymes, including nadph oxidase , which is requried for o2- production, as well as superoxide dismutase  and catalase , which are involved in h2o <dig> production and scavenging, respectively. as shown in figure 3c, nox activity was slightly elevated in m- <dig>  but the difference was statistically insignificant. similarly, no significant difference in sod activity was observed between m- <dig> and the wild-type control. it is noteworthy that cat activity was significantly lower in m- <dig> compared with the wild type.

carotenoid accumulation altered starch metabolism in ecms
the clear induction of the α-amylase genes and their elevated enzymatic activity  suggested a modification of starch metabolism in the ecms. this provided a key clue in explaining some of the phenomena observed in the ecms. for example, they generally have reduced dry weight , and their cytological profiles often showed fewer starch granules than the wild types . therefore, we investigated starch levels in the calli. compared with the corresponding wild types, the ecms had reduced starch content , which was consistent with the results of iodine staining . furthermore, we isolated the starch granules and noted that there are substantially more in the wild types than in the ecms . subsequent sem investigation demonstrated the absence of large starch granules in ecm cells . we also discovered that the ecms had higher soluble sugar  content in the ecms , which suggested a biochemical alteration of starch metabolism in the ecms.figure  <dig> 
comparison of starch accumulation between the ecms and wild-type calli.  light microscopic inspection of starch granule deposition in the callus cells. protoplasts from wild-type calli and representative ecms, respectively, are observed under a normal light field and a polarization microscope. the polarization microscope shows the characteristic birefringences of starch granules and carotenoid crystals, respectively.  starch content analysis. columns and bars represent the means and ± sd, respectively . **indicates that the values are significantly different compared with ecms at the significance level of p <  <dig> .  i2/ki staining analysis and isolation of starch granules for sem inspection. hqc is shown as a representative. the image in the lower left corner shows the yields of starch granules from equal weight of calli. hqc-wt and hqc- <dig> represent the ecm line and wild type, respectively. the right images show the starch granule morphology magnified  <dig> times via sem.



reduced starch content occurred in parallel with significant carotenoid accumulation in citrus
we generated transgenic plants by overexpressing 35s:: crtb in an early flowering citrus relative, hongkong kumquat . overexpression of the crtb gene led to orange pigmentation of the flower petals, roots, and other tissues , which demonstrated increased carotenoid accumulation. cellular inspection using light and electron microscopy revealed significant modifications of the plastids in the orange tissues, which led the preexisting plastids to show a chromoplast-like profile. for instance, in the wild-type tissues, amyloplasts were found in the flowers and dark-grown roots, etioplasts were found in dark-grown embryoids, and chloroplasts in old petioles and light-grown roots, and all of these plastids showed significant starch granule deposition . however, in the corresponding transgenic tissues, the plastids showed an entirely different morphology: abundant plastoglobules and crystal structures could be observed, but starch granules and thylakoid membranes were scarce . we also investigated the expression of genes related to starch metabolism in the roots. the results confirmed that α-amylase genes were significantly up-regulated in transgenic roots . these observations demonstrated that the reduction in starch occurred in parallel with significant carotenoid accumulation in citrus, and they also suggested that carotenoid accumulation could induce similar transcriptional perturbation in the roots and in citrus calli. moreover, six differentially expressed genes involved in stress and senescence that were identified in the microarray data from citrus calli were analyzed in the roots of the transgenic hongkong kumquat and in the wild-type control. qrt-pcr analysis demonstrated that five of six genes, including those encoding wrky <dig>  the usp family protein, the hydroxyproline-rich glycoprotein family protein, the senescence-related factor, and the plastocyanin-like domain-containing protein, showed significant transcriptional alterations in the carotenoid-rich roots compared with the wild-type control. importantly, the changes were consistent with those seen in the ecms .figure  <dig> 
phenotypes of transgenic and wild-type hongkong kumquats and cellular investigation.  two-year-old flowering hongkong kumquats .  phenotypes of flowers .  phenotype of senescent leaf .  nucellar seedlings under light-grown for  <dig> d .  frozen sectioning investigation of the petal, leafstalk, and root of the wild-type hongkong kumquat, respectively.  frozen sectioning investigation of the petal, leafstalk, and root of the transgenic hongkong kumquat, respectively.  ultrastructural inspection of the petal, leafstalk, and root of the wild-type hongkong kumquat, respectively.  ultrastructural inspection of petal, leafstalk, and root of the transgenic hongkong kumquat, respectively. s, starch granules; p, plastoglobules; th, thylakoids; c, carotenoid crystal and characteristic internal membrane. the bars represent 10 μm in light microscopy and represent 1 μm in transmission electron microscopy.



flavonoid/anthocyanin biosynthesis was negatively affected by carotenoid accumulation
in the ecms, transcriptional changes associated with secondary metabolism were obvious . in particular, the transcription of flavonoid/anthocyanin biosynthetic genes was repressed in the ecms. additionally, we tested the expression of chalcone synthase  and chalcone isomerase   in the roots of the transgenic hongkong kumquat and its control. qrt-pcr analysis showed that the chs and chi genes were both expressed at lower levels in the orange roots of the transgenic hongkong kumquats than in the wild-type control . these results suggested that carotenoids have a negative effect on flavonoid/anthocyanin accumulation. citrus embryogenic calli and roots are anthocyanin-free, making it difficult to investigate this phenotype in these tissues. to study this negative correlation, we established an apple ecm by engineering an anthocyanin-rich m. hupehensis callus using a 35s:: crtb construct. overexpression of the crtb gene led to a  <dig> -fold increase in total carotenoid levels in the apple ecm . abundant carotenoid accumulation could also be observed through cellular inspection, which showed that apple ecm cells formed many plastoglobules in the plastids, but that the plastids in the wild-type cells were filled with starch granules . notably, under visible light, the wild-type callus contained abundant anthocyanins, but the apple ecm showed minimal anthocyanin accumulation . additionally, qrt-pcr analysis of anthocyanin biosynthetic genes showed that they were repressed in the apple ecm . to further understand the negative effect of carotenoids on anthocyanin accumulation in the apple callus system, norflurazon  treatment was performed to block colored carotenoid accumulation. after a twenty-day culture with 10 μm norflurazon treatment under visible light, the apple ecm, which was initially yellow, turned red. anthocyanin analysis revealed that norflurazon treatment could partially rescue anthocyanin accumulation in apple ecm .figure  <dig> 
pigment accumulation in the transgenic
m. hupehensis
callus with overexpressive
crtb
gene.  left image shows the phenotypes of the m. hupehensis calli cultured under visible light condition; middle image is the western blotting confirmation of crtb protein, coomassie blue staining for loading control; right image displays the results of pigment  levels analysis, columns and bars represent the means and ± sd, respectively ; 35s:: crtb represents the apple ecm.  cytological investigation of m. hupehensis callus shows the amyloplasts in the wild-type cell, and the chromoplast-like structures in the ecm cell ; s, starch granule; p, plastoglobule; m, mitochondrion. bars represent 10 μm.  qrt-pcr analysis of anthocyanin related genes in the m. hupehensis calli. ufgt, uridine diphosphate -glucose: flavonoid 3-o-glycosyltransferase; ldox, leucoanthocyanidin dioxygenase; dfr1/ <dig>  dihydroflavonol 4-reductase 1/2; f3h, flavanone  <dig> β-hydroxylase; chi, chalcone isomerase; chs, chalcone synthase. columns and bars represent the means and ± sd, respectively . 35s:: crtb represents the light-cultured apple ecm; wt represents the light-cultured wild-type apple callus.  phenotypes and pigment analyses under norflurazon treatment for 20 days. the medium contained 10 μm norflurazon. columns and bars represent the means and ± sd, respectively . transcript levels are expressed relative to the apple ecm . * and ** indicate that the values are significantly different at the significance levels of p <  <dig>  and p <  <dig> , respectively.



discussion
the callus model system has provided a unique opportunity to investigate the effect of carotenoid metabolic engineering in plants  <cit> . using our previously constructed, carotenoid-engineered cell models in citrus  <cit> , we examined carotenoid-related biological processes. despite the genotypic diversity of the representative ecms, they had similar transcriptional patterns . our results revealed new aspects of carotenoid-induced redox modification, starch metabolism, and anthocyanin loss. the present discoveries of carotenoid-related biological processes also support previous studies of carotenoid-associatied plastid development and key metabolic modifications  <cit> .

altered carotenoid accumulation changed the redox status of ecms
transcriptomic data showed that pod and gst genes were significantly induced . additionally, genes involved in phenylpropanoid metabolism and hormone metabolism  were expressed at higher levels in the ecms than in the wild types . these transcriptional characteristics conferred a clear stress response pattern in the ecms, but this pattern could not be explained by aba levels . a previous study revealed that carotenoids can react with ros to suppress oxidative stress in arabidopsis leaves under high light  <cit> . in our study, o2- levels were markedly reduced in the ecms compared with the wild types, but nox and sod, which are required for o2- production and scavenging, respectively, showed insignificant changes in activity in the m- <dig> ecm . therefore, it was hypothesized that carotenoids participated in the elimination of o2- in the ecms. however, carotenoid accumulation did not lead to a similar decrease in h2o <dig> levels; instead, the ecms had more h2o <dig> than the wild types . this result provided an explanation for the up-regulated stress response in the ecms, as h2o <dig> plays an important signaling role in plant protection systems and could induce a transcriptional pattern similar to that found in the ecms  <cit> . this hypothesis was supported by qrt-pcr analysis of several ros-induced genes in the calli . increased h2o <dig> levels was an unexpected example of ros modification in the ecms. one possibility is that significant degradation of o2- enhanced h2o <dig> production in the ecms  <cit> . in addition, the reduction of cat activity in the m- <dig> ecm provided evidence of a weakened h2o <dig> scavenging system, which could lead to increased h2o <dig> levels  <cit> .

similar stress responses were also observed in other plant organs with altered carotenoid accumulation, such as in or transgenic potato and in red-fleshed mutant citrus fruits  <cit> . it is unclear if there is a common mechanism mediating the carotenoid-associated stress response in plants. recently, carotenoid oxidation products, such as β-cyclocitral, which is generated from the oxidation of β-carotene by singlet oxygen, have been shown to be signals mediating stress responses in arabidopsis  <cit> . thus, β-cyclocitral-associated stress response may exist in the ecms.

carotenoid accumulation mediated starch metabolism
our cytological and biochemical observations  reveal a very interesting correlation and suggest that carotenoids might regulate carbohydrate metabolism in plants. the discovery of this process clarifies the developmental processes associated with the nutritional and sensory qualities of agricultural products that accumulate carotenoids. carotenoid biosynthesis requires a carbohydrate supply for assembling the carotenoid molecular backbone. the plastids are the only organelles involved in carotenoid biosynthesis, and they are also the sites for sugar and starch carbohydrate metabolism  <cit> . thus, a feedback mechanism for maintaining a carbon supply for carotenogenesis could be involved in the correlation between carotenoid accumulation and starch degradation. this hypothesis is supported by a previous investigation that demonstrates a mutually exclusive relationship between carotenoid accumulation and starch deposition during the natural ripening processes of tobacco floral nectaries  <cit> .

in addition, by comparing plastids from white and red carrot roots, kim et al.  <cit>  suggested that carotenoid accumulation might act as a developmental signal directing plastid modification. carotenogenesis promoted by the overexpression of crtb or by light has been found to coincide with the differentiation of chromoplasts in carrot roots  <cit> . a recent study further suggests that the adaptation of plastid structures can facilitate the sequestration of the newly formed carotenoids  <cit> . in the present study, chromoplast-like profiles were observed in various tissues of the 35s:: crtb transgenic f. hindsii swingle, as well as in the ecms, as reported previously  <cit> . therefore, reduced starch content was presumably related to the plastid modification process induced by significant carotenoid accumulation in citrus. this interpretation provides a new perspective to understand the feedback mechanism of carotenogenesis. however, the up-regulation of α-amylase is in apparent contrast with the proteomic analysis of barsan et al.  <cit> , who showed that proteins involved in starch metabolism decrease in abundance during chromoplastogenesis. presumably, plastid modifications associated with engineered carotenoid accumulation might involve protein dynamics that differ from those of natural chromoplastogenesis in fruit. despite the high level of conservation of the chromoplast proteome in the ripening fruits of sweet orange and tomato  <cit> , the plastids in the flower petals, roots, embryoids, petioles, and callus systems of citrus are never involved in chromoplastogenesis during natural developmental processes, and they are distinct from those in citrus and tomato fruits. additionally, engineered carotenoid accumulation could alter the redox status of ecms, and this observation suggested that redox-regulated starch degradation occurred in the engineered carotenoid-rich tissues  <cit> . further studies are required to identify the direct causal link between carotenoid accumulation and starch reducation.

carotenoid accumulation negatively regulates anthocyanin biosynthesis
carotenoids and anthocyanins are both biological pigments and can co-exist in plant tissues. however, there is little to no anthocyanin accumulation in some carotenoid-rich tissues  <cit> . this phenomenon is not absolute, but it seems to be prevalent in nature. for example, the ripening flesh of tomatoes and apricots accumulates abundant carotenoids but has little to no anthocyanins  <cit> . in addition, the negative correlation between the accumulation of carotenoids and anthocyanins was observed in the peels of five apple genotypes  <cit> . although carotenoids and anthocyanins show diverse molecular structures and biosynthetic pathways, they perform similar biological functions, including acting as antioxidants, and as attractants for pollinators  <cit> . perhaps, the alternative accumulation of pigments represents an evolutionary mechanism to escape functional redundancy. however, to date, there is no evidence supporting this hypothetic evolutionary mechanism. our present study found many down-regulated flavonoid/anthocyanin genes in ecms. this phenomenon was also observed in the carotenoid-rich roots of transgenic 35s:: crtb f. hindsii swingle. these results suggested a potential effect of carotenoids on anthocyanin biosynthesis. furthermore, we utilized an apple ecm overexpressing the crtb gene to confirm the negative effect of carotenoid accumulation on anthocyanin biosynthesis.

compared with the wild type control, the carotenoid-rich apple ecm had minimal anthocyanin accumulation. additionally, norflurazon could partially rescue anthocyanin accumulation in the apple ecm. these results supported the transcriptional data from citrus, indicating a possible negative effect of carotenoids, and especially colored carotenoids, on anthocyanin accumulation. however, it is known that norflurazon treatment can not only inhibit colored carotenoid biosynthesis, but also alter ros signaling  <cit> . therefore, norflurazon treatment analysis also raised a question about the role of redox state in the correlation between carotenoids and anthocyanins. anthocyanin accumulation is regarded as a positive response to oxidative stress  <cit> . the accumulation of carotenoids and their related structures, plastoglobules, may provide a more effective approach than anthocyanin accumulation to suppress oxidation. this interpretation is supported by previous studies showing that increasing levels of xanthophylls or plastoglobules could enhance the photooxidative tolerance and reduce anthocyanin accumulation in arabidopsis and apple leaves  <cit> . moreover, a recent study has probed into anthocyanin biosynthesis with an early redox signaling control upstream of the known transcription factors  <cit> . qrt-pcr analysis revealed that most the anthocyanin biosynthetic genes were consistently suppressed in the apple ecm, which suggested that there is significant transcriptional regulation involved in the negative effect of carotenoid accumulation on anthocyanin biosynthesis. however, the redox signaling-based regulatory mechanism that could mediate the link between carotenoid accumulation and anthocyanin biosynthesis is still unclear and requires further study. in addition, in strawberry fruit, competitive regulation via the peroxidase faprx <dig> has recently been proposed; faprx <dig> diverts phenolic flux from anthocyanins to lignin  <cit> . the existence of such competitive regulation in the apple ecm warrants future study.

CONCLUSIONS
our studies on the transcriptional patterns of citrus calli linked carotenoid accumulation with redox state, starch metabolism, and flavonoid/anthocyanin accumulation. the existence of these physiological processes was further elucidated using biochemical and cytological analyses, as well as genetic manipulation of carotenoid biosynthesis in citrus calli, f. hindsii swingle, and m. hupehensis calli. our findings provide a new perspective on the complexity of carotenoid accumulation and its associated biological processes. for example, we confirmed that significant carotenoid accumulation could induce starch degradation in callus systems and in tissues such as flower petals and roots. the data generated from these model systems provide important information that could promote the understanding of starch metabolism and carotenoid accumulation during the ripening process in other plant systems. equally importantly, our discoveries have significant implications for carotenoid metabolic engineering by providing the knowledge needed to give close consideration to a wider range of characteristics, such as plant resistance and systematic metabolic modification. in particular, the decreased anthocyanin levels associated with carotenoid accumulation should be avoided in carotenoid metabolic engineered plants. anthocyanins are an important source of hydrophilic dietary antioxidants, and fruits and vegetables rich in both soluble and lipophilic antioxidants are considered to offer the best health protection  <cit> .

