BACKGROUND
new zealand coastal zones contain an abundant population of the native sea urchin species evechinus chloroticus, locally known by the maori name, kina. it is the type member of its genus, but there has been little molecular analysis performed on this species to date. sea urchin roe  is a highly valued food product internationally, with the largest demand coming from japan where the roe, locally known as “uni”, is used for sushi. the demand for sea urchin roe has grown as japanese food increases in popularity in the north american food industry  <cit> . sea urchin roe is considered a high quality food product with the price greatly influenced by factors such as appearance, colour, texture, and flavour  <cit> . e. chloroticus is fished off the coasts of new zealand both commercially and recreationally for its roe. the reported commercial catch of e. chloroticus for  <dig> was  <dig>  kilograms, mainly obtained off the south coast  <cit> . the majority of e. chloroticus roe is sold in new zealand as a local delicacy, with some exports sent to australia  <cit> .

there has been research interest in enhancing the quality and yield of e. chloroticus roe to increase the return value for the domestic market. this would also potentially create opportunities for exportation to overseas markets that demand specific qualities in roe  <cit> . although most assessments of sea urchin roe quality have previously been on physical differences, recent studies sought to identify protein and metabolite differences contributing to variation in quality for e. chloroticus roe, specifically to variations in colour  <cit> . it was hypothesised from the results that binding proteins targeting carotenoid molecules, the major source of pigmentation in roe, might affect colour. efforts have thus been made to identify carotenoid binding proteins in the roe  <cit> . despite the research interest in e. chloroticus, very little genetic information was available for this species in public databases. there was an opportunity to develop genetic data for e. chloroticus, which would facilitate a genomic based analysis. for this purpose, we conducted a whole transcriptome sequencing project aiming to characterise transcripts from various tissues. this would provide a source of genetic information to aid current and future research involving e. chloroticus.

as well as a valued food product, sea urchins have long been used as a model organism in areas such as developmental and systems biology. their importance as a research model system for modern molecular, evolutionary, and cell biology led to the genome sequencing project for the sea urchin species strongylocentrotus purpuratus <cit> . the genome was estimated to encode around  <dig>  genes, and was shown to share many pathways with humans including orthologs to human disease genes. also discovered was the lack of an adaptive immune system, and instead the possession of a large innate immune system that contained a diverse range of pathogen-binding motifs  <cit> . the many innate immune proteins encoded in the sea urchin genome are considered a valuable resource for antimicrobial applications and for furthering our understanding of the human innate immune system  <cit> . gene structure in the s. purpuratus genome has subsequently been further defined by transcriptome analysis  <cit> , but aside from s. purpuratus there is little genomic data available for any other sea urchin species from public databases. genomic data produced for the e. chloroticus species would be a novel resource in addition to the s. purpuratus data for any research involving the sea urchin as a model system.

e. chloroticus is currently placed as the single species of its genus evechinus under the echinometridae family of sea urchins, which belong to the marine phylum echinodermata. the echinometridae family includes species that are geographically close to e. chloroticus such as heliocidaris located off the south coast of australia and echinometra located in the indo-west pacific and pacific to atlantic oceans. the echinometridae family had recently been placed in a superfamily called odontophora with the strongylocentrotidae and toxopneustidae families based phylogenetic and morphological data  <cit> . the placement of e. chloroticus with the echinometridae species had been based on morphological evidence and was described as morphologically close to species from the heliocidaris genus, specifically h. tuberculata <cit> . the genus evechinus, the following history of which was described by mcrae   <cit> , was first placed in the echinidae family by h. l. clark  who later  shifted evechinus and heliocidaris to the strongylocentrodidae family based on the polyporus ambulacral plates and circular ambitus of heliocidaris, and the larval specialisation and the pedicellariae of evechinus. their placement was later contended by mortensen  who moved the genera to their current family echinometridae based on the strongly developed single lateral tooth of the gemmiform pedicellariae, the paired nature of the poison glands, and the structure of the larval forms  <cit> . the established relationships of e. chloroticus to other sea urchin species has been based solely on morphological evidence, and has yet to be analysed at a genomic level. obtaining transcriptome data would provide an opportunity to compare the sequence similarity of e. chloroticus genes to other sea urchins species and infer new information about its phylogenetic relationships.

here we describe the extraction of rna from multiple tissue types of e. chloroticus followed by their sequencing using next generation sequence  technology. transcripts were reconstructed by de novo assembly and annotated by sequence similarity to public protein databases to provide a set of transcripts along with functional annotations. lastly, we describe the relationship of e. chloroticus to other sea urchin species based on the sequence similarity of selected genes.

RESULTS
sequencing and quality control
libraries  were constructed using rna extracted from selected tissue samples from a male and female e. chloroticus. these animals were taken from doubtful sound, fiordland, new zealand, and housed feeding on kelp at the new zealand marine studies centre, portobello, dunedin, for  <dig> years. tissues used for sequencing included the roe, muscle, gut tissue, water vascular system and also a sample of the coelomic fluid. samples were harvested, snap frozen and total rna extracted using a rnaeasy kit with a qiagen® shredder. equal amounts of total rna from each tissue sample were combined to give the mixed rna sample. rna from an individual male and female, consisting of a mixed total tissue sample, a roe tissue sample and a coelomic fluid sample, were used to generate six libraries.

sequencing was carried out on an illumina hiseq- <dig> machine, which generated  <dig> million pairs of  <dig> base length paired-end reads . the raw sequence data in fastq format was submitted to the national centre for biotechnology information  sequence read archive  database and accessible through the bioproject . quality control was carried out on the raw reads prior to assembly. this involved the removal of adapter sequences, trimming of low quality bases  from both ends of reads and discarding reads less than  <dig> bases in length. reads from potential contaminating species were also removed. quality control resulted in a total of  <dig> , <dig> high quality reads  with  <dig> % remaining paired-end. these reads were then used for transcript assembly.

de novo assembly
the de novo assembly of the quality processed reads using the trinity assembly program resulted in  <dig>  transcript isoforms. reads used in the assembly were aligned to the assembled transcripts and lowly represented isoform sequences with less than 1% of their gene  reads were removed resulting in  <dig>  transcripts. this represents the total set of transcripts from the assembly. transcripts had a total length of  <dig> ,629 bp  with a median length of 415 bp, mean length of 912 bp, gc% of  <dig> , and a n <dig> of  <dig>  bp . a large proportion of the transcripts were short and had a low number of mapped reads. to generate an additional subset transcripts with low coverage were filtered using a minimum fpkm  value of  <dig> , which resulted in a reduced set of  <dig>  transcripts. this fpkm of  <dig>  corresponded to a minimum of  <dig> reads per kilobase of transcript, which equated to an average base coverage of approximately  <dig> . removing the low abundance transcripts doubled the median length to  <dig> . the main reason for producing a reduced set was for use in the annotation step, shorter transcripts were less likely to be protein coding and able to be annotated, also transcripts less than 200 bp in length cannot be submitted to the ncbi transcriptome shotgun assembly database . transcripts in the reduced set had a total length of  <dig> ,820 bp  with a median length of 923 bp, mean length of  <dig>  bp, gc% of  <dig> , and a n <dig> of  <dig>  bp . the length distribution of transcripts for the total and reduced sets is shown in figure  <dig>  as seen in the graph the large reduction in transcripts between the sets after abundance filtering relates to a large removal of short transcripts between  <dig> to  <dig> bases in length. transcripts were submitted to the ncbi tsa database . the set of reads used for the assembly was aligned to the total and reduced transcript sets for read representation . out of 118 m total reads,  <dig> % of the reads mapped to the transcripts in the total transcript set and  <dig> % mapped to the reduced set. this showed that the  <dig>  transcripts removed from the total set represented only 1% of the total reads.

the completeness of the assembly was assessed by two means, the reconstruction of transcripts with full-length proteins and the representation of core conserved genes. to assess the reconstruction of full-length proteins, the  <dig>  transcripts were scanned for possible open reading frames . a total of  <dig>  coded proteins were predicted and tested for similarity to s. purpuratus proteins, available from the ncbi protein database, using blastp with a cut-off e-value of 10- <dig>  a total of  <dig>  of the predicted e. chloroticus proteins matched to  <dig>  unique s. purpuratus proteins. for each unique s. purpuratus protein the length coverage was calculated using the best matching e. chloroticus protein and the distribution of percent length coverage is shown in figure  <dig>  for the s. purpuratus proteins,  <dig>   had a match to an e. chloroticus protein with >90% alignment coverage. this shows that a majority of these proteins were near full-length. the eukaryotic clusters of orthologous groups  from the clusters of orthologous groups  represents a database of protein sequences with conserved domains between eukaryotes. the cegma  program was used to assess the representation of core eukaryotic proteins in the transcript set. cegma uses a representative set of  <dig> core eukaryotic genes  that are highly conserved between eukaryotic species. a total of  <dig> of the  <dig> cegs had a match to a transcript in the reduced set. cegma also reports on a subset of  <dig> most highly conserved cegs as a measurement of genome completeness. out of the subset of  <dig> cegs there were matches to  <dig> with  <dig> being ‘complete’  and only  <dig> being partial. this showed the transcriptome assembly was able to successfully assemble a majority of transcripts for core eukaryotic genes.

functional annotation
functional annotation was carried out on the reduced set of  <dig>  transcripts. blastx searches were performed for each transcript against the ncbi non-redundant protein database and for each result the top  <dig> hits with e-values less than 10- <dig> were saved. a total of  <dig>  of the  <dig>  transcripts  had a blastx match to a known protein within the database . the  <dig>  transcripts  without a blastx result were mostly shorter length sequences  that likely do not have a protein coding sequence. however, included in this group though will be transcripts that code for novel proteins without any similar sequence in the database, as well as polyadenylated non-coding rnas.

the distribution of e-values for the top hits showed that 72% of transcripts had a strong match to a database protein  . the species distribution for the top hits showed 85% of top hits to proteins from s. purpuratus . previous research on s. purpuratus, including the genome sequencing project, has provided a set of annotated proteins for this sea urchin species. this resource provided the majority of best annotations for the e. chloroticus transcripts. the next species most represented in the top hits at 2% was saccoglossus kowalevskii. s. kowalevskii is a species of acorn worm, which are closely related to members of the echinodermata phylum  <cit> . out of the  <dig> transcripts with protein top hits to s. kowalevskii, most appeared to have less significant matches to s. purpuratus. the relatively large proportion of s. kowalevskii top hits could be due to longer, more complete protein sequence available for s. kowalevskii over s. purpuratus for those transcripts. the proportion of others  represented all other specific species with top hits to less than 1% of the transcripts and of these  <dig> transcripts had ‘unknown’ species as their top hit.

the most abundant transcripts within different samples were assessed. reads were aligned to transcripts to generate fpkm values at a gene level for male roe, female roe, male coelomic fluid and female coelomic fluid samples. the top  <dig> transcripts with highest fpkm values for each sample can be seen in additional file  <dig>  the expression levels of each unique top transcript were compared across each sample by taking the log <dig> of the fpkm and clustered based on euclidean distance. the heatmap produced with these values  showed groups of transcripts where the abundance related to sample type, sex, or both. the most abundant transcripts from coelomic fluid cells were mostly ribosomal proteins, which were found to be relatively expressed less in the roe. there was a similar expression of transcripts from the coelomic fluid between male and female. ferritin was expressed higher in cells from the coelomic fluid compared to the roe and also higher in the male samples compared to the female samples. several transcripts were similarly expressed at high levels across all samples, which included essential proteins such as cytochrome b and c, nadh and a senescence-associated protein. transcripts that were specifically abundant in the male roe included sperm production related proteins, such as the sperm flagellar membrane, flagellasialin precursor and creatine flagellar-like proteins. levels of tubulin proteins were also higher in male roe. cell replication related proteins such as histone, cyclin and ribonucleoside-diphosphate reductase were higher in roe samples than coelomic fluids. female roe specifically had higher levels of these transcripts compared to male.

the number of transcripts with a blastx match  was similar to the number of predicted proteins . a large portion of the transcripts  remained without a significant blastx match. to analyse these transcripts further we assessed the representation of repeated sequences. both the reduced set of transcripts and the unannotated set without a blastx match were analysed using the repeatmasker program with the latest repbase database to identify repeating elements. the summary of repeatmasker results  shows repeating elements that were detected, which included a number of different retroelements and dna transposons. when these results were compared to that for the s. purpuratus genome, obtained from the repeatmasker site, there were a lot of similarities in the relative counts for repeating elements. sines represented the majority of retroelements for e. chloroticus, in s. purpuratus the majority of retroelements were trna-related sines. the most represented lines for e. chloroticus were the l2/cr1/rex, the l <dig> was the most represented for s. purpuratus. for the ltr elements the gypsy/dirs <dig> were the most represented for both. the most represented dna transposon for both was piggybac, which in s. purpuratus is the most abundant repeating element taking up 31% of total repeated sequence . there were a small number of ncrna fragments that corresponded mainly to rrna. the results for the reduced set of transcripts were compared to results from the unannotated set using the percentage of sequence values for relative levels of element abundance. retroelements were slightly less abundant in the unannotated set  when compared to the reduced set , which was likely due to coded reverse transcriptases annotated by blastx. there was a large decrease in lines  and ltrs  in the unannotated set, but an increase in sine elements . comparing the abundance of dna transposons there was an increase in the unannotated set , which mostly corresponded with the increase in piggybac . overall, there was only a small increase in the proportion of total interspersed repeats between the reduced set  and the unannotated set .

the redundancy of unannotated transcripts was assessed by clustering transcripts based on 90% or more sequence similarity. out of  <dig>  transcripts, this resulted in  <dig>  clusters of non-redundant transcripts. the proportion of nucleotide sequence matches to the unannotated transcripts was assessed by using blastn to search against the ncbi non-redundant nucleotide database with a cut-off e-value of 10- <dig>  only  <dig>   transcripts had a match to a database nucleotide sequence. these results for the unannotated transcripts showed that a large number of transcripts in the reduced set contained novel sequence without a protein or nucleotide match to the ncbi non-redundant databases. these transcripts are not due to overly redundant sequences or an increased proportion of repeated sequence.

there are challenges to providing a complete annotation of transcripts from a de novo assembly. high-throughput annotation approaches such as multiple blast searches provide a practical means to giving automated annotations to transcriptome datasets, but the broad nature of this search is limited by the detail and sensitivity of the annotation. from the proportion of unannotated e. chloroticus transcripts there will be biologically important transcripts that could not be annotated by this approach.

as an example we looked to identify a non-coding transcript for telomerase rna. telomerase rna is a non-coding rna that together with the telomerase reverse transcriptase protein forms a ribonucleoprotein enzyme that is essential for synthesising the telomeric dna repeats at the ends of chromosomes  <cit> . the first invertebrate telomerase rna sequence was recently identified using a targeted strategy in s. purpuratus <cit> , which gave an opportunity to attempt to identify this transcript in e. chloroticus. a blastn search using the 535 bp telomerase rna sequence from s. purpuratus identified an unannotated 520 bp transcript from e. chloroticus with an e-value of less than 10- <dig>  the e. chloroticus and s. purpuratus sequences were aligned and conserved domains identified . the e. chloroticus sequence showed close similarity to the s. purpuratus sequence with 76% identity. the universal template-pseudoknot domain and the vertebrate specific h/aca domain could be identified. however, while the box h and cab box could be identified, the terminal box aca motif was not covered, suggesting that the end of the e. chloroticus assembly was truncated. while a number of transcripts could not be annotated with multiple blastx/blastn searches, this unannotated set still contains biologically important transcripts, such as the telomerase rna, that can be discovered through such a detailed search.

gene ontology  annotation
gene ontology  terms were assigned to transcripts through blast2go. all go terms associated with the blastx matches were retrieved and mapped to each transcript. scores were computed for each go term and the most specific terms used to annotate the transcript. out of the  <dig>  transcripts with blastx results,  <dig>  transcripts had go mapping results with  <dig>  receiving go annotations. additional go terms could be annotated to transcripts using interpro protein domains assigned through interproscan. an additional  <dig> transcripts with no blastx result received go annotations through associated protein domains . the top most represented go terms for each of the three go categories, molecular function, biological process and cellular component, are shown in figure  <dig>  the top represented go terms for molecular function were from binding domains; protein binding  followed by zinc ion binding  and atp binding . for biological process, the top go terms were signal transduction  followed by oxidation-reduction process  and transmembrane transport . for cellular component, the top go terms were cytoplasm  followed by integral to membrane  and cytosol .

interpro annotation
interproscan was used to search with the longest orf from each transcript against the interpro database, an integrated database of protein domains and functional sites. this provided additional annotation based on conserved structural domains;  <dig>  transcripts received interpro annotation. additional go terms could be retrieved from the interproscan results and merged with existing go annotations,  <dig>  transcripts had go terms associated with interpro results. the most represented features  were signal peptide cleavage sites  and the transmembrane helix domains , followed by the p-loop containing nucleotide triphosphate hydrolases superfamily . the next highest represented was the immunoglobulin-like fold  and the reverse transcriptases family . the genome sequencing of s. purpuratus revealed that sea urchins have a large innate immune system with many pathogen recognition genes, providing an opportunity to use the sea urchin model in areas of evolutionary immunobiology  <cit> . the toll-like receptor family has expanded in sea urchins; the s. purpuratus genome contains  <dig> toll-like receptors , whereas the human genome contains only  <dig>  there were  <dig> matches within the e. chloroticus transcripts to a toll-like receptor domain, and proteins from these toll-like receptor transcripts were predicted to be mostly full length . this new transcript data will be useful in studies on the sea urchin immune system.

ec and kegg orthology annotations
using the annotated go terms associated ec  numbers could be assigned to the transcripts. a total of  <dig>  transcripts were assigned  <dig>  unique ec numbers, which were across  <dig> different kegg pathways; the top represented pathways are shown in figure  <dig>  the top  <dig> pathways were related to metabolism; the most represented was the purine metabolism pathway with  <dig> transcripts across  <dig> enzymes, followed by pyrimidine metabolism with  <dig> transcripts across  <dig> enzymes and glutathione metabolism with  <dig> transcripts across  <dig> enzymes. the transcripts were also analysed using the kegg automatic annotation server  to provide annotations of kegg orthology  codes, resulting in  <dig>  transcripts being annotated to  <dig>  unique kos. the most represented kos are shown in figure  <dig> 

phylogenetic analysis
previously, the phylogenetic relationship of e. chloroticus to other sea urchin species had not been analysed. the genetic data produced from this study allowed a first look at the phylogenetic relationship of e. chloroticus to other members of its family. there are few molecular studies on the phylogeny of the echinometridae family. a study by kinjo et al.,   <cit>  used the mitochondrial dna phylogeny of echinometridae to deduce the evolutionary history of their larval skeletal morphology. they compared the mitochondrial nadh dehydrogenase genes nd <dig> and nd <dig> of  <dig> echinometridae species that represented a majority of the genera. they constructed phylogenetic trees for the nd <dig>  nd <dig> and nd1-nd <dig> combined sequences using neighbour-joining , maximum-likelihood  and maximum parsimony methods. using the combination of the slower mutagenic nd <dig> and faster mutagenic nd <dig>  their nd1-nd <dig> phylogenetic tree grouped each genus into a monophyletic clade and grouped the echinometridae species together from two outgroup species, which were from the two sister families strongylocentrotidae and toxopneustidae. groupings also formed between different genera giving insight into the relationships within the echinometridae family. to analyse the relationship of e. chloroticus to other echinometridae species the sequence data from the study by kinjo et al.,  for the nd <dig> and nd <dig> mitochondrial genes was used for a phylogenetic analysis with the addition of the e. chloroticus genes. phylogenetic trees were constructed for the nd <dig>  nd <dig>  and nd1-nd <dig> combined sequences using nj, ml and bayesian inference  methods  with supporting values of bootstrap percentages.

the resulting trees were very consistent with those from kinjo et al., . the nd1-nd <dig> trees  supported the monophyly of each genus and the relationships between genera reported in kinjo et al.,  were represented in these trees. the grouping of all echinometridae species into a single clade from the two outgroup species was not supported for the ml tree, but was achieved with low support for the nj tree and higher support for the bayes tree. analysing the placement of e. chloroticus in the nd1-nd <dig> trees, e. chloroticus did not form any clades with any of the other echinometridae species. the ml tree placed e. chloroticus in the same position as the outgroup species s. purpuratus, separate from the echinometridae clades formed. the nj tree placed e. chloroticus outside of the echinometridae family clade and in a clade with s. purpuratus. the bayes tree, which had the highest supporting values for each echinometridae clade, placed e. chloroticus outside of a highly supported family level clade for echinometridae. these results showed e. chloroticus is phylogenetically distinct from the other species of its family.

kinjo et al.  described nd <dig> as having higher rates of mutation compared to other mitochondrial genes and therefore useful for determining close relationships between species. the nd <dig> had a slower rate of mutation and was described as being useful for determining distant relationships. in the separate nd <dig> trees  e. chloroticus was placed in the same positions as in the nd1-nd <dig> trees. the nd <dig> sequence has therefore been significant in constructing the nd1-nd <dig> trees and the faster mutating gene could not determine any relationships between e. chloroticus and the other echinometridae. in the nd <dig> trees  e. chloroticus was placed in a clade with the two genera clades for heliocidaris and echinostrephus with low support in the ml tree and higher support in the bayes tree. the bayes tree though unexpectedly placed s. purpuratus as a sister to one of the echinometra clades. this result may have been the ability of the nd <dig> gene to detect distant relationships as these species belonged to the same superfamily. the results from the nd <dig> ml and bayes trees suggested a distant relationship between e. chloroticus and the heliocidaris and echinostrephus genera.

the results of the phylogenetic comparison of these two mitochondrial genes showed e. chloroticus as a distinct species that had significant genetic difference to other species of its family. this greater difference in genetic sequence in e. chloroticus compared with that of other echinometridae species may be attributed to the fact that e. chloroticus had lived in isolation, solely around the coasts of new zealand, for millions of years since its speciation  <cit> . the geographical isolation of e. chloroticus would have prevented genetic exchange through fertilisation with other echinometridae. mutations over time would cause genetic differences to build up within the e. chloroticus species, and due to its isolation they would remain unique, unable to be shared with other echinometridae. this could have led to the early speciation of e. chloroticus. the other species of echinometridae remained in contact longer and could have taken longer to speciate and become genetically different from each other through unique mutations. the earlier speciation of e. chloroticus would explain the greater number of genetic differences in its gene sequences compared to other echinometridae species, which led to its distinct place in the phylogenetic trees. although separated, e. chloroticus remained morphologically similar to other echinometridae species. this could be due to the similar environments the species share, specifically with the heliocidaris species off the southern coasts of australia, and there had not been pressures for greater morphological difference. e. chloroticus therefore had remained morphologically similar to species within its family, but had become significantly different phylogenetically due to its early separation and long period of isolation around new zealand. a comprehensive phylogenetic analysis of the echinometridae family is limited by the range of species for which genomic data is available. such a study would be valuable in uncovering the distant relationships between species within this family and to predict the time of the geographical isolation of e. chloroticus.

CONCLUSIONS
we report the first genome wide dataset for the new zealand sea urchin species e. chloroticus. high-throughput sequencing of rna extracted from multiple tissue samples followed by de novo transcriptome assembly has produced a dataset of  <dig>  transcripts for e. chloroticus. a total of  <dig>  transcripts had a significant protein match to the ncbi non-redundant database. transcripts were annotated with go terms, interpro domains and ko terms to provide additional functional information. this new data allowed the first phylogenetic analysis of e. chloroticus to other species of its family echinometridae. comparison of nd <dig> and nd <dig> sequence revealed e. chloroticus as being genetically distinct from its family, as it did not form any strong clades with other family members and remained outside of family level clades. there is an opportunity to further analyse the phylogenetic relationship of e. chloroticus to other sea urchin species and uncover its evolutionary history. this transcriptome data will provide a valuable resource of genomic information for this unique sea urchin species for studies either looking to improve the commercialisation of e. chloroticus or using the sea urchin as a model system. additional datafiles including transcript datasets and functional annotation data are available from the project site: http://mrna.otago.ac.nz/kina/.

