BACKGROUND
polyadenylation is a crucial step during the maturation of pre-messenger rnas  in eukaryotes. with a few exceptions , protein coding transcripts are cleaved at their 3′ ends and subsequently polyadenylated, resulting in a characteristic poly tail  <cit> . while 3′-end processing takes place in nucleus, it has profound effects on gene expression regulation, including transcription termination, terminal intron removal, mrna export, translation initiation, and mrna stability  <cit> . as one of the key regulated steps in mrna maturation, improper cleavage and polyadenylation is often associated with expression defects and lead to human diseases  <cit> .

3′-end formation of nascent transcripts is mediated by a large multi-protein complex, which in human constitutes of more than  <dig> proteins  <cit> . several key subunits of this large complex has been characterized, including the cleavage and polyadenylation specificity factor , cleave stimulation factor , cleavage factor i and ii , and poly polymerase   <cit> . in mammals, recruitment of the 3′-end processing complex to pre-mrnas is mediated by a bipartite sequence element: cpsf interacts with a conserved aauaaa or auuaaa upstream motif, while cstf recognizes an u- or gu-rich downstream sequence element . other factors  are subsequently recruited to form a functional 3′-end processing complex. furthermore, additional sequences upstream  and/or downstream of the core elements may also play an auxiliary role in complex assembly and 3′-end formation  <cit> . lastly, it has been shown that nucleosomes are preferentially depleted at the polyadenylation sites , implying that nucleosome position might be involved in defining authentic 3′-end formation  <cit> .

polyadenylation is a highly regulated event and alternative polyadenylation  is one of the major contributors of transcriptome diversity  <cit> . earlier estimation suggested that approximately half of human and mouse transcripts  harbor multiple poly sites, leading to heterogeneous 3′ end formation  <cit> . a more recent survey showed that up to 80% of the human genes exhibit tissue-specific variants resulting from tandem 3′ untranslated region  events  <cit> . emerging evidence suggests that apa is coordinated with other regulatory events  to ensure robust tissue- or cell-specific gene expression  <cit> . 3′ utr length also plays a critical role in cell differentiation, proliferation and human diseases  <cit> .

global understanding of polyadenylation events in vertebrates has come primarily from cdnas and expressed sequence tags  <cit> . several genome-wide approaches have been recently developed based on tilling array  <cit>  and sequencing based approaches  <cit> . here, we present a modified polyadenylation sequencing or pa-seq strategy, allowing for precise identification of polyadenylation site at the genome scale in a cost-effective manner. by monitoring polyadenylation profiles of  <dig> human tissues, tissue-specific apa signatures were identified. in addition, noncoding transcripts, similar to protein-coding genes, are extensively regulated at the polyadenylation level. lastly, we showed distinct patterns of 3′ utr shortening/lengthening among different tissues, suggesting that apa may play a critical role in establishing tissue or cell identity. together, the pa-seq strategy provided a comprehensive polyadenylation landscape of human transcripts across diverse tissues. it can be broadly employed to monitor polyadenylation profiles of eukaryotic transcriptomes.

RESULTS
a paired-end sequencing strategy to map global polyadenylation sites
to reliably monitor genome-wide polyadenylation events, we developed a modified polyadenylation sequencing strategy or pa-seq . briefly, total rna is fragmented and reverse transcribed with a modified oligo primer, which contains a dual biotin group at the 5′ end and a dutp at a fixed location . after second strand synthesis, the resulting cdna fragments are captured using streptavidin-coupled magnetic beads. uracil-specific excision reagent , which recognizes and specially cleaves at the modified base , is then used to release the cdna fragments from beads. the resulting products are further ligated with barcoded illumina paired-end adaptors, followed by low-cycle amplification and illumina sequencing. notably, the user cleavage removes the long poly stretch in cdnas, therefore eliminating the potential complication due to these low complexity sequences. lastly, the built-in strand specificity also allows for reliable detection of pa sites at complex genomic loci .

pa-seq was employed to monitor polyadenylation profiles of  <dig> human tissues, including fetal and adult brains, breast, colon, heart, kidney, liver, lung, pancreas, prostate, skeletal muscle, spleen and testis. we obtained ~ <dig> million paired 51-mer reads. of them, 78%  of the read pairs can be uniquely mapped to the reference genome . another 7% of reads were mapped to multiple genomic locations, possibly due to repetitive regions in the human genome. for downstream data analyses, we focused on polyadenylation cleavage sites derived from uniquely mapped sequencing pairs.

as the initial assessment of pa-seq data, we interrogated the relative location of experimentally identified pa sites  in respect to polya_db annotations  <cit> . in terms of coverage, ~60% of all pa sites in the polya_db have concordant reads observed in our data set . an additional 18% of polya_db sites are within 5nt of our pa-seq data . conversely, more than 60% of all uniquely mapped pairs are consistent with pa sites annotated in polya_db . we also compared the distance between pa-seq data and refseq annotation, which showed similar concordant results . non-redundant read pairs were also used to avoid potential biases for highly expressed genes or due to polymerase chain reaction  artifacts. while known pa sites remained as the dominant category, distal pa sites became more prominent , suggesting that novel pa sites remained to be identified. a representative genomic region with four genes showed that the majority of the reads overlapped with the annotated pa sites . together, these results strongly suggested that pa-seq is a reliable approach for direct monitoring of genome-wide polyadenylation events.

to examine whether the pa-seq results reflect relative gene expression level, the tag counts of individual genes were compared with the available microarray-based expression datasets of the same tissue origin. with minimal normalization of both the array and the sequence data, pa-seq and array expression profiles were considerably correlated . this result was comparable with the correlation observed between typical rna sequencing  and array-based methods  <cit> . pa-seq expression profile was also correlated with rna-seq . therefore, the read count generated with the pa-seq approach can potentially be used to reflect transcript abundance.

prevalent apa in protein-coding and noncoding transcripts
next, we applied f-seq, a feature density estimator  <cit> , to compute pa cluster based on uniquely mapped read pairs. the pa-seq data from  <dig> tissues were combined so that a unified peak-calling scheme can be applied. to filter out any potential nonspecific priming events, we removed pa clusters with  <dig> or more ‘a’ in the  <dig> nt region downstream of peak mode . with a minimum of  <dig> tags,  <dig>  discrete pa clusters were identified, which cover  <dig>  coding genes and  <dig>  non-coding rnas  based on refseq annotation. overall, there are  <dig>  pa clusters within the protein-coding loci, of which 38% have two or more pa clusters . consistent with a previous estimation  <cit> , each coding gene has on average  <dig>  pa clusters. in addition, we identified  <dig>  pa clusters covering  <dig>  annotated ncrnas , and 35% ncrnas have two or more pa clusters . these results strongly indicated that ncrnas, similar to the coding transcripts, are extensively regulated by alternative polyadenylation. the rest of the pa clusters  are distant  from any annotated regions. although some of them might represent distant pa sites of known genes, others are likely derived from novel transcripts in intergenic regions. the distribution of these distant pa clusters largely followed the genome-wide trend . furthermore, we found that majority  of pa clusters are employed in  <dig> or more tissues, including  <dig> % of the clusters that can be detected in all  <dig> tissues . the distribution of the distant pa clusters  showed a similar trend: majority  of them are employed in  <dig> or more tissues, and  <dig> % of the pa clusters can be detected in all  <dig> tissues . these data suggested that genic and intergenic pa sites are relatively ubiquitously employed, while a considerable proportion  may exhibit tissue-restricted usage . overall, our data serve as a unique resource to uncover novel pa sites in known genes and/or novel transcripts.

for the protein-coding pa clusters, their relative locations within respective genes were determined .  <dig> % of the clusters are overlapped with known polyadenylation sites,  <dig> % and  <dig> % clusters are located in the annotated and extended 3′ utr regions , respectively. these alternative pa sites are expected to modulate the length of 3′ utrs and may affect the stability, localization and/or translation of the corresponding transcripts  <cit> . in addition, a considerable proportion  of the pa clusters fall into introns, suggesting the potential coupling of alternative splicing and polyadenylation  <cit> . a small subset of the pa clusters is mapped to exons  as well as the upstream regions of the transcripts . these 5′ proximal pa clusters are interesting and may have resulted from transcriptional read-through  <cit> , enhancer rnas  <cit>  or other novel mechanisms  <cit> . together, our data support the notion that 3′-end formation in the human transcriptomes is much more complex than previously appreciated  <cit> .

validation of novel pa clusters
since our data uncovered a large number of novel polyadenylation sites, rt-pcr was used to experimentally validate novel pa clusters located in the 3′ utr and intronic regions . these pa sites represent two most prevalent classes of alternative polyadenylation, and are involved in regulating 3′ utrs length and coupling between alternative splicing and polyadenylation, respectively. all  the pa clusters, which were randomly selected from the 3′ utr regions, can be experimentally validated . similarly,  <dig> out of  <dig> novel intronic pa clusters were validated . for the one case that failed the initial validation, it was due to an unannotated splicing event: the pa site was ultimately confirmed with a primer further upstream and the rt-pcr product is shorter than the expected size .

sequence motifs involved in precise pa site selection
motif analyses were then performed for the pa clusters identified above. as expected  <cit> , aataaa and attaaa are the top motifs overrepresented in the pa surrounding regions . for both annotated and novel pa clusters, au-rich and u/gu-rich regions are detected at upstream and downstream of pa cleavage site, respectively , which agreed with the position of canonical poly signal and downstream sequence element  in metazoans  <cit> .

it has been shown that pa clusters may vary significantly in size and shape  <cit> . we therefore broadly categorized pa clusters into  <dig> groups: narrow peak , broad with peak  and weak peak . both np and bp have a dominant peak , whereas wp exhibits a more dispersed pattern of cleavage sites . strikingly, majority of the pa clusters belong to the np  and bp  categories. wp clusters  only account for a small percentage  of all pa clusters. this is in sharp contrast to transcription initiation clusters where wp is the dominant class  <cit> . we speculated that the precision in pa site selection might be achieved by sequence conservation of cis-acting elements  and/or tight regulation of polyadenylation machinery.

next we compared the local sequence content between focused  and dispersed  polyadenylation clusters. interestingly, the distribution of ataaa motif is much tighter for the peaked  pa clusters than that of dispersed clusters  , suggesting that the broad pa cleavage patterns may be resulting from multiple closely spaced polyadenylation signals. in addition, the sequences downstream of pa cleavage site differ significantly between np/bp and wp clusters. for np/bp clusters, they tend to have an extended g-rich region compared to the background , whereas the u-rich region  is rather restricted to immediate sequences downstream of the cleavage site . these results are consistent with notion that pa cleavage sites are often followed by u/gu-rich  and g-rich sequences , which are bound by cstf and cfiim, respectively  <cit> . in contrast, wp clusters tend to have an extended u-rich downstream of cleave site with a narrow g-rich region at nucleotide 34– <dig> positions . two additional motifs, ‘ugua’ and ‘ugug’, were also analyzed. consistent with the previous report  <cit> , our results showed that for both np/bp and wp clusters these two motifs are enriched at the upstream and downstream regions of pa cleavage sites, respectively . together, these data suggested that intrinsic sequence motifs might play an important role in determining the precision of polyadenylation cleavage events.

identification of pa signature in diverse tissues
we next aimed to identify pa clusters that exhibit tissue-specific or tissue-enriched usage. an “entropy” term  was introduced to reflect pa site usage among diverse tissues  <cit> . for pa clusters showing low entropy, the corresponding tissue with dominant pa usage were subsequently determined . as expected, fetal and adult brains share many tissue-specific pa clusters. similar findings were also observed for skeletal muscle and heart. in addition, we examined whether tissue identity can be inferred from pa site usages. starting from the host genes in which the tissue-specific pa clusters resides, the correct tissues always came out at the top with the most significant p value . since the classification analysis was performed without the prior inputs on tissue origin, these results strongly suggest that pa usage, similar to gene expression profiles, also exhibits tissue-specific signatures.

tissue specific pa sites are not necessarily resulting from tissue-specific apa. several other mechanisms, such as tissue-specific transcription and/or alternative splicing, may lead to pa sites with preferential tissue usage. to determine the potential contribution at the transcriptional level, tissue-specific pa sites were used to compile their host transcripts, the promoter regions of which were subsequently searched for overrepresented sequence motifs. interestingly, several transcription factor-binding sites were identified, which are known to promote tissue-specific gene expression . for instance, the steroidogenic factor  <dig>  is enriched in transcripts with testis-specific pa clusters. sf <dig> has recently been shown to cooperate with sry to initiate testis development from early bipotential gonads  <cit> . it is worth noting that tissue-restricted expression is not the sole contributor of tissue-specific pa usage.

3′ utr shortening and gene expression regulation
alternative polyadenylation  is an important mechanism for regulated eukaryotic gene expression. it has been proposed that transcriptional activity is coupled with apa  <cit> , and highly expressed loci tend to have shortened 3′ utr by favoring the proximal apa sites  <cit> . these earlier studies arbitrarily divided the 3′ utr into “constant” and “alternative” regions based on prior apa annotations, and the shortening of 3′ utr was inferred from microarray or rna-seq data. since our data contain experimentally defined pa sites as well as their counts, it provides a unique opportunity to interrogate global 3′ utr patterning among different tissues.

to this end, we devised a utr shortening index . based on a consolidated gene model, the usi analysis employed both the locations and the tag counts of the pa clusters identified in the 3′ utr of each transcribed locus . this is a significant improvement over the previous strategies  <cit> , which only considered the most proximal and distal pa sites annotated for individual gene loci. in addition, the expression level of each gene was approximated by the combined counts of all pa clusters. since protein-coding genes may differ significantly in their transcript structures , we developed a gene-centric ranking scheme for subsequent analysis. for each gene in a given tissue, its effective 3′ utr length and normalized expression level were ranked with respect to other tissues, therefore avoiding unexpected complications due to averaging utr lengths among genes .

three distinct enrichment patterns were discovered among tissues examined. brain, testis, lung and breast are enriched for genes with abundant transcripts and a shortened 3′ utr , while low-abundance transcripts in several other tissues  tend to have a lengthened 3′ utr . the rest of tissues  are by virtue an admixture and favor both gene categories . despite the tissue preferences in 3′ utr shortening/lengthening, these observations supported the notion of reverse correlation between 3′ utr length and expression level, indicating the potential coordination between transcriptional control and alternative polyadenylation  <cit> . other possibilities may also exist; for instance, 3′ utr length might affect mrna stability, a potential mechanism does not necessarily involve transcription regulation.

it has been proposed that 3′ utr shortening may promote gene expression, possibly by avoiding mirna targeting  <cit> . conversely, transcripts with longer 3′ utr are more likely to be targeted by mirnas and/or other regulatory molecules. with regard to apa, two different paradigms might be involved to help establish tissue identities. the preferential usage of proximal pa sites in tissue-enriched genes  is expected to reinforce transcriptional decision on genes required for proper tissue functions. supporting this notion, gene ontology  analysis of genes with high expression rank and shortened 3′ utr in adult and fetal brain shows significant enrichment of neural functions . one interesting example is snca, which encodes α-synuclein  and is involved in the regulation of dopamine release and transport  <cit> . snca is highly expressed in adult and fetal brain compared to other tissue analyzed. in addition, it utilizes a proximal pa site only in the two brain tissues examined, while the distal pa site is employed in other tissues . these data supported the notion that apa might play important roles in establishing tissue or cell identity. in contrast, certain lowly expressed transcripts might be the result of leaky transcription and 3′ utr lengthening of these transcripts may help prevent their expression at the posttranscriptional level. it is worth noting that the two above mechanisms are not mutually exclusive. as demonstrated in the pancreas and spleen tissues , they might complement each other to ensure a broader genome-wide coordination.

discussion
to profile global polyadenylation events, several sequencing based methods have been developed  <cit> . in these methods, the final sequencing libraries contained a stretch of repetitive sequence introduced by oligo priming. due to low sequence complexity downstream of the pa cleavage sites of interest, such experimental design often led to unnecessary challenges at the sequencing step  as sequencing primer, which might not be optimal, if sequenced from 3′ end). to solve this problem, our pa-seq strategy introduced a modified base  in the oligo, which can help remove the stretch of ‘t’ by uracil-specific excision reagent  after second strand synthesis, and thus enables direct interrogation of polyadenylation sites in a more effective manner. although our pa libraries can be sequenced directly from the 3′ end, paired-end sequencing was employed in this study, which is expected to further improve mapping specificity and efficiency as well as recapitulate local sequence complexity . a detailed comparison between the polya-seq  <cit>  and pa-seq  in mappability and identification of pa sites can be found in additional file  <dig> and additional file  <dig>  respectively.

another innovative polyadenylation method, 3p-seq, has also been developed  <cit> . one major advantage of this method is the use of splint oligo ligation to avoid internal priming events. in addition, it employed rnase h digestion to shorten poly tail of the target mrnas. however, the pa profiles resulting from 3p-seq strategy is not as quantitative as conventional methods, possibly due to the involvement of multiple ligation steps that may not be highly efficient  <cit> . an alternative approach, 3′reads, has also been developed to address the internal priming issue  <cit> . these methods can be used to generate a reference list of authentic pa sites, which can help further improve the computational strategy of our pa-seq analysis to achieve more reliable and quantitative profiling of genome-wide polyadenylation events.

alternative polyadenylation is known to be an important mechanism in regulating tissue-specific gene expression and proteome diversity. one striking observation from this study is the distinct tissue preference in 3′ utr shortening/lengthening. since our analyses focused on tandem pa sites in the 3′ utr region, it is unlikely that 3′ utr shortening/lengthening is a direct result of alternative splicing. however, it does not rule out that splicing factors, in addition to other rna binding proteins, may play a direct role in controlling pa choices. an early profiling study has identified the expression signature of splicing factors in different tissues; and snrnp  is among the splicing factor genes that are highly differentially expressed particular in brain and testis  <cit> . accumulated evidence showed that u <dig> snrnp plays a determinative role in regulating polyadenylation and mrna length  <cit> . therefore, it will be of great interest to further characterize the direct involvement of component of basal and alternative splicing machinery in regulated polyadenylation.

strikingly, we found selective 3′ utr shortening in genes highly expressed in fetal and adult brain, while others have found that brain transcripts on average have the longest 3′ utr in length  <cit> , a subset of which may even have extended 3′ utr beyond current annotations  <cit> . instead of averaging among transcribed loci, our analysis is a gene-centric approach, comparing the normalized expression level as well as the effective utr length of the same gene among diverse tissues, to uncover potential coordination between gene expression and polyadenylation. these opposing observations may not be contradictory as they seem to be at the initial glimpse. together, these data implied that a subset of brain-enriched genes preferentially shorten their 3′ utrs to ensure a high level of expression, despite that a different subset of transcripts expressed in the brain may have a rather extended 3′ utr. as one prevalent phenomenon in neurons, it has been shown that brain-enriched mirnas tend to co-express with their target genes, which also exhibit brain-specific expression  <cit> . the paradox can be in part explained by selective 3′ utr shortening and target avoidance, suggesting alternative polyadenylation might be critical for establishing neuronal cell identity.

lastly, we found ncrna, similar to protein coding transcripts, are also extensively regulated at the polyadenylation level. the data sets presented here provided a starting point to further characterize the functional significance of such regulatory events. it is plausible that different ncrna isoforms may have distinct regulatory functions, cellular localization and/or stability. for instance, comparison of polyadenylation transcripts at different cellular compartments is expected to interrogate potential links between alternative polyadenylation and subcellular localization. further integration of function and interaction data  is required for to characterizing this additional level of transcriptome complexity and deserves future study.

CONCLUSIONS
one major challenge of profiling transcriptome 3′ end is to avoid sequencing the poly stretch. we used uracil-specific excision reagent to recognize and cleave the modified base  near the polyadenylation site, therefore eliminating the potential complication due to these low complexity sequences. using this modified pa-seq strategy, tissue-specific pa signatures were identified. furthermore, we showed that noncoding transcripts, similar to protein-coding genes, are extensively regulated at the 3′ end. in addition, downstream g-rich motif and upstream u-rich motif played an important role in the regulation of tissue-specific polyadenylation. lastly, we showed distinct patterns of 3′ utr shortening/lengthening among different tissues, which suggested that apa may play a critical role in establishing tissue or cell identity. together, the pa-seq strategy provided a comprehensive polyadenylation landscape of human transcripts across diverse tissues.

