BACKGROUND
future climate-driven changes in the marine environment are projected to include decreased salinity in many coastal areas due to increased precipitation and enhanced freshwater run-off  <cit> . most climate change research to date has focused on effects of increasing temperatures and ocean acidification, rather than salinity  <cit> . salinity plays an important role in shaping the distribution of marine species and future alterations in salinity may pose major ecological challenges to organisms inhabiting coastal areas  <cit> . changes in salinity are known to have direct or indirect effects on survival, metabolism, growth, reproduction, and/or osmotic balance in aquatic organisms  <cit> . future salinity shifts in coastal areas may therefore impose strong selection on species inhabiting these areas, leading to changes in species composition and the evolution of new adaptations. understanding how marine organisms respond to environmental changes and how rapidly new adaptations can evolve is key for predicting how ecosystems will respond to global environmental change in the future.

in the baltic sea, salinity forms a strong environmental gradient that determines the composition and distribution of species  <cit> . it is one of the world’s largest semi-enclosed brackish seas and reached its present brackish state about 8000 years ago  <cit> . since then, the baltic sea has been colonised by organisms from both freshwater and marine environments  <cit> . the sea surface salinity along this gradient ranges from <  <dig> psu  in the northern bothnian bay  to approximately  <dig> psu at the border to the north sea  <cit> . limited water exchange with surrounding seas and almost no tidal flow make salinity conditions in the baltic sea relatively stable compared to many other coastal areas  <cit> . species diversity and within-species genetic diversity are markedly lower inside the brackish baltic sea compared to adjacent areas, which to a large extent is attributed to these marginal environmental conditions creating specific selection pressures and promoting the evolution of local adaptations  <cit> . recent modelling of future climate scenarios in the baltic sea indicates that increased precipitation will lead to reduced salinity  <cit> , which could potentially result in dramatic shifts in species’ distributions. such shifts would also likely influence ecological interactions and ecosystem functions.

organisms can respond to changes in salinity through plastic responses involving molecular , physiological, morphological, behavioural or life history trait changes, without genotypic changes occurring through selection  <cit> . here, we mainly consider phenotype plasticity in the context of “phenotypic buffering”, i.e. a plasticity that maintains a functional phenotype despite external disturbances  <cit> . from an evolutionary perspective, it has been suggested that phenotypic plasticity can act as a buffer against selection that may delay or even preclude the evolution of local adaptations. however, it can also be considered a source of novel opportunities upon which selection can act, e.g. by facilitating the transition to new fitness levels while maintaining a large population size  <cit> . in either case, phenotypic plasticity is likely to play an important role in the ability of species to tolerate future environmental changes  <cit> . being highly plastic is often assumed to involve a cost, which would explain why plasticity is not universal  <cit> . consequently, it has been suggested that in more stable environments, where  high plasticity is not required, adaptations to a narrower range of environmental conditions may be selected for, resulting in a loss of phenotypic plasticity  <cit> . adaptation, in contrast to phenotypic plasticity, always involves a genetic change, resulting from selection acting on fitness-related phenotypic traits. although there is mounting evidence that local adaptation may be common in the marine environment, there are few studies on the relative role of evolutionary responses versus plasticity to changing salinity in marine invertebrates  <cit> , but see  <cit> .

barnacles  generally display high tolerance to fluctuating environments. they make up an important component of intertidal and estuarine communities, where they are frequently exposed to variation in salinity, as well as fluctuating temperature and desiccation  <cit> . the bay barnacle balanus  improvisus <cit>  is the only barnacle species recorded from the baltic sea, but it is also found in other coastal areas and estuaries worldwide  <cit> . b. improvisus is believed to originate from the eastern north america and was first recorded in the baltic sea in the mid 1800’s  <cit> . compared to most other barnacle species, b. improvisus can tolerate a very wide range of salinities, from < <dig> to  <dig> psu, however, salinities below  <dig> psu have been reported to have long-term negative impacts on fitness  <cit> . the molecular and cellular mechanisms behind this broad salinity tolerance are poorly known, although it has been proposed that b. improvisus can alternate between being a passive osmoconformer in high salinities  and actively osmoregulate in salinities below  <dig> psu  <cit> . it was recently shown that alternatively spliced variants of na+/k+ atpases were differentially expressed in response to reduced salinity giving further support for plasticity through active osmoregulation  <cit> .

if there is indeed a cost to the euryhalinity  of b. improvisus, then this capacity may be reduced, or even lost, in populations living in a stable and low salinity environment such as the baltic sea. previous studies comparing the effects of salinity in different barnacle species found that b. improvisus had a broad tolerance and fed actively in most salinity conditions, and that the response depended on previous salinity history  <cit> . more specifically, b. improvisus from the baltic sea showed highest activity in low salinities , compared to populations of b. improvisus from england , potentially indicating local adaptation to the baltic environment  <cit> . this may indicate that rapid evolution had occurred in baltic sea populations of b. improvisus over a timescale of a few hundred years after colonisation. however, the study by davenport  <cit>  only tested short-term exposures to different salinities without appropriate acclimation of barnacles collected from the field, which limits the ability to draw conclusions about the degree of local adaptation. by performing long-term controlled experiments, starting from early post-settlement and following barnacles until sexual maturity, we can better understand how salinity affects a wide range of phenotypic traits and reveal which traits may be more exposed to selection in different salinity conditions, potentially resulting in local adaptations.

here, we investigated whether the broad distribution of b. improvisus along the strong salinity gradient of the baltic sea can be explained by physiological plasticity or if local adaptations to various salinity regimes have evolved in populations along the gradient. we used a common-garden experiment in which multiple barnacle populations sampled along the salinity gradient were grown from immediate post-settlement to reproductive maturity under different salinity treatments. we measured several fitness-related traits including growth, mortality, shell strength and reproductive maturity.

methods
sampling of brood stock barnacles and larval culture
several hundred adult barnacles  improvisus) were collected on settling panels from three different populations in: i) the stockholm archipelago, baltic sea , ii) the kiel fjord, baltic sea  and iii) tjärnö, swedish west coast  during july to august  <dig> . settled barnacles were transported to the laboratory at tjärnö  and kept in large re-circulating systems at their native mean salinities  and at a constant temperature of 19°c. adult barnacles were fed daily with newly hatched artemia sp. ad libitum. as in other barnacle species, b. improvisus produces free-swimming larvae  with pelagic dispersal for up to several weeks before they settle on hard substrates and metamorphose into the adult stage  <cit> . nauplius larvae were obtained through natural spawning of the adults in a modified laboratory culture system described previously  <cit> . nauplii were cultured  until the cyprid stage in their native salinities, which were created by mixing filtered seawater  with filtered tap water  and fed with a mixture of the microalgae thalassiosira pseudonana and skeletonema marinoi . these microalgae were also cultured at different salinities  in order to reduce osmotic disturbances when transferring algae to the larval cultures. we took into account the possible natural variability between larval batches by collecting larvae from the adult barnacle cultures  on four different occasions during two weeks in september-october  <dig>  representing four replicate batches of larvae . larval batches were used as level of replication for each population, since natural variability in larval performance between batches has been observed previously  <cit> . cyprid larvae from each batch were settled on acrylic plastic  panels and were transferred to the experimental system  after eight days, leaving enough time for the larvae to attach and metamorphose before the start of the experiment.

experimental setup
the experiment involved three salinity treatments , corresponding to the native mean salinities for the three barnacle populations studied . from each of the four batches obtained per population, two panels with newly settled barnacles  were placed in separate aquaria in each of the three salinity treatments, resulting in a split-plot design  <cit> . three large independent re-circulating systems  were used, each consisting of  <dig> aquaria . the flow through each aquarium was 20-25 l/h. each system had a biological filter  with coral rubble, activated charcoal and nitrifying bacteria added to maintain water quality and avoid build-up of nitrogenous waste products. in addition, water in each system was completely replaced every two weeks, at which time the culture systems were cleaned, drained and treatment combinations were moved to a new system within the same room to avoid confounding the effects of salinity with effects of aquarium location within the room. the experiment was maintained at 20°c and a light regime of 14:10 h . the different salinities were obtained by mixing filtered deep saltwater  from the kosterfjord  with filtered tap water . water quality variables including temperature, salinity, at, nh <dig> and nh <dig> were monitored routinely during the experiment . salinity was adjusted by adding freshwater whenever needed. barnacles were fed a mixture of microalgae  at ~  <dig>  cells ml- <dig> and  <dig>  cells ml- <dig>  respectively. algal cell concentrations were checked regularly using a multisizer™  <dig> coulter counter  and levels were adjusted to maintain stable concentrations ad libitum throughout the experiment. the algal cell concentration in the systems never reached below  <dig>  cells ml- <dig>  chlorophyll content of the algal cultures and experimental systems were also checked for possible degradation of food quality, assessed by a spectrophotometric trichromatic method  <cit> , which showed no signs of degradation. after four weeks, the barnacle diet was complemented with newly hatched artemia  added every second day. barnacles were cultured in the experimental systems for a total of nine weeks.

growth modelling and condition index
barnacle growth was recorded photographically every two weeks, . to avoid overcrowding, excess barnacles were removed from panels during the first two weeks, and subsequently whenever barnacles came in contact with each other. at the end of the experiment  <dig> -  <dig> barnacles remained on each panel ). the different barnacle densities were evenly distributed between populations and salinity treatments. digital images were converted to binary files using imagej . an image analysis script in matlab  was developed to track and measure maximum basal plate diameter  for each barnacle at four time points . only barnacles that remained alive at the end of the experiment were included in the analysis. two different growth models were fitted to the size data for each individual barnacle. the first model was the von bertalanffy growth equation  <cit> :

  yt=smax1-be-kt 

where y is the shell diameter at time t, smax is the asymptote of the curve, b is the lag phase , and k is the growth rate. the second model was the gompertz growth equation  <cit> :

  yt=aebect 

where y is the shell diameter at time t, a is the maximum shell diameter , b is the lag phase or early growth phase and c is the maximum growth rate  . the von bertalanffy growth model is widely used, especially in fisheries studies, but it has also earlier been fitted to barnacle growth data  <cit> . the gompertz growth model is commonly used to describe growth in fish  <cit> , but has also been used in studies on marine invertebrates  <cit> . the von bertalanffy model assumes that growth rate declines over time, whereas the gompertz model includes assumptions of slower growth in the beginning and at the end of the growth phase . it has been suggested that a sigmoid curve  is more applicable to data for larval and early juvenile stages  <cit> . since barnacle larvae go through a metamorphosis to become adults, including the formation of a calcareous shell, this could potentially result in reduced initial growth rate. we fitted both growth models to our data and compared them using the coefficient of determination, r <dig>  and root mean square error . we found no statistically significant difference in fit between the two models  based on rmse, although the gompertz growth equation provided a better fit than von bertalanffy in a majority of cases . we therefore used gompertz curves in all further growth analysis. estimates of the three gompertz model parameters were obtained for each individual barnacle  and the mean value for all barnacles on each replicate panel was used in subsequent statistical analysis. dry weight  of barnacles from each batch and treatment combination was determined for  <dig> haphazardly selected individuals from each panel. samples were dried  and weighed to the nearest  <dig>  g . dried samples were then burned  and the remaining inorganic material was weighed , and ash-free dry weight  calculated. we calculated a condition index  defined as the body-mass to shell-mass ratio . this measure has previously been used to evaluate physiological stress under environmental changes in invertebrates, e.g.  <cit> . results are presented as norms of reaction, a common way to describe the relation between the genetic background  and the phenotypic responses  across a range of environments, e.g. different salinities  <cit> .

shell strength
to investigate whether salinity affected shell strength, the strength of  <dig> haphazardly chosen barnacles on each panel was determined using a taxt2i texture analyzer . the pressure  required to break the barnacle shell from above  was determined according to  <cit> . maximum “breaking stress” was measured using a cylinder of 2 mm diameter pushing onto the rostral plate with a speed of  <dig>  mm s- <dig>  measured shell strength  was further normalised by dividing by the maximum shell diameter of each individual barnacle.

reproductive maturity
twenty barnacles from each batch were inspected under a dissection microscope to determine their state of reproductive maturity. gonad maturity and reproductive status could easily be determined since b. improvisus broods its offspring for up to several weeks before releasing them into the water column. the proportion of individuals with well-developed gonads  or fertilized eggs was recorded at the end of the experiment.

mortality
mortality was estimated by comparing the number of living barnacles on each panel after two weeks with the number alive after nine weeks. mortality estimates for the first two weeks of the experiment could not be obtained due to missing data , although no major mortality events were observed during this period. mortality estimates were corrected for removal  of barnacles during the experiment.

statistical analyses
general and generalized linear models  were fitted using r-studio  and spss . effects of salinity and population origin on growth, shell strength, dw, aw, afdw, ci and mortality were tested using a 2-factor anova, with ‘salinity’ and ‘population’ as fixed factors. batch was used as the level of replication in all analyses. for all the response variables we evaluated the main effects of salinity, population, and their interaction . significant interactions between salinity and population would indicate that populations respond differently to different salinity environments, which could be a result of local adaptations to a specific salinity regime. assumptions of normality and homogeneity of variances were checked using q/q-plots, box plots and levene’s test. aw was log-transformed and per cent mortality was arcsin-transformed prior to analysis. tukey’s hsd test was used post-hoc to further resolve significant differences between means. due to high frequencies of zero count data, fecundity  was analysed using generalized linear models  with salinity and population as the main factors in the models. significance of these factors was evaluated using log likelihood tests of full versus reduced models.

to test the effects of salinity and population on the overall fitness of barnacles , permanova  was applied, using euclidian distance matrices with  <dig> permutations. we also ran permanova pair-wise post-hoc tests for multiple comparisons. possible trade-offs between individual phenotypic traits in different salinities were visualized and evaluated using a canonical analysis of principal coordinates   <cit> . this type of analysis differs from unconstrained ordinations , because it identifies axes that maximize differences among groups rather than maximizing the variance explained, and thus allows a clearer focus on explicit hypotheses about e.g. salinity effects  <cit> .

ethics statement
this work has been conducted according to relevant national and international guidelines for ethics and animal welfare, which do not include any specific requirement for barnacles.

RESULTS
for all the response variables we investigated the effects of salinity and population, as well as their interaction . none of the interactions were statistically significant, with the exception of shell strength  .

growth
salinity had a small but statistically significant effect on the size of barnacles  from all three tested populations . barnacles growing in  <dig> psu had on average 8% larger shells than those in  <dig> psu , but were not significantly different from those in  <dig> psu . the length of the early lag phase in growth  was clearly influenced by salinity, where the start of growth of barnacles in  <dig> psu was significantly delayed compared to the two higher salinities . there were no significant differences in maximum growth rate  between salinities or between populations . although sample sizes were small , the fitting of growth curves was good with average r <dig> =  <dig>  ±  <dig>   . the advantage of fitting a growth model described by several parameters, instead of simply analysing one endpoint, is that it provides a more detailed understanding of how salinity affects complex and dynamic growth patterns.

ash weight  was significantly influenced by salinity , where barnacles in  <dig> psu had lower aw after 9 weeks, compared to barnacles in the higher salinities . we found no statistically significant difference in aw between populations, although in  <dig> psu barnacles from the stockholm population had lower aw than the other populations . afdw did not differ significantly between salinities or populations .

condition index and shell strength
the highest body-mass to shell-mass ratio  was found in barnacles in low salinity , and ci decreased with increasing salinity . there were no differences in ci between populations . furthermore, low salinity  resulted in weaker shells compared to higher salinities . importantly, however, there was a significant interaction between the effects of salinity and population on shell strength . barnacles from the high salinity environment  had stronger shells in their native salinity  compared to the other two populations . this positive relationship between shell strength and native salinity was not observed for the kiel and stockholm populations .

reproductive maturity
barnacles with mature gonads were observed in all three salinity treatments and in all three populations, but not in all combinations . mature gonads were mostly observed in barnacles growing at intermediate and high salinities . barnacles brooding fertilized eggs, however, were only observed in the two lower salinities . generalized linear modelling revealed that mainly salinity but also to some extent population  significantly influenced reproductive status  . the analyses showed that the number of barnacles with fertilized eggs was best explained by a model including only salinity . this result was strongly driven by the absence of individuals with fertilized eggs in  <dig> psu, . for barnacles with mature gonads, but not carrying fertilized eggs, a model containing salinity and population gave the best fit . for all populations, the greatest numbers of barnacles with mature gonads were observed in  <dig> psu, followed by  <dig> psu and  <dig> psu. barnacles from kiel generally had the highest proportion of individuals with mature gonads in all salinities.

mortality
mortality was low in all treatments and populations, ranging from  <dig> to 15% . mortality was significantly higher in  <dig> psu than in  <dig> psu , however, we detected no population-specific differences in mortality .

trade-offs between phenotypic traits in response to salinity
the cap analysis that we used to explore effects of salinity and population on trade-offs between phenotypic traits revealed differences between salinity treatments, but not among populations . the first and the most important axis  separated the barnacles into three groups, based on salinity. this analysis confirmed that the traits that contributed most to this pattern were related mainly to shell strength and reproduction, although these were not  <dig> degrees opposed to each other as would be expected if the trade-off was complete. in high salinity , barnacles generally had stronger shells but delayed reproduction, whereas in low salinity , barnacles had weaker shells, but more fertilized eggs. in contrast, maximum size of barnacles  and afdw did not contribute to the observed effects of salinity.

discussion
our study shows that b. improvisus can tolerate a broad range of salinities and thus displays high phenotypic plasticity throughout its post-settlement life. nonetheless, long-term exposure to different salinities had significant effects on fitness-related phenotypic traits such as shell-strength and fecundity. we also found evidence for a possible trade-off between traits , which may have important consequences in coping with changing environmental conditions. overall responses to different salinities were similar in all populations, although differences in shell strength between populations in high salinity indicate possible local adaptation related to differences in natural predation pressure between the baltic sea and north sea.

the broad salinity tolerance of b. improvisus was first observed by darwin who found the species living in almost freshwater conditions in the la plata river  during his voyage with the beagle in  <dig>  <cit> . since then, several studies have documented the euryhaline abilities of b. improvisus <cit> . few other barnacle species show similar tolerance to low salinities  <cit> , however most studies have investigated effects of short-term exposure, focusing on behavioural responses in adults, e.g.  <cit>  or larval development, e.g.  <cit> . few studies have investigated long-term effects of salinity on the post-larval life stages of barnacles  <cit> . our study therefore contributes important new knowledge about long-term fitness-related effects of salinity exposure during the juvenile post-settlement stage until reproductive maturity.

despite better performance in low and intermediate salinities in terms of e.g. maximum size and survival , our experiments revealed that long-term exposure to low salinity had negative effects on other fitness-related traits in b. improvisus. growth during the first weeks after metamorphosis is recognized as a vital phase of a barnacle’s life  <cit> , and therefore our observation of delayed onset of growth in barnacles at  <dig> psu  may have important consequences. turpayeva and simkina  <cit>  observed a similar delay in early growth in response to low salinity in b. improvisus. fitness advantages of rapid initiation of growth include improved competition for space  <cit> , increased tolerance to fluctuating environmental stressors  <cit>  as well as size-based predator avoidance  <cit> . reduced growth under environmental stress has been shown in other marine species  <cit> . the delay in early growth that we observed in  <dig> psu may be due to altered physiology , resulting in re-allocation of energy  <cit>  and/or increased shell production costs in low salinities due to low caco <dig> content in the water  <cit> .

salinity had a clear effect on reproduction in all populations with the highest reproductive activity  in  <dig> psu. although mature gonads were found in barnacles in  <dig> psu, no individuals with fertilized eggs were observed even after nine weeks of study, indicating that reproduction may be delayed in high salinity. this may be a result of more energy initially being invested in shell production in high salinities, revealing a trade-off between two important fitness-related traits: reproduction and defence against predators by producing hard shells . a similar trade-off between shell morphology and reproduction has also been reported by  <cit>  for the barnacle chthamalus anisopoma. alternatively, it is possible that reproduction is delayed or disrupted in high salinities, i.e. not representing an adaptive trade-off per se, but rather the result of physiological dysfunction. in either case, delaying reproduction will result in fewer broods per year, and thereby affect recruitment dynamics  <cit> , however the importance of this delay may be overwhelmed by the effects of season on reproductive activity. studies on other barnacle species have suggested that exposure to low salinities markedly reduces the reproductive output  <cit> . this does not seem to be the case for b. improvisus, providing further support for the conclusion that b. improvisus is a truly brackish species.

the calcareous outer shell of a barnacle offers protection against predation but also aids in regulating exposure to extreme conditions such as desiccation or salinity changes  <cit> . the reduction in shell strength we observed at low salinities  was most likely caused by limited amounts of dissolved caco <dig> at low salinity  <cit> . reduced shell strength and ash weight in response to low salinity has also been found in other invertebrate species, including mussels  and oysters  <cit> . extreme high salinities  were also found to reduce shell strength of b. amphitrite <cit> , indicating that shell strength may not only be limited by available caco <dig> in the water, but may also be associated with other physiological stress in response to changes in salinity.

interestingly, we found that barnacles from the highest salinity environment  built stronger shells in  <dig> psu compared to the other two populations . the absence of many of b. improvisus’ main predators  from lower salinity environments in the inner baltic sea  <cit>  may have resulted in lower selection pressure for strong shells, especially when caco <dig> is limited. similar, population-specific differences in the ability to build thick shells have been shown for blue mussels  from the baltic and north seas  <cit> . interestingly, barnacles from kiel  only showed a modest increase in shell strength in  <dig> psu, compared to barnacles from tjärnö  even though the predators a. rubens and c. maenas are abundant in that habitat  <cit> . we can only speculate with regard to the predation pressure that these species exert on b. improvisus in kiel, however it is clear that other factors such as maternal effects  <cit> , trade-offs between shell-strength and reproductive output , and physiological constraints may also have influenced our results. furthermore, the influence of gene flow from populations further inside the baltic sea  to kiel is estimated to be higher than the gene flow from tjärnö to kiel, based on oceanographic modelling, which could partly explain the observed pattern  <cit> .

with the exception of the population-specific responses in shell strength, no evidence of local adaptation was detected in the other measured traits. several scenarios could explain this result: i) balanus improvisus was first observed in the baltic sea relatively recently  b. improvisus has free-swimming pelagic larvae that drift with ocean currents for up to several weeks, potentially creating high levels of gene flow that prevent local adaptation from evolving  <cit> . in addition, b. improvisus is a major fouling organism on ships and human mediated dispersal may enhance gene flow between populations  <cit> . however, there are several examples in the literature that show that adaptations can evolve rapidly  <cit>  and that adaptations can be maintained despite high gene flow  <cit> ; iii) b. improvisus displays broad phenotypic plasticity, which can facilitate establishment in new environments without the need for strong selection/adaptation of local populations  <cit> .

phenotypic plasticity has also been suggested to play an important role in organisms’ ability to cope with current and future climate change  <cit> . recent modelling of future climate scenarios in the baltic sea indicate that increased precipitation may lead to reduced salinity  <cit> , which could potentially result in dramatic shifts in species’ distributions. according to the most extreme climate scenario of meier et al. <cit> , the surface salinity of  <dig> psu, today situated in the northern baltic sea , would move south to the waters around bornholm  by the end of the 21st century  although hypothetical  <cit> , this type of environmental shift would have dramatic consequences, especially in ecosystems with already low species richness and genetic diversity, such as the baltic sea. our results indicate that it is unlikely that climate-related shifts in salinity will have strong negative effects on b. improvisus populations, but may rather favour the species. it should be remembered, however, that climate change involves multiple environmental parameters, as well as shifts in ecosystem composition, and it is therefore hard to predict the likely effects of salinity changes on the ecology of b. improvisus or the ecosystems in which it lives.

CONCLUSIONS
in conclusion, we have shown that b. improvisus is a highly euryhaline species with strong capacity to tolerate a range of salinities through primarily plastic responses. for almost all response variables, b. improvisus performed slightly better at low and intermediate salinities, supporting the idea that b. improvisus is one of few truly brackish species. however, the negative effects of low salinity on early initiation of growth as well as reduced shell strength suggest trade-offs between traits in different environments in order to maximise fitness. population-specific responses in shell-strength indicated the possibility of local adaptation, perhaps in relation to different predation pressures along the salinity gradient. the existence of these population-specific responses, despite recent colonization, high potential dispersal and broad tolerance, supports earlier work indicating that evolutionary changes can occur rapidly. projected future climate-driven reductions in salinity in the baltic sea will most likely not have major impacts on b. improvisus populations, however, further work is needed to clarify the interactions between salinity tolerance and other stressors such as temperature, acidification and food limitation  <cit> . furthermore, selection experiments using multiple generations of b. improvisus are needed to elucidate the respective roles of phenotypic plasticity, trans-generational effects, and adaptations in response to locally strong selection pressures. finally, population genomic studies in the baltic sea could help to elucidate population structure and identify  genes involved in both phenotypic plasticity and local adaptations.

competing interests
the author’s declare that they have no competing interests.

authors’ contributions
alw was involved in planning of the experimental design, carried out the experiment and collected the data, ran the statistical analyses and drafted the manuscript. ca participated in designing the experiment, analysing the data and commenting on the manuscript, tl developed the mathematical script for analysis of growth data and commented on the manuscript, ul and ab contributed to the experimental planning and commented on the manuscript, pj took part in the planning, analyses and commenting on the manuscript, jh was involved in the planning, experimental setup, statistical analysis and commenting on the manuscript. all authors read and approved the final manuscript.

supplementary material
additional file 1: table s1
experimental conditions of the common-garden setup. table s <dig>  effects of salinity and population on reproduction . table s <dig>  results from the permanova on effects of salinity and population on phenotypic traits in barnacles, including growth, shell strength, condition index and reproductive maturity.

click here for file

 acknowledgements
this work was supported by a linnaeus-grant from the swedish research councils, vr and formas  as well as the lars hierta memorial foundation. we also want to thank the technical staff and lab assistants at the lovén centre - tjärnö for assisting during the experiment  as well as the archipelago foundation in stockholm  for providing animals for the barnacle larval cultures. a special thanks to gerry quinn  for statistical advice and to christian pansch, geomar, kiel, for assistance with shell strength measurements as well as giving useful comments on the manuscript.
