BACKGROUND
since its original discovery by warburg  <cit>  it has been well established that most, if not all cancer cells are more dependent on aerobic glycolysis for atp production than normal cells. the near uniform presence of this metabolic phenotype in tumor cells is counterintuitive, as glycolysis produces only  <dig> moles of atp per mole of glucose, far less than the  <dig> generated by mitochondrial respiration . several hypotheses have been proposed for the maintenance of this seemingly wasteful catabolic state. at the cell population level, mitochondrial respiration malfunction and enhancement of glycolysis are thought to be a metabolic advantage under the intermittent hypoxia conditions experienced by pre-malignant and malignant tumor cells  <cit> . however, aerobic glycolysis is not found exclusively in cancer cells, but is also observed in rapidly dividing normal cells even under conditions of normoxia  <cit> . it is also widely believed that the glycolysis rate increases in order to match the increased anabolic needs of the rapidly proliferating cells for precursor metabolites  <cit> . yet, a focus on the cell's anabolic needs alone neglects two important facts; first, in addition to precursor metabolites, growing cells need atp to meet the energy demands of biosynthetic pathways. second, in its original definition the warburg effect refers to the increase in the glycolysis rate ending in the excretion of lactate, which does not contribute to the production of precursor metabolites.

the actual molecular mechanisms that lead to the enhanced aerobic glycolysis are increasingly well understood. under physiological condition, for example, pi3k/akt signaling pathways play a critical role in promoting aerobic glycolysis in activated t cells in response to growth factors or cytokines stimulation  <cit> . in the pathophysiological condition of tumorigenesis, malfunction of mitochondrial respiration due to mitochondrial dna mutations/deletions is an important contributing factor  <cit> . also, p <dig>  one of the most frequently mutated genes in cancers, is both a positive regulator of mitochondrial respiration  <cit>  and a negative regulator of glycolysis  <cit> . these, together with the activation of hypoxia-inducible factor , a transcription factor that is activated by hypoxic stress but also by oncogenic, metabolic, and oxidative stress, often lead to the overexpression of the glucose transporters and various glycolysis pathway enzymes or isozyme subtypes explaining the increased glucose uptake and altered utilization  <cit> .

the evidence accumulated so far thus indicates that the presence of aerobic glycolysis is a common characteristics of rapidly proliferating cells, and that it may offer a growth advantage to rapidly proliferating normal cells, e.g., during development and tissue regeneration, and to cancer cells in tumor formation. yet, a system-level interpretation of the origin of this growth advantage has not yet been formally provided. to start addressing this issue, here we introduce a reduced flux balance model of atp generation that incorporates a glucose uptake capacity constraint and the limited solvent capacity of the cell cytoplasm. the model allows us to uncover the existence of two different energetically favorable metabolic regimes within proliferating cells, a finding that is congruent with experimental results.

RESULTS
reduced flux balance model of cell metabolism
aerobic glycolysis includes the glycolysis pathway producing pyruvate and the pyruvate reduction producing lactate. the overall reaction for aerobic glycolysis is   

aerobic glycolysis has a yield of  <dig> moles of atp per mole of glucose, resulting from the conversion of glucose into lactate. on the other hand, oxidative phosphorylation includes the glycolysis pathway producing pyruvate, the oxidation of pyruvate in the tca cycle, and the respiratory chain. the overall reaction of for oxidative phosphorylation is   

oxidative phosphorylation yields  <dig> moles of atp per mole of glucose, two of which are produced in glycolysis and the other  <dig> during the oxidation of pyruvate in the tca cycle coupled to respiratory chain activity. summing up these differential contributions we obtain the rate of atp production   

where the second equality was obtained using fg = fl + fm.

our aim is to determine the optimal flux distribution  that provides maximum atp production rate given the cell's metabolic constraints. of these, the first metabolic constraint is associated with the maximum glucose uptake rate    

where fg is the maximum glucose uptake rate. the second constraint, quantified below, reflects on the high concentration of macromolecules within the cell's cytoplasm  <cit> , resulting in a limited solvent capacity for the allocation of metabolic enzymes. enzyme molecules have a finite volume and the total sum of their volumes cannot exceed the cell volume. in our case, this constraint applies to the volume occupied by glycolytic enzymes, ldh and mitochondria. enzymes associated with other pathways occupy a fraction of the intracellular volume as well. nevertheless, this fraction simply restricts the amount of the cytoplasmic space available to glycolytic enzymes, ldh and mitochondria. more precisely, if vg, vl and vm are the cell volume occupied by glycolytic enzymes, ldh and mitochondria, respectively, then   

where vatp is the total cell volume reserved for the allocation of components of the atp producing pathways. the occupied volumes vg, vl and vm are proportional to the enzyme masses mg, ml and mm, with vg = vgmg, vl = vlml and vm = vmmm, where vg, vl and vm are the specific volumes of glycolytic enzymes, ldh and mitochondria, respectively. in turn, the glycolytic rate , the lactate excretion rate  and the mitochondrial atp production rate  are proportional to the mass of glycolytic enzymes, lactate dehydrogenase and mitochondria respectively, with fg = rgmg/v, 2fl = rlml/v and 36fm = rmmm/v, where rg is the glycolytsis rate per unit of glycolytic enzyme mass, rl is the rate of lactate production per mass of ldh, rm is the mitochondrial atp production rate per unit of mitochondrial mass, and v is the cell volume. in these equations the product by the mass and the division by the cell volume takes into account that the rates r are commonly reported in the literature per unit of dry weight, while the pathway rates f are reported per unit of cell volume. because of the interdependency of volume, mass and reaction rate, the volume constraint  can be translated to the metabolic constraint   

where ϕ atp = vatp/v is the total volume fraction of the cell cytoplasm occupied by glycolytic enzymes, ldh and mitochondria, and the crowding coefficients ag = vg/rg, al =  <dig> vl/rl and am =  <dig> vm/rm quantify the occupied volume fractions per unit of glycolytic, lactate excretion and mitochondrial respiration rate, respectively. using empirical data reported in the literature we have estimated the crowding coefficients . we obtain ag ≈  <dig>  , al≈  <dig>   and am ≈  <dig>  , indicating that the mitochondria contributes about  <dig> and  <dig> times more to molecular crowding than glycolytic enzymes and lactate dehydrogenase, respectively. the unexpected consequences derived from this fact will be uncovered below.

in our modeling we assume that vatp, rg, rl and rm are constant parameters that can be obtained from experimental estimates. note though, that this is an approximation, as there may be regulatory mechanisms that under certain environmental or developmental conditions are capable of altering the amount of intracellular space allocated to atp producing pathways and the activity of glycolytic enzymes, ldh and mitochondria.

taken together the relevant metabolic optimization problem is as follows: maximize the atp production rate  under the metabolic capacity constraints  and .

optimal solution
in the following we discuss the model-predicted utilization of aerobic glycolysis and oxidative phosphorylation pathways in the context of the cell's glucose uptake rate. it becomes obvious that the glycolysis rate matches the maximum glucose uptake capacity  to maximize the atp production rate. however, there are some differences in the flux distribution along aerobic glycolysis and oxidative phosphorylation depending on the glucose uptake rate. specifically,   

for fg <f <dig>  and for fg ≥ f <dig>   

where      

the optimal solution is graphically illustrated in figure 2a and 2b . at low glucose uptake rates atp is entirely produced by the oxidative phosphorylation pathway and there is no lactate production . this trend continues up to a threshold glucose uptake rate, f <dig> , when mitochondria occupy the entire cell volume fraction  available for atp production pathways . beyond this threshold value the concentration of mitochondria, and therefore the rate of atp production through oxidative phosphorylation, cannot be increased further. however, additional glucose uptake may be diverted toward pathway less efficient in terms of atp yield per mole of glucose. indeed, the optimal solution predicts a metabolic switch, in which glucose uptake rates larger than f <dig> leads to a linearly increasing lactate production , and therefore a component of the atp production is now derived from aerobic glycolysis. furthermore, the increase in lactate production is accompanied by a slight, gradual reduction of the oxidative phosphorylation flux . therefore, due to the increased aerobic glycolysis rate atp production can still be increased beyond f <dig> . however, because aerobic glycolysis has a lower yield than oxidative phosphorylation, the atp production rate increases with a lower slope beyond f <dig>  finally, it is worth noting that because am is  <dig> and  <dig> times higher than ag and al, respectively, these plots are not too sensitive to the precise estimates of the crowding coefficients. indeed, assuming that am is much greater than ag and al, we can approximate  by fm ≈ f <dig> and fl ≈ fg-f <dig>  therefore, we predict that the plots of fm and fl versus fg are rather universal, with a distinctive change of behavior at fg = f <dig> 

experimental evidence for model validity
the model described above results in two experimentally testable predictions: the glucose uptake threshold f <dig> , where the metabolic switch takes place, and the shape of the lactate excretion, oxidative phosphorylation and atp production plots as a function of the glucose uptake rate. to start addressing the validity of these predictions we first utilized previously reported experimental data for mouse ls cells  <cit>  , hybridoma cells  <cit>  , and a mixture of cancer and normal cells  <cit>  , indicating that cancer cells and normal cells follow the same law.

in the first two cases  <cit> , the growth rate of the cells were manipulated by their growth in chemostat cultures at different dilution rates, a protocol that is known to substantially vary the cells' glucose uptake rate. in both cases the empirical lactate excretion plots  follow the model predictions : at low glucose uptake rates there is no significant lactate excretion, but once reaching a threshold the lactate excretion rate increases linearly with the further increase in glucose uptake rate. moreover, the slope of this linear increase coincides with that predicted by the model. for the ls cells, we can also derive their oxidative phosphorylation  and atp production rate  from the published experimental data  <cit>  , and in both cases we obtain a good agreement between the experimental data  and the model predictions . in the third case, the mixture of cancer and normal cells is a compilation of experimental reports using different methods and cell lines  <cit>  . here again, glucose uptake rates and lactate excretion levels show a good correlation to each other .

the glucose uptake threshold, i.e., the uptake rate where the switch takes place, can be estimated from a linear fit to the lactate excretion plot in the regime where lactate is excreted . it ranges between  <dig> - <dig>  mm/min for mouse ls cells,  <dig> - <dig>  mm/min for hybridoma cells and  <dig>  mm/min for the mixture of cancer and normal cells . based on independent empirical estimates of the cell volume fraction occupied by mitochondria and the atp production rate per unit of mitochondrial mass, our model predicts the threshold glucose uptake rate, f <dig>  to be in the range between  <dig>  and  <dig>  mm/min , which overlaps with the ranges reported above for the different cell lines. this agreement is surprisingly good given that they were estimated using independent data.

to further test the model's predictive capability, we have next examined human bj fibroblast cells serially transduced with the catalytic domain of human telomerase , sv <dig> large t  and small t  antigens, and an oncogenic allele of h-ras   <cit> . previous studies using these cells have shown, as we partially confirm here , that the growth rate, soft agar colony formation, and in vivo tumorigenicity of cl1-, cl2-, cl3-, and cl4- cells largely correspond with their level of transduction  <cit> , and that their glucose uptake rates progressively increase from normal toward more tumorigenic transformants )  <cit> . previous experiments also demonstrated that normal cl <dig> cells display a severe reduction in their atp content upon inhibition of mitochondrial oxidative phosphorylation, while the fully tumorigenic cl <dig> cells remain largely unaffected   <cit> . in contrast, compared to the other three cell types cl <dig> cells display higher level of lactate production and a more severe reduction in their atp content when their ldh activity is inhibited  <cit> .

to confirm and extend the above findings, we experimentally tested the extracellular lactate levels, mitochondrial mass and mitochondrial membrane potential  of cl1- <dig> cells at  <dig> h,  <dig> h,  <dig> h, and  <dig> h after seeding the same amount of cells, along with cell counts and total protein concentration measurements. we find that the tumorigenic cl <dig> cells have the highest extracellular lactate levels compared to the other cell types at all time points tested that correlates with a concomitant change in ldh enzyme activity but not protein expression level . cl <dig> cells also have the lowest mitochondrial mass and membrane potential, though compared to cl <dig> cells their decrease is larger than predicted by our model  . taken together, the observed alterations in lactate production and mitochondrial parameters, together with the previously observed oxidative phosphorylation and ldh activity inhibition profiles in the same cells  <cit> , are congruent with the model predictions: an increase of lactate excretion and decline of mitochondrial respiration with an increasing replicative/tumorigenic capacity .

discussion and 
CONCLUSIONS
rapidly proliferating mammalian cells, including cancer cells, almost always exhibit aerobic glycolysis even under normoxic conditions, characterized by an increased lactate excretion rate relative to the respiration rate. since its original observation by warburg  <cit> , from the standpoint of metabolic efficiency this has been a surprising observation because aerobic glycolysis is far less efficient than mitochondrial respiration in terms of moles of atp generated per mole of glucose. implicit to this result, however, is the assumption that glucose uptake is a limiting factor of cell metabolism. yet, the validity of this assumption on metabolic efficiency in the context of additional physicochemical constraints of the cell has not been formally addressed.

by developing a reduced flux balance model of atp production  here we demonstrate the existence of two different metabolic regimes in mammalian cells, depending on whether the cell metabolic rate is limited by the glucose uptake or by the solvent capacity of the cell's cytoplasm. in conditions where glucose transport limits the cell's metabolic activity we find that the optimal solution is to produce atp entirely via mitochondrial respiration, confirming that atp generation yield is the appropriate measure within this regime; however, at high glucose uptake rates the optimal solution is characterized by an abrupt increase of the flux towards lactate production  and a gradual decrease of mitochondrial respiration . this second regime is determined by the existence of a limited cytoplasmic solvent capacity for allocating the components of the atp generating pathways ). for glucose uptake rates exceeding the threshold level, f <dig>  the cell cannot further increase the concentration of mitochondria to increase the respiration rate in order to match the increased glucose uptake rate. yet, the glucose uptake "surplus" may now be diverted towards a pathway that is less efficient in terms of atp yield per mole of glucose but is characterized by a higher rate of lactate  production per its own  mass than the rate of atp production by respiration per mitochondrial mass.

comparisons to experimental data reported for ls mouse cells  <cit> , hybridoma cells  <cit>  and a collection of normal and cancer cells  <cit>  provide an indirect support for the validity of these predictions. the agreement between the experimentally determined fluxes and the model predictions is remarkably good . in all cases the empirical plot of the lactate excretion as a function of the glucose uptake rate  falls close to that predicted by the model . more importantly, the experimental values indicate a glucose uptake threshold around  <dig> mm/min, which falls in the range f1~ <dig> - <dig>  mm/min predicted by our model. also, experimental data reported here and previously  <cit>  on lactate production, mitochondrial parameters and enzyme inhibition profiles of genetically modified human bj fibroblast cells  <cit>  are congruent with the model's predictions. in similar recent experiments, oncogenic ras/e1a transformed low passage murine embryonic fibroblast   also displayed higher mitochondrial respiration activity and lower lactate secretion compared to more rapidly dividing high passage mefs   <cit> , and tumor progression in patients may correlate with reduced mitochondrial density and/or function  <cit> .

the model described here has its limitations and does not account for all the potential population-level advantages of the warburg effect. first, decreased mitochondrial respiration also contributes to the mitochondrial depolarization that is frequently observed in tumor cells, and that is thought to dampen the cell's propensity for mitochondrially-induced apoptosis  <cit> . secondly, the effect of the secreted lactic acid on the surrounding normal tissue may increase the tumor cells' invasive potential  <cit> . thus, tumor cells may evolve to decrease mitochondrial respiration  even further than predicted by our model. third, increased glycolytic rates can increase the sensitivity of the pathways producing precursor metabolites to specific regulators, allowing high rates of proliferation when required  <cit> . moreover, our simplified model focuses on the atp demand and the cell volume fraction occupied by mitochondria. however, in addition to atp rapidly proliferating cells need increased amount of precursor metabolites to fuel their biosynthetic pathways  <cit> . thus, ultimately a cell-scale metabolic model will need to be developed to take into account all the cell's metabolic demands. the achievement of this goal is currently limited by the unavailability of enzyme activity measurements at the human metabolic network scale.

from a more general perspective, it is evident that aerobic glycolysis is not unique to cancer- and rapidly proliferating normal mammalian cells but is present in unicellular organisms, as well. for instance, under aerobic growth conditions fast growing e. coli and s. cerevisiae cells also exhibit aerobic glycolysis, resulting in the excretion of the metabolic byproducts, acetate and ethanol, respectively. more importantly, both for e. coli and for s. cerevisiae a shift toward aerobic glycolysis follows a switch from limited to rich nutrient conditions  <cit> , and for e. coli the maximum growth rates in different carbon sources and the mode of utilization of mixed carbon sources are in agreement with those allowed by the limited solvent capacity of the cell's cytoplasm  <cit> . taken together with our current finding for mammalian cells, these results suggest that the appearance of aerobic glycolysis provides an energetically favorable catabolic state for all rapidly proliferating cells due to the inherent physicochemical constraint of molecular crowding on cell metabolism.

these results may have relevance to cancer therapy as well. it has been previously proposed that the warburg effect may represent a unique property of cancer cell metabolism  <cit> . pharmacological reduction of lactate production and excretion may indeed reduce the invasive potential of tumor cells or makes them more susceptible to apoptosis  <cit> . however, the metabolic state of tumor cells itself is not a unique target for cancer chemotherapy, though individual, tumor specific isozymes may be targeted  <cit> .

