BACKGROUND
several studies  have found stronger correlation between the expression levels of genes that are located close to each other on the genome than between those of distant genes: when gene expressions of many genes are measured for multiple tissue samples, for example using microarray technology, adjacent genes are sometimes found to be consistently up- or downregulated in a subset of the tissue samples.

gene expression is influenced by many factors , many of which could influence the correlation between the expression of two genes in general, and that between two adjacent genes in particular. of particular interest are chromatin domains. dna can exist in either one of two states: a condensed state, termed heterochromatin, which is broadly inaccessible to transcription ), and an active state, termed euchromatin. a chromatin domain  typically spans several genes . therefore, one would expect the expressions of two adjacent genes to tend to be positively correlated, at least if it was possible to measure transcription in individual cells. if the chromatin state was completely random  suggested a dynamic equilibrium, where chromatin fluctuates, to some extent randomly, between the two states), the effect of chromatin domains would vanish when gene expression is measured in pools of many cells, as with microarray technology. however, there is ample evidence for non-randomness. for example, chromatin states tend to be preserved after cell division . and cho <cit>  demonstrated that the states of chromatin domains in yeast are related to the cell cycle.

in addition to the chromatin theory, several other explanations have been suggested for the apparent correlation between the expressions of adjacent genes. several authors  have noted that divergent gene pairs show stronger correlation than tandem and convergent pairs, possibly because divergent pairs share an upstream activation sequence. lercher <cit>  found that many of the co-expressed adjacent genes in caenorhabditis elegans are either operons or homologues , and it has been suggested that evolution has arranged for functionally related genes to be located close to each other, either in order to promote consistent inheritance , or in order to benefit from the correlation accounted for by the chromatin domains . parisi <cit>  found a nonrandom distribution of the chromosomal location of genes with high expression level in testis and ovaria in drosophila. jackson <cit>  suggested that the location of a gene in the nucleus plays a role for its transcription, in relation to gradients of the concentration of transcription factors.

finally, since the action of a transcription factor on a promotor gets weaker with distance, genes belonging to the same pathway should show stronger correlation if they are located close to each other . due to this abundance of alternative theories, a study of gene-expression correlations should be designed in a way that makes it possible to distinguish correlation structures predicted by one model from those predicted by other models. the same applies to the statistical analysis techniques used.

an important consequence of the evolution-based theories is that they predict a consistent coregulation structure. suppose that two genes  are co-regulated because, for example, they participate in the same pathway. they would, then, show a strong correlation because they would be co-regulated in all tissue samples. this need not necessarily be the case with the chromatin domain model: the segments of euchromatin in one tissue sample may overlap with those in another tissue sample. this latter scenario, we call an inconsistent coregulation structure. with consistent coregulation, adjacent gene pairs will show either strong positive correlation, or they will be uncorrelated. with inconsistent coregulation, all adjacent gene pairs will show a modest positive correlation.

in a microarray analysis of gene expressions in  <dig> pools of drosophila embryos and  <dig> adult drosophilae , it was shown that adjacent genes with correlated expression levels tend to cluster. the method they used to demonstrate this was the following: let w be a fixed window size, e.g.  <dig>  for each window of w adjacent genes, the average pairwise pearson correlation coefficient within the window was computed. if that measure was found to be significant at, say,  <dig> - α =  <dig>  , all the genes in the sequence were tagged. doing this for all windows , the total number of tagged genes was counted. then the experiment was repeated with shuffled genes , and the number of tagged genes in the shuffled experiment was subtracted from the number of tagged genes in the original experiment. this difference  grows with window size and starts plateauing for a window size of approximately  <dig>  spellman and rubin interpreted this as evidence for gene interaction within regions of approximately that size.

one problem with the above method of analysis is that the increasing number of "net genes" would occur even without direct interactions between genes separated by up to ten positions. as shown in figure  <dig>  the analysis gives similar results when applied to simulated data from a normal distribution, in which an autocorrelation of ac =  <dig>  or  <dig>  was imposed artificially. so we cannot, on the basis of the analysis described above, reject the hypothesis that the data arose from a simple first-order autocorrelation process, in which no clustering of correlated genes exists. it is true that gene-pairs with high correlation form clusters: the autocorrelation of pearson's r for adjacent genes is  <dig> , with a standard error  <dig> . however, this can be explained by the fact that genes that tend to correlate strongly with other genes in general  tend to correlate with both their neighbors. if one eliminates that confounder by looking at non-overlapping gene pairs only, the autocorrelation vanishes . another way of showing this is by means of cross-tables. we divided the adjacent gene-pairs into three groups: positively correlated pairs, negatively correlated  and non-correlated. . if the correlated gene-pairs were clustered, one would expect that a gene-pair belonged to the same group as the next gene-pair more often than would happen by chance. this is indeed the case when overlapping gene-pairs are considered:  <dig> gene pairs out of  <dig>  had an r >  <dig>  while the next  gene pair also had an r >  <dig> . this is  <dig>  times more than what we expected due to chance alone. however, the same was observed when only one of the two overlapping gene-pairs was was a neighbor pair and the other was a random pair . but when non-overlapping adjacent gene pairs were considered , the contingency was  <dig> out of  <dig> which is only  <dig>  times more than expected due to chance. so the apparent clustering of correlated gene pairs is mainly due to overlap rather than to adjacency.

on the other hand, it is clear that there is some higher order correlation structure in spellman and rubin's data. this can be seen by computing the average correlation coefficient for subgroups of the gene pairs, based on their physical distance  – it decreases much slower with distance than would a first-order process. hence, the question remains how the correlation structure should be modelled and analyzed. in this paper, we present a method to separate

a) correlation of gene expression that can be attributed to consistent coregulation, from

b) the uniform correlation expected under an hypothesis of inconsistent corregulation.

RESULTS
data
we used the drosophila data published by spellman and rubin <cit> . this data set consisted of normalized expression levels of  <dig> genes in  <dig> flies , obtained with affymetrix genechip microarrays. for the purpose of analysis based on physical distance between genes, the data set was linked to flybase <cit>  on the basis of the cg-identifiers provided by spellman and rubin.  <dig> genes had to be omitted from that analysis because of unmatched cg-identifiers. we checked that these omitted genes were not a biased sample with respect to correlation in expression with their neighbor genes.

non-adjacent gene pairs
the distribution of the correlation coefficient between gene pairs in general,  was fitted with a three-component normal mixture, based on the arcus tangens hyperbolic-transform  of the correlation coefficients, which was validated with a kolmogorov-smirnov test . as shown in table  <dig>  the mean of the middle component, tanh, was  <dig>  with a standard error of  <dig> . . the fact that the standard deviation of the third component, σ+, is greater than that of the other components, suggests that the co-regulation of some gene pairs was stronger than that of others.

adjacent gene pairs
gene pairs of intermediate distance
to get an impression of the size of the segments involved in co-regulation, we fitted the three-component mixture to the correlation coefficient between the expressions of more distant gene pairs. μ <dig> was  <dig>  for the correlation between the expression of a gene and that of its direct neighbor, and  <dig>  for the correlation with its second neighbor. from the fifth neighbor and until at least the tenth, a stable level of  <dig>  is reached, which is still higher than for distant gene pairs. one possible interpretation of this is that two different co-regulation effects exist: a short-segment effect accounting for a correlation of approximately  <dig> - <dig>  =  <dig> , and a long-segment effect accounting for a correlation of approximately  <dig> - <dig>  =  <dig> . at first we had the suspicion that this stable level of  <dig>  was a whole-chromosome effect, but that was not the case. we found no significant difference between the overall average correlation of random gene pairs from the same chromosome and random gene pairs from different chromosomes.

in a first-order autocorrelation process, tanh for the second neighbor would be the square of that for the first neighbor. however, the unexpectedly small difference between the two values could be due to the fact that some second neighbors are physically quite close. to confirm or reject the hypothesis of a first-order process, however, the analysis must be based on physical distance rather than simple adjacency. as shown in table  <dig>  the decrease in average correlation as a function of physical distance is still too slow for a first-order process.

simulated data
to validate our approach, we computed the correlation coefficients of adjacent and random gene pairs in simulated data, based on either consistent or inconsistent co-regulation. as expected, the simulated data with inconsistent co-regulation resulted in a correlation structure with only one component, whereas those with consistent coregulation showed two components.  was always positive in the simulated models).

discussion
there are many theories that could explain correlation between the expressions of two genes in general, and that of two adjacent genes in particular. for the verification of the specific correlation structures predicted by each theory, spelmann and rubin's data turned out to be very useful. their experimental design was based on two distinct classes of experimental conditions , which makes a relatively simple correlation structure plausible. also, the data from each of their microarrays could be fit nicely with a normal mixture, which makes it possible to analyze their data on the basis of the pearson r. as expected, most of the consistent correlation was found to be related to age group and unrelated to adjacency. maybe more surprisingly, most of the correlation that was related to adjacency could not be accounted for by consistent co-regulation. this suggest that, at the statistical level, co-regulation of adjacent genes should be understood in terms of the mechanics of the transcription process, rather than in terms of the evolutionary origin of specific gene groups. in other words, in this particular data set, consistent correlation was very widespread, applying to 40% of all gene pairs , half of this could be attributed to the two age groups , but this consistent correlation was not the most important contributor to the elevated correlation coefficients for adjacent gene pairs. correlation between the expression of adjacent genes is evident, but it is possible, as suggested by spellman and rubin, that such a correlation between expression levels for two adjacent genes does not generally imply a relationship with respect to biological function.

spellman and rubin concluded that the adjacent genes with correlated expressions were confined to certain domains, which spanned 20% of all genes. our findings are different, in that we distinguished between two components of the correlation structure. we found a baseline correlation of  <dig>   applying to all adjacent gene pairs. in addition to that, we found that 8% of all adjacent gene pairs  were strongly positively correlated. finally, unlike spellman and rubin, we found no evidence for clustering of the strongly correlated gene pairs.

since this data set contained data from whole animals, we cannot say anything about the role of chromatin domains  in tissue differentiation. parisi et al.  <cit>  found clustering of genes that were upregulated in drosophila germ cells, which suggests that one would find elevated consistent coregulation of adjacent genes when applying our model to data sets with different tissue classes.

even for random  gene pairs, μ <dig> was slightly positive. it is hard to imagine a biological effect that could cause μ <dig> to be significantly greater than zero, but it could be an artifact of the normalization: if gene g is expressed at the same level in all tissue samples, and gene h as well, they should have a correlation coefficient of zero, but since they will both yield elevated measurements in flies in which the normalization bias is positive, the observed correlation will be positive. the fact that μ <dig> is almost zero suggests that normalization bias is not a major problem with this data set. the fact that μ <dig> for random gene pairs is not generally higher in mixed age groups than in pure adult or embryo groups  is consistent with the assumption that μ <dig> for random gene pairs does not have a biological interpretation. although looking at adjacent genes is computationally convenient, it would probably be more correct to use physical distance, rather than adjacency, as a covariate. actually, fukuoka <cit>  found that physical distance is stronger related to correlation of expression levels than is adjacency. table  <dig> shows that when a subgroup of the gene pairs is selected on the basis of physical distance, it becomes even more clear that the elevated correlation is a general property of all near-by gene pairs. this is not surprising since the group of adjacent gene pairs is heterogenous, containing gene pairs with vastly varying distances. unfortunately, there are some problems related to the use of physical distance.

first, it is not clear with respect to which anchor the physical distance should be defined. we have chosen to use the minimal distance , because it is not confounded by the length of the gene. however, depending on which co-regulation mechanism one has in mind, other distance measures might be more natural. this question becomes crucial if one wants to make subgroup analysis based on convergent, divergent and tandem gene pairs.

second, physical distance is a continuous variable, which means that the model must be augmented with an assumption regarding the relationship between distance and correlation.

the question remains to what biological phenomena the baseline correlation between adjacent genes should be attributed. several of the theories that have been proposed could account for it, and it is likely that several mechanisms play a role.

in addition to the baseline correlation, we also found more consistent correlation between adjacent genes and inconsistent co-regulation, but this does not necessarily imply a combination of two mechanisms: one could imagine a kind of quasi-consistent mechanism, in which groups of adjacent, co-regulated genes could have boundaries everywhere, but with some boundary locations being more likely than others. finally, it has been suggested that the correlation between the expressions of adjacent genes should be understood in terms of enhancer-promotor interaction, which weakens with distance. it is possible that such a model would predict a pattern similar to what we have found.

CONCLUSIONS
it is possible to analyze correlation structures in gene expression data on the basis of simple, parametric models with known mathematical properties and parameters with biological interpretations, or at least some candidate interpretations. when applied to the data from spellman and rubin, it appeared that the expressions of two genes can show positive correlation for either of two largely distinct reasons: because they share some confounder unrelated to adjacency , or because they are located close to each other on the chromosome. the underlying biological mechanisms remain unknown, but there appears to be a component of the correlation that depends on distance only and not of the biological function of the genes. if this is true, gene clustering algorithms might benefit from making distinction between the adjacency-related and not-adjacency-related co-regulation, for example by subtracting the effect of adjacency from the correlation of adjacent genes. doing that would, according to our findings, lead to more reliable identifications of gene pairs with related biological functions.

