BACKGROUND
embryonic stem cells  can differentiate into any cell type of the three germ layers as well as into male and female germ cells  <cit> . as such, they offer great potential for regenerative medicine and animal breeding. escs have been derived from the mouse, rat and humans, but only mouse escs have been tested in tetraploid complementation assays . the derivation of such cell lines later helped researchers understand the molecular mechanisms governing pluripotency and early embryonic cell fate commitment. however, because of the short lifespan of the mouse, mouse models are insufficient for evaluating the long-term effects of cell replacement or cell therapy. on the other hand, the in vivo developmental potential of escs cannot be directly tested in humans. pigs are an ideal model for preclinical development and design of therapeutic approaches because their organs are morphologically and functionally similar to humans  <cit> . for this reason, pig es cell lines must be generated with the same in vivo developmental potential as mouse es cells. since the 1990s, attempts have been made to derive pig escs and the generation of porcine ipscs has been recently reported. however, during this time, no stable porcine cell lines have been capable of germ-line transmission; thus, they are not authentically pluripotent . these problems may be due to inadequacies in the currently used in vitro culture conditions that cannot support pluripotency maintenance. this is partly a result of a lack of information regarding unique molecular mechanisms of early pig embryonic development  <cit> .

the progression from fertilization to implantation among mammals is highly conserved, and the morphologic stages are similar  <cit> . few interspecies differences do occur, such as time spent at each stage, timing of zygotic genome activation  and cell lineage commitment initiation. gene-regulation networks of mouse peds have been extensively studied and reported , but scarce information regarding molecular mechanism of pig early embryonic development as well as other large domestic animals has limited our knowledge of developmental biology and aspects of engineering their stem cells.

genome-wide transcriptome analysis may reveal unique gene regulation networks during ped that would be useful in the biological studies of undifferentiated escs and pre-implantation embryos  <cit> . transcriptome analysis of early pig embryos may also elucidate differentiation characteristics of putative porcine escs and ipscs to optimize in vitro culture conditions for the generation of true pig escs. therefore, we compared early pig in vivo fertilized-derived and mouse in vivo fertilized-derived embryo transcriptomes and mapped a putative gene regulation network during pig ped. this work represents a significant step towards characterizing normal and cloned pig early embryos using genome-wide gene expression patterns.

RESULTS
dynamic gene expression landscapes of ped
to identify the gene regulation networks that act during in vivo pig ped, we isolated mrna for deep sequencing from in vivo porcine  and mouse embryos  and porcine scnt embryos  harvested at different stages during ped . at the blastocyst stage, we physically separated the blastocyst into two parts, one containing pure trophectoderm  and the other  containing the inner cell mass  and part of the te . the protocol for small cell number mrna-sequencing was optimized to identify and analyze pig and mouse genome-wide transcriptomes at various stages of early development  <cit> . to verify the sequencing data reproducibility, we collected two sets of pig in vivo embryos at each stage . the pearson correlation coefficient for replicates calculated by log <dig> rpkm ranged from  <dig>  to  <dig> , indicating reliable sequencing data. representative results observed in oocyte samples are shown in figure 1b. to further validate the data and analysis methods, we performed three correlation measurements to estimate the transcriptome similarity between mouse and pig embryos derived in vivo and between in vivo pig embryos and pig scnt embryos . all three correlation coefficient calculations revealed similar patterns at different stages with no obvious differences between mouse and pig embryos from 4-cell stage. however, a major difference was found at the 4-cell stage between the pig scnt-derived and in vivo fertilized-derived pig embryos. also a prominent difference existed between te cells at the blastocyst stage .figure  <dig> 
gene expression landscape of pre-implantation embryonic development.  the porcine pre-implantation embryonic developmental process .  representative pearson correlation coefficient for replicates of pig oocyte samples calculated using log2-based rpkm.  correlation analysis of the gene expression at corresponding time points of mouse and pig pre-implantation embryos derived in vivo or pig pre-implantation embryos derived in vivo and in vitro. three methods were used to estimate the similarity between expressed patterns.  unsupervised hierarchical clustering of the gene expression profiles of mouse and pig pre-implantation embryos. read counts were used as the input for average agglomerative clustering analysis via euclidean distance measurement.



to explore the relationships between different developmental stages, unsupervised hierarchical clustering analysis was used to evaluate similarities in global gene expression patterns. data showed that the biggest difference between consecutive time points during mouse ped occurred from the 1- to 2-cell stage, and the second biggest difference occurred from the 8-cell to morula stages. a similar pattern was observed in normal pig embryos but the major difference occurred between the 2-cell and 4-cell stages . in addition, the morula clustered together with the icmte  in mice, while the icmte clustered with the te in pigs. in the human, a different clustering pattern exists   <cit> . thus pig, mouse and human ped have different patterns of gene expression.

an obvious difference was observed in the hierarchical order between pig in vivo derived embryos and pig scnt embryos . in scnt embryos, the largest difference existed from the 4- to 8-cell stage and the next largest difference was noted from the morula to blastocyst stage . thus the events of reprogramming that occurred after reconstruction of scnt embryos changed the gene expression patterns during their pre-implantation development.

comparative analysis of the gene regulation networks important to maternal deposition and zygotic gene activation between pigs and mice
after fertilization, there is a transition from maternal to zygotic developmental control which requires both degradation of maternal rnas and zygotic genome activation   <cit> . we first identified maternal transcripts from oocyte transcriptomes and zygotic activated transcripts in mice and pigs based on transcription trends   <cit> . in vivo fertilized-derived pig embryos shared  <dig> % of their maternal mrna with in vitro scnt-derived embryos, and  <dig> % of transcripts were shared with mouse embryos . in vivo pig embryos shared  <dig> % of their zygotic activation transcripts with those in mice embryos, and  <dig> % were shared in scnt-derived embryos . these results suggest that porcine maternal transcripts are more conserved than pig zygotic activated transcripts, a finding that is consistent with previous reports on humans and cattle embryos  <cit> . maternal transcript specialization may explain the low efficiency of interspecies animal cloning . these data also suggest that transcriptional factors in the ooplasm can more effectively identify donor-cell-specific dna domains of the same species.figure  <dig> 
identification of maternal deposition and zygotic activation.  venn diagrams of maternal deposit  and zygotic activation  conserved across mice and pigs or specific to mice or pigs. maternal deposit genes are defined by rpkm >  <dig> in oocyte samples.  histograms of regulated genes . the expression of regulated genes was found to be significantly different between two joint time points when corrected .



to evaluate the differences in zygotic activation between mice and pigs, we counted the number of up- and down-regulated genes at different stages of early cleavage development. major bursts of transcription occurred at the 2-cell stage in mice, at the 4-cell stage in normal pig embryos, and at the 8-cell stage in pig scnt embryos . these results may correspond to the zygotic activation stage  <cit> . the timing of zga varies among species and occurs between 4- and 8-cell stages in humans and reportedly between 1- and 2-cell stages in mice  <cit> . based on our transcriptome analysis, porcine zga occurs at 4-cell stage, consistent with previous reports  <cit> . zga appeared to be delayed by one cell cycle in pig scnt embryos, compared with in vivo normal embryos . it is associated with the transcripts during scnt embryonic development that might result from artificial micromanipulation  <cit> . for example, reconstructed embryos undergo only active demethylation at a slow and gradual pace, whereas normal embryos exhibit both active and passive demethylation at faster rates  <cit> . we found that genes associated with demethylation, such as dnmt3b and dnmt <dig>  changed their expression level after demethylation in both normal and scnt embryos .

transition from maternal to zygotic transcripts is accompanied by expression of specific genes whose products associate with protein binding. genes of known ontology  were used to construct heat-maps of hierarchical clustering , showing that the protein binding-associated transcripts were enriched in mouse 2-cell embryos, pig normal 4-cell stage and morula embryos, and pig 8-cell scnt embryos. this supports the concept that zga timing events differ in mice and pigs . also, mouse and pig embryos showed differences in transcripts associated with atp-synthesis-coupled-proton transportation. the column dendrogram was reordered to show the atp synthesis genes are differentially expressed in the two species. atp-synthesis-coupled-proton transports were highly expressed at the 4-cell stage in normal pig embryos, the 8-cell stage in pig scnt embryos, and the 2-cell stage in mouse embryos, which supports the previous findings that zga events occur at these stages . genes and go analysis data regarding maternal deposit and zga are shown in additional file 5: table s <dig> 

comparative analysis of gene regulation in pig and mouse during the three committed lineages of embryonic development
two lineage segregation events occur in mammalian ped. in mice, the first event occurs at e <dig> , when icm and te formation are mediated by pou5f <dig> . the second event is regulated by nanog and gata <dig>  resulting in the segregation of the primitive endoderm and epiblast lineages from the icm at the blastocyst stage  <cit> . to evaluate differences in the regulation of lineage segregation between pig and mouse embryos, we first examined gene expression in pig icm cells.

profile identification of putative pig icm transcripts
we split the porcine blastocyst into two parts using an ultra-sharp blade. one half contained the te only and the other comprised both icm and te cells . we then identified specific genes expressed in porcine icm cells by comparing transcriptomes of pure te and icmte in pig normal embryos. to validate this method, we identified  <dig>  icm-specific genes through differential expression analysis between icmte and te mrna sequencing data in mouse embryos .  <dig> % of the icm-specific genes  and  <dig> % of the icmte-specific genes  were included in icm datasets that have been previously reported  <cit> . this suggests that our data is reliable . with this method, we identified  <dig>  putative porcine icm-specific genes in in vivo-derived embryos and  <dig> genes in scnt embryos from the first sample set . similar results were obtained with the second set of normal pig embryos. with these,  <dig>  human icm-specific genes were identified  <cit> . we found that  <dig> % of the putative mouse icm-specific genes and  <dig> % of the human icm-specific genes are shared with pig in vivo-derived embryos , and that these contained es cell markers such as pou5f <dig>  tbx <dig> and gata <dig>  . go analysis results suggested that mouse and pig icm cells share pathways including those within the cell cycle, cell division, in utero embryonic development, the tgf-beta receptor signaling pathway, and positive regulation of transcription. however, pig icm-specific genes were clustered with unique pathways, such as fatty acid metabolism, heat shock protein binding, and fatty acid beta-oxidation, which may be important in pig early embryonic development . many icm-specific genes in the mouse embryos were associated with mouse es cell pluripotency. typical mes cell markers such as pou5f <dig>  sox <dig>  esrrb, klf <dig>  mest and tbx <dig> were expressed in the putative icm, and these are believed to act within the pathways involved with stem cell maintenance and response to retinoic acid .figure  <dig> 
gene expression profiling in putative pig icm cells.  venn diagram of icm-specific gene expression of mouse and pig embryos derived in vivo and pig embryos derived in vitro. icm-specific genes were found to be expressed at higher levels than genes expressed in the blastocyst of the te sample when corrected for p-value < <dig> , fold change > <dig>  and blast rpkm > <dig>   venn diagram of genes expressed in the mouse, pig and human icm  <cit> .  pou5f <dig>  nanog, gata <dig> and cdx <dig> expression levels were measured using rpkm values and rna-sequencing results.  pou5f <dig> immunostaining at different stages of porcine ped.



to determine whether the same key regulation factors act in the same signaling pathways in both pig and mouse embryos during ped, we analyzed signaling pathway patterns relevant to development or pluripotency: the tgf-beta, mapk, jak-stat and wnt pathway. interestingly, different genes within the same pathways were activated in mouse and in pig embryos. acvr2b, id <dig> and amhr <dig> were highly expressed in mouse icm in the tgf-beta pathway, whereas smad <dig>  smurf <dig> and id <dig> were highly expressed in pig icm. likewise, differences were also observed for the jak-stat, mapk and wnt signaling pathways . these data indicate that unique regulatory signaling pathways may be associated with porcine icm development, and that these are different during lineage segregation between mouse and pig embryos.

analysis of molecular markers for lineage commitment during ped
next, we analyzed the expression of genes that govern early lineage segregation, specifically oct <dig>  cdx <dig>  nanog, sox <dig> and gata <dig>  in putative icm and te cells. consistent with previous reports, we found that oct <dig> expression was restricted to the icm at the blastocyst stage during mouse ped . this was consistent with analysis of deep sequencing data . the pattern of oct <dig> expression in in vivo pig embryos was similar to that of mouse embryos . these results suggest that oct <dig>  which regulates early development in mice, may have a similar function for lineage segregation in pigs. in mice, the expression of cdx <dig> increased gradually from the 8-cell stage, and was predominant in te at the blastocyst stage . we observed a similar tendency of cdx <dig> expression during pig ped, but the expression level was much lower than in mice . nanog expression was very low and could not be detected in the morula or blastocyst by immunostaining during pig ped . in addition, the pattern of gata <dig> and sox <dig> expression in pig ped was different to that observed in mice . this suggests that the regulation of second lineage segregation events during ped might differ between mice and pigs.

comparison of gene regulation in lineage segregation during pig and mouse ped
to understand the mechanisms underlying lineage segregation in pig ped, we analyzed co-expressed genes in the morula and icm and genes shared by the morula and te in mouse and pig . both gene groups may be relevant to icm development and te formation independently because both icm and te differentiate from the morula.figure  <dig> 
gene expression profiling for lineage segregation during ped.  venn diagram of co-expression genes in the morula and icm , and in the morula and te . co-expression relationship for one gene is on both lists: 1) morula cells gene expression list . 2) icm cells specific gene expression list or te cells gene expression list .  heat map of icm and te marker gene clustering .



among the co-expressed genes in the morula and icm, we observed that  <dig> genes  were shared between pnm and ms, including oct <dig>  tbx <dig>  gata <dig> and smad <dig>  these genes may be involved in regulating second lineage segregation . using go analysis of the shared genes co-expressed by the morula and icm between the mouse and pig, we found that most gene expression is associated with embryonic biology, including in utero embryonic and endoderm development. mouse and pig embryos also differed in co-expressed genes related to fatty acid metabolic processes, lipid metabolic processes, and biological aspects of the cytoplasm, nucleus, mitochondria, and protein binding .

a total of  <dig>  genes were commonly expressed in the morula and te cells in ms and in pnm  . genes related to lineage commitment, such as tcf <dig>  tcfap2c, cnot <dig>  grb <dig> and smad <dig>  were found in both pigs and mice. mouse morula and te co-expressed genes included cdx <dig>  fgfr1op, tcf <dig>  trim <dig>  trim  <dig>  eed, gata <dig>  fgfr <dig>  cnot <dig>  grb <dig>  and tcf <dig>  pnm morula and te co-expressed genes included trim <dig>  trim <dig>  trim <dig>  gata <dig>  fgf <dig> and grb <dig> but not cdx <dig>  . these data indicate that te lineage differentiation is regulated by different signaling pathways or by different levels of gene expression in pig and mouse embryos. comparative analysis of the expression of specific markers of icm and te in the different stages of embryos was performed . a significant difference in the heat map patterns for these marker genes suggests that regulation of icm development among pigs, mice and the human were more conserved than those of te development.

expression of enzymes relevant to fatty acid metabolism in pig early embryonic development
comparing gene expression in mouse and pig embryos and their relevant pathways during ped, we observed an enrichment in the pathways relevant to fatty acid metabolism during zga and lineage segregation in pig embryos. we then evaluated the pathways of fatty acid biosynthesis, fatty acid elongation, and fatty acid metabolism during ped. genes for enzymes that regulate fatty acid biosynthesis and elongation were highly expressed at the 4-cell and the morula stage in normal pig embryos, compared with mouse and pig scnt embryos. in contrast, a slight increase in expression of these enzymes was observed in mouse blastocysts and in pig 8-cell scnt embryos . thus, fatty acid biosynthesis and elongation in pre-implantation embryos may be important to pig embryonic and fetal development. in addition, enzymes related to fatty acids are activated during different stages of development and at different levels across species. under current culture conditions, oocytes for pig scnt embryos were allowed to mature in vitro, and the reconstructed embryos were cultured in fatty-acid-free medium. this may explain the low efficiency of pig cloning. further studies are warranted to understand the mechanisms by which fatty acid metabolism is regulated during pig ped and in in vitro culture of pig pre-implantation embryos, es cells and ipscs.figure  <dig> 
fatty acid metabolism of pig ped.  fatty acid pathways in pre-implantation embryos. three fatty acid-related sub-pathways from the kegg database are shown in hierarchical clusters, and genes with one-to-one orthologous relationships between pigs and mice were selected.  network of fatty acid related genes drawn using the kegg graph package  <cit> . this network depicts the relative interaction relationships for those enzymes. directly linked enzymes were more closely related than indirectly linked enzymes.



nuclear transfer micromanipulation and global gene expression patterns during reconstructed embryo development
the ooplasm contains factors that erase somatic epigenetic imprints, rendering the somatic nucleus totipotent. gene expression patterns that occur after nuclear transfer may be essential to later development. identification and comparison of the unique gene expression patterns of normal and cloned pig embryos may help determine the unique requirements of cloned embryos and inform us about specific factors in pig ipscs reprogramming.

to explore mechanisms underlying reprogramming of scnt, we analyzed serial gene expression of normal and cloned embryos at different development stages. the correlation coefficient between normal icmte and scnt embryonic icmte was found to be  <dig>  . we observed fewer putative icm-specific genes in the cloned embryos than in the normal embryos . perhaps cloned embryos contain fewer icm cells than normal embryos  <cit> . go analysis of genes expressed in cloned embryonic putative icm showed that they participated in pathways involving protein binding and regulation in the cytoplasm, mitochondria and nucleus, presumably because of interactions between the ooplasm and the transferred somatic nucleus. however, genes expressed in normal embryos were related to signaling pathways involving the cytoplasm, nucleus, mitochondria, atp binding, nucleotide binding and fatty acid metabolic processes . fatty acid metabolism appears to be unique to pig early embryonic development, and its function is unclear. in addition, pig normal and scnt embryos differed in signaling pathways relevant to development including fgf, mapk, jak-stat, and wnt pathways .

in mouse scnt, functional defects in the trophoblast cell lineage are the main cause of low cloning success rates  <cit> . pnm and pnt comparative analysis of the transcriptomes of embryos at different stages revealed that the correlation of te from blastocysts is lower than that of icmte . go analysis revealed differences in biological processes in the nucleus, cytoplasm, and cell organs between normal and cloned embryonic te . this suggests that the functional defects in the trophoblastic cell lineage might also contribute to low efficiency in pig cloning.

putative gene regulation networks during pig ped
from our data, we assumed that most of the two lineage segregations during ped were conserved across the three-layer networks of mouse and pig embryos collected in vivo. marker genes  for the three layers were selected based on previous findings  <cit> . co-expression networks of those marker genes were constructed based on the pearson correlation coefficient , and singleton sub-networks  were removed from the final network.

network evaluation revealed that pig and mouse pre-implantation embryos share some hub genes  with regulatory networks for lineage segregations. in sub-network analysis, icm-lineage segregation and primitive endoderm differentiation markers such as esrrb, gata <dig>  pou5f <dig>  tcl <dig>  sall <dig> and tbx <dig>  and te commitment makers such as hand <dig>  ccdc <dig>  ets <dig>  wnt7a and eomes, were found to be common to pigs and mice . kegg pathway analysis of all of the networks involved with these genes revealed that the regulation process in pig embryos is mostly associated metabolic pathways whereas that in mouse embryos, is mostly associated with signal transduction . these results also suggest that metabolic pathways, including fatty acid metabolism, are important in lineage segregation during pig ped, although details of the underlying mechanism remain to be further explored.

discussion
we developed a platform for mrna sequencing of porcine pre-implantation embryos and a method for evaluating putative icm gene expression by comparing the icmte and te transcriptome. genome-wide transcriptome analysis revealed unique molecular gene regulation networks which regulate zga, lineage segregation and embryonic metabolism during pig ped.

some highly expressed genes in pig putative icm, most of which are related to es cell pluripotency, differed from those highly expressed in mouse icm  <cit> . even with shared pathways that occur at the same stage of ped, the specific members of special signaling pathways that are highly expressed were different between mice and pigs. this indicates that pig ped is regulated by a species-specific network of genetic factors. identification of the activated genes in es cell-specific pathways such as the tgf-beta, mapk, jak-stat and wnt pathways support this conclusion. scnt is a reliable platform for studying somatic cell reprogramming. differences between the pnm and pnt embryos, especially between their icms, provide insights into the mechanisms involved in somatic reprogramming, including those involved in the generation of ipscs. for example, we found that fatty acid metabolic processes to be significantly more active in pnm than in mouse or scnt pig pre-implantation embryos. these results indicate that fatty acid metabolism may be important for pig ped and lineage segregation events. it may also be important for the maintenance of pluripotency, which may be a useful nutritional element during derivation of true pig es cell lines.

the molecular regulators of early lineage segregation in mouse embryos are well known but those in pig embryos are not. transcriptome analysis of genes co-expressed by the morula and icm, and co-expressed by the morula and te in the pig and comparison with genes common to those in mice revealed that some markers of early embryonic segregation, such as cdx <dig> and nanog, may not be restricted to the icm or the te in the pig blastocyst. this indicates that either a different mechanism regulates the differentiation of the pig pre-implantation embryonic ectoderm lineage or these events occur at a later stage in pig ped. analysis of genes co-expressed by the morula and icm together with morula and te revealed that regulation of icm differentiation is more conserved. however, the regulatory mechanism of te differentiation may be subtly different in mouse and pig embryos because pnm icm expresses eed and gata <dig>  which are restricted to the te in mice. it is unclear whether oct <dig> expression may limit cdx <dig> expression in the pig te as it does in mouse embryos. it is also unclear if oct <dig> expression in pig te causes a decline in the control of te differentiation or if there are other factors that are expressed in the pnm te that regulate te differentiation.

the events that occur shortly after fertilization in normal embryos include segregation of maternal chromosomes, breakdown of the sperm’s nuclear envelope, repackaging of the sperm’s chromatin, and the formation of two pronuclei. in cloned embryos, the sub-cellular changes include the breakdown of the somatic cell nuclear envelope, the condensation of the somatic cell chromosomes, and the formation of pseudo-pronucleus  <cit> . the different processes that occur during this transient period may cause gene expression patterns to differ between normal and cloned embryos, which may then affect the regulation of later development. aberrant global gene expression and delay of the zga in scnt pre-implantation embryos may be the reasons for the incomplete reprogramming observed in scnt embryos.

evidence from previous studies indicates that individual fatty acids may affect oocyte maturation and embryonic development  <cit> . endogenous lipids are more abundant in pig oocytes and pre-implantation embryos than in mouse, cattle and sheep. this can cause significant damage during cryopreservation  <cit> . lipids have important functions in membrane receptor biology, signal transduction, and growth regulation . however, little is known about the fatty acid metabolism network and its regulation in pre-implantation embryos. information concerning lipid uptake and utilization by oocytes and embryos may therefore be crucial to improving cryopreservation practices, in vitro culture systems for the derivation of pig escs, and the combination of the factors used for reprogramming into pig ipscs.

CONCLUSIONS
in summary, our study represents a significant step in the characterization of pig pre-implantation embryos and provides insight into the dynamic molecular regulation of pig ped. we provide genome-level evidence and gene expression patterns for events such as zga and lineage segregation during ped. go and kegg analyses of each trancriptome suggests that pathways which regulate epiblast and primitive endoderm lineage commitment may be more conserved than those that regulate ectoderm segregation. our data also provide a resource for pig pluripotent stem cell engineering and for understanding porcine development.

